{"id": "26118", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26118", "title": "Roof", "text": "Top covering of a building\nA roof (pl.: roofs or rooves) is the top covering of a building, including all materials and constructions necessary to support it on the walls of the building or on uprights, providing protection against rain, snow, sunlight, extremes of temperature, and wind. A roof is part of the building envelope.\nThe characteristics of a roof are dependent upon the purpose of the building that it covers, the available roofing materials and the local traditions of construction and wider concepts of architectural design and practice, and may also be governed by local or national legislation. In most countries, a roof protects primarily against rain. A verandah may be roofed with material that protects against sunlight but admits the other elements. The roof of a garden conservatory protects plants from cold, wind, and rain, but admits light.\nA roof may also provide additional living space, for example, a roof garden.\nEtymology.\nOld English 'roof, ceiling, top, summit; heaven, sky', also figuratively, 'highest point of something', from Proto-Germanic (cf. Dutch 'deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid', Middle High German 'penthouse', Old Norse 'boat shed'). There are no apparent connections outside the Germanic family. \"English alone has retained the word in a general sense, for which the other languages use forms corresponding to OE. thatch\".\nDesign elements.\nThe elements in the design of a roof are:\nThe material of a roof may range from banana leaves, wheaten straw or seagrass to laminated glass, copper \"(see: copper roofing)\", aluminium sheeting and pre-cast concrete. In many parts of the world ceramic roof tiles have been the predominant roofing material for centuries, if not millennia. Other roofing materials include asphalt, coal tar pitch, EPDM rubber, Hypalon, polyurethane foam, PVC, slate, Teflon fabric, TPO, and wood shakes and shingles.\nThe construction of a roof is determined by its method of support and how the underneath space is bridged and whether or not the roof is \"pitched\". The \"pitch\" is the angle at which the roof rises from its lowest to its highest point. Most US domestic architecture, except in very dry regions, has roofs that are sloped, or \"pitched\". Although modern construction elements such as drainpipes may remove the need for pitch, roofs are pitched for reasons of tradition and aesthetics. So the pitch is partly dependent upon stylistic factors, and partially to do with practicalities.\nSome types of roofing, for example thatch, require a steep pitch in order to be waterproof and durable. Other types of roofing, for example pantiles, are unstable on a steeply pitched roof but provide excellent weather protection at a relatively low angle. In regions where there is little rain, an almost flat roof with a slight run-off provides adequate protection against an occasional downpour. Drainpipes also remove the need for a sloping roof.\nA person that specializes in roof construction is called a roofer.\nThe durability of a roof is a matter of concern because the roof is often the least accessible part of a building for purposes of repair and renewal, while its damage or destruction can have serious effects.\nForm.\nThe shape of roofs differs greatly from region to region. The main factors which influence the shape of roofs are the climate and the materials available for roof structure and the outer covering.\nThe basic shapes of roofs are flat,\nmono-pitched, gabled, mansard, hipped, butterfly, arched and domed. There are many variations on these types. Roofs constructed of flat sections that are sloped are referred to as pitched roofs (generally if the angle exceeds 10 degrees). Pitched roofs, including gabled, hipped and skillion roofs, make up the greatest number of domestic roofs. Some roofs follow organic shapes, either by architectural design or because a flexible material such as thatch has been used in the construction.\nParts.\nThere are two parts to a roof: its supporting structure and its outer skin, or uppermost weatherproof layer. In a minority of buildings, the outer layer is also a self-supporting structure.\nThe roof structure is generally supported upon walls, although some building styles, for example, geodesic and A-frame, blur the distinction between wall and roof.\nSupport.\nThe supporting structure of a roof usually comprises beams that are long and of strong, fairly rigid material such as timber, and since the mid-19th century, cast iron or steel. In countries that use bamboo extensively, the flexibility of the material causes a distinctive curving line to the roof, characteristic of Oriental architecture.\nTimber lends itself to a great variety of roof shapes. The timber structure can fulfil an aesthetic as well as practical function, when left exposed to view.\nStone lintels have been used to support roofs since prehistoric times, but cannot bridge large distances. The stone arch came into extensive use in the ancient Roman period and in variant forms could be used to span spaces up to across. The stone arch or vault, with or without ribs, dominated the roof structures of major architectural works for about 2,000 years, only giving way to iron beams with the Industrial Revolution and the designing of such buildings as Paxton's Crystal Palace, completed 1851.\nWith continual improvements in steel girders, these became the major structural support for large roofs, and eventually for ordinary houses as well. Another form of girder is the reinforced concrete beam, in which metal rods are encased in concrete, giving it greater strength under tension.\nRoof support can also serve as living spaces as can be seen in roof decking. Roof decking are spaces within the roof structure that is converted into a room of some sort.\nOuter layer.\nThis part of the roof shows great variation dependent upon availability of material. In vernacular architecture, roofing material is often vegetation, such as thatches, the most durable being sea grass with a life of perhaps 40 years. In many Asian countries bamboo is used both for the supporting structure and the outer layer where split bamboo stems are laid turned alternately and overlapped. In areas with an abundance of timber, wooden shingles, shakes and boards are used, while in some countries the bark of certain trees can be peeled off in thick, heavy sheets and used for roofing.\nThe 20th century saw the manufacture of composition asphalt shingles which can last from a thin 20-year shingle to the thickest which are limited lifetime shingles, the cost depending on the thickness and durability of the shingle. When a layer of shingles wears out, they are usually stripped, along with the underlay and roofing nails, allowing a new layer to be installed. An alternative method is to install another layer directly over the worn layer. While this method is faster, it does not allow the roof sheathing to be inspected and water damage, often associated with worn shingles, to be repaired. Having multiple layers of old shingles under a new layer causes roofing nails to be located further from the sheathing, weakening their hold. The greatest concern with this method is that the weight of the extra material could exceed the dead load capacity of the roof structure and cause collapse. Because of this, jurisdictions which use the International Building Code prohibit the installation of new roofing on top of an existing roof that has two or more applications of any type of roof covering; the existing roofing material must be removed before installing a new roof.\nSlate is an ideal, and durable material, while in the Swiss Alps roofs are made from huge slabs of stone, several inches thick. The slate roof is often considered the best type of roofing. A slate roof may last 75 to 150 years, and even longer. However, slate roofs are often expensive to install \u2013 in the US, for example, a slate roof may have the same cost as the rest of the house. Often, the first part of a slate roof to fail is the fixing nails; they corrode, allowing the slates to slip. In the UK, this condition is known as \"nail sickness\". Because of this problem, fixing nails made of stainless steel or copper are recommended, and even these must be protected from the weather.\nAsbestos, usually in bonded corrugated panels, has been used widely in the 20th century as an inexpensive, non-flammable roofing material with excellent insulating properties. Health and legal issues involved in the mining and handling of asbestos products means that it is no longer used as a new roofing material. However, many asbestos roofs continue to exist, particularly in South America and Asia.\nRoofs made of cut turf (modern ones known as green roofs, traditional ones as sod roofs) have good insulating properties and are increasingly encouraged as a way of \"greening\" the Earth. The soil and vegetation function as living insulation, moderating building temperatures. Adobe roofs are roofs of clay, mixed with binding material such as straw or animal hair, and plastered on lathes to form a flat or gently sloped roof, usually in areas of low rainfall.\nIn areas where clay is plentiful, roofs of baked tiles have been the major form of roofing. The casting and firing of roof tiles is an industry that is often associated with brickworks. While the shape and colour of tiles was once regionally distinctive, now tiles of many shapes and colours are produced commercially, to suit the taste and pocketbook of the purchaser. Concrete roof tiles are also a common choice, being available in many different styles and shapes.\nSheet metal in the form of copper and lead has also been used for many hundreds of years. Both are expensive but durable, the vast copper roof of Chartres Cathedral, oxidised to a pale green colour, having been in place for hundreds of years. Lead, which is sometimes used for church roofs, was most commonly used as flashing in valleys and around chimneys on domestic roofs, particularly those of slate. Copper was used for the same purpose.\nIn the 19th century, iron, electroplated with zinc to improve its resistance to rust, became a light-weight, easily transported, waterproofing material. Its low cost and easy application made it the most accessible commercial roofing, worldwide. Since then, many types of metal roofing have been developed. Steel shingle or standing-seam roofs last about 50 years or more depending on both the method of installation and the moisture barrier (underlayment) used and are between the cost of shingle roofs and slate roofs.\nIn the 20th century, a large number of roofing materials were developed, including roofs based on bitumen (already used in previous centuries), on rubber and on a range of synthetics such as thermoplastic and on fibreglass.\nFunctions.\nA roof assembly has more than one function. It may provide any or all of the following functions:&lt;br&gt;\n1. To shed water i.e., prevent water from standing on the roof surface. Water standing on the roof surface increases the live load on the roof structure, which is a safety issue. Standing water also contributes to premature deterioration of most roofing materials. Some roofing manufacturers' warranties are rendered void due to standing water.&lt;br&gt;\n2. To protect the building interior from the effects of weather elements such as rain, wind, sun, heat and snow.&lt;br&gt;\n3. To provide thermal insulation. Most modern commercial/industrial roof assemblies incorporate insulation boards or batt insulation. In most cases, the International Building Code and International Residential Code establish the minimum R-value required within the roof assembly.&lt;br&gt;\n4. To perform for the expected service life. All standard roofing materials have established histories of their respective longevity, based on anecdotal evidence. Most roof materials will last long after the manufacturer's warranty has expired, given adequate ongoing maintenance, and absent storm damage. Metal and tile roofs may last fifty years or more. Asphalt shingles may last 30\u201350 years. Coal tar built-up roofs may last forty or more years. Single-ply roofs may last twenty or more years.&lt;br&gt;\n5. Provide a desired, unblemished appearance. Some roofs are selected not only for the above functions, but also for aesthetics, similar to wall cladding. Premium prices are often paid for certain systems because of their attractive appearance and \"curb appeal.\"\nInsulation.\nBecause the purpose of a roof is to secure people and their possessions from climatic elements, the insulating properties of a roof are a consideration in its structure and the choice of roofing material.\nSome roofing materials, particularly those of natural fibrous material, such as thatch, have excellent insulating properties. For those that do not, extra insulation is often installed under the outer layer. In developed countries, the majority of dwellings have a ceiling installed under the structural members of the roof. The purpose of a ceiling is to insulate against heat and cold, noise, dirt and often from the droppings and lice of birds who frequently choose roofs as nesting places.\nConcrete tiles can be used as insulation. When installed leaving a space between the tiles and the roof surface, it can reduce heating caused by the sun.\nForms of insulation are felt or plastic sheeting, sometimes with a reflective surface, installed directly below the tiles or other material; synthetic foam batting laid above the ceiling and recycled paper products and other such materials that can be inserted or sprayed into roof cavities. Cool roofs are becoming increasingly popular,&lt;ref name=\"10.3390/su13094665\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and in some cases are mandated by local codes. Cool roofs are defined as roofs with both high reflectivity and high thermal emittance.\nPoorly insulated and ventilated roofing can suffer from problems such as the formation of ice dams around the overhanging eaves in cold weather, causing water from melted snow on upper parts of the roof to penetrate the roofing material. Ice dams occur when heat escapes through the uppermost part of the roof, and the snow at those points melts, refreezing as it drips along the shingles, and collecting in the form of ice at the lower points. This can result in structural damage from stress, including the destruction of gutter and drainage systems.\nDrainage.\nThe primary job of most roofs is to keep out water. The large area of a roof repels a lot of water, which must be directed in some suitable way, so that it does not cause damage or inconvenience.\nFlat roof of adobe dwellings generally have a very slight slope. In a Middle Eastern country, where the roof may be used for recreation, it is often walled, and drainage holes must be provided to stop water from pooling and seeping through the porous roofing material.\nWhile flat roofs are more prone to drainage issues, poorly designed or textured sloping roofs can face similar problems. Standing water on a roof can lead to mold growth, which is highly damaging to both the building\u2019s structure and the health of its occupants. Repairing drainage issues is significantly less costly than fixing the damage caused by mold.\nSimilar problems, although on a very much larger scale, confront the builders of modern commercial properties which often have flat roofs. Because of the very large nature of such roofs, it is essential that the outer skin be of a highly impermeable material. Most industrial and commercial structures have conventional roofs of low pitch.\nIn general, the pitch of the roof is proportional to the amount of precipitation. Houses in areas of low rainfall frequently have roofs of low pitch while those in areas of high rainfall and snow, have steep roofs. The longhouses of Papua New Guinea, for example, being roof-dominated architecture, the high roofs sweeping almost to the ground. The high steeply pitched roofs of Germany and Holland are typical in regions of snowfall. In parts of North America such as Buffalo, New York, United States, or Montreal, Quebec, Canada, there is a required minimum slope of 6 in 12 (1:2, a pitch of 30\u00b0).\nThere are regional building styles which contradict this trend, the stone roofs of the Alpine chalets being usually of gentler incline. These buildings tend to accumulate a large amount of snow on them, which is seen as a factor in their insulation. The pitch of the roof is in part determined by the roofing material available, a pitch of 3 in 12 (1:4) or greater slope generally being covered with asphalt shingles, wood shake, corrugated steel, slate or tile.\nThe water repelled by the roof during a rainstorm is potentially damaging to the building that the roof protects. If it runs down the walls, it may seep into the mortar or through panels. If it lies around the foundations it may cause seepage to the interior, rising damp or dry rot. For this reason most buildings have a system in place to protect the walls of a building from most of the roof water. Overhanging eaves are commonly employed for this purpose. Most modern roofs and many old ones have systems of valleys, gutters, waterspouts, waterheads and drainpipes to remove the water from the vicinity of the building. In many parts of the world, roofwater is collected and stored for domestic use.\nAreas prone to heavy snow benefit from a metal roof because their smooth surfaces shed the weight of snow more easily and resist the force of wind better than a wood shingle or a concrete tile roof.\nSolar roofs.\nNewer systems include solar shingles which generate electricity as well as cover the roof. There are also solar systems available that generate hot water or hot air and which can also act as a roof covering. More complex systems may carry out all of these functions: generate electricity, recover thermal energy, and also act as a roof covering.\nSolar systems can be integrated with roofs by:\n integration in the covering of pitched roofs, e.g. solar shingles,\n mounting on an existing roof, e.g. solar panel on a tile roof,\n integration in a flat roof membrane using heat welding (e.g. PVC) or\n mounting on a flat roof with a construction and additional weight to prevent uplift from wind.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26119", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26119", "title": "Podocarpus latifolius", "text": "Species of conifer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPodocarpus latifolius (real yellowwood, broad-leaved yellowwood, or South African yellowwood, , , , ) is a large evergreen tree up to 35\u00a0m high and 3\u00a0m trunk diameter, in the conifer family Podocarpaceae; it is the type species of the genus \"Podocarpus\".\nThe real yellowwood has been declared the national tree of South Africa and is protected there.\nAppearance.\nThe real yellowwood is a large evergreen tree that grows up to 30 meters in height. It grows relatively slowly but forms a wood of exceptional quality.\nThe leaves are strap-shaped, 25\u201340\u00a0mm long on mature trees or up to 100\u00a0mm long on young trees, and 6\u201312\u00a0mm broad, with a bluntly pointed tip. The species name \"latifolius\" is Latin for \"broad-leaved\". The bright-coloured foliage of new growth stands out against the dark leaves of mature foliage.\nThe cones of this dioecious tree are berry-like, with a single (rarely two) 7\u201311\u00a0mm seed apical on an 8\u201314\u00a0mm pink-purple aril; the aril is edible and sweet. The male (pollen) cones are 10\u201330\u00a0mm long.\nDistribution.\nIt is native to the moister southern and eastern areas of South Africa, from coastal areas of the Western Cape east to KwaZulu-Natal and north to eastern Limpopo. Pockets are naturally found further north in and around Zimbabwe.\nIt is commonly found in afro-temperate forests and often in mountainous areas. In harsh or exposed areas it tends to become stunted, small and dense.\nEcology.\n\"Podocarpus latifolius\" is the preferred phorophyte species of \"Solenangis conica\", an epiphytic orchid.\nHuman usage.\nIt is a slow-growing tree but exceptionally long-lived, and is increasingly grown as an ornamental feature in South African gardens. The unusual texture of the foliage is a reason for its growing popularity. The bright edible berries attract birds, which spread the seed.\nThe wood is hard, similar to yew wood, used for furniture, panelling, etc. Due to past over-exploitation, little is now cut.\nTaxonomy.\nRelationship to \"Podocarpus milanjianus\".\n\"Podocarpus latifolius\" is closely related to \"Podocarpus milanjianus\". Whether they are a single or two separate species is not settled. Some authorities treat the South African populations as \"Podocarpus latifolius\", and those elsewhere in Africa as \"Podocarpus milanjianus\". Others treat them as a single species, \"Podocarpus latifolius\".\nA 2020 study sampled DNA from \"Podocarpus latifolius\" and \"Podocarpus milanjianus\" trees, gathered from 88 sites across Africa. They concluded that all populations sampled constituted a single species: \"As South African samples (\"P. latifolius\") did not form a clade separated from the other clades (\"P. milanjianus\"), we confirm that the two taxa can be considered as synonyms.\" The authors concluded that the species originated in East Africa. The western populations, in the highlands of Cameroon and Nigeria and in the Angolan highlands, diverged from the other populations around 300,000 years ago, and the species expanded to its current distribution pattern about 200,000 years ago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26120", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26120", "title": "Role playing game", "text": ""}
{"id": "26122", "revid": "49895235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26122", "title": "Robben Island", "text": "Island in Table Bay, South Africa\nRobben Island () is an island in Table Bay, 6.9 kilometres (4.3\u00a0mi) west of the coast of Bloubergstrand, north of Cape Town, South Africa. It takes its name from the archaic Dutch word for seals (\"robben\"), hence the Dutch/Afrikaans name \"Robbeneiland\", which translates to \"Seal(s) Island\".\nRobben Island is roughly oval in shape, long north\u2013south, and wide, with an area of . It is flat and only a few metres above sea level, as a result of an ancient erosion event. It was fortified and used as a prison from the late-seventeenth century until 1996, after the end of apartheid.\nDuring the late 20th century, it was used to imprison political prisoners who opposed the postwar apartheid state. Political activist and lawyer Nelson Mandela was imprisoned on the island for 18 of the 27 years of his imprisonment before the fall of apartheid and introduction of full, multi-racial democracy in South Africa. He was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and was elected in 1994 as President of South Africa, becoming the country's first black president. He served one term from 1994 to 1999. \nTwo other former inmates of Robben Island, in addition to Mandela, have been elected to the presidency since the late-1990s: Kgalema Motlanthe (2008\u20132009) and Jacob Zuma (2009\u20132018). Other former prisoners have held a variety of political positions in the democracy.\nRobben Island is a South African National Heritage Site as well as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nLocated at the entrance to Table Bay, 11\u00a0km from Cape Town, this island was 'discovered' by Bartolomeu Dias in 1488. For many years, it was used by Portuguese navigators, and later by English and Dutch sailors, as a refueling station.\nIn 1654, the settlers of the Dutch Cape Colony placed all of their ewes and a few rams on Robben Island. The men built a large shed and a shelter. The isolation offered better protection for the livestock against wild animals than on the mainland. The settlers also collected seal skins and boiled oil to supply the needs of the settlement.\nSince the end of the 17th century, Robben Island has been used for the incarceration of chiefly political prisoners. The Dutch settlers were the first to use Robben Island as a prison. The island's first prisoner was probably Autshumato in the mid-17th century. Among its early permanent inhabitants were political leaders imprisoned from other Dutch colonies, including the Dutch East Indies. These included the two surviving Malagasy leaders, named in Dutch East India Company records as Massavana and Koesaaij, of the mutiny of Malagasy slaves on the slave ship \"Meermin\". They had been sold to the Dutch East India Company in Madagascar to be enslaved in the Cape Colony. Massavana died three years later, but Koesaaij survived at Robben Island for another 20 years.\nAfter the British Royal Navy captured several Dutch East Indiamen at the battle of Saldanha Bay in the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War in 1781, a boat rowed out to meet the British warships. On board were the \"kings of Ternate and Tidore, and the princes of the respective families\". The Dutch had long held them on \"Isle Robin\", but then had moved them to Saldanha Bay.\nIn 1806, Scottish whaler John Murray opened a whaling station at a sheltered bay on the north-eastern shore of the island, which became known as Murray's Bay. It was adjacent to the site of the present-day Murray's Bay Harbour, which was constructed in 1939\u201340.\nAfter a failed uprising at Grahamstown in 1819, the fifth of the Xhosa Wars, the British colonial government sentenced African leader Makanda Nxele to life imprisonment on the island. He drowned on the shores of Table Bay after escaping the prison.\nThe island was also used as a leper colony and animal quarantine station. Starting in 1845, lepers from the \"Hemel-en-Aarde\" (heaven and earth) leper colony near Caledon were moved to Robben Island when \"Hemel-en-Aarde\" was found unsuitable. Initially, people were relocated on a voluntary basis, and the lepers were free to leave the island if they so wished. In April 1891, the cornerstones for 11 new buildings to house lepers were laid. After passage of the Leprosy Repression Act in May 1892, admission was no longer voluntary, and the movement of the lepers was restricted. Doctors and scientists did not understand the disease and thought that isolation was the only way to prevent other people from contracting it. Prior to 1892, an average of about 25 lepers a year were admitted to Robben Island, but in 1892 that number rose to 338, and a further 250 were admitted in 1893.\nDuring the Second World War, the island was fortified. BL 9.2-inch guns and 6-inch guns were installed as part of the defences for Cape Town.\nIn 1948 the National Party came to power and instituted a formal program of apartheid. Over time, black Africans and allies began to organize against this policy. From 1961, Robben Island was used by the South African government as a prison for political prisoners and convicted criminals. \nIn 1969, the \"Moturu Kramat,\" now a sacred site for Muslim pilgrimage on Robben Island, was built to commemorate Sayed Abdurahman Moturu, the Prince of Madura. Moturu, one of Cape Town's first imams, had been exiled in the mid-1740s to the island. He died there in 1754. Muslim political prisoners would pay homage at the shrine before leaving the island.\nIn 1982, former inmate Indres Naidoo published his book \"Island in Chains\", the first account prison life on the island.\nThe maximum security prison for political prisoners closed in 1991. The medium security prison for criminal prisoners was closed five years later.\nSince the end of apartheid, the island has become a popular tourist destination. It is managed by Robben Island Museum (RIM), which operates the site as a living museum. In 1999, the island was declared a World Heritage Site for its importance to South Africa's political history and development of a democratic society. Every year, thousands of visitors take the ferry from the Victoria &amp; Alfred Waterfront in Cape Town for tours of the island and its former prison. Many of the guides are former prisoners. All land on the island is owned by the nation of South Africa, with the exception of the island church. Administratively, Robben Island is a suburb of the City of Cape Town. It is open all year around, weather permitting.\nAs a tourist attraction in South Africa's national consciousness, today Robben Island is often regarded as \"a symbol of oppression\" by many black South Africans.\nAccess to the island.\nRobben Island is accessible to visitors through tours that depart from Cape Town's waterfront. Tours depart three times a day and take about 3.5 hours, consisting of a ferry trip to and from the island, and a tour of the various historical sites on the island that form part of the Robben Island Museum. These include the island graveyard, the disused lime quarry, Robert Sobukwe's house, the Bluestone quarry, the army and navy bunkers, and the maximum security prison. Nelson Mandela's cell is shown.\nMaritime hazard.\nSeagoing vessels must take great care navigating near Robben Island and nearby Whale Rock (it does not break the surface) as these pose a danger to shipping. A prevailing rough Atlantic swell surrounds the offshore reefs and the island's jagged coastline. Stricken vessels driven onto rocks are quickly broken up by the powerful surf. A total of 31 vessels are known to have been wrecked around the island.\nIn 1990, a marine archaeology team from the University of Cape Town began Operation \"Sea Eagle\". It was an underwater survey that scanned of seabed around Robben Island. The task was made particularly difficult by the strong currents and high waves of these waters. The group found 24 vessels that had sunk around Robben Island. Most wrecks were found in waters less than deep. The team concluded that poor weather, darkness and fog were the cause of the sinkings.\nMaritime wrecks around Robben Island and its surrounding waters include the 17th-century Dutch East Indiaman ships, the \"Yeanger van Horne\" (1611), the \"Shaapejacht\" (1660), and the \"Dageraad\" (1694). Later 19th-century wrecks include several British brigs, including the \"Gondolier\" (1836), and the United States clipper, \"A.H. Stevens\" (1866). In 1901 the mail steamer SS \"Tantallon Castle\" struck rocks off Robben Island in dense fog shortly after leaving Cape Town. After distress cannons were fired from the island, nearby vessels rushed to the rescue. All 120 passengers and crew were taken off the ship before it was broken apart in the swells. A further 17 ships have been wrecked in the 20th century, including British, Spanish, Norwegian and Taiwanese vessels.\nRobben Island lighthouse.\nDue to the maritime danger of Robben Island and its near waters, Jan van Riebeeck, the first Dutch colonial administrator in Cape Town in the 1650s, ordered that huge bonfires were to be lit at night on top of Fire Hill, the highest point on the island (now Minto Hill). These were to warn VOC ships that they were approaching the island.\nIn 1865, Robben Island lighthouse was completed on Minto Hill. The cylindrical masonry tower, which has an attached lightkeeper's house at its base, is high with a lantern gallery at the top. In 1938, the lamp was converted to electricity. The lighthouse uses a flashing lantern instead of a revolving lamp; it shines for a duration of 5 seconds every seven seconds. The 46,000-candela beam, visible up to away, flashes white light away from Table Bay. A secondary red light acts as a navigation aid for vessels sailing south-southeast.\nWildlife and conservation.\nWhen the Dutch arrived in the area in 1652, the only large animals on the island were seals and birds, including penguins. In 1654, the settlers released rabbits on the island to provide a ready source of meat for passing ships.\nThe original colony of African penguins on the island was completely exterminated by 1800. But, since 1983, a new colony has been established there, and the modern island is again an important breeding area for the species. The colony grew to a size of ~16,000 individuals in 2004, before starting to decline in size again. As of 2015[ [update]], this decline has been continuous (to a colony size of ~3,000 individuals). Such a decline has been found at almost all other African penguin colonies. Its causes are still largely unclear and likely to vary between colonies, but at Robben Island are probably related to a diminishing of the food supply (sardines and anchovies) through competition by fisheries. Easy to see in their natural habitat, the penguins have been a popular tourist attraction.\nAround 1958, Lieutenant Peter Klerck, a South African Navy officer serving on the island, introduced various animals. The following extract of an article, written by his son Michael Klerck, who lived on the island from an early age, describes the local fauna:\nIn the early 21st century, the rabbit population had reached an estimated 25,000, which had become an invasive species, endangering others. Humans are hunting and culling the rabbits to reduce their number.\nClimate change.\nIn 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included Robben Island in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4\u00b0C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of the scenarios. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5\u00b0C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~ with a range of ) well before the year 4000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26123", "revid": "1296456881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26123", "title": "Real-time operating system", "text": "Computer operating system for applications with critical timing constraints\nA real-time operating system (RTOS) is an operating system (OS) for real-time computing applications that processes data and events that have critically defined time constraints. A RTOS is distinct from a time-sharing operating system, such as Unix, which manages the sharing of system resources with a scheduler, data buffers, or fixed task prioritization in multitasking or multiprogramming environments. All operations must verifiably complete within given time and resource constraints or else the RTOS will fail safe. Real-time operating systems are event-driven and preemptive, meaning the OS can monitor the relevant priority of competing tasks, and make changes to the task priority.\nCharacteristics.\nA key characteristic of an RTOS is the level of its consistency concerning the amount of time it takes to accept and complete an application's task; the variability is \"jitter\". The chief design goal is not high throughput, but rather a guarantee of a soft or hard performance category. An RTOS that can usually or generally meet a deadline is a soft real-time OS, but if it can meet a deadline deterministically it is a hard real-time OS.\nAn RTOS has an advanced algorithm for scheduling. Scheduler flexibility enables a wider, computer-system orchestration of process priorities, but a real-time OS is more frequently dedicated to a narrow set of applications. Key factors in a real-time OS are minimal interrupt latency and minimal thread switching latency; a real-time OS is valued more for how quickly or how predictably it can respond than for the amount of work it can perform in a given period of time.\nDesign philosophies.\nThe most common designs are:\nTime sharing designs switch tasks more often than strictly needed, but give smoother multitasking, giving the illusion that a process or user has sole use of a machine.\nEarly CPU designs needed many cycles to switch tasks during which the CPU could do nothing else useful. Because switching took so long, early OSes tried to minimize wasting CPU time by avoiding unnecessary task switching.\nScheduling.\nIn typical designs, a task has three states:\nMost tasks are blocked or ready most of the time because generally only one task can run at a time per CPU core. The number of items in the ready queue can vary greatly, depending on the number of tasks the system needs to perform and the type of scheduler that the system uses. On simpler non-preemptive but still multitasking systems, a task has to give up its time on the CPU to other tasks, which can cause the ready queue to have a greater number of overall tasks in the ready to be executed state (resource starvation).\nUsually, the data structure of the ready list in the scheduler is designed to minimize the worst-case length of time spent in the scheduler's critical section, during which preemption is inhibited, and, in some cases, all interrupts are disabled, but the choice of data structure depends also on the maximum number of tasks that can be on the ready list.\nIf there are never more than a few tasks on the ready list, then a doubly linked list of ready tasks is likely optimal. If the ready list usually contains only a few tasks but occasionally contains more, then the list should be sorted by priority, so that finding the highest priority task to run does not require traversing the list. Instead, inserting a task requires walking the list.\nDuring this search, preemption should not be inhibited. Long critical sections should be divided into smaller pieces. If an interrupt occurs that makes a high priority task ready during the insertion of a low priority task, that high priority task can be inserted and run immediately before the low priority task is inserted.\nThe critical response time, sometimes called the flyback time, is the time it takes to queue a new ready task and restore the state of the highest priority task to running. In a well-designed RTOS, readying a new task will take 3 to 20 instructions per ready-queue entry, and restoration of the highest-priority ready task will take 5 to 30 instructions.\nIn advanced systems, real-time tasks share computing resources with many non-real-time tasks, and the ready list can be arbitrarily long. In such systems, a scheduler ready list implemented as a linked list would be inadequate.\nAlgorithms.\nSome commonly used RTOS scheduling algorithms are:\nIntertask communication and resource sharing.\nA multitasking operating system like Unix is poor at real-time tasks. The scheduler gives the highest priority to jobs with the lowest demand on the computer, so there is no way to ensure that a time-critical job will have access to enough resources. Multitasking systems must manage sharing data and hardware resources among multiple tasks. It is usually unsafe for two tasks to access the same specific data or hardware resource simultaneously. There are three common approaches to resolve this problem:\nTemporarily masking/disabling interrupts.\nGeneral-purpose operating systems usually do not allow user programs to mask (disable) interrupts, because the user program could control the CPU for as long as it is made to. Some modern CPUs do not allow user mode code to disable interrupts as such control is considered a key operating system resource. Many embedded systems and RTOSs, however, allow the application itself to run in kernel mode for greater system call efficiency and also to permit the application to have greater control of the operating environment without requiring OS intervention.\nOn single-processor systems, an application running in kernel mode and masking interrupts is the lowest overhead method to prevent simultaneous access to a shared resource. While interrupts are masked and the current task does not make a blocking OS call, the current task has \"exclusive\" use of the CPU since no other task or interrupt can take control, so the critical section is protected. When the task exits its critical section, it must unmask interrupts; pending interrupts, if any, will then execute. Temporarily masking interrupts should only be done when the longest path through the critical section is shorter than the desired maximum interrupt latency. Typically this method of protection is used only when the critical section is just a few instructions and contains no loops. This method is ideal for protecting hardware bit-mapped registers when the bits are controlled by different tasks.\nMutexes.\nWhen the shared resource must be reserved without blocking all other tasks (such as waiting for Flash memory to be written), it is better to use mechanisms also available on general-purpose operating systems, such as a mutex and OS-supervised interprocess messaging. Such mechanisms involve system calls, and usually invoke the OS's dispatcher code on exit, so they typically take hundreds of CPU instructions to execute, while masking interrupts may take as few as one instruction on some processors.\nA (non-recursive) mutex is either locked or unlocked. When a task has locked the mutex, all other tasks must wait for the mutex to be unlocked by its \" owner\" - the original thread. A task may set a timeout on its wait for a mutex. There are several well-known problems with mutex based designs such as priority inversion and deadlocks.\nIn priority inversion a high priority task waits because a low priority task has a mutex, but the lower priority task is not given CPU time to finish its work. A typical solution is to have the task that owns a mutex 'inherit' the priority of the highest waiting task. But this simple approach gets more complex when there are multiple levels of waiting: task \"A\" waits for a mutex locked by task \"B\", which waits for a mutex locked by task \"C\". Handling multiple levels of inheritance causes other code to run in high priority context and thus can cause starvation of medium-priority threads.\nIn a deadlock, two or more tasks lock mutex without timeouts and then wait forever for the other task's mutex, creating a cyclic dependency. The simplest deadlock scenario occurs when two tasks alternately lock two mutex, but in the opposite order. Deadlock is prevented by careful design.\nMessage passing.\nThe other approach to resource sharing is for tasks to send messages in an organized message passing scheme. In this paradigm, the resource is managed directly by only one task. When another task wants to interrogate or manipulate the resource, it sends a message to the managing task. Although their real-time behavior is less crisp than semaphore systems, simple message-based systems avoid most protocol deadlock hazards, and are generally better-behaved than semaphore systems. However, problems like those of semaphores are possible. Priority inversion can occur when a task is working on a low-priority message and ignores a higher-priority message (or a message originating indirectly from a high priority task) in its incoming message queue. Protocol deadlocks can occur when two or more tasks wait for each other to send response messages.\nInterrupt handlers and the scheduler.\nSince an interrupt handler blocks the highest priority task from running, and since real-time operating systems are designed to keep thread latency to a minimum, interrupt handlers are typically kept as short as possible. The interrupt handler defers all interaction with the hardware if possible; typically all that is necessary is to acknowledge or disable the interrupt (so that it won't occur again when the interrupt handler returns) and notify a task that work needs to be done. This can be done by unblocking a driver task through releasing a semaphore, setting a flag or sending a message. A scheduler often provides the ability to unblock a task from interrupt handler context.\nAn OS maintains catalogues of objects it manages such as threads, mutexes, memory, and so on. Updates to this catalogue must be strictly controlled. For this reason, it can be problematic when an interrupt handler calls an OS function while the application is in the act of also doing so. The OS function called from an interrupt handler could find the object database to be in an inconsistent state because of the application's update. There are two major approaches to deal with this problem: the unified architecture and the segmented architecture. RTOSs implementing the unified architecture solve the problem by simply disabling interrupts while the internal catalogue is updated. The downside of this is that interrupt latency increases, potentially losing interrupts. The segmented architecture does not make direct OS calls but delegates the OS related work to a separate handler. This handler runs at a higher priority than any thread but lower than the interrupt handlers. The advantage of this architecture is that it adds very few cycles to interrupt latency. As a result, OSes which implement the segmented architecture are more predictable and can deal with higher interrupt rates compared to the unified architecture.\nSimilarly, the System Management Mode on x86 compatible hardware can take a lot of time before it returns control to the operating system.\nMemory allocation.\nMemory allocation is more critical in a real-time operating system than in other operating systems.\nFirst, for stability there cannot be memory leaks (memory that is allocated but not freed after use). The device should work indefinitely, without ever needing a reboot. For this reason, dynamic memory allocation is frowned upon. Whenever possible, all required memory allocation is specified statically at compile time.\nAnother reason to avoid dynamic memory allocation is memory fragmentation. With frequent allocation and releasing of small chunks of memory, a situation may occur where available memory is divided into several sections and the RTOS cannot allocate a large enough continuous block of memory, although there is enough free memory. Secondly, speed of allocation is important. A standard memory allocation scheme scans a linked list of indeterminate length to find a suitable free memory block, which is unacceptable in a RTOS since memory allocation has to occur within a certain amount of time.\nBecause mechanical disks have much longer and more unpredictable response times, swapping to disk files is not used for the same reasons as RAM allocation discussed above.\nThe simple fixed-size-blocks algorithm works quite well for simple embedded systems because of its low overhead.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26124", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26124", "title": "Roman Emperor Caligula", "text": ""}
{"id": "26125", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26125", "title": "Romans", "text": "Romans may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26127", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26127", "title": "The Righteous Brothers", "text": "American singing duo\nThe Righteous Brothers are an American musical duo originally formed by Bill Medley and Bobby Hatfield but now comprising Medley and Bucky Heard. Medley formed the group with Hatfield in 1963. They had first performed together in 1962 in the Los Angeles area as part of a five-member group called the Paramours, and adopted the name \"the Righteous Brothers\" when they became a duo. Their most active recording period was in the 1960s and '70s, and, after several years inactive as a duo, Hatfield and Medley reunited in 1981 and continued to perform until Hatfield's death in 2003. The term \"blue-eyed soul\" is thought to have been coined by Philadelphia radio DJ Georgie Woods in 1964 when describing the duo's music.\nHatfield and Medley had contrasting vocal ranges, which helped them create a distinctive sound as a duet. They each had the vocal talent to perform as soloists. Medley sang the low parts with his bass-baritone voice, with Hatfield taking the higher-register vocals with his tenor. His voice reached the register of a countertenor.\nFollowing a year and a half of Top 40 non-entries on \"Billboard\"'s Hot 100, the duo hit big with the late-1964 release of what would become their signature record, \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'\" \u2013 a transatlantic number one produced by Phil Spector, often considered one of his finest works and a landmark recording in popular music. Other notable hits include three US 1965 Top Tens \u2013 \"Just Once in My Life\" and covers of \"Unchained Melody\" (also a huge hit in 1990 after being featured in the film \"Ghost\") and \"Ebb Tide\" \u2013 and the massive US 1966 number one \"(You're My) Soul and Inspiration\", plus the 1974 comeback hit \"Rock and Roll Heaven\". Both Hatfield and Medley also had for a time their own solo careers. In 2016, Medley re-formed The Righteous Brothers with Bucky Heard and they continue to perform as a duo.\nThe Righteous Brothers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2003 and into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2005. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked them no. 16 on its list of the 20 Greatest Duos of All Time.\nMusic career.\n1962\u20131964: Beginning.\nBobby Hatfield and Bill Medley were in different groups before they met \u2013 Hatfield was in a group from Anaheim called the Variations, and Medley in a group from Santa Ana called the Paramours. Barry Rillera, a member of Medley's band who was also in Hatfield's group, suggested they go see each other's show and perform together. Later, after a member of Paramours left in 1962, Hatfield and Medley joined forces and formed a new Paramours, which included Johnny Wimber (a founder of the Vineyard Movement). They started performing at a club called John's Black Derby in Santa Ana, and were signed to a small record label Moonglow in 1962. They released a single \"There She Goes (She's Walking Away)\" in December 1962. However, the Paramours did not have much success and soon broke up, leaving Hatfield and Medley to perform as a duo in 1963. According to Medley, they then adopted the name \"the Righteous Brothers\" for the duo because black Marines from the El Toro Marine base started calling them \"righteous brothers\". At the end of a performance, a black U.S. Marine in the audience shouted, \"That was righteous, brothers!\", and greeted them with \"Hey righteous brothers, how you doin'?\" on meeting them.\nThe Righteous Brothers released three albums under the Moonglow label, one of these and a further compilation album were released after they had joined Phil Spector. They released 12 singles with Moonglow, but only two were moderate hits \u2013 \"Little Latin Lupe Lu\" and \"My Babe\" from their first album \"Right Now!\". In August and September 1964, they opened for The Beatles in their first U.S. tour. However, they left before the tour finished as they were asked to appear on a new television show called \"Shindig!\"; they also felt unappreciated by the audience as they were then little known on the East Coast, and the audience demanded to hear the Beatles while they were performing. They returned to Los Angeles to tape the pilot for the show, and would later appear in the show regularly. Their next album was \"Some Blue-Eyed Soul\"; the term blue-eyed soul was first used to refer to the Righteous Brothers by black DJs, but after they became popular, the term became a general term for all white singers who sang what was then considered \"black music\". In October and November 1964, they opened for the Rolling Stones on their American tour.\n1964\u20131965: The Spector years.\nIn 1964, music producer Phil Spector came across the Righteous Brothers when they performed in a show at the Cow Palace in Daly City, where one of Spector's acts, the Ronettes, was also appearing, and he conducted the band for the show. Spector was impressed enough to arrange a deal with Moonglow in early October 1964 allowing him to record and release songs by the Righteous Brothers in the US, Canada and UK under his own label, Philles Records. Prior to this, all the songs Spector produced for Philles Records featured African-American singers; the Righteous Brothers would be his first white vocal group for the label. However, their \"blue-eyed soul\" vocal style suited Spector.\nSpector commissioned Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil to write a song for them, which turned out to be \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'\". The song, released in late 1964, became their first major hit single and reached No. 1 in February 1965. Produced by Phil Spector, the record is often cited as one of the finest expressions of Spector's Wall of Sound production techniques. It is one of the most successful pop singles of its time, despite exceeding the then-standard length for radio play. Indeed, according to BMI, \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'\" became the most-played song on American radio and television of the 20th century, with more than eight million airplays by the end of 1999.\nThe Righteous Brothers had several other hit singles with Philles Records in 1965, including \"Just Once in My Life\" and \"Unchained Melody\" (originally the B-side of \"Hung on You\"), both reaching the Billboard Top 10. Medley said that he produced \"Unchained Melody\"; the song was originally intended only as a track on the album \"Just Once in My Life\", and Spector had asked him to produce the albums so Spector could spend time and money on producing singles. Later copies of the original 45 release credited Spector as producer when it became a hit.\nAfter the success of \"Unchained Melody\", Spector started releasing older songs with the Righteous Brothers, including \"Ebb Tide\", which reached No. 5. Hatfield was the only vocal on \"Unchained Melody\" and \"Ebb Tide\", and both were songs Bobby Hatfield had performed with his first group, the Variations. According to Medley, both the early singles \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'\" and \"Just Once in My Life\" featured Medley's vocal strongly, which caused some friction between the duo, and the Hatfield solos in later singles restored some balance between the two. The last single released that they recorded with Philles Records was \"The White Cliffs of Dover\". Although Spector focused his attention in producing singles, a number of albums by the Righteous Brothers released with Philles Records sold well.\nIn 1965, they had a couple of guest appearances in the films \"A Swingin' Summer\" and \"Beach Ball\". They also became the first rock and roll act to play the Strip in Las Vegas (at The Sands).\n1966\u20131967: Verve Records.\nThe duo's relationship with Spector however ended in some acrimony; in 1966 they signed with Verve/MGM Records, leading to a lawsuit from Spector, which MGM settled with a $600,000 payment to Spector. Their next release in 1966, \"(You're My) Soul and Inspiration\" was a Phil Spector sound-alike song. The song was first written by Mann and Weil after the success of \"Lovin' Feelin'\" but not completed, and they finished the song following a request by Medley after the Righteous Brothers moved to Verve. Medley then produced the completed song, and was able to fully simulate the Spector style of production and achieve a similar sound to that of \"Lovin' Feelin'\". It quickly became their second No. 1 U.S. hit, staying at the top for three weeks.\nAfter a few more top-40 hits, including \"He\" and \"Go Ahead And Cry\", their popularity began to decline. Even a collaboration with former Motown A&amp;R chief William \"Mickey\" Stevenson failed to work. In 1967, before they went their separate ways, and, to capitalize on their previous hits, Verve/MGM issued a \"Greatest Hits\" compilation which has been modified twice: in 1983 with 10 tracks and in 1990 with two more tracks.\n1968\u20131975: Break up and reunion.\nThe duo split up in February 1968, a breakup that would last for more than six years, when Medley left to pursue a solo career. Medley recorded a few solo recordings on several labels, while Hatfield teamed up with singer Jimmy Walker (from the Knickerbockers) using the Righteous Brothers name on the MGM label. Medley first recorded \"I Can't Make It Alone\" written by Carole King, but the song failed to make much of an impact. The following single, \"Brown Eyed Woman\" written by Mann and Weil, performed better. However, neither he nor Hatfield was able to match their previous chart success.\nHatfield and Jimmy Walker recorded an album, \"Re-Birth\", as The Righteous Brothers before disbanding in 1971. In a 2013 interview, Jimmy Walker said he had wanted to continue, but Hatfield decided to take a break and broke up the act. In 1969, Hatfield appeared in a TV movie, \"The Ballad of Andy Crocker\", and also recorded \"Only You\". He released a solo album, \"Messin' In Muscle Shoals\" in 1971.\nAccording to Medley, he was performing three shows a night in Las Vegas, but finding it too much of a strain on his voice singing solo, and under advice he sought out Hatfield to reform the Righteous Brothers; Hatfield at this point was broke and living alone in a small apartment. In 1974, Medley and Hatfield announced their reunion at an appearance on \"The Sonny &amp; Cher Comedy Hour\". They signed with Haven Records, run by producers Dennis Lambert and Brian Potter and distributed by Capitol Records. Within a few weeks of reforming, they recorded Alan O'Day's \"Rock and Roll Heaven\", a paean to several deceased rock singers which became a hit, peaking at No. 3 on the Billboard Hot 100. Several more minor hits on Haven followed. After 1975, however, the Righteous Brothers would not appear in music charts except for re-releases of older songs and compilation albums, some of which were re-recordings of earlier works.\n1976\u20132003: Later career and solo works.\nBetween 1976 and 1981, Hatfield and Medley stopped performing as a duo after the death of Medley's first wife, as he wanted time off to look after his son. They reunited for an anniversary special on \"American Bandstand\" in 1981 to perform an updated version of \"Rock and Roll Heaven\". They resumed touring intermittently, and they recorded a 21st Anniversary Celebration concert in 1983 at the Roxy on the Sunset Strip in Los Angeles, which was later released on video and was also aired on television.\nIn the late 1970s, Medley once again began to record as a solo artist and had some success in the 1980s. In 1984, he scored country hits with \"Till Your Memory's Gone\" and \"I Still Do\", the latter also an adult-contemporary crossover hit. In late 1987, his duet with Jennifer Warnes, \"(I've Had) The Time of My Life\", which appeared on the soundtrack for \"Dirty Dancing\", topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. It won them a Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals.\nIn 1990, Bobby Hatfield's original recording of \"Unchained Melody\" was featured in the popular feature film \"Ghost\", starring Patrick Swayze and Demi Moore. It triggered an avalanche of requests to Top 40 radio stations by fans who had seen the movie to play the 1965 Righteous Brothers' recording. This motivated Polygram (which now owned the Verve/MGM label archives) to re-release the song to Top 40 radio. It became a major hit for a second time, reaching No. 13 on the Hot 100 in 1990. It also became their second No. 1 in the UK. The duo quickly re-recorded another version of \"Unchained Melody\" for Curb Records. Both the reissued and the re-recorded songs charted at the same time for several weeks, and the Righteous Brothers made history as the first act to have two versions of the same song in the Top 20 at the same time. The re-recorded \"Unchained Melody\" hit No. 19 on the Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).\nThey also re-recorded other songs for a budget-priced CD, \"The Best of The Righteous Brothers\", released by Curb Records. Medley would later describe the re-recordings as \"artistically, a stupid idea; financially, a wonderfully idea\". The album sold very well and received a double platinum certification from the RIAA. A greatest hits CD collection of the original recordings called \"\" was released later by Verve/Polydor. This compilation album also became their first entry in the UK album chart. They began to tour extensively all through the 1990s and early 2000s and performed for about 12 weeks a year in Las Vegas.\nHatfield's death.\nBobby Hatfield was found dead in his hotel room in Kalamazoo, Michigan, on November 5, 2003, shortly before he was due to perform at a concert with Bill Medley at Western Michigan University's Miller Auditorium. The autopsy report attributed his death to heart failure brought on by cocaine. Bill Medley continued to perform as a solo artist for some time after Hatfield's death, occasionally singing with a screen projection of old film footage of Hatfield.\n2016: The Righteous Brothers revived.\nIn January 2016, Medley announced he intended to revive the Righteous Brothers for the first time since 2003. The late Hatfield was replaced with singer Bucky Heard at Las Vegas's Harrah's Showroom for more than 40 shows from March 23, 2016, to November 8. The repertoire included some of the Righteous Brothers' best-known songs, such as \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'\", \"Soul &amp; Inspiration\", \"Unchained Melody\", but also the later \"Rock and Roll Heaven\", as well as Bill Medley's \"The Time of My Life\". Medley explained that it was the encouragement of the Righteous Brothers' fans as well as several friends, producers and contacts in Las Vegas that made him consider reviving the Righteous Brothers' name again, while acknowledging that it was a difficult choice to continue without Hatfield, saying \"I've had a million fans hollering at me to keep the Righteous Brothers alive... I looked at a couple of guys, but you know, you can't replace Bobby Hatfield, he's the best in the world\". Medley was previously acquainted with Heard and watched him perform at a tribute concert to Journey, after which he realized that Heard was the only one he would consider capable of filling Hatfield's shoes, also noting that he and Heard had good chemistry together. Medley approached Heard a few days later and discussed the matter, which ended in a coin toss, which Medley won, resulting in Heard accepting Medley's proposal. Heard has since communicated that he knows he can never replace Hatfield, nor will he attempt to do so and that he intends to sing like Hatfield rather than sound like him. A new CD was released the same year, featuring several of the Righteous Brothers' hit singles sung by Medley and Heard.\nIn early 2024, after six decades of touring, Bill Medley announced his forthcoming retirement from the road with the Righteous Brothers; Lovin' Feelin' Farewell Tour. The tour commenced in January 2024, running throughout the year and into early 2025.\nIn 2025, Medley released a solo album, \"Straight from the Heart\".\nAwards and nominations.\nThe Righteous Brothers were nominated twice for a Grammy. In 1965, their recording of \"You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin\" was nominated in the Best Rock And Roll Recording category at the 7th Annual Grammy Awards. Their re-recording of \"Unchained Melody\" was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group at the 1991 Grammy. They were also awarded the Best New Singing Group in the Billboard Disc Jockey Poll in 1965.\nThe Righteous Brothers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on March 10, 2003. They were inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2005. In 2019, the Righteous Brothers were Inducted into the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nDiscography.\nFor their discography as solo artists, see Bill Medley and Bobby Hatfield.\nCompilation albums.\nMany compilation albums by The Righteous Brothers have been released, the following is a selection of compilation albums that received certifications.\nSingles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26129", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26129", "title": "Rajiv Gandhi", "text": "Prime Minister of India from 1984 to 1989\nRajiv Gandhi (20 August 1944 \u2013 21 May 1991) was an Indian statesman and pilot who served as the prime minister of India from 1984 to 1989. He took office after the assassination of his mother, then\u2013prime minister Indira Gandhi, to become at the age of 40 the youngest Indian prime minister. He served until his defeat at the 1989 election, and then became Leader of the Opposition, Lok Sabha, resigning in December 1990, six months before his own assassination.\nGandhi was not related to Mahatma Gandhi. Instead, he was from the politically powerful Nehru\u2013Gandhi family, which had been associated with the Indian National Congress party. For much of his childhood, his maternal grandfather Jawaharlal Nehru was prime minister. Gandhi attended The Doon School, an elite boarding institution, and then the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom. He returned to India in 1966 and became a professional pilot for the state-owned Indian Airlines. In 1968, he married Sonia Maino; the couple settled in Delhi for a domestic life with their children Rahul and Priyanka. For much of the 1970s, his mother was prime minister and his younger brother Sanjay an MP; despite this, Gandhi remained apolitical.\nAfter Sanjay died in a plane crash in 1980, Gandhi reluctantly entered politics at the behest of his mother. The following year he won his brother's Parliamentary seat of Amethi and became a member of the Lok Sabha, the lower house of India's Parliament. As part of his political grooming, Rajiv was made general secretary of the Congress party and given significant responsibility in organising the 1982 Asian Games.\nOn the morning of 31 October 1984, his mother (the then prime minister) was assassinated by her two Sikh bodyguards Satwant Singh and Beant Singh in the aftermath of Operation Blue Star, an Indian military action to remove Sikh separatist activists from the Golden Temple. Later that day, Gandhi was appointed prime minister. His leadership was tested over the next few days as organised mobs rioted against the Sikh community, resulting in anti-Sikh massacres in Delhi. That December, the Congress party won the largest Lok Sabha majority to date, 414 seats out of 541. Gandhi's period in office was mired in controversies such as Bhopal disaster, Bofors scandal and \"Mohd. Ahmed Khan v. Shah Bano Begum\". In 1988, he reversed the coup in Maldives, antagonising militant Tamil groups such as PLOTE, intervening and then sending peacekeeping troops to Sri Lanka in 1987, leading to open conflict with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). His party was defeated in the 1989 election.\nGandhi remained Congress president until the elections in 1991. While campaigning for the elections, he was assassinated by a suicide bomber from the LTTE. In 1991, the Indian government posthumously awarded Gandhi the Bharat Ratna, the country's highest civilian award. At the India Leadership Conclave in 2009, the Revolutionary Leader of Modern India award was conferred posthumously on Gandhi.\nEarly life and career.\nRajiv Gandhi was born in Bombay (Mumbai) on 20 August 1944 in British ruled India to anti-colonial Indian activists Indira and Feroze Gandhi. In 1951, Rajiv and his younger brother Sanjay were admitted to Shiv Niketan school, where the teachers said Gandhi was shy and introverted, and \"greatly enjoyed painting and drawing\". He then studied at the St. Columba's School, Delhi. Thereafter, he was admitted to the preparatory Welham Boys' School and then moved to The Doon School, Dehradun in 1954, where Sanjay joined him two years later. At Doon, Gandhi's senior was Mani Shankar Aiyar, who later became a prominent member in his inner circle. Gandhi was also educated at the Ecole d'Humanit\u00e9, an international boarding school in Switzerland. He left the Doon School in 1961 with a second-class certificate, having performed well in his final subjects apart from a pass mark in chemistry.\nDuring Gandhi's final year at Doon, his mother and Albert D'Rozario, the scientific attach\u00e9 at the Indian High Commission in London, arranged his application to Cambridge University. D'Rozario, who had been a college classmate of Gandhi's father Feroze, recommended that Gandhi should read engineering, and met with Mark Pryor, the Senior Tutor at Trinity College, Cambridge. Pryor arranged for Gandhi's conditional admission to Trinity, contingent on his passing the Mechanical Sciences Qualifying (MSQ) Examination with acceptable marks. After studying for his A-Levels at the sixth form college of Davies, Laing &amp; Dick in London, Gandhi sat the MSQ Examination in March 1962 but was unsuccessful. He passed on his second attempt in June, and was admitted to Trinity on 4 September 1962, joining the college in October. While at Trinity, he joined the Cambridge University Boat Club.\nDuring Gandhi's time at Cambridge, his mother and D'Rozario remained concerned about his well-being. D'Rozario, who along with his wife Sophy often hosted Gandhi at their Finchley home, took Gandhi to task for his inattention towards his studies. Despite his support, Gandhi failed end-of-year exams and left Trinity in 1965 without a degree, though he kept in touch with his former mentor in his retirement. In 1966 he began a course in mechanical engineering at Imperial College London, but also failed to complete it. Gandhi really was not studious enough, as he went on to admit later.\nGandhi returned to India in 1966, the year his mother became prime minister. He went to Delhi and became a member of the Flying Club, where he trained as a pilot. In 1970, he was employed as a pilot by Indian Airlines; unlike Sanjay, he did not exhibit any interest of joining politics. In 1968, after three years of courtship, he married Sonia M\u00e0ino. Their first child, a son, Rahul was born in 1970. In 1972, the couple had a daughter, Priyanka, who married Robert Vadra. Gandhi was a friend of Amitabh Bachchan, and was familiar with Bachchan even before he launched his acting career. Rajiv, Sanjay and Bachchan spent time together when Bachchan was student in Delhi University and a resident of New Delhi. In the 1980s, Bachchan entered politics to support Gandhi.\nEntry into politics.\nOn 23 June 1980, Rajiv's younger brother Sanjay Gandhi died unexpectedly in an aeroplane crash. At that time, Rajiv Gandhi was in London as part of his foreign tour. Hearing the news, he returned to Delhi and cremated Sanjay's body. As per Agarwal, in the week following Sanjay's death, Shankaracharya Swami Shri Swaroopanand, a saint from Badrinath, visited the family's house to offer his condolences. He advised Rajiv not to fly aeroplanes and instead \"dedicate himself to the service of the nation\". Seventy members of the Congress party signed a proposal and went to Indira, urging Rajiv to enter politics. Indira told them it was Rajiv's decision whether to enter politics. When he was questioned about it, he replied, \"If my mother gets help from it, then I will enter politics\". Rajiv entered politics on 16 February 1981, when he addressed a national farmers' rally in Delhi. During this time, he was still an employee of Air India.\nParticipation in active politics.\nOn 4 May 1981, Indira Gandhi presided over a meeting of the All India Congress Committee. Vasantdada Patil proposed Rajiv as a candidate for Sanjay's old constituency, Amethi, which was accepted by all members at the meeting. A week later, the party officially announced his candidacy for the constituency. He then paid the party membership fees of the party and flew to Sultanpur to file his nomination papers and completed other formalities. He won the seat, defeating Lok Dal candidate Sharad Yadav by a margin of 237,000 votes. He took his oath on 17 August as Member of Parliament.\nRajiv Gandhi's first political tour was to England, where he attended the wedding ceremony of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer on 29 July 1981. In December the same year, he was put in charge of the Indian Youth Congress. He first showed his organisational ability by \"working round the clock\" on the 1982 Asian Games. He was one of 33 members of the Indian parliament who were part of the Games' organising committee; sports historian Boria Majumdar writes that being \"son of the prime minister he had a moral and unofficial authority\" over the others. The report submitted by the Asian Games committee mentions Gandhi's \"drive, zeal and initiative\" for the \"outstanding success\" of the games.\n1984 anti-Sikh riots post Indira Gandhi's death.\nOn 31 October 1984, the prime minister, Rajiv Gandhi's mother, Indira Gandhi, was assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards, which led to violent riots against Sikhs. Sources estimate the number of Sikh deaths to be between 8,000 and 17,000. At a Boat Club rally 19 days after the assassination, Gandhi said, \"Some riots took place in the country following the murder of Indiraji. We know the people were very angry and for a few days it seemed that India had been shaken. But, when a mighty tree falls, it is only natural that the earth around it does shake a little\". According to Verinder Grover, the statement made by Gandhi was a \"virtual justification\" of the riots. Congress leader Mani Shankar Aiyar wrote, \"Did it constitute an incitement to mass murder?\" He also criticised Gandhi for his reluctance to bring the army from Meerut to handle the mob.\nPrime Minister of India (1984\u20131989).\nRajiv Gandhi was in West Bengal on 31 October 1984 when his mother, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, was assassinated by two of her Sikh bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, to avenge the military attack on the Golden Temple during Operation Blue Star. Sardar Buta Singh and President Zail Singh pressed Rajiv to succeed his mother as prime minister within hours of her murder. Commenting on the anti-Sikh riots in Delhi, Rajiv Gandhi said, \"When a giant tree falls, the earth below shakes\"; a statement for which he was widely criticised. Many Congress politicians were accused of orchestrating the violence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndian politics got the youngest ever Prime minister in Rajiv Gandhi. This phenomenon attracted attention the world over. . . his winsome smile, charm and decency were his valuable personal assets. . . A senior opposition member, while talking to me, conceded that . . . he could not conceal his feeling that Rajiv Gandhi would be invincible for the opposition.\n \u2014 \"Satyendra Narayan Sinha\"\nSoon after assuming office, Gandhi asked President Singh to dissolve Parliament and hold fresh elections, as the Lok Sabha had completed its five-year term. Gandhi officially became the president of the Congress party, which won a landslide victory with the largest majority in history of the Indian Parliament, giving Gandhi absolute control of government. He benefited from his youth and a general perception of being free of a background in corrupt politics. Gandhi took his oath on 31 December 1984; at 40, he was the youngest prime minister of India. Historian Meena Agarwal writes that even after taking the Prime Ministerial oath, he was a relatively unknown figure, \"novice in politics\" as he assumed the post after being an MP for three years.\nCabinet ministers.\nAfter his swearing-in as prime minister, Gandhi appointed his fourteen-member cabinet. He said he would monitor their performance and would \"fire ministers who do not come to the mark\". From the Third Indira Gandhi ministry, he removed two powerful figures; Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee and Railway Minister A. B. A. Ghani Khan Choudhury. Mohsina Kidwai became the Minister of Railways; she was the only female figure in the cabinet. Former Home Minister PV Narasimha Rao was put in charge of defence. V. P. Singh, who was initially appointed as the Finance Minister, was given the Defence Ministry in 1987. During his tenure as prime minister, Gandhi frequently shuffled his cabinet ministers, drawing criticism from the magazine \"India Today\", which called it a \"wheel of confusion\". The West Bengal chief minister Jyoti Basu said, \"The Cabinet change reflects the instability of the Congress (I) Government at the Centre\". He also administered and created the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.\nDosco Mafia or Doon Cabinet.\nGandhi, an alumnus of The Doon School, drew criticism from the media for appointing many old boys to his administration. His inner circle was labelled a \"Doon Cabinet\" or \"Dosco Mafia\", and \"Washington Post\" reported, \"The catch phrase around Delhi these days is that the 'Doon School runs India,' but that is too simple an analysis for a complex, chaotic country with so many competing spheres of influence.\" Gandhi's reliance on Doon alumni for political advice later led Prime Minister Morarji Desai to remark, \"If I had anything to do with this place, I'd close it down\".\nAnti-defection law.\nGandhi's first action as prime minister was passing the anti-defection law in January 1985. According to this law, an elected Member of Parliament or legislative assembly could not join an opposition party until the next election. Historian Manish Telikicherla Chary calls it a measure of curbing corruption and bribery of ministers by switching parties so they could gain majority. Many such defections occurred during the 1980s as elected leaders of the Congress party joined opposition parties.\n1985 Congress Sandesh Yatra.\nRajiv Gandhi had announced 'Sandesh Yatra' at the plenary session of AICC in Mumbai in 1985. The All India Congress Seva Dal ran it across the country. Pradesh Congress Committees (PCCs) and party leaders made four simultaneous trips from Mumbai, Kashmir, Kanyakumari and the Northeast. The yatra, which lasted for more than three months, concluded at Delhi's Ramlila Maidan.\nMass connect programmes though Bharat Yatra.\nIn 1990, Rajiv Gandhi undertook Bharat Yatra through different modes \u2013 padyatra, the second class carriage of an ordinary passenger train. He chose Champaran as the starting point for his 'Bharat Yatra'. Rajiv Gandhi started the Sadbhavna Yatra from Charminar in Hyderabad on 19 October 1990.\nShah Bano case.\nIn 1985, the Supreme Court of India ruled in favour of Muslim divorcee Shah Bano, declaring that her husband should give her alimony. Some Indian Muslims treated it as an encroachment upon Muslim Personal Law and protested against it. Gandhi agreed to their demands. In 1986, the Parliament of India passed The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1986, which nullified the Supreme Court's judgment in the Shah Bano case. The Act diluted the Supreme Court judgment and allowed maintenance payments to divorced women only during the period of Iddah, or until 90 days after the divorce, according to the provisions of Islamic law. This was in contrast to Section 125 of the Code. Indian magazine \"Business and Economics\" called it a minority appeasement by Gandhi. Lawyer and former Law Minister of India, Ram Jethmalani, called the Act \"retrogressive obscurantism for short-term minority populism\". Gandhi's colleague Arif Mohammad Khan, who was then a Member of Parliament, resigned in protest.\nEconomic policy.\nIn his election manifesto for the 1984 general election, he did not mention any economic reforms, but after assuming office he tried to liberalise the country's economy. He sought to liberalise India's trade policies but faced stiff opposition to the proposed reforms. He did so by providing incentives to make private production profitable. Subsidies were given to corporate companies to increase industrial production, especially of durable goods. It was hoped this would increase economic growth and improve the quality of investment. Rural and tribal people protested because they saw them as \"pro-rich\" and \"pro-city\" reforms.\nGandhi increased government support for science, technology and associated industries, and reduced import quotas, taxes and tariffs on technology-based industries, especially computers, airlines, defence and telecommunications. In 1986, he announced a National Policy on Education to modernise and expand higher education programs across India. In 1986, he founded the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya System, which is a Central government-based education institution that provides rural populations with free residential education from grades six to twelve. His efforts created MTNL in 1986, and his public call offices\u2014better known as PCOs\u2014helped develop the telephone network in rural areas. He introduced measures to significantly reduce the \"Licence Raj\" after 1990, allowing businesses and individuals to purchase capital, consumer goods and import without bureaucratic restrictions.\nForeign policy.\nAccording to Rejaul Karim Laskar, a scholar of Indian foreign policy and an ideologue of Congress party, Rajiv Gandhi's vision for a new world order was premised on India's place in its front rank. According to Laskar, the \"whole gamut\" of Rajiv Gandhi's foreign policy was \"geared towards\" making India \"strong, independent, self-reliant and in the front rank of the nations of the world.\" According to Laskar, Rajiv Gandhi's diplomacy was \"properly calibrated\" so as to be \"conciliatory and accommodating when required\" and \"assertive when the occasion demanded.\"\nIn 1986, by request of the president of Seychelles France-Albert Ren\u00e9, Gandhi sent India's navy to Seychelles to oppose an attempted coup against Ren\u00e9. The intervention of India averted the coup. This mission was codenamed as Operation Flowers are Blooming. In 1987, India re-occupied the Quaid Post in the disputed Siachen region of the Indo-Pakistani border after winning what was termed Operation Rajiv. In the 1988 Maldives coup d'\u00e9tat, the Maldives president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom asked for help from Gandhi. He dispatched 1500 soldiers and the coup was suppressed.\nOn Thursday, 9 June 1988, at the fifteenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, held at Headquarters, New York, Gandhi made vocal his views on a world free of nuclear weapons, to be realised through an, 'Action Plan for Ushering in a Nuclear-Weapon Free and Non-Violent World Order.'\nHe said:\nAlas, nuclear weapons are not the only weapons of mass destruction. New knowledge is being generated in the life sciences. Military applications of these developments could rapidly undermine the existing convention against the military use of biological weapons. The ambit of our concern must extend to all means of mass annihilation.\nThis was based on his prior historic speech before the Japanese National Diet on 29 November 1985, in which he said:\nLet us remove the mental partitions which obstruct the ennobling vision of the human family linked together in peace and prosperity. The Buddha's message of compassion is the very condition of human survival in our age.\nThe foiled bid of India recently to enter the Nuclear Suppliers Group, echoed his policy of non-proliferation to be linked to universal disarmament, which the World Nuclear Association refuses to recognise; non-proliferation being seen by India as essentially a weapon of the arms control regime, of the big nuclear powers as United States, Russia, United Kingdom, France, and China.\nPakistan.\nIn February 1987, the Pakistani president Zia-ul-Haq visited Delhi, where he met Gandhi to discuss \"routine military exercises of the Indian army\" on the borders of Rajasthan and Punjab. Gandhi reciprocated, in December 1988, by visiting Islamabad and meeting the new prime minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto, to reaffirm the 1972 Shimla agreement.\nSri Lanka.\nThe Sri Lankan Civil War broke out with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which was demanding an independent Tamil state in Sri Lanka. Gandhi discussed the matter with the Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranasinghe Premadasa at the SAARC meeting in 1986. In that year, the Sri Lankan army blockaded the Tamil majority district of Jaffna; Gandhi ordered relief supplies to be dropped into the area by parachute because the Sri Lankan navy did not allow the Indian Navy to enter.\nGandhi signed the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord in July 1987. The accord \"envisaged a devolution of power to the Tamil-majority areas\", dissolved the LTTE, and designated Tamil as an official language of Sri Lanka. Gandhi said:\nThe Government of India believe that, despite some problems and delays, many of which were foreseen but unavoidable in the resolution of an issue of this magnitude and complexity, this Agreement represents the only way of safeguarding legitimate Tamil interests and ensuring a durable peace in Sri Lanka. Some have chosen to criticise the Agreement. None has shown a better way of meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Tamils in Sri Lanka, restoring peace in that country and of meeting our own security concern in the region. We have accepted a role which is difficult, but which is in our national interests to discharge. We shall not shrink our obligations and commitments. This is a national endeavour.\nChanderasekar withdrew the IPKF in 1989.\nAssault by Sri Lankan guard.\nOn 30 July 1987, a day after Gandhi went to Sri Lanka and signed the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord, an honour guard named Vijitha Rohana hit him on his shoulder with his rifle; Gandhi's quick reflexes saved him from injury. The guard was then dragged off by his security personnel. The guard said his intention was to kill Gandhi because of \"the damage he had caused\" to Sri Lanka. Wijemuni was imprisoned for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years for the assault. Gandhi later said about the incident:\nWhen I was inspecting the guard of honour and as I walked past one person, I saw through the corner of my eye some movement. I ducked down a little bit in a reflex action. By my ducking, he missed my head and the brunt of the blow came on my shoulder below the left ear.\nRegional issues.\nPunjab.\nSoon after assuming office, Gandhi released the leaders of the Akali Dal who had been imprisoned since 1984's Operation Blue Star during Indira Gandhi's prime ministership. He lifted the ban on All India Sikh Students Federation and filed an inquiry into the 1984 Anti-Sikh Riots. He also held a closed-door meeting with senior Akali Dal leaders to find a solution to the Punjab problem. Despite Akali opposition, in January 1985, Gandhi signed the Rajiv-Longowal Accord with Akali leader HS Longowal. Punjab's state assembly election was scheduled in September 1985, but Longowal died and was replaced by Surjit Singh Barnala, who formed the government. After two years, in 1987, Barnala resigned his office because of a breakdown of law and order, leading to the implementation of President's rule in the state.\nIn May 1988, Gandhi launched the Operation Black Thunder to clear the Golden Temple in Amritsar of arms and gunmen. Two groups called National Security Guard and Special Action Group were created; they surrounded the temple in a 10-day siege during which the extremists' weapons were confiscated. Congress leader Anand Sharma said, \"Operation Black Thunder effectively demonstrated the will of Rajiv Gandhi's government to take firm action to bring peace to Punjab\".\nNortheast India.\nGandhi's prime-ministership marked an increase of insurgency in northeast India. Mizo National Front demanded independence for Mizoram. In 1987, Gandhi addressed this problem; Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were given the status of states that were earlier union territories. Gandhi also ended the Assam Movement, which was launched by Assamese people to protest against the alleged illegal migration of Bangladeshi Muslims and immigration of other Bengalis to their state, which had reduced the Assamese to a minority there. He signed the Assam Accord on 15 August 1985. According to the accord, foreigners who came to the state between 1951 and 1961 were given full citizenship but those who arrived there between 1961 and 1971 did not get right to vote for the next ten years.\nTechnology.\nGandhi employed former Rockwell International executive Sam Pitroda as his adviser on public information infrastructure and innovation. During Gandhi's time in office, public sector telecom companies MTNL and VSNL were developed. According to Pitroda, Gandhi's ability to resist pressure from multi-national companies to abandon his plan to spread telecommunication services has been an important factor in India's development. According to news website Oneindia, \"About 20 years ago telephones were considered to be a thing for the use of the rich, but credit goes to Rajiv Gandhi for taking them to the rural masses\". Pitroda also said their plan to expand India's telephone network succeeded because of Gandhi's political support. According to Pitroda, by 2007 they were \"adding six million phones every month\". Gandhi's government also allowed the import of fully assembled motherboards, which led to the price of computers being reduced. According to some commentators, the seed for the information technology (IT) revolution was also planted during Rajiv Gandhi's time.\nBofors scandal, HDW scandal and 1989 elections defeat.\nRajiv Gandhi's finance minister, V. P. Singh, uncovered compromising details about government and political corruption, to the consternation of Congress leaders. Transferred to the Defence Ministry, Singh uncovered what became known as the Bofors scandal, which involved millions of US dollars and concerned alleged payoffs by the Swedish arms company Bofors through Italian businessman and Gandhi family associate Ottavio Quattrocchi, in return for Indian contracts. Upon discovering the scandal, Singh was dismissed from office and later resigned his Congress membership. Gandhi was later personally implicated in the scandal when the investigation was continued by Narasimhan Ram and Chitra Subramaniam of \"The Hindu\" newspaper, damaging his image as an honest politician. In 2004, he was posthumously cleared of this allegation.\nIn an interview in July 2005, V. P. Singh explained that his fall out with Rajiv Gandhi was not due to the Bofors deal, but rather due to the HDW deal. Courtesy a contract signed with the German \ncompany HDW in 1981, the Indian government had agreed to purchase two ready submarines built in Germany by HDW and two submarines in CKD form to be assembled in Mazagaon docks. V. P. Singh had received a telegram from the Indian ambassador in Germany, stating that an Indian agent had received commissions in the HDW submarine deal. He told Rajiv Gandhi about this and instituted an enquiry. This led to differences and V. P. Singh resigned from the cabinet.\nIn his book, \"Unknown Facets of Rajiv Gandhi, Jyoti Basu and Indrajit Gupta\", released in November 2013, former CBI director Dr. A P Mukherjee wrote that Gandhi wanted commission paid by defence suppliers to be used exclusively for meeting running expenses of the Congress party. Mukherjee said Gandhi explained his position in a meeting between the two at the prime minister's residence on 19 June 1989. In May 2015, Indian president Pranab Mukherjee said the scandal was a \"media trial\" as \"no Indian court has as yet established it as a scandal\".\nOpposition parties Lok Dal, Indian National Congress (Socialist) and Jan Morcha united under Singh to form the Janata Dal. Singh led the National Front coalition to victory in 1989 elections and he was sworn in as prime minister. Though the coalition won 143 seats compared to Congress's 197, it gained majority in the lower house of the parliament through outside support from the Bharatiya Janta Party under the leadership of Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Lal Krishna Advani and the left parties such as the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and the Communist Party of India. Eminent lawyer and politician, former Law Minister of India Ram Jethmalani said that as prime minister, Gandhi was \"lacklustre and mediocre\".\nAssassination.\nRajiv Gandhi's last public meeting was on 21 May 1991, at Sriperumbudur, a village approximately from Madras (present-day Chennai), where he was assassinated while campaigning for the Sriperumbudur Lok Sabha Congress candidate. At 10:10 pm, a woman later identified as 22-year old Kalaivani Rajaratnam \u2013 a member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam \u2013 approached Gandhi in public and greeted him. She then bent down to touch his feet and detonated a belt laden with of RDX explosives tucked under her dress. The explosion killed Gandhi, Rajaratnam, and at least 14 other people. The assassination was captured by a 21-year-old local photographer, whose camera and film were found at the site. The cameraman, named Haribabu, died in the blast but the camera remained intact. Gandhi's mutilated body was airlifted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi for post-mortem, reconstruction, and embalming.\nA state funeral was held for Gandhi on 24 May 1991; it was telecast live and was attended by dignitaries from over 60 countries. He was cremated at Vir Bhumi, on the banks of the river Yamuna near the shrines of his mother Indira Gandhi, brother Sanjay Gandhi, and grandfather Jawaharlal Nehru.\nAftermath.\nThe Supreme Court judgement, by Justice K. T. Thomas, confirmed that Gandhi was killed because of personal animosity by the LTTE chief Prabhakaran arising from his sending the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) to Sri Lanka and the IPKF atrocities against Sri Lankan Tamils. The Gandhi administration had already antagonised other Tamil militant organisations like PLOTE for reversing the 1988 military coup in Maldives. The judgement further cites the death of Thileepan in a hunger strike and the suicide by 12 LTTE cadres in a vessel in Oct 1987.\nIn the Jain Commission report, various people and agencies are named as suspects in the murder of Rajiv Gandhi. Among them, the cleric Chandraswami was suspected of involvement, including financing the assassination. Nalini Sriharan, the only surviving member of the five-member squad behind the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, is serving life imprisonment. Arrested on 14 June 1991, she and 25 others were sentenced to death by a special court on 28 January 1998. The court confirmed the death sentences of four of the convicts, including Nalini, on 11 May 1999. Nalini was a close friend of an LTTE operative known as Sriharan alias Murugan, another convict in the case who has been sentenced to death. Nalini later gave birth to a girl, Harithra, in prison. Nalini's death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment in April 2000. Rajiv's widow, Sonia Gandhi, intervened and asked for clemency for Nalini on the grounds of the latter being a mother. Later, it was reported that Gandhi's daughter, Priyanka, had met Nalini at Vellore Central Prison in March 2008. Nalini regrets the killing of Gandhi and said the real conspirators have not been caught yet.\nIn August 2011, the president of India rejected the clemency pleas of Murugan and two others on death row\u2014Suthendraraja, alias Santhan, and Perarivalan, alias Arivu. The execution of the three convicts was scheduled for 9 September 2011. However, the Madras High Court intervened and stayed their executions for eight weeks based on their petitions. In 2010, Nalini had petitioned the Madras High Court seeking release because she had served more than 20 years in prison. She argued that even life convicts were released after 14 years. The state government rejected her request. Murugan, Santhan and Perarivalan have said they are political prisoners rather than ordinary criminals. On 18 February 2014, the Supreme Court of India commuted the death sentences of Murugan, Santhan and Perarivalan to life imprisonment, holding that the 11-year-long delay in deciding their mercy petition had a dehumanising effect on them. On 19 February 2014 Tamil Nadu government decided to release all seven convicts in Rajiv Gandhi's assassination case, including A. G. Perarivalan and Nalini. The Government of India challenged this decision before the Supreme Court, which referred the case to a Constitution Bench.\nThe report of the Jain Commission created controversy when it accused the Tamil Nadu chief minister Karunanidhi of a role in the assassination, leading to Congress withdrawing its support for the I. K. Gujral government and fresh elections in 1998. LTTE spokesman Anton Balasingham told the Indian television channel NDTV the killing was a \"great tragedy, a monumental historical tragedy which we deeply regret\". A memorial called Vir Bhumi was constructed at the place of Gandhi's cremation in Delhi. In 1992, the Rajiv Gandhi National Sadbhavana Award was instituted by the Indian National Congress Party.\nSince his death, 21 May has been declared Anti-Terrorism Day in India.\nIn popular culture.\nA number of films have been made in India focusing on Rajiv Gandhi's life especially on his assassination. \"India's Rajiv\" is a 1991 Indian documentary television series by Simi Garewal, released closely after Gandhi's assassination it covers his life up to that event. Indian films specifically focusing on the assassination plot include \"The Terrorist\" (1997) by Santosh Sivan, \"Cyanide\" (2006) by A. M. R. Ramesh, \"Kuttrapathirikai\" (2007) by R. K. Selvamani with Anupam Kher in the role of Gandhi, \"Mission 90 Days\" (2007) by Major Ravi, and \"Madras Cafe\" (2013) by Shoojit Sircar starring Sanjay Gurbaxani as the former prime minister.\n\"Pradhanmantri\" (lit.\u2009'Prime Minister'), a 2013 Indian documentary television series which aired on ABP News and covers the various policies and political tenures of Indian PMs, includes the tenureship of Rajiv Gandhi in the episodes \"Rajiv Gandhi becomes PM and Shah Bano case\", \"Ayodhya dispute\", \"Rajiv Gandhi and Bofors scandal\", and \"Rise of LTTE and Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi\" with Mohit Chauhan portraying the role of Gandhi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "26130", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26130", "title": "Rendering", "text": ""}
{"id": "26131", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26131", "title": "Racial profiling", "text": "Law-enforcement practice\nRacial profiling or ethnic profiling is the offender profiling, selective enforcement or selective prosecution based on race or ethnicity, rather than individual suspicion or evidence. This practice involves using discriminatory practices and often relies on negative stereotypes. Racial profiling can include disproportionate stop-and-searches, traffic stops, and the use of surveillance technology for facial identification. Racial profiling can occur de jure (when state policies target specific racial groups) or de facto (when the practice occurs outside official legislation). Critics argue that racial profiling is discriminatory as it disproportionately targets people of color. Supporters claim it can be an effective tool for preventing crime but acknowledge that it should be closely monitored and used in a way that respects civil rights.\nThe subject of racial profiling has sparked debate between philosophers who disagree on its moral status. Some believe that racial profiling is morally permissible under certain circumstances, whereas others argue it is never morally permissible.\nJustifications.\nThose who argue in favor of racial profiling usually set some conditions for racial profiling to be justified, typically fairness, evidence-basedness and non-abusiveness. Proponents of racial profiling generally argue that, if these conditions are met, it can be an efficient tool for crime prevention because it allows law enforcement to focus their efforts on groups that are according to crime statistics and correlates of crime more likely to commit crimes.\nMathias Risse and Richard Zeckhauser provide a consequentialist analysis of racial profiling, weighing the benefits and costs against each other. They conclude that racial profiling is morally permissible because the harms done to the search subjects are fewer than the potential benefits for society in terms of security. Moreover, the (innocent) subjects themselves also benefit because they will live a safer environment overall.\nRisse and Zeckhauser conclude that the objections to racial profiling are not rooted in the practice per se but in background injustice in our societies. Instead of banning racial profiling, they argue, efforts should be made to remedy racial inequality in our societies.\nCriticism.\nCriticisms of racial profiling can be divided into objections against profiling \"in general\" and objections specifically against profiles about race. For examples of the former, some argue that making inferences based on purely demographic data is inegalitarian, and others that such demographic inferences are intellectually unreliable. For an example of the latter, some opponents of racial profiling claim that those who support racial profiling underestimate its collective harms and fail to recognize how the practice can exacerbate racism.\nAdam Omar Hosein argues that racial profiling may be permissible under certain circumstances, but the present circumstances (in the United States) make it unjust. The costs of racial profiling for black communities in the U.S. are much higher than Risse and Zeckhauer account for. Racial profiling can make targeted individuals assume they have an inferior political status, which can lead to an alienation from the state. This can make racial profiling turn into a self-fulfilling prophecy when an individual is more likely to commit a crime because they are perceived as a criminal.\nHosein also points to an epistemic problem. Arguments in favor of racial profiling are based on the premise that there is a correlation between belonging to a specific racial group and committing certain crimes. However, should such a correlation exist, it is based on data that is skewed by previous racial profiling. Because more subjects of a certain racial group were targeted, more crime was registered in this group. It is therefore epistemically unjustified to assume that this group commits more crime. Racial profiling intersects with gendered profiling. Some argue profiling of men contributes to sex differences in crime.\nBy country.\nCanada.\nAccusations of racial profiling of visible minorities who accuse police of targeting them due to their ethnic background is a growing concern in Canada. In 2005, the Kingston Police released the first study ever in Canada which pertains to racial profiling. The study focused on the city of Kingston, Ontario, a small city where most of the inhabitants are white. The study showed that black-skinned people were 3.7 times more likely to be pulled over by police than white-skinned people, while Asian and White people are less likely to be pulled over than Black people. Several police organizations condemned this study and suggested more studies like this would make them hesitant to pull over visible minorities.\nCanadian Aboriginals are more likely to be charged with crimes, particularly on reserves. The Canadian crime victimization survey does not collect data on the ethnic origin of perpetrators, so comparisons between incidence of victimizations and incidence of charging are impossible. Although aboriginal persons make up 3.6% of Canada's population, they account for 20% of Canada's prison population. This may show how racial profiling increases effectiveness of police, or be a result of racial profiling, as they are watched more intensely than others.\nIn February 2010, an investigation of the \"Toronto Star\" daily newspaper found that black people across Toronto were three times more likely to be stopped and documented by police than white people. To a lesser extent, the same seemed true for people described by police as having \"brown\" skin (South Asians, Arabs and Latinos). This was the result of an analysis of 1.7 million contact cards filled out by Toronto Police officers in the period 2003\u20132008.\nThe Ontario Human Rights Commission states that \"police services have acknowledged that racial profiling does occur and have taken [and are taking] measures to address [the issue], including upgrading training for officers, identifying officers at risk of engaging in racial profiling, and improving community relations\". Ottawa Police addressed this issue and planned on implementing a new policy regarding officer racially profiling persons, \"the policy explicitly forbids officers from investigating or detaining anyone based on their race and will force officers to go through training on racial profiling\". This policy was implemented after the 2008 incident where an African Canadian woman was strip searched by members of the Ottawa police. There is a video showing the strip search where one witnesses the black woman being held to the ground and then having her bra and shirt cut ripped/cut off by a member of the Ottawa Police Force which was released to the viewing of the public in 2010.\nChina.\nAccording to the New York Times, the Chinese government has been racially profiling Uyghurs using facial recognition and surveillance technology. Uyghurs are a Muslim minority living primarily in China's Western province of Xinjiang. The report described these methods as \"automated racism\". In research projects aided by European institutions it has combined the facial output with people's DNA, to create an ethnic profile. The DNA was collected at the prison camps, which are interning more than one million Uyghurs, as had been corroborated in November 2019 by data leaks, such as the China Cables.\nGermany.\nIn February 2012, the first court ruling concerning racial profiling in German police policy, allowing police to use skin color and \"non-German ethnic origin\" to select persons who will be asked for identification in spot-checks for illegal immigrants. Subsequently, it was decided legal for a person submitted to a spot-check to compare the policy to that of the SS in public. A higher court later overruled the earlier decision declaring the racial profiling unlawful and in violation of anti-discrimination provisions in Art. 3 Basic Law and the General Equal Treatment Act of 2006.\nThe civil rights organisation \"B\u00fcro zur Umsetzung von Gleichbehandlung\" (Office for the Implementation of Equal Treatment) makes a distinction between criminal profiling, which is legitimate in Germany, and ethnic profiling, which is not.\nAccording to a 2016 report by the Interior ministry in Germany, there had been an increase in hate crimes and violence against migrant groups in Germany. The reports concluded that there were more than 10 attacks per day against migrants in Germany in 2016. This report from Germany garnered the attention of the United Nations, which alleged that people of African descent face widespread discrimination in Germany.\nA 2017 statement by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Rights after a visit to Germany states: \"While the Basic Law guarantees equality, prohibits racial discrimination, and states that human dignity is inviolable, it is not being enforced.\" and calls racial profiling by police officials endemic. Recommendations include legal reform, establishing an independent complaint system, training and continuing education for the police, and investigations to promote accountability and remedy.\nEthiopia.\nEthnic profiling against Tigrayans occurred during the Tigray War that started in November 2020, with Ethiopians of Tigrayan ethnicity being put on indefinite leave from Ethiopian Airlines or refused permission to board, prevented from overseas travel, and an \"order of identifying ethnic Tigrayans from all government agencies and NGOs\" being used by federal police to request a list of ethnic Tigrayans from an office of the World Food Programme. Tigrayans' houses were arbitrarily searched and Tigrayan bank accounts were suspended. Ethnic Tigrayan members of Ethiopian components of United Nations peacekeeping missions were disarmed and some forcibly flown back to Ethiopia, at the risk of torture or execution, according to United Nations officials.\nIsrael.\nIn 1972, terrorists from the Japanese Red Army launched an attack that led to the deaths of at least 24 people at Ben Gurion Airport. Since then, security at the airport has relied on a number of fundamentals, including a heavy focus on what Raphael Ron, former director of security at Ben Gurion, terms the \"human factor\", which he generalized as \"the inescapable fact that terrorist attacks are carried out by people who can be found and stopped by an effective security methodology.\" As part of its focus on this so-called \"human factor\", Israeli security officers interrogate travelers using racial profiling, singling out those who appear to be Arab based on name or physical appearance. Additionally, all passengers, including those who do not appear to be of Arab descent, are questioned as to why they are traveling to Israel, followed by several general questions about the trip in order to search for inconsistencies. Although numerous civil rights groups have demanded an end to the profiling, the Israeli government maintains that it is both effective and unavoidable. According to Ariel Merari, an Israeli terrorism expert, \"it would be foolish not to use profiling when everyone knows that most terrorists come from certain ethnic groups. They are likely to be Muslim and young, and the potential threat justifies inconveniencing a certain ethnic group.\"\nJapan.\nIn December 2021, the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo, Japan warned of \"suspected racial profiling\" by police across Japan against non-Japanese residents. Since 2022, the number of people coming forward about racial profiling complaints against police officers in Japan has greatly expanded. In January 2024, three foreign-born residents of Japan filed a lawsuit which alleged they were repeatedly questioned by police based on their physical appearances, with one plaintiff, Pakistan-born Syed Zain, claiming that he was harassed by police at least 70 times since arriving in Japan in 2002. On 30 April 2024, an article was published by \"The Mainichi\" which provided some detail how an investigation found that numerous Japanese police officers had a high rate of racial profiling incidents which involved the targeting of foreigners.\nOne former officer from western Japan saw police consistently being ordered by senior officers to target foreigners for questioning, ID checks and searches. This officer claimed that patrol officers were told to target foreigners. People with Korean, black and Southeast Asian roots were among those most frequently targeted. White people were less targeted, often being considered by police to be either \"tourists\" or having \"a Japanese partner.\" On May 8, 2022, the \"New York Times\" reported that racial profiling was \"prevalent\" in Japan, but not often documented.\nMexico.\nThe General Law on Population (Reglamento de la Ley General de Poblacion) of 2000 in Mexico has been cited as being used to racially profile and abuse immigrants to Mexico. Mexican law makes illegal immigration punishable by law and allows law officials great discretion in identifying and questioning illegal immigrants. Mexico has been criticized for its immigration policy. Chris Hawley of \"USA Today\" stated that \"Mexico has a law that is no different from Arizona's\", referring to legislation which gives local police forces the power to check documents of people suspected of being in the country illegally. Immigration and human rights activists have also noted that Mexican authorities frequently engage in racial profiling, harassment, and shakedowns against migrants from Central America.\nSri Lanka.\nEthnic Sri Lankan Tamils traveling from the Northern Province and Eastern Province in Sri Lanka have to compulsory register with the Police and mandatory carry a police certificate as per the Prevention of Terrorism Act and emergency regulations if found not living in the house in the certificate they could be arrested. In 2007 Tamils were expelled from Colombo. The move to expel these people drew wide criticism of the government. The United States Embassy in Sri Lanka condemned the act, asking the government of Sri Lanka to ensure the constitutional rights of all the citizens of the country. Norway also condemned the act, describing it as a clear violation of international human rights law. Their press release urged government of Sri Lanka to desist from any further enforced removals. Canada has also condemned the action. Human rights groups, Local think tank and other observers have termed this act as \"ethnic cleansing\". The media group said that this type of act reminds people of what \"Hitler did to the Jews\", and the Asian Center of Human Rights urged India to intervene.\nSpain.\nRacial profiling by police forces in Spain is a common practice. A study by the University of Valencia, found that people of color are up to ten times more likely to be stopped by the police on the street. Amnesty International accused Spanish authorities of using racial and ethnic profiling, with police singling out people who are not white in the street and public places.\nIn 2011, the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) urged the Spanish government to take \"effective measures\" to ethnic profiling, including the modification of existing laws and regulations which permit its practice. In 2013, the UN Special Rapporteur, Mutuma Ruteere, described the practice of ethnic profiling by Spanish law enforcement officers \"a persisting and pervasive problem\". In 2014, the Spanish government approved a law which prohibited racial profiling by police forces.\nUnited Kingdom.\nRacial issues have been prevalent in the UK for a long time. For example, following the arrival of Windrush migrants from the Caribbean and West Indies after the Second World War, racial tensions began to flare up in the country - see the Notting Hill Race Riot. The most recent statistics from the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford in 2019 show that people born outside of the UK made up 14% of the UK's population or 9.5 million people. Black Britons make up 3% of the population and Indian Britons occupy 2.3% of the population with the remainder being largely EU or North American migrants.\nAn increase in knife crime in the capital in recent decades has led to an increase in police stop and search powers. However, there are concerns that these powers lead to discrimination and racial profiling with statistics showing that there were 54 stop and searches for every 1000 black people compared to just 6 for every 1000 white people. Following social dissatisfaction and claims of institutional racism, the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities published \"The report of the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities\" in 2021, finding overall that there was no institutional racism in the UK. The report and its findings were criticised by many including the United Nations working group who argued that the report 'attempts to normalise white supremacy' and could 'fuel racism'.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, racial profiling is mainly used when referring to the disproportionate searching of African Americans, Hispanics, and other people of color.\nAccording to an American College of Physicians study, 92% of Blacks, 78% of Latino Americans, 75% of Native Americans, and 61% of Asian Americans have \u201creported experiencing racial discrimination in the form of racial slurs, violence, threats, and harassment.\u201d\nRacial profiling has roots in slavery and has grown with the rise of urbanization, conflated with gentrification. The US harbors a sense of fear and danger in people of color through the uncontested use of racial profiling in day-to-day interactions - from personal implicit biases, overt and covert racist laws and practices, and discriminatory law enforcement agencies.\nSociologist Robert Staples said that racial profiling in the U.S. is \u201cnot merely a collection of individual offenses\u201d, but rather a systemic phenomenon across American society, dating back to the era of slavery.\n\u201cAt the root of the emergence of the modern Anglo-American police was the problem of changing social relations and conditions arising from industrialization and urbanization,\u201d says sociologist Dr. Tia Dafnos.\nThis is exemplified in the large wage and generational wealth gaps and workplace and housing discrimination that exist between the White and non-White populations. Racial profiling in policing institutions is not new, either. The modern American police force has taken inspiration and structure from slave patrols and as a result people in minority populations report high rates of unfair treatment by courts, unreasonable arrests and frisking, and hesitancy to call the police in times of need out of fear of discrimination.\nThe US Constitution's Fourth Amendment, which protects citizens from unreasonable search and seizure, was extended after a run of controversial court cases in the 1960s in which people of color were facing higher rates of frisking and intimidation. This extension says that police must obey the law while enforcing it. Although the Supreme Court has claimed continued adherence to objectivity in the face of Fourth Amendment cases, American police employ racial profiling with harmful consequences.\nRecent incidents of racial profiling, often in mundane situations like traffic stops, have resulted in unnecessary violence and deaths. Data suggest that \u201cAfrican American and American Indian/Alaska Native women and men are killed by the police at higher rates\u201d than their White counterparts, and Latinx men are killed at higher rates than White men. African American men are 2.5 times more likely to be killed by police than White men.\nUnlawful and wrongful deaths, in the cases of George Floyd and Sonya Massey, have been attributed to extreme racial profiling and met with social media outburst and growing attention towards the Black Lives Matter and Say Her Name movements. The \"Terry v. Ohio\" court case of 1968 has also led to countless incidents of racial profiling in the US, as it allows police officers to stop an individual or vehicle without probable cause if they think an individual is committing a crime or about to commit a crime, although they must have a reasonable suspicion based on \"specific and articulable facts\". The driving while black phenomenon draws from data that supports that people of color disproportionately experience police shootings, traffic stops, searches, and arrests.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26132", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26132", "title": "Rankine scale", "text": "Absolute temperature scale using Fahrenheit degrees\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe Rankine scale ( ) is an absolute scale of thermodynamic temperature named after the University of Glasgow engineer and physicist W. J. M. Rankine, who proposed it in 1859. Similar to the Kelvin scale, which was first proposed in 1848, zero on the Rankine scale is absolute zero, but a temperature difference of one Rankine degree (\u00b0R or \u00b0Ra) is defined as equal to one Fahrenheit degree, rather than the Celsius degree used on the Kelvin scale. In converting from kelvin to degrees Rankine, or . A temperature of is equal to .\nUsage.\nThe Rankine scale is used in engineering systems where heat computations are done using degrees Fahrenheit.\nThe symbol for degrees Rankine is \u00b0R (or \u00b0Ra if necessary to distinguish it from the R\u00f8mer and R\u00e9aumur scales). By analogy with the SI unit kelvin, some authors term the unit \"Rankine\", omitting the degree symbol.\nSome temperatures relating the Rankine scale to other temperature scales are shown in the table below.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26133", "revid": "2030868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26133", "title": "Reaumur", "text": ""}
{"id": "26134", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26134", "title": "Rise and Fall of the City Mahagonny", "text": ""}
{"id": "26137", "revid": "46039225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26137", "title": "Rabbinical Assembly", "text": "International association of Conservative rabbis\nThe Rabbinical Assembly (RA) is the international association of Conservative rabbis. The RA was founded in 1901 to shape the ideology, programs, and practices of the Conservative movement. It publishes prayerbooks and books of Jewish interest, and oversees the work of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards for the Conservative movement. It organizes conferences and coordinates the Joint Placement Commission of the Conservative movement. Members of the RA serve as rabbis, educators, community workers and military and hospital chaplains around the world.\nRabbis ordained by Jewish Theological Seminary of America (New York, New York), the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies at the American Jewish University (Los Angeles, California), The Seminario Rab\u00ednico Latinoamericano (Buenos Aires, Argentina), The Zacharias Frankel College (Berlin, Germany) and The Schechter Rabbinical Seminary (Jerusalem, Israel) automatically become members of the RA upon their ordination. Rabbis whose ordination is from other seminaries and yeshivas may also be admitted to the RA. As of 2010, there were 1,648 members of the RA.\nThe majority of RA members serve in the United States and Canada, while more than ten percent of its rabbis serve in Israel and many of its rabbis serve in Latin America, in the countries of Europe, Australia, and Africa.\nHistory.\nThe Rabbinical Assembly was founded in 1901 as the Alumni Association of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS). Henry M. Speaker served as the first president. In 1918, the association changed its name to the Rabbinical Assembly, opening itself up to rabbis ordained at institutions other than JTS.\nThe longest-serving executive vice president of the Rabbinical Assembly was Wolfe Kelman, who accepted the post in 1951 and continued in the post until 1989.\nIn 1985, the RA admitted its first female member, Amy Eilberg, the first female ordained at JTS. It immediately proceeded to admit Rabbis Jan Caryl Kaufman and Beverly Magidson, who had been ordained at Hebrew Union College. By 2010, 273 of the 1648 members of the Rabbinical Assembly were women.\nIn 1989, upon Wolfe Kelman's retirement, Joel H. Meyers became executive director of the RA. In 1991, Meyers was appointed executive vice president, and he served in this role until his retirement in 2008.\nIn October 2008, Julie Schonfeld was named as the new executive vice president of the Rabbinical Assembly, making her the first female rabbi to serve in the chief executive position of an American rabbinical association. She has since become Chief Executive Officer of the RA.\nBodies for interpreting Jewish law.\nThe Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) is the movement's central body on interpreting Jewish law and custom; it was founded by the Rabbinical Assembly in 1927, with Max Drob as its first head. It presently composed of 25 rabbis, who are voting members, and five laypeople, who do not vote but participate fully in deliberations. When any six (or more) members vote in favor of a position, that position becomes an official position of the Rabbinical Assembly. An individual rabbi, however, functions as the \"mara de-atra\" (\u05de\u05e8\u05d0 \u05d3\u05d0\u05ea\u05e8\u05d0, lit. \"master of the house\" in Aramaic, the local authority in Jewish law), adopting the position he or she considers most compelling, even if it has not been approved by the CJLS.\nThe Rabbinical Assembly of Israel (the Israeli arm of the RA) has its own decision making body, the \"Va'ad Halacha\". Responsa by both the CJLS and the Va'ad Halacha are equally valid, although the Va'ad's emphasis is on issues pertaining to Israeli society. The CJLS and the Va'ad do not always come up with the same answer to a question. Individual rabbis are free to decide which responsa to adopt or to develop their own halakhic positions.\nPublications.\nThe RA has also published prayer books for Shabbat and weekdays, most recently Siddur Sim Shalom and \"Or Hadash: A Commentary on Siddur Sim Shalom\" by Reuven Hammer.\nIt has also published prayer books for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, most recently Mahzor Lev Shalem. The RA has also published liturgical texts for other days on the Jewish calendar, such as \"Megillat Hashoah: The Holocaust Scroll\" for Yom Ha-shoah and \"Siddur Tishah B'Av\" for the fast day of Tishah B'Av.\nIn cooperation with the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism and the Jewish Publication Society, the RA published the \"Etz Hayim Humash\", a Torah commentary for synagogue use.\nIn cooperation with the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, the RA also publishes a scholarly quarterly journal, \"Conservative Judaism\", which is edited by Martin Samuel Cohen.\nUnder its Aviv Press imprint, the RA publishes books on Jewish spirituality and contemporary Jewish practice written by its members. The earliest publications by Aviv Press were:\nIn April 2012, the Rabbinical Assembly published new guide to Jewish law and practice, \"The Observant Life: A Guide to Ritual and Ethics for Conservative Jews\", edited by Martin Samuel Cohen and Michael Katz.\nMembers of the RA have their own private discussion group, \"Ravnet\".\nLeadership.\nThe Rabbinical Assembly has been served by a variety of volunteer presidents over the course of its history. Below is a listing of those who served as presidents during the 21st century:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26138", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26138", "title": "Rodrigo Borgia", "text": ""}
{"id": "26139", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26139", "title": "Retroposon", "text": "Retroposons are repetitive DNA fragments which are inserted into chromosomes after they had been reverse transcribed from any RNA molecule.\nDifference between retroposons and retrotransposons.\nIn contrast to retrotransposons, retroposons never encode reverse transcriptase (RT) (but see below). Therefore, they are non-autonomous elements with regard to transposition activity (as opposed to transposons).\nNon-long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons such as the human LINE1 elements are sometimes falsely referred to as retroposons. However, this depends on the author. For example, Howard Temin published the following definition: Retroposons encode RT but are devoid of long terminal repeats (LTRs), for example long interspersed elements (LINEs). Retrotransposons also feature LTRs and retroviruses, in addition, are packaged as viral particles (virions). Retrosequences are non-autonomous elements devoid of RT. They are retroposed with the aid of the machinery of autonomous elements, such as LINEs; examples are short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) or mRNA-derived retro(pseudo)genes.\nGene duplications.\nRetroposition accounts for approximately 10,000 gene-duplication events in the human genome, of which approximately 2-10% are likely to be functional. Such genes are called retrogenes and represent a certain type of retroposon.\nHorizontal gene transfer.\nA classical event is the retroposition of a spliced pre-mRNA molecule of the c-Src gene into the proviral ancestor of the Rous sarcoma virus (RSV). The retroposed c-src pre-mRNA still contained a single intron and within RSV is now referred to as v-Src gene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26140", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26140", "title": "Rolls Royce", "text": ""}
{"id": "26141", "revid": "59002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26141", "title": "Robots in fiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "26143", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26143", "title": "Rooted hierarchical tree structure", "text": ""}
{"id": "26144", "revid": "15922743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26144", "title": "Rooted hierarchy", "text": ""}
{"id": "26145", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26145", "title": "Record", "text": "A record, recording or records may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSports and skills.\nSome sports clubs take their name from this word:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26147", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26147", "title": "Outline of religion", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to religion\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to religion:\nReligion \u2013 organized collection of beliefs, cultural systems, and world views that relate humanity to an order of existence. Many religions have narratives, symbols, and sacred histories that are intended to explain the meaning of life and/or to explain the origin of life or the Universe. From their beliefs about the cosmos and human nature, people derive morality, ethics, religious laws or a preferred lifestyle. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Religion by continent\n Africa \u2022 Antarctica \u2022 Asia \u2022 Europe \u2022 North America \u2022 Oceania (includes Australia) \u2022 South America\n Religion by political division, arranged alphabetically\n Religions by country\n Religion by political division, arranged by continent or major geopolitical region\n Religion in Africa\n Religion in West Africa \n Benin \u2022 Burkina Faso \u2022 Cape Verde \u2022 C\u00f4te d'Ivoire \u2022 Gambia \u2022 Ghana \u2022 Guinea \u2022 Guinea-Bissau \u2022 Liberia \u2022 Mali \u2022 Mauritania \u2022 Niger \u2022 Nigeria \u2022 Senegal \u2022 Sierra Leone \u2022 Togo\n Religion in North Africa \n Algeria \u2022 Egypt \u2022 Libya \u2022 Mauritania \u2022 Morocco \u2022 Sudan \u2022 South Sudan \u2022Tunisia\n Religion in Central Africa \n Angola \u2022 Burundi \u2022 Cameroon \u2022 Central African Republic \u2022 Chad \u2022 The Democratic Republic of the Congo \u2022 Equatorial Guinea \u2022 Gabon \u2022 Republic of the Congo \u2022 Rwanda \u2022 S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe\n Religion in East Africa \n Burundi \u2022 Comoros \u2022 Djibouti \u2022 Eritrea \u2022 Ethiopia \u2022 Kenya \u2022 Madagascar \u2022 Malawi \u2022 Mauritius \u2022 Mozambique \u2022 Rwanda \u2022 Seychelles \u2022 Somalia (Somaliland) \u2022 Tanzania \u2022 Uganda \u2022 Zambia \u2022 Zimbabwe\n Religion in Southern Africa \n Botswana \u2022 Eswatini \u2022 Lesotho \u2022 Namibia \u2022 South Africa \n Religion in Antarctica\n Religion in Asia\n Religion in Central Asia\n Kazakhstan \u2022 Kyrgyzstan \u2022 Tajikistan \u2022 Turkmenistan \u2022 Uzbekistan\n Religion in East Asia\n China \n Tibet\n Hong Kong \u2022 Macau\n Japan \u2022 North Korea \u2022 South Korea \u2022 Mongolia \u2022 Taiwan\n Religion in North Asia\n Russia\n Religion in Southeast Asia\n Brunei \u2022 Burma (Myanmar) \u2022 Cambodia \u2022 East Timor (Timor-Leste) \u2022 Indonesia \u2022 Laos \u2022 Malaysia \u2022 Philippines \u2022 Singapore \u2022 Thailand \u2022 Vietnam\n Religion in South Asia\n Afghanistan \u2022 Bangladesh \u2022 Bhutan \u2022 Maldives \u2022 Nepal \u2022 Pakistan \u2022 Sri Lanka\n Religion in India\n States of India: Andhra Pradesh\u00a0\u2022 Arunachal Pradesh\u00a0\u2022 Assam\u00a0\u2022 Bihar\u00a0\u2022 Chhattisgarh\u00a0\u2022 Goa\u00a0\u2022 Gujarat\u00a0\u2022 Haryana\u00a0\u2022 Himachal Pradesh\u00a0\u2022 Jammu and Kashmir\u00a0\u2022 Jharkhand\u00a0\u2022 Karnataka\u00a0\u2022 Kerala\u00a0\u2022 Madhya Pradesh\u00a0\u2022 Maharashtra\u00a0\u2022 Manipur\u00a0\u2022 Meghalaya\u00a0\u2022 Mizoram\u00a0\u2022 Nagaland\u00a0\u2022 Odisha\u00a0\u2022 Punjab\u00a0\u2022 Rajasthan\u00a0\u2022 Sikkim\u00a0\u2022 Tamil Nadu\u00a0\u2022 Telangana\u00a0\u2022 Tripura\u00a0\u2022 Uttar Pradesh\u00a0\u2022 Uttarakhand\u00a0\u2022 West Bengal\n Religion in West Asia\n Armenia \u2022 Azerbaijan \u2022 Bahrain \u2022 Cyprus (including disputed Northern Cyprus) \u2022 Georgia \u2022 Iran \u2022 Iraq \u2022 Israel \u2022 Jordan \u2022 Kuwait \u2022 Lebanon \u2022 Oman \u2022 State of Palestine\u00a0\u2022 Qatar \u2022 Saudi Arabia \u2022 Syria \u2022 Turkey \u2022 United Arab Emirates \u2022 Yemen\n Religion in the Caucasus (a region considered to be in both Asia and Europe, or between them)\n Religion in North Caucasus\n Parts of Russia (Chechnya, Ingushetia, Dagestan, Adyghea, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachai-Cherkessia, North Ossetia, Krasnodar Krai, Stavropol Krai)\n Religion in South Caucasus\n Georgia (including disputed Abkhazia, South Ossetia) \u2022 Armenia \u2022 Azerbaijan (including disputed Nagorno-Karabakh Republic)\n Religion in Europe \n Akrotiri and Dhekelia \u2022 \u00c5land \u2022 Albania \u2022 Andorra \u2022 Armenia \u2022 Austria \u2022 Azerbaijan \u2022 Belarus \u2022 Belgium \u2022 Bosnia and Herzegovina \u2022 Bulgaria \u2022 Croatia \u2022 Cyprus \u2022 Czech Republic \u2022 Denmark \u2022 Estonia \u2022 Faroe Islands \u2022 Finland \u2022 France \u2022 Georgia \u2022 Germany \u2022 Gibraltar \u2022 Greece \u2022 Guernsey \u2022 Hungary \u2022 Iceland \u2022 Ireland \u2022 Isle of Man \u2022 Italy \u2022 Jersey \u2022 Kazakhstan \u2022 Kosovo \u2022 Latvia \u2022 Liechtenstein \u2022 Lithuania \u2022 Luxembourg \u2022 Malta \u2022 Moldova (including disputed Transnistria) \u2022 Monaco \u2022 Montenegro \u2022 Netherlands \u2022 North Macedonia \u2022 Norway \u2022 Poland \u2022 Portugal \u2022 Romania \u2022 Russia \u2022 San Marino \u2022 Serbia \u2022 Slovakia \u2022 Slovenia \u2022\nSpain\n Autonomous communities of Spain: Catalonia\n Sweden \u2022 Switzerland \u2022 Turkey \u2022 Ukraine \n United Kingdom\n England (Birmingham, Cornwall, London, Sussex) \u2022 Northern Ireland \u2022 Scotland \u2022 Wales\n Vatican City\n Religion in the European Union\n North America\n Canada \n Religion in Provinces of Canada: \u2022 Alberta \u2022 British Columbia \u2022 Manitoba \u2022 New Brunswick \u2022 Newfoundland and Labrador \u2022 Nova Scotia \u2022 Ontario (Toronto) \u2022 Prince Edward Island \u2022 Quebec \u2022 Saskatchewan\n Religion in Territories of Canada: Northwest Territories \u2022 Nunavut \u2022 Yukon\nGreenland \u2022 Saint Pierre and Miquelon\n United States \n Alabama\u00a0\u2022 Alaska\u00a0\u2022 Arizona\u00a0\u2022 Arkansas\u00a0\u2022 California\u00a0\u2022 Colorado\u00a0\u2022 Connecticut\u00a0\u2022 Delaware\u00a0\u2022 Florida\u00a0\u2022 Georgia\u00a0\u2022 Hawaii\u00a0\u2022 Idaho\u00a0\u2022 Illinois\u00a0\u2022 Indiana\u00a0\u2022 Iowa\u00a0\u2022 Kansas\u00a0\u2022 Kentucky\u00a0\u2022 Louisiana\u00a0\u2022 Maine\u00a0\u2022 Maryland\u00a0\u2022 Massachusetts\u00a0\u2022 Michigan\u00a0\u2022 Minnesota\u00a0\u2022 Mississippi\u00a0\u2022 Missouri\u00a0\u2022 Montana\u00a0\u2022 Nebraska\u00a0\u2022 Nevada\u00a0\u2022 New Hampshire\u00a0\u2022 New Jersey\u00a0\u2022 New Mexico\u00a0\u2022 New York\u00a0\u2022 North Carolina\u00a0\u2022 North Dakota\u00a0\u2022 Ohio\u00a0\u2022 Oklahoma\u00a0\u2022 Oregon\u00a0\u2022 Pennsylvania (Philadelphia)\u00a0\u2022 Rhode Island\u00a0\u2022 South Carolina\u00a0\u2022 South Dakota\u00a0\u2022 Tennessee\u00a0\u2022 Texas\u00a0\u2022 Utah\u00a0\u2022 Vermont\u00a0\u2022 Virginia\u00a0\u2022 Washington\u00a0\u2022 Religion in Washington, D.C.\u00a0\u2022 West Virginia\u00a0\u2022 Wisconsin\u00a0\u2022 Wyoming\n Mexico \n Religion in Central America\n Belize \u2022 Costa Rica \u2022 El Salvador \u2022 Guatemala \u2022 Honduras \u2022 Nicaragua \u2022 Panama\n Religion in the Caribbean\n Anguilla \u2022 Antigua and Barbuda \u2022 Aruba \u2022 Bahamas \u2022 Barbados \u2022 Bermuda \u2022 British Virgin Islands \u2022 Cayman Islands \u2022 Cuba \u2022 Dominica \u2022 Dominican Republic \u2022 Grenada \u2022 Haiti \u2022 Jamaica \u2022 Montserrat \u2022 Netherlands Antilles \u2022 Puerto Rico \u2022 Saint Barth\u00e9lemy \u2022 Saint Kitts and Nevis \u2022 Saint Lucia \u2022 Saint Martin \u2022 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines \u2022 Trinidad and Tobago \u2022 Turks and Caicos Islands \u2022 United States Virgin Islands\nReligion in Oceania (includes the continent of Australia)\n Religion in Australasia\n Australia \n Religion in Dependencies/Territories of Australia\n Christmas Island \u2022 Cocos (Keeling) Islands \u2022 Norfolk Island\n New Zealand\n Religion in Melanesia\n Fiji \u2022 Indonesia (Oceanian part only) \u2022 New Caledonia (France) \u2022 Papua New Guinea \u2022 Solomon Islands \u2022 Vanuatu \u2022\n Religion in Micronesia\n Federated States of Micronesia \u2022 Guam (USA) \u2022 Kiribati \u2022 Marshall Islands \u2022 Nauru \u2022 Northern Mariana Islands (USA) \u2022 Palau \u2022 Wake Island (USA) \u2022\n Religion in Polynesia\n American Samoa (USA) \u2022 Chatham Islands (NZ) \u2022 Cook Islands (NZ) \u2022 Easter Island (Chile) \u2022 French Polynesia (France) \u2022 Hawaii (USA) \u2022 Loyalty Islands (France) \u2022 Niue (NZ) \u2022 Pitcairn Islands (UK) \u2022 Adamstown \u2022 Samoa \u2022 Tokelau (NZ) \u2022 Tonga \u2022 Tuvalu \u2022 Wallis and Futuna (France)\n Religion in South America \n Argentina \u2022 Bolivia \u2022 Brazil \u2022 Chile \u2022 Colombia \u2022 Ecuador \u2022 Falkland Islands \u2022 Guyana \u2022 Paraguay \u2022 Peru \u2022 Suriname \u2022 Uruguay \u2022 Venezuela"}
{"id": "26151", "revid": "50758699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26151", "title": "Raven", "text": "Larger birds in the genus \"Corvus\"\nA raven is any of several large-bodied passerine bird species in the genus \"Corvus\". These species do not form a single taxonomic group within the genus. There is no consistent distinction between crows and ravens; the two names are assigned to different species chiefly by size.\nThe largest species are the common raven and the thick-billed raven; these are also the largest passerine species.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"raven\" originally referred to the common raven (\"Corvus corax\"), the widespread species of the Northern Hemisphere.\nThe modern English word \"raven\" has cognates in all other Germanic languages, including Old Norse (and subsequently modern Icelandic) and Old High German , all of which descend from Proto-Germanic .\nCollective nouns for a group of ravens include a \"conspiracy\", a \"treachery\", a \"rave\" and an \"unkindness\"; in practice, most people use the more generic \"flock\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Index of animals with the same common nameThis page is an index of articles on animal species (or higher taxonomic groups) with the same common name (vernacular name). If an led you here, you may wish to edit the linking article so that it links directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "26152", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26152", "title": "Romani people", "text": "Indo-Aryan ethnic group\nThe Romani people ( or ), also known as the Roma (sg.: Rom) or Romanies (sg.: Romany), are an Indo-Aryan ethnic group who traditionally lived a nomadic lifestyle. Although they are widely dispersed, their most concentrated populations are believed to be in Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Serbia, and Slovakia. In the English language, Romani people have long been known by the exonym Gypsies or Gipsies and this remains the most common English term for the group. Some Roma use and embrace this term while others consider it to be derogatory or an ethnic slur.\nRomani culture has been influenced by their time spent under various reigns and empires, notably the Byzantine and Ottoman empires. The Romani language is an Indo-Aryan language with strong Persian, Armenian, Byzantine Greek and South Slavic influence. It is divided into several dialects, which together are estimated to have over 2 million speakers. Many Roma are native speakers of the dominant language in their country of residence, or else of mixed languages that combine the dominant language with a dialect of Romani in varieties sometimes called para-Romani. \nLinguistic and genetic evidence reveal that the ancestors of the Romani people originated in South Asia. They likely came from the area corresponding to the regions of Punjab, Rajasthan and Sindh, in present-day Northwest India and Pakistan. Their northwestward migration occurred in waves, with the first wave believed to have taken place sometime between the 5th and 11th centuries. They are believed to have first arrived in Europe sometime between the 7th and 14th centuries.\nNames.\nRomani-language endonyms.\nThe English word \"Rom\" derives from Romani \"rom\", meaning 'man, husband' (plural \"rom\u00e1\"). A common alternative is \"Romany\" as the singular in place of \"Rom,\" and \"Romanies\" as the plural in place of \"Roma\". The etymology of the word is unclear. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" says it likely derives from Sanskrit \"\u1e0domba\", meaning 'lower-caste person working as a wandering musician', itself deriving from a Dravidian word, such as \"domba\", \"\u1e0domba\" ('caste of acrobats, jugglers, clowns'). In English, the form \"Roma\" is often reinterpreted as singular and a new plural, \"Romas\", is formed. \n\"Romani\" is the feminine adjective, while \"Romano\" is the masculine adjective. Some Romanies use \"Rom\" or \"Roma\" as an ethnic name, while others (such as the Sinti, or the Romanichal) do not use this term as a self-description for the entire ethnic group.\nSometimes, \"Rom\" and \"Romani\" are spelled with a double \"r\", i.e., \"Rrom\" and \"Rromani\". In this case \"Rr\" is used to represent the phoneme (also written as \"\u0159\" and \"rh\"), which in some Romani dialects has remained different from the one written with a single \"r\". The double \"r\" spelling is common in certain institutions (such as the INALCO Institute in Paris), or used in certain countries, e.g., Romania, to distinguish from the endonym/homonym for Romanians (\"sg. rom\u00e2n, pl. rom\u00e2ni\").\nIn Norway, \"Romani\" is used exclusively for an older Northern Romani-speaking population (which arrived in the 16th century) while \"Rom/Romanes\" is used to describe Vlax Romani-speaking groups that migrated since the 19th century.\nEnglish-language endonyms.\nIn the English language (according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\"), \"Rom\" is both a noun (with the plural \"Roma\" or \"Roms\") and an adjective. Similarly, \"Romani\" (\"Romany\") is both a noun (with the plural \"Romani\", \"the Romani\", \"Romanies\", or \"Romanis\") and an adjective. Both \"Rom\" and \"Romani\" have been in use in English since the 19th century as an alternative for \"Gypsy\". \nThe terms \"Roma\" and \"Romanies\" are increasingly encountered as generic terms for the Romani people.\nBecause not all Roma use the word \"Romani\" as an adjective, the term also became a noun for the entire ethnic group. Today, the term \"Romani\" is used by some organizations, including the United Nations and the US Library of Congress. However, the Council of Europe and other organizations consider that \"Roma\" is the correct term referring to all related groups, regardless of their country of origin, and recommend that \"Romani\" be restricted to the language and culture: Romani language, Romani culture. The British government uses the term \"Roma\" as a sub-group of \"White\" in its ethnic classification system.\nThe standard assumption is that the demonyms of the Roma, Lom and Dom, share the same origin.\nOther designations.\nIn English, the exonym \"Gypsy\" (or \"Gipsy\") is the most commonly used word for the group. It originates from the Middle English , short for . The Castilian term and French have similar etymologies. They are ultimately derived from the Greek (), meaning 'Egyptian', via Latin. This designation owes its existence to the belief, common in the Middle Ages, that the Roma, or some related group (such as the Indian Dom people), were itinerant Egyptians.\nThese exonyms are sometimes written with capital letter, to show that they designate an ethnic group. While some Roma use the term, some Roma consider it derogatory because of negative and stereotypical associations. The Council of Europe consider that \"Gypsy\" or equivalent terms, as well as administrative terms such as \"Gens du Voyage\", are not in line with European recommendations. In Britain, many Roma proudly identify as \"Gypsies\", and, as part of the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller grouping, this is the name used to describe all para-Romani groups in official contexts. In North America, the word \"Gypsy\" is most commonly used as a reference to Romani ethnicity, though lifestyle and fashion are at times also referenced by using this word.\nAnother designation of the Roma is \"Cingane\" (alternatively \u00c7ingene, Tsinganoi, Zigar, Zigeuner, Tschingaren), likely deriving from the Persian word (), derived from the Turkic word , meaning poor person. It is also possible that the origin of this word is \"Athinganoi\", the name of a Christian sect with whom the Roma (or some related group) could have become associated in the past.\nPopulation and subgroups.\nRomani populations.\nThere is no official or reliable count of the Romani populations worldwide. Many Roma refuse to register their ethnic identity in official censuses for a variety of reasons, such as fear of discrimination. \nDespite these challenges to getting an accurate picture of the Romani dispersal, there were an estimated 10 million in Europe (as of 2019), although some Romani organizations have given earlier estimates as high as 14 million. Significant Romani populations are found in the Balkans and throughout Europe. In the European Union, there are an estimated 6 million Roma.\nOutside Europe there may be several million more Roma, particularly in the Americas, following migrations from Europe beginning in the late 19th century.\nRomani subgroups.\nRomani people may belong to distinct subgroups based in part on territorial, cultural and dialectal differences, and self-designation.\nRomani subgroups may have more than one ethnonym. They may use more than one endonym and be commonly known by an exonym or erroneously by the endonym of another subgroup. The only name approaching an all-encompassing self-description is \"Rom\". Even when subgroups do not use the name, they all acknowledge a common origin and a dichotomy between themselves and \"Gadjo\" (non-Roma). For instance, while the main group of Roma in German-speaking countries refer to themselves as Sinti, their name for their original language is \"Romanes\".\nSubgroups have been described as, in part, a result of the castes and subcastes in India, which the founding population of \"Rom\" almost certainly experienced in their south Asian \"urheimat\".\nMany subgroups use names derived from the Romani word \"kalo\" or \"calo\", meaning \"black\" or \"absorbing all light\". This closely resembles words for \"black\" or \"dark\" in Indo-Aryan languages (e.g., Sanskrit \u0915\u093e\u0932 \"k\u0101la\": \"black\", \"of a dark colour\"). Likewise, the name of the Dom or Domba people of north India\u2014with whom the Roma have genetic, cultural and linguistic links\u2014has come to imply \"dark-skinned\" in some Indian languages. Hence, names such as \"kale\" and \"cal\u00e9\" may have originated as an exonym or a euphemism for \"Roma\".\nWhile not subgroups, Romani people often use the religionym and confessionyms \"Xoraxane\" to refer to Muslim Roma and \"Dasikane\" to refer to Christian Roma.\"\" \nOther endonyms for Roma include, for example:\nDiaspora.\nThe Romani people have a number of distinct populations throughout Europe. \nIn the 19th century, Roma began migrating from Europe to the Americas. However, Romani slaves were first shipped to the Americas with Columbus in 1498. Spain sent Romani slaves to their Louisiana colony between 1762 and 1800. An Afro-Romani community exists in St. Martin Parish due to intermarriage between freed African American and Romani slaves.\nIn Brazil, the Roma are mainly called \"ciganos\" by the non-Romani population. Most of them belong to the \"Cal\u00e9s\" (Kale) subgroup. Juscelino Kubitschek, Brazil's president from 1956 to 1961, was 50% Romani by his mother's bloodline. Washington Lu\u00eds, the last president of the First Brazilian Republic (1926\u20131930) also had Romani ancestry.\nThe Romani population in the United States is estimated at more than one million. There are between 800,000 and 1million Roma in Brazil, most of whose ancestors emigrated in the 19th century from Eastern Europe. Brazilian Roma are mostly descended from German/Italian Sinti (in the South/Southeast regions), and Roma and Calon people. Brazil also includes a notable Romani community descended from Sinti and Roma deportees from the Portuguese Empire during the Portuguese Inquisition.\nPersecution against the Roma has led to many of the cultural practices being extinguished, hidden or modified to survive in a country that has excluded them ethnically and culturally. The very common carnivals throughout Brazil are one of the few spaces in which the Roma can still express their cultural traditions, including the so-called \"carnival wedding\" in which a boy is disguised as a bride and the famous \"Roman\u00ed dance\", picturesquely simulated with the women of the town parading in their traditional attire.\nSouth Asian origin.\nGenetic findings reveal that the ancestors of the Romani people originated in South Asia, likely in the regions of present-day Punjab, Rajasthan and Sindh. Because Romani groups did not keep chronicles of their history or have oral accounts of it, most hypotheses about early Romani migration are based on linguistic theory.\n\"Shahnameh\" legend.\nAccording to a legend reported in the Persian epic poem, the \"Shahnameh\", the Sasanian king Bahr\u0101m V G\u014dr learned towards the end of his reign (421\u2013439) that the poor could not afford to enjoy music, and so he asked the king of India to send him ten thousand \"luris\", lute-playing experts. When the \"luris\" arrived, Bahr\u0101m gave each one an ox, a donkey, and a donkey-load of wheat so they could live on agriculture and play music for free for the poor. However, the \"luris\" ate the oxen and the wheat and came back a year later with their cheeks hollowed by hunger. The king, angered with their having wasted what he had given them, ordered them to pack up their bags and go wandering around the world on their donkeys.\nLinguistic evidence.\nLinguistic evidence has indisputably shown that the roots of the Romani language lie in present-day India: the language has grammatical characteristics of Indian languages and a large part of its basic lexicon shares the same root.\nRomani and Domari share some similarities: agglutination of postpositions of the second layer (or case-marking clitics) to the nominal stem, concord markers for the past tense, the neutralisation of gender marking in the plural, and the use of the oblique case as an accusative. This has prompted much discussion about the relationships between these two languages. Domari was once thought to be a \"sister language\" of Romani, the two languages having split after the departure from the Indian subcontinent\u2014but later research suggests that the differences between them are significant enough to treat them as two separate branches within the central zone group of languages. The Dom and the Rom, therefore, likely descend from two migration waves from present-day India separated by several centuries.\nThe Romani migration hypothesis is supported by several lines of evidence. Linguistic analysis shows the Romani language features a unique blend of words present in modern Indian dialects with a high number of military-related words. Genetic studies also reinforce this theory by revealing a link between Romani populations and specific communities (castes) in northern India, such as the Jats and Rajputs, which are of upper-caste.\nIn phonology, the Romani language shares several isoglosses with the Central branch of Indo-Aryan languages, especially in the realization of some sounds of the Old Indo-Aryan. However, it also preserves several dental clusters. In regards to verb morphology, Romani follows exactly the same pattern of northwestern languages such as Kashmiri and Shina through the adoption of oblique enclitic pronouns as person markers, lending credence to the theory of their Central Indian origin and a subsequent migration to northwestern India. Though the retention of dental clusters suggests a break from central languages during the transition from Old to Middle Indo-Aryan, the overall morphology suggests that the language participated in some of the significant developments leading toward the emergence of New Indo-Aryan languages.\nThe following table presents the numerals in the Romani, Domari and Lomavren languages, with the corresponding terms in Sanskrit, Hindi, Odia, and Sinhala to demonstrate the similarities. Note that the Romani numerals 7 through 9 have been borrowed from Greek.\nGenetic evidence.\nGenetic findings in 2012 suggest the Roma originated in northwestern India and migrated as a group. According to the study, the ancestors of present scheduled caste and scheduled tribe populations of northern India, traditionally referred to collectively as the \u1e0coma, are the likely ancestral populations of modern European Roma. However, according to scholars like Ian Hancock, it has also been speculated that they could have been from high-caste like Jats and Rajputs.\nIn December 2012, additional findings appeared to confirm that the \"Roma came from a single group that left northwestern India about 1,500 years ago\". According to the study, they reached the Balkans about 900 years ago and then spread throughout Europe. The team also found that the Roma displayed genetic isolation, as well as \"differential gene flow in time and space with non-Romani Europeans\".\nGenetic research published in the \"European Journal of Human Genetics\" \"has revealed that over 70% of males belong to a single lineage that appears unique to the Roma\".\nGenetic evidence supports the medieval migration from India. The Roma have been described as \"a conglomerate of genetically isolated founder populations\", while a number of common Mendelian disorders among Roma from all over Europe indicates \"a common origin and founder effect\". A 2020 whole-genome study confirmed the northern Indian origins, and also confirmed substantial Balkan and Middle Eastern ancestry amongst Roma in Central and Eastern Europe. The study also included a sample of Roma from Spain and Lithuania, which revealed significantly higher levels of European ancestry.\nA study from 2001 by Gresham et al. suggests \"a limited number of related founders, compatible with a small group of migrants splitting from a distinct caste or tribal group\". The same study found that \"a single lineage... found across Romani populations, accounts for almost one-third of Romani males\". A 2004 study of Roma in Central and Eastern Europe and Spain by Morar et al. concluded that the Romani population \"was founded approximately 32\u201340 generations ago, with secondary and tertiary founder events occurring approximately 16\u201325 generations ago\".\nHaplogroup H-M82 is a major lineage cluster in the Balkan Romani group, accounting for approximately 60% of the total. Haplogroup H is uncommon in Europe but present in the Indian subcontinent.\nA study of 444 people representing three ethnic groups in North Macedonia found mtDNA haplogroups M5a1 and H7a1a were dominant in Romanies (13.7% and 10.3%, respectively).\nY-DNA composition of Muslim Roma from \u0160uto Orizari Municipality in North Macedonia, based on 57 samples:\nY-DNA Haplogroup H1a occurs in Roma at frequencies 7\u201370%. Unlike ethnic Hungarians, among Hungarian and Slovakian Roma subpopulations Haplogroup E-M78 and I1 usually occur above 10% and sometimes over 20%, while among Slovakian and Tiszavasvari Roma, the dominant haplogroup is H1a; among Tokaj Roma it is Haplogroup J2a (23%); and among Taktahark\u00e1ny Roma, it is Haplogroup I2a (21%).\nFive rather consistent founder lineages throughout the subpopulations were found among Roma \u2013 J-M67 and J-M92 (J2), H-M52 (H1a1), and I-P259 (I1). Haplogroup I-P259 as H is not found at frequencies of over 3% among host populations, while haplogroups E and I are absent in south Asia. The lineages E-V13, I-P37 (I2a) and R-M17 (R1a) may represent gene flow from the host populations. Bulgarian, Romanian and Greek Roma are dominated by Haplogroup H-M82 (H1a1), while among Spanish Roma J2 is prevalent. In Serbia among Kosovo and Belgrade Roma Haplogroup H prevails, while among Vojvodina Roma, H drops to 7 percent and E-V13 rises to a prevailing level.\nAmong non-Roma Europeans, Haplogroup H is extremely rare, peaking at 7% among Albanians from Tirana and 11% among Bulgarian Turks. It occurs at 5% among Hungarians, although the carriers might be of Romani origin. Among non-Roma-speaking Europeans, it occurs at 2% among Slovaks, 2% among Croats, 1% among Macedonians from Skopje, 3% among Macedonian Albanians, 1% among Serbs from Belgrade, 3% among Bulgarians from Sofia, 1% among Austrians and Swiss, 3% among Romanians from Ploie\u0219ti, and 1% among Turks.\nThe Ottoman occupation of the Balkans also left a significant genetic mark on the Y-DNA of the Roma there, creating a higher frequency of Haplogroups J and E3b in Romani populations from the region.\nFull genome analysis.\nA full genome autosomal DNA study on 186 Roma samples from southeastern, northeastern and southwestern Europe in 2019 found that modern Romani people in these areas are characterized by a common south Asian origin and a complex admixture from Middle Eastern, Caucasus, Balkan and wider European-derived ancestries. Earlier admixture dates amongst Roma in the Balkans supports that they migrated into Europe via the Balkans. The autosomal genetic data links the proto-Roma to groups in northwest India (specifically Punjabi and Gujarati samples), as well as, Dravidian-speaking groups in southeastern India (specifically Irula). The paternal lineages of Roma are most common in southern and central India among Dravidian-speaking populations. The authors argue that this may point to a founder effect among the early Roma during their ethnogenesis or shortly after they migrated out of the Indian subcontinent. It is theorized that the ancestors of the Romani people could have a low-caste origin for the Proto-Roma, since they were genetically closer to the Punjabi cluster that lacks a common marker characteristic of high castes, which is West Euroasian admixing. \nPossible migration route.\nThe ancestors of the Roma may have emerged from what is now Rajasthan, migrating to the northwest (to what is now Punjab) around 250 BCE. Their subsequent westward migration, possibly in waves, is now believed to have occurred beginning in about 500 CE.\nIt has also been suggested that emigration from India may have taken place in the context of the raids by Mahmud of Ghazni. As these soldiers were defeated, they were moved west with their families into the Byzantine Empire. The author Ralph Lilley Turner theorised a central Indian origin of Romani followed by a migration to northwest India as it shares a number of ancient isoglosses with central Indo-Aryan languages in relation to realization of some sounds of Old Indo-Aryan. This is lent further credence by its sharing exactly the same pattern of northwestern languages such as Kashmiri and Shina through the adoption of oblique enclitic pronouns as person markers. The overall morphology suggests that Romani participated in some of the significant developments leading toward the emergence of New Indo-Aryan languages, thus indicating that the proto-Roma did not leave the Indian subcontinent until late in the second half of the first millennium.\nA number of Armenian-origin words in the Romani language indicate that Romanies passed through Armenia prior to linguistic changes of the 9th century. They arrived in the Balkans\u2014Europe proper\u2014during the Byzantine period.\nEthnic identities conflated with the Roma.\nRomani people have a long history of taking on different identities of, or being associated with, various ethnic groups.\nProposed recognition as part of the Indian diaspora.\nIn March 1976, the International Roma Cultural Festival in Chandigarh, India received the support of then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who referred to the Roma as part of the global Indian diaspora. In February 2016, during the International Roma Conference, then Indian Minister of External Affairs, Sushma Swaraj stated that the people of the Romani community are the \"children of India\". Advocates for the proposal who took part in the event, including Jovan Damjanovic, president of the World Roma Organisation (Rromanipen), have argued that recognition could provide the Roma with cultural affirmation, a stronger sense of belonging, and potential access to support from Indian institutions, while also symbolically addressing centuries of marginalization. Damjanovic stated in an exclusive interview with the Hindustan Times that if India were to accept this proposal, it would mark the first step towards opposing the negative perceptions surrounding the Romani people. He also noted that this could provide India with substantial cultural, economic, and political benefits. The conference ended with a recommendation to the Government of India to recognize the Romani community spread across 30 countries as a part of the Indian diaspora. Following that event, a starred question was raised in the Lok Sabha concerning whether Roma constituted part of the diaspora and whether any official study had been proposed to trace their origins. The Ministry of External Affairs (India) replied that the purpose of the 2016 conference was to revive cultural and linguistic ties, assess existing scholarship, and encourage further research, but not to accord formal diaspora recognition.\nIn April 2022, an international conference held in Zagreb, Croatia, revisited the issue. The event, supported by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, aimed to examine whether the Roma, dispersed across multiple countries, could be recognized as part of the Indian diaspora. Speakers at the conference emphasized the historical and cultural connections of the Roma to India and highlighted the community's desire for recognition, while also noting the complexities arising from centuries of displacement and marginalization. The conference underscored the ongoing need to consider formal recognition, though no official status was conferred by India still.\nIn a 2007 paper made by Ian Hancock, a Romani scholar, argues that the Romani people's Indian origin holds significant political weight beyond mere historical or academic interest. He contends that acknowledging this connection is essential for the \"political legitimacy and security\" of the Romani people. Hancock asserts that by establishing a verifiable historical and genetic link to a specific place of origin, the Romani people can counter the \"fictitious history\" often imposed on them by non-Romani individuals. This would allow them to take control of their own narrative and assert their identity. Furthermore, this Indian connection provides a basis for seeking support from the Indian government, which has been instrumental in acknowledging them symbolically as an Indian population outside of India. This recognition provides backing for the Romani leaders in their struggle for rights and representation in international forums like the United Nations, thereby enhancing their political standing and providing a measure of security on the global stage.\nRomaei/Eastern Romans.\nWith the Roma fleeing the Muslim conquest of Mahmud of Ghazni in Northern India in the early 11th century, they arrived in the Eastern Roman Empire by the 12th century. The name Roma/Romani is similar to Romaei (), or Rhomaioi/Romioi (\u1fec\u03c9\u03bc\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03b9/\u1fec\u03c9\u03bc\u03b7\u03bf\u03af/\u03a1\u03c9\u03bc\u03b9\u03bf\u03af, \"Romans\") (the endonym for the Eastern Romans / Byzantines) from which the name could have originated. Roma is also similar to their original Sanskrit word () meaning \"drummer\", with the Doma being dancers and musicians and a sub-group of the Dalit caste.\nAthinganoi.\nIn the Eastern Roman / Byzantine Empire the Roma also took on the identity of the ethnic religious group, the Athinganoi (Greek: \u0391\u03b8\u03af\u03b3\u03b3\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9). They were a Manichaean sect regarded as Judaizing heretics who lived in Phrygia and Lycaonia but were neither Hebrews nor Gentiles. They kept the Sabbath, but were not circumcised. They were Shomer nagia. The word \"Athiganoi\" is where the Turkish name as well as the Romanian name come from, as the Ottoman Empire had some linguistic and cultural influence on the neighbouring medieval Romanian principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia. The Turkish Ottomans conquered the Byzantine Empire in the 15th century, hence they ruled over the Roma (Ciganos) as well. Today, Turkey has the largest Romani population.\nEgyptians.\nSome terms for the Romani people trace their origin to conflation with Egyptians. The English term \"Gypsy\" (or \"Gipsy\") originates from the Middle English \"gypcian\", short for \"Egipcien\". The Spanish term and French have similar etymologies. They are ultimately derived from the Greek (), meaning \"Egyptian\", via Latin. This designation owes its existence to the belief, common in the Middle Ages, that the Roma, or some related group (such as the Indian Dom people), were itinerant Egyptians.\nBohemians.\nThe Roma from Bohemia (today Czech Republic) were called Bohemian ( in French) because they were believed to have originated ethnically in Bohemia and later came to Western European countries such as France in the 16th century. The term bohemian came to mean carefree, artistic people. The Roma were musicians and dancers as well as circus performers that moved place to place, having an adventurous nomadic lifestyle, away from society's conventional norms and expectations. This lifestyle inspired the 19th-century European artistic movement, Bohemianism as well as the hippie movement of the 1950s and 1960s in the United States.\nIrish Travellers.\nBecause Irish Travellers, a sub-group of the Irish (having the same ancestral genetics from within the general population of Ireland) lived as nomads, the Roma and the Irish travellers came to be conflated with each other and in time some of the Roma, but they are not the same.\nYenish people.\nSimilar to the Irish Travellers, the Yenish people were confused with the Roma because they were nomadic and itinerant people. The Yenish people have origins in Western Europe, mostly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Luxembourg and Belgium. The Yenish descended from members of the marginalized and vagrant poor classes of society in Germanic-speaking regions in Europe in the Late Middle Ages. Most of the Yenish became sedentary in the course of the mid-19th to 20th centuries. The culture of the Irish Travellers and the Yenish people in Western Europe and the culture of the Roma are different while having the nomadic and itinerant similarity.\nBalkan people.\nForced sterilisation carried out in several European countries, such as Norway, Sweden, Czech Republic and Slovakia, in the mid to late 20th century led to a decrease in Roma populations in those countries. Countries in South Eastern Europe that had not carried out forced sterilisation, such as Romania and Bulgaria, experienced steady increases of Roma birth rates during the 20th century that continue to this day, mainly because of the Roma tradition to marry young (in their early teens). Once communism fell in Eastern Europe and travel restrictions were lifted as well as Eastern European countries joining the European Union in the 2000s, it was easier for the Eastern European Roma to mass migrate to Western Europe. Often, Romania is wrongly identified as the place of origin of the Roma because of the similar name Roma/Romani and Romanians. Romanians derive their name from the Latin \"romanus\", meaning \"Roman\", referencing the Roman conquest of Dacia. (The Dacians were a sub-group of the Thracians.) Romanian genetics show ancient Balkan ancestry (Thracian ancestry) as well as Slavic ancestry and not Indian ancestry like the Roma.\nHistory.\nArrival in Europe.\nA number of Armenian-origin words in the Romani language indicate that Romanies passed through Armenia prior to linguistic changes of the 9th century. They arrived in the Balkans\u2014Europe proper\u2014during the Byzantine period. A document of 1068 describing an event in Constantinople mentions \"Atsingani\", probably referring to Roma. According to a 2012 genomic study, they reached the Balkans in the 12th century. Meanwhile, there are records which support an earlier arrival, potentially as early as the 7th century. \nLater historical records of the Roma in the Balkans are from the 14th century: in 1322, after leaving Ireland on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, Irish Franciscan friar Symon Semeonis encountered a migrant group of Roma outside the town of Candia (modern Heraklion), in Crete, calling them \"the descendants of Cain\"; his account is the earliest surviving description by a western chronicler of the Roma in Europe.\nIn 1350, Ludolph of Saxony mentioned a similar people with a unique language whom he called \"Mandapolos\", a word possibly derived from the Greek word \"mantes\" (meaning prophet or fortune teller).\nIn the 14th century, Roma are recorded in Venetian territories, including Methoni and Nafplio in the Peloponnese, and Corfu. Around 1360, a fiefdom called the \"Feudum Acinganorum\" was established in Corfu, which mainly used Romani serfs and to which the Roma on the island were subservient. \nWith the decline of the Byzantine Empire, the Ottoman Empire began expanding into Europe during the second half of the 14th century. Fleeing Ottoman wars, Romani people began migrating to western Europe during the 15th and 16th centuries. They often travelled as pilgrims, in organised groups of between 40 and 200 people. By the 16th century, they were present throughout western and northern Europe.\nBy the 1440s, they were recorded in Germany; and by the 16th century, Scotland and Sweden. Some Gitanos are thought to have migrated from Persia through north Africa, reaching the Iberian Peninsula in the 15th century.\nEarly modern history.\nTheir early history shows a mixed reception. Although 1385 marks the first recorded transaction for a Romani slave in Wallachia, they were issued safe conduct by Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund in 1417. Roma were ordered expelled from the Meissen region of Germany in 1416, Lucerne in 1471, Milan in 1493, France in 1504, Catalonia in 1512, Sweden in 1525, England in 1530 (see Egyptians Act 1530), and Denmark in 1536. From 1510 onwards, any Rom found in Switzerland was to be executed, while in England (beginning in 1554) and Denmark (beginning of 1589) any Rom who did not leave within a month was to be executed. Portugal began deportations of Roma to its colonies in 1538.\nA 1596 English statute gave Roma special privileges that other wanderers lacked. France passed a similar law in 1683. Catherine the Great of Russia declared the Roma \"crown slaves\" (a status superior to serfs), but also kept them out of certain parts of the capital. In 1595, \u0218tefan R\u0103zvan overcame his birth into slavery, and became the Voivode (Prince) of Moldavia.\nSince a royal edict by Charles II in 1695, Spanish Roma had been restricted to certain towns. An official edict in 1717 restricted them to only 75 towns and districts, so that they would not be concentrated in any one region. In the Great Gypsy Round-up, Roma were arrested and imprisoned by the Spanish Monarchy in 1749.\nDuring the latter part of the 17th century, around the Franco-Dutch War, both France and the Dutch Republic needed thousands of men to fight. Some recruitment took the form of rounding up vagrants and the poor to work the galleys and provide the armies' labour force. With this background, Roma were targets of both the French and the Dutch.\nAfter the wars, and into the first decade of the 18th century, Roma were slaughtered with impunity throughout the Dutch Republic. Roma, called 'heiden' ('heathens') by the Dutch, wandered throughout the rural areas of Europe and became the societal pariahs of the age. \"Heidenjachten\", translated as \"heathen hunt\" happened throughout the Dutch Republic in an attempt to eradicate them.\nAlthough some Roma could be kept as slaves in Wallachia and Moldavia until abolition in 1856, the majority traveled as free nomads with their wagons, as alluded to in the spoked wheel symbol in the Romani flag. Elsewhere in Europe, they were subjected to ethnic cleansing, abduction of their children, and forced labour. In Britain, Roma were sometimes expelled from small communities or hanged; in France, they were branded, and their heads were shaved; in Moravia and Bohemia, the women were marked by their ears being severed. As a result, large groups of the Roma moved to the East, toward Poland, which was more tolerant, and Russia, where the Roma were treated more fairly as long as they paid the annual taxes.\nModern history.\nRoma began emigrating to North America in colonial times, with small groups recorded in Virginia and French Louisiana. Larger-scale Roma emigration to the United States began in the 1860s, with Romanichal groups from Great Britain. The most significant number immigrated in the early 20th century, mainly from the Vlax group of Kalderash. Many Roma also settled in South America.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II and the Holocaust, the Nazis committed a systematic genocide against the Roma. In the Romani language, this genocide is known as the \"Porajmos\". Romanies were marked for extermination and sentenced to forced labor and imprisonment in concentration camps. They were often killed on sight, especially by the Einsatzgruppen (paramilitary death squads) on the Eastern Front. The total number of victims has been variously estimated at between 220,000 and 1,500,000. The Nazis also targeted other groups, such as Soviet prisoners of war, Poles, individuals with disabilities, Jehovah's Witnesses, homosexuals, and especially Jews.\nThe Roma were also persecuted in Nazi puppet states. In the Independent State of Croatia, the Usta\u0161a killed almost the entire Romani population of 25,000. The concentration camp system of Jasenovac, run by the Usta\u0161a militia and the Croat political police, was responsible for the deaths of between 15,000 and 20,000 Roma.\nPost-1945.\nIn Czechoslovakia, they were labeled a \"socially degraded stratum\", and Romani women were sterilized as part of a state policy to reduce their population. This policy was implemented with large financial incentives, with threats of denying future welfare payments, with misinformation, or after administering drugs.\nAn official inquiry from the Czech Republic, resulting in a report (December 2005), concluded that the Communist authorities had practised an assimilation policy towards Roma, which \"included efforts by social services to control the birth rate in the Romani community. The problem of sexual sterilisation carried out in the Czech Republic, either with improper motivation or illegally, exists,\" said the Czech Public Defender of Rights, recommending state compensation for women affected between 1973 and 1991. New cases were revealed up until 2004, in both the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Germany, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland \"all have histories of coercive sterilization of minorities and other groups\".\nSociety and traditional culture.\nThe traditional Romanies place a high value on the extended family. Traditionally, virginity is essential in unmarried women. However, Eastern European Roma are more likely to find it acceptable for girls to have sex before marriage compared to other Eastern Europeans. Both men and women usually marry young; there has been controversy in several countries over the Romani practice of child marriage. Romani law amongst some Roma, particularly the Kalaidzhi, establishes that the man's family must pay a bride price to the bride's parents, but only traditional families still follow it.\nOnce married, the woman joins the husband's family, where her main job is to tend to her husband's and her children's needs and take care of her in-laws. The power structure in the traditional Romani household has at its top the oldest man or grandfather, and men, in general, have more authority than women. Women gain respect and power as they get older. Young wives begin gaining authority once they have children.\nTraditionally, as can be seen on paintings and photos, some Romani men wear shoulder-length hair and a mustache, as well as an earring. Romani women generally have long hair, and Xoraxane Romani women often dye it blonde with henna.\nRomani people have traditionally displayed a desire to live in alignment with the natural world. Cooking was often done outdoors over open fires, using hunted or foraged ingredients. Many Roma in England historically lived and travelled around the English countryside in vardos, while others settled in urban areas. Today, the vast majority are settled and live in houses. Romani were often portrayed outdoors in rural settings in historical European art and literature.\nRomani social behavior has traditionally been regulated by Indian social customs (\"marime\" or \"marhime\") which are still respected by most Roma (and by most older generations of Sinti). This regulation affects many aspects of life and is applied to actions, people and things: parts of the human body are considered impure, the genital organs (because they produce emissions) and the rest of the lower body. Clothes for the lower body, as well as the clothes of menstruating women, are washed separately. Items used for eating are also washed in a different place. Childbirth is considered impure and must occur outside the dwelling place. The mother is deemed to be impure for forty days after giving birth.\nDeath is considered impure, and affects the whole family of the dead, who remain impure for a period of time. In contrast to the practice of cremating the dead, Romani dead must be buried. Animals that are considered to have unclean habits are not eaten by the community.\nThere are records of Romani women practicing fortune-telling dating back centuries, using techniques such as palm-reading. It often served as a means of income, and was typically passed from mother to daughter. In 1747 and later again in 1824, palm-reading was made illegal in Britain, which led to it becoming a covert practice. Romani fortunetellers were traditionally known as \"drabardi\". While it was practiced as a trade aimed at non-Romani, it was virtually never practiced amongst Romani themselves. However, the notion that Romani people have psychic powers and that Romani women are fortunetellers also functions as a harmful stereotype sometimes still present to this day.\nRomani people historically practiced nomadic professions such as horse trading, metalworking, music, dancing, juggling, horse training, fortune-telling and training animals (such as bears). Romani people also earned money by working in the labour market as tinkers or sieve-makers. Romani people turned to roofing and blacktopping when metalworking had been superseded by factory-type technology.\nBelonging and exclusion.\nIn Romani philosophy, \"Romanipen\" (also \"romanypen\", \"romanipe\", \"romanype\", \"romanimos\", \"romaimos\", \"romaniya\") is the totality of the Romani spirit, Romani culture, Romani Law, being a Romany, a set of Romani strains.\nAn ethnic Rom is considered a gadjo in Romani society if they have no \"Romanipen\". Sometimes a non-Rom may be considered a Rom if they do have \"Romanipen\". Usually this is an adopted child. It has been hypothesized that this owes more to a framework of culture than a simple adherence to historically received rules.\nReligion.\nGenerally, religious Roma are either Christians or Muslims.\nMuslim Roma generally preserve enduring influences of Ottoman culture, as shaped within former European provinces of the Ottoman Empire. During periods of conflict, particularly the Ottoman wars in Europe, some Roma fled the Balkans, settling in parts of northern and western Europe. Muslim Roma partaking in these migrations, or their descendants, eventually converted to Christianity, as Islam did not endure among these populations. In parts of the Balkans, particularly in Bulgaria, some people of Romani descent identify as ethnic Turks, and over generations have adopted the Turkish language.\nTheravada Buddhism influenced by the Dalit Buddhist movement has gained some popularity in recent times among Roma in Hungary.\nBeliefs.\nThe modern-day Roma often adopted Christianity or Islam depending on which was the dominant religion in the regions through which they had migrated. It is likely that the adherence to differing religions prevented families from engaging in intermarriage. In Eastern Europe, most Roma are Orthodox Christians, Muslims or Catholics. In Bulgaria, Greece, Moldova, Romania and Serbia, the majority of Romani inhabitants are Orthodox Christians. In Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Kosovo, the majority are Muslims. In Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia, the majority are Catholics. In Western Europe, the majority of Romani inhabitants are Catholic or Protestant. In Crimea and East Thrace, the majority of Romani inhabitants are Muslim. The majority of the diaspora in the United States adhere to some branch of Christianity.\nDeities and saints.\nBlessed Ceferino Gim\u00e9nez Malla is recently considered a patron saint of the Roma in Catholicism. Saint Sarah, or Sara e Kali, has also been venerated as a patron saint in her shrine at Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, France. Since the turn of the 21st century, Sara e Kali is understood to have been Kali, an Indian deity brought from India by the refugee ancestors of the Roma; as the Roma became Christianized, she was absorbed in a syncretic way and venerated as a saint.\nSaint Sarah is now increasingly being considered as \"a Romani Goddess, the Protectress of the Roma\" and an \"indisputable link with Mother India\".\nThe Balkans/Southeast Europe.\nFor the Romani communities that have resided in Southeast Europe for numerous centuries, the following apply with regard to religious beliefs:\nOther regions.\nIn Ukraine and Russia, the Romani populations are Christian and Muslim. Their ancestors settled on the Crimean peninsula during the 17th and 18th centuries, but some migrated to Ukraine, southern Russia and the Povolzhie (along the Volga River). These communities are recognized for their staunch preservation of the Romani language and identity.\nIn the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovakia, Romani populations are Roman or Greek Catholic, many times adopting and following local, cultural Catholicism as a syncretic system of belief that incorporates distinct Roma beliefs and cultural aspects. For example, many Polish Roma delay their Church wedding due to the belief that sacramental marriage is accompanied by divine ratification, creating a virtually indissoluble union until the couple consummate, after which the sacramental marriage is dissoluble only by the death of a spouse. Therefore, for Polish Roma, once married, one can't ever divorce. Another aspect of Polish Roma's Catholicism is a tradition of pilgrimage to the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery.\nIn southern Spain, many Romanies are Pentecostal, but this is a small minority that has emerged in contemporary times. The majority of the Romani people in France are Catholic or Protestant (mostly Pentecostal).\nMusic.\nRomani music plays an important role in central and eastern European countries such as Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Albania, Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia and Romania, and the style and performance practices of Romani musicians have influenced European classical composers such as Franz Liszt and Johannes Brahms. The \"l\u0103utari\" who perform at traditional Romanian weddings are virtually all Romani.\nProbably the most internationally prominent contemporary performers in the \"l\u0103utari\" tradition are Taraful Haiducilor. Bulgaria's popular \"wedding music\", too, is almost exclusively performed by Romani musicians such as Ivo Papasov, a virtuoso clarinetist closely associated with this genre and Bulgarian pop-folk singer Azis.\nMany famous classical musicians, such as the Hungarian pianist Georges Cziffra, are Romani, as are many prominent performers of manele. Zdob \u0219i Zdub, one of the most prominent rock bands in Moldova, although not Romanies themselves, draw heavily on Romani music, as do Spitalul de Urgen\u021b\u0103 in Romania, Shantel in Germany, Goran Bregovi\u0107 in Serbia, Darko Rundek in Croatia, Beirut and Gogol Bordello in the United States.\nAnother tradition of Romani music is the genre of the Romani brass band, with such notable practitioners as Boban Markovi\u0107 of Serbia, and the brass \"l\u0103utari\" groups Fanfare Cioc\u0103rlia and Fanfare din Cozmesti of Romania.\nThe distinctive sound of Romani music has also strongly influenced bolero, jazz, and flamenco (especially \"cante jondo\") in Spain.\nDances such as the flamenco and bolero of Spain were influenced by the Roma. Antonio Cansino blended Romani and Spanish flamenco and is credited with creating modern-day Spanish dance. The Dancing Cansinos popularized flamenco and bolero dancing in the United States. Famous dancer and actress, Rita Hayworth, is the granddaughter of Antonio Cansino.\nEuropean-style gypsy jazz (\"jazz Manouche\" or \"Sinti jazz\") is still widely practiced among the original creators (the Romanie People); one who acknowledged this artistic debt was guitarist Django Reinhardt. Contemporary artists in this tradition known internationally include Stochelo Rosenberg, Bir\u00e9li Lagr\u00e8ne, Jimmy Rosenberg, Paulus Sch\u00e4fer and Tchavolo Schmitt.\nThe Roma in Turkey have achieved musical acclaim from national and local audiences. Local performers usually perform for special holidays. Their music is usually performed on instruments such as the darbuka, g\u0131rnata and c\u00fcmb\u00fc\u015f.\nFolklore.\n\"Paramichia\" is a term used to refer to Romani legends and folktales. A popular legend among the Vlach Roma is of the hero Mundro Salamon, also known by other Roma subgroups as Wise Solomon or O Godjiaver Yanko.\nSome Roma believe in the \"mulo\" or \"mullo,\" meaning \"one who is dead\"; the Romani version of the vampire. The Roma from Slavic countries believe in werewolves. Roma figure prominently in the 1941 film \"The Wolf Man\" and the 2010 remake.\nCuisine.\nThe Roma believe that some foods are auspicious, or lucky (\"baxtalo\"), such as foods with pungent tastes like garlic, lemon, tomato, and peppers, and fermented foods such as sauerkraut, pickles and sour cream. Hedgehogs are a delicacy among some Roma.\nContemporary art and culture.\nRomani contemporary art emerged at the climax of the process that began in Central and Eastern Europe in the late 1980s, when the interpretation of the cultural practice of minorities was enabled by a paradigm shift, commonly referred to in specialist literature as the \"cultural turn\". The idea of the cultural turn was introduced; and this was also the time when the notion of cultural democracy became crystallized in the debates carried on at various public forums. Civil society gained strength, and civil politics appeared, which is a prerequisite for cultural democracy. This shift of attitude in scholarly circles derived from concerns specific not only to ethnicity but also to society, gender and class.\nLanguage.\nMost Roma speak one of several dialects of the Romani language, an Indo-Aryan language. They also often speak the languages of the countries they live in. Typically, they also incorporate loanwords and calques into Romani from the languages of those countries and especially words for terms that the Romani language does not have. Most of the \"Ciganos\" of Portugal, the of Spain, the Romanichal of Great Britain, and the Romanisael of Sweden and Norway have lost their knowledge of pure Romani, and speak the mixed languages Cal\u00f3, Angloromani and Scandoromani, respectively. Most of the Romani language-speaking communities in these regions consist of later immigrants from eastern or central Europe.\nThere are no concrete statistics for the number of Romani speakers, both in Europe and globally. However, a conservative estimate is 3.5\u00a0million speakers in Europe and a further 500,000 elsewhere, though the actual number may be considerably higher. This makes Romani the second-largest minority language in Europe, behind Catalan.\nIn regards to the diversity of dialects, Romani works in the same way as most other European languages. Cross-dialect communication is dominated by the following features:\nPersecutions.\nRoma enslavement.\nOne of the most enduring persecutions against the Roma was their enslavement. Slavery was widely practiced in medieval Europe, including the territory of present-day Romania from before the founding of the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia in the 13th\u201314th centuries. Legislation decreed that all the Roma living in these states, as well as any others who immigrated there, were classified as slaves. Slavery was gradually abolished during the 1840s and 1850s.\nThe exact origins of slavery in the Danubian Principalities are not known. There is some debate over whether the Roma came to Wallachia and Moldavia as free people or were brought there as slaves. Historian Nicolae Iorga associated the Roma's arrival with the 1241 Mongol invasion of Europe and he also considered their enslavement a vestige of that era, in which the Romanians took the Roma from the Mongols and preserved their status as slaves so they could use their labor. Other historians believe that the Roma were enslaved while they were being captured during the battles with the Tatars. The practice of enslaving prisoners of war may have also been adopted from the Mongols.\nSome Roma may have been slaves of the Mongols or the Tatars, or they may have served as auxiliary troops in the Mongol or Tatar armies. However, most of them migrated from south of the Danube at the end of the 14th century, some time after the founding of Wallachia. By then, the institution of slavery was already established in Moldavia and it was possibly established in both principalities. After the Roma migrated into the area, slavery became a widespread practice among the majority of the population. The Tatar slaves, smaller in numbers, were eventually merged into the Romani population.\nPersecution.\nSome branches of the Roma reached western Europe in the 15th century, fleeing from the Ottoman conquest of the Balkans as refugees. Although the Roma were refugees from the conflicts in southeastern Europe, they were often suspected of being associated with the Ottoman invasion by certain populations in the West because their physical appearance was exotic. (The Imperial Diet at Landau and Freiburg in 1496\u20131498 declared that the Roma were spies for the Turks). In western Europe, such suspicions and discrimination against people who constituted a visible minority resulted in persecution, often violent, with attempts to commit ethnic cleansing until the modern era. In times of social tension, the Romani suffered as scapegoats; for instance, they were accused of bringing the plague during times of epidemics.\nOn 30 July 1749, Spain conducted \"The Great Roundup\" of Roma (Gitanos) in its territory. The Spanish Crown ordered a nationwide raid that led to the break-up of families because all able-bodied men were interned in forced labor camps in an attempt to commit ethnic cleansing. The measure was eventually reversed and the Roma were freed as protests began to erupt in different communities, sedentary Roma were highly esteemed and protected in rural Spain.\nLater in the 19th century, Romani immigration was forbidden on a racial basis in areas outside Europe, mostly in the English-speaking world. In 1880, Argentina prohibited immigration by Roma, as did the United States in 1885.\nThere is widespread denial about the persecution still faced by Romani people.\nForced assimilation.\nIn the Habsburg monarchy under Maria Theresa (1740\u20131780), a series of decrees tried to integrate the Romanies to get them to permanently settle, removed their rights to horse and wagon ownership (1754) to reduce citizen-mobility, renamed them \"New Citizens\" and obliged Romani boys into military service just as any other citizens were if they had no trade (1761, and Revision 1770), required them to register with the local authorities (1767), and another decree prohibited marriages between Romanies (1773) to integrate them into the local population. Her successor Josef II prohibited the wearing of traditional Romani clothing along with the use of the Romani language, both of which were punishable by flogging. During this time, the schools were obliged to register and integrate Romani children; this policy was the first of the modern policies of integration. In Spain, attempts to assimilate the Gitanos were under way as early as 1619, when the Gitanos were forcibly settled, the use of the Romani language was prohibited, Gitano men and women were sent to separate workhouses and their children were sent to orphanages. King Charles III took a more progressive approach to Gitano assimilation, proclaiming that they had the same rights as Spanish citizens and ending the official denigration of them which was based on their race. While he prohibited their nomadic lifestyle, their use of the Calo language, the manufacture and wearing of Romani clothing, their trade in horses and other itinerant trades, he also forbade any form of discrimination against them and he also forbade the guilds from barring them. The use of the word \"gitano\" was also forbidden to further their assimilation, it was replaced with \"New Castilian\", a designation which was also applied to former Jews and Muslims.\nMost historians believe that Charles III's pragm\u00e1tica failed for three main reasons, reasons which were ultimately derived from its implementation outside major cities as well as in marginal areas: The difficulty which the Gitano community faced in changing its nomadic lifestyle, the marginal lifestyle to which the community had been driven by society and the serious difficulties of applying the pragm\u00e1tica in the fields of education and work. One author ascribes its failure to the overall rejection of the integration of the Gitanos by the wider population.\nOther policies of forced assimilation were implemented in other countries, one of these countries was Norway, where a law which permitted the state to remove children from their parents and place them in state institutions was passed in 1896. This resulted in some 1,500 Romani children being taken from their parents in the 20th century.\nPorajmos (Romani Holocaust).\nDuring World War II and the Holocaust, the persecution of the Roma reached a peak during the Romani Holocaust (the Porajmos), the genocide which was perpetrated against them by Nazi Germany. In 1935, Roma living in Germany were stripped of citizenship by the Nuremberg laws and subsequently subjected to violence and imprisonment in concentration camps. During the war, the policy was extended to areas under German occupation, and it was also implemented by other axis countries, most notably, by the Independent State of Croatia, Romania, and Hungary. From 1942, Roma were subjected to genocide in extermination camps.\nBecause no accurate pre-war census figures exist for the Roma, the actual number of Romani victims who were killed in the Romani Holocaust cannot be assessed. Estimates range from 90,000 victims to as high as 4,000,000, with a majority falling between 200,000 and 500,000. Lower estimates do not include those Roma who were killed in all Axis-controlled countries. A detailed study by Sybil Milton, a former senior historian at the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, contained an estimate of at least 220,000, possibly as many as 500,000. Ian Hancock, Director of the Program of Romani Studies and the Romani Archives and Documentation Center at the University of Texas at Austin, argues in favour of a higher figure of between 500,000 and 1,500,000.\nContemporary issues.\nIn Europe, Roma are associated with poverty, high crime rates, and behavior that is considered antisocial or inappropriate by the rest of the European population. Partly for this reason, discrimination against the Roma has continued to be practiced to the present day, although efforts are being made to address it.\nAmnesty International reports continued to document instances of Antizigan discrimination during the late 20th century, particularly in Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, and Kosovo. The European Union has recognized that discrimination against Roma must be addressed, and with the national Roma integration strategy they encourage member states to work towards greater Romani inclusion and upholding the rights of the Roma in the European Union.\nIn eastern Europe, Romani children often attend Roma Special Schools, separate from non-Romani children; these schools tend to offer a lower quality of education than the traditional education options accessible by non-Romani children, putting the Romani children at an educational disadvantage.\nThe Roma of Kosovo have been persecuted by ethnic Albanians since the end of the Kosovo War, and for the most part, much of the Romani community has been expelled.\nCzechoslovakia carried out a policy of sterilization of Romani women, starting in 1973. The dissidents of the Charter 77 denounced it in 1977\u201378 as a genocide, but the practice continued through the Velvet Revolution of 1989. A 2005 report by the Czech Republic's independent ombudsman, Otakar Motejl, identified dozens of cases of coercive sterilization between 1979 and 2001, and called for criminal investigations and possible prosecution against several health care workers and administrators.\nIn 2008, following the rape and subsequent murder of an Italian woman in Rome at the hands of a young man from a local Romani encampment, the Italian government declared that Italy's Romani population represented a national security risk and it also declared that it was required to take swift action to address the \"emergenza nomadi\" (\"nomad emergency\"). Specifically, officials in the Italian government accused the Romanies of being responsible for rising crime rates in urban areas.\nThe 2008 deaths of Cristina and Violetta Djeordsevic, two Romani children who drowned while Italian beach-goers remained unperturbed, brought international attention to the relationship between Italians and Roma. Reviewing the situation in 2012, one Belgian magazine observed:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On International Roma Day, which falls on 8 April, the significant proportion of Europe's 12 million Roma who live in deplorable conditions will not have much to celebrate. And poverty is not the only worry for the community. Ethnic tensions are on the rise. In 2008, Roma camps came under attack in Italy, intimidation by racist parliamentarians is the norm in Hungary. Speaking in 1993, V\u00e1clav Havel prophetically remarked that \"the treatment of the Roma is a litmus test for democracy\": and democracy has been found wanting. The consequences of the transition to capitalism have been disastrous for the Roma. Under communism they had jobs, free housing and schooling. Now many are unemployed, many are losing their homes and racism is increasingly rewarded with impunity.\nThe 2016 Pew Research poll found that Italians, in particular, hold strong anti-Roma views, with 82% of Italians expressing negative opinions about Roma. In Greece, 67%, in Hungary 64%, in France 61%, in Spain 49%, in Poland 47%, in the UK 45%, in Sweden 42%, in Germany 40%, and in the Netherlands 37% had an unfavourable view of Roma. The 2019 Pew Research poll found that 83% of Italians, 76% of Slovaks, 72% of Greeks, 68% of Bulgarians, 66% of Czechs, 61% of Lithuanians, 61% of Hungarians, 54% of Ukrainians, 52% of Russians, 51% of Poles, 44% of French, 40% of Spaniards, and 37% of Germans held unfavorable views of Roma. IRES published in 2020 a survey which revealed that 72% of Romanians have a negative opinion about them.\nAs of 2019, reports of anti-Roma incidents are increasing across Europe. Discrimination against Roma remains widespread in Kosovo, Romania, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and the Czech Republic, against which the European Court of Human Rights has ruled in Romani advocates' favor on the subject of discriminatory and segregationist education and housing practices. Romani communities across Ukraine have been the target of violent attacks.\nRoma refugees fleeing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine have faced discrimination in Europe, including in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Moldova.\nConcerning employment, a 2019 report by the FRA revealed that, across the European states that were surveyed, on average 34% of Romani men and 16% of Romani women were in paid work.\nRomani children are overrepresented as victims of human trafficking and have a higher vulnerability to sexual exploitation.\nMany Roma in the EU have no national health insurance and around 57% do not have a job or a form of paid employment. A third of households don't have tap water, a toilet or a shower.\nThe European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights reported in 2021 that 25% of Roma surveyed in ten European countries experienced discrimination within the previous year in areas such as healthcare, housing, education, and employment. Of these, only 5% reported the incidents to authorities, a decrease from 16% in 2016. 80% of Roma across ten European countries are at risk of poverty, a rate that has remained unchanged since 2016. While there have been slight improvements in housing conditions, with the share living in poor housing decreasing from 61% to 52%, severe material deprivation and overcrowding remain widespread. Discrimination remains a significant barrier to equal access to education for Roma communities, contributing to ongoing segregation and lower educational attainment. The FRA Roma Survey 2021 also highlighted stark health disparities, whereby Roma men live, on average, nine years less, and Roma women eleven years less, than the general population in the surveyed countries.\nForced repatriation.\nIn the summer of 2010, French authorities demolished at least 51 Roma camps and began the process of repatriating their residents to their countries of origin. This followed tensions between the French state and Romani communities, which had been heightened after a traveller drove through a French police checkpoint, hit an officer, attempted to hit two more officers, and was then shot and killed by the police. In retaliation a group of Roma, armed with hatchets and iron bars, attacked the police station of Saint-Aignan, toppled traffic lights and road signs and burned three cars. The French government has been accused of perpetrating these actions to pursue its political agenda. EU Justice Commissioner Viviane Reding stated that the European Commission should take legal action against France over the issue, calling the deportations \"a disgrace\". A leaked file dated 5 August, sent from the Interior Ministry to regional police chiefs, included the instruction: \"Three hundred camps or illegal settlements must be cleared within three months, Roma camps are a priority.\"\nVoluntarily assimilated groups.\nSome Romani people have been known to assimilate en masse with and even be absorbed by other ethnic groups. Assimilated Romani people often keep their identity a secret from outsiders, so it is very hard to determine the extent to which Romani peoples voluntarily assimilate into Gadjo society.\nThe most notable case of large-scale Romani assimilation is of the Romani Crimean Tatars. Several independent waves of Romani people undertook complete or near-complete assimilation into the Crimean Tatar people. Romani Crimean Tatars are the fourth largest subethnic group of the Crimean Tatar nation. For centuries, the Crimean Roma have worked as artisans, musicians, entertainers, and in a variety of blue-collar professions such as porters and blacksmiths. Almost all Romani Crimean Tatars living in Crimea today are legally Gadjo because they are recorded as ethnic Crimean Tatars, not Roma, in their internal passports and national censuses and consider their Crimean Tatar identity to be their primary identity. Mixed marriages between Romani Crimean Tatars and other Crimean Tatars without Romani backgrounds are accepted by the Crimean Roma. Many prominent Crimean Tatar celebrities are of Romani descent, such as Enver Sherfedinov and Sabriye Erecepova. Historian Olga Kucherenko postulates that while Crimean Tatars were in exile, additional Romani people of non-Crimean origin were also absorbed into the Romani Crimean Tatars.\nIn Basque Country, the Erromintxela people are assimilated descendants of a 15th-century wave of Kalderash Roma, who entered the Basque Country via France. Both ethnically, linguistically, and culturally, they are distinct from the Cal\u00f3-speaking Romani people in Spain and the Cascarot Romani people of the Northern Basque Country. Over time the Erromintxela replaced many of their Romani customs with Gadjo Basque customs. Their Erromintxela language is a mixture of Basque and the Romani languages, but there are very few speakers left due to assimilation. The younger generation of Erromintxela Roma are overwhelmingly shifting away from their Erromintxela language in favor of the Basque and Spanish languages.\nIn the United States, there are an estimated one million Americans who are of Romani descent, although most are not open about their background and keep a low profile. Most Americans know very little about Romani people, so they face less discrimination in the US than Europe, although they can still be victims of anti-Romani racism. Prominent Americans of Romani descent include Charlie Chaplin and President Bill Clinton.\nSegregation and water injustice.\nRoma communities across Europe continue to face significant barriers in accessing adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene services, as discrimination, poverty, and social exclusion, among other factors, exacerbate the lack of access of these groups. A 2018 report by the European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) exemplifies this with the right to water where the systematic exclusion of Roma from decision-making processes results in the denial of the human right \"to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation\" as defined by the UN General Assembly in 2010. These cases of systemic discrimination, environmental racism, and the failure of authorities to provide sanitation services reflect patterns identified not only in research but also in legal proceedings claiming violations of the principle of equal treatment. Litigation in Bulgaria, Slovakia, Romania, Hungary, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, and Kosovo has also exposed the systemic nature of this problem.\nArtistic representations.\nMany depictions of the Roma in literature and art present romanticized narratives of the mystical powers of fortune telling or as people who have an irascible or passionate temper paired with an indomitable love of freedom and a habit of criminality. The Roma were a popular subject in Venetian painting from the time of Giorgione at the start of the 16th century. The inclusion of such a figure adds an exotic oriental flavor to scenes. A Venetian Renaissance painting by Paris Bordone (c. 1530, Strasbourg) of the Holy Family in Egypt makes Elizabeth a Romani fortune-teller; the scene is otherwise located in a distinctly European landscape.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26154", "revid": "40774701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26154", "title": "Roman Inquisition", "text": "System of tribunals enforcing Catholic orthodoxy\nThe Roman Inquisition, formally , was a system of partisan tribunals developed by the Holy See of the Catholic Church, during the second half of the 16th century, responsible for prosecuting individuals accused of a wide array of crimes according to Catholic law and doctrine, relating to Catholic religious life or alternative religious or secular beliefs. It was established in 1542 by the leader of the Catholic Church, Pope Paul III. In the period after the Medieval Inquisition, it was one of three different manifestations of the wider Catholic Inquisition, the other two being the Spanish Inquisition and Portuguese Inquisition.\nFunction and functioning.\nThe main function of the institution was to maintain and implement papal bulls and other church rulings, in addition to their function of administering legalistic ramifications upon deviants of Catholic orthodoxy within states that cooperated with the pope and ostensibly exhibiting proper procedure to Catholic states in the process of formulating the Counter-Reformation. The papal bull \"Ad abolendam\", by Lucius III, prescribed penalties for heretical clerics and laymen and established a procedure of systematic inquisition by bishops; the third canon of the fourth Lateran Council (1215) specified procedures against heretics and their accomplices. Clerics were to be degraded from their orders, lay persons were to be branded as infamous and not be admitted to public offices or councils or to run a business, will not have the freedom to make a will nor shall succeed to an inheritance, goods were to be confiscated. A secular leader who \"neglects to cleanse his territory of this heretical filth\" would be excommunicated and the supreme pontiff could declare his vassals absolved from their fealty to him and make the land available for occupation by Catholics who would possess it unopposed and preserve it in the purity of the faith.\nThe organisational system of the Roman Inquisition did differ essentially from that of the Medieval Inquisition. Typically, the pope appointed one cardinal to preside over meetings of the Congregation. Though often referred to in historical literature as \"Grand Inquisitors\", the role was substantially different from the formally appointed Grand Inquisitor of the Spanish Inquisition. There were usually ten other cardinals who were members of the Congregation, as well as a prelate and two assistants all chosen from the Dominican Order. The Holy Office also had an international group of consultants; experienced scholars of theology and canon law who advised on specific questions. The congregation, in turn, presided over the activity of local tribunals.\nHistory.\nThe Roman Inquisition began in 1542 as part of the Catholic Church's Counter-Reformation against the spread of Protestantism, but it represented a less harsh affair than the previously established Spanish Inquisition. \nIn 1588, Pope Sixtus V established, with \"Immensa Aeterni Dei\", 15 congregations of the Roman Curia, of which the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was one. In 1908, it was renamed the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office. In 1965, it was renamed again to the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and later renamed once again in 2022 to the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith.\nWhile the Roman Inquisition was originally designed to combat the spread of Protestantism in Italy, the institution outlived that original purpose, and the system of tribunals lasted until the mid 18th century, when pre-unification Italian states began to suppress the local inquisitions, effectively eliminating the power of the church to prosecute heretical crimes.\nNotable subjects of investigation.\nCopernicus.\nNicolaus Copernicus circulated for scholarly discussion his hypothesis of a cosmos that was heliocentric and an Earth that rotated around its own axis, first, in 1514 in a manuscript essay, \"\" (Brief Commentary on the Hypotheses of Heavenly Movements), and then more robustly in the book \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\" (\"On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres\"), in 1543. The book was dedicated to Pope Paul III, who was known for his interests in astronomy. Both works were known in Rome, and neither attracted adverse theological responses in the sixteenth century.\nSome seven decades following Copernicus's death, specialists in mathematics, philosophy, and Catholic theology, whom the Roman Inquisition consulted in response to complaints made against Galileo in 1616, judged the proposition that the sun is immobile and at the center of the universe and that the Earth moves around it, to be \"foolish and absurd in philosophy\" and that the first was \"formally heretical\" while the second was \"at least erroneous in faith\".\nWhile the Inquisition refrained from condemning either Copernicus or his book (or Galileo) on the basis of this assessment, several theological claims in \"De revolutionibus\" were ordered to be excised in future publications. Unexpurgated versions of \"On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres\" were placed on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (Index of Forbidden Books).\nGalileo.\nGalileo Galilei revised the Copernican theories and was admonished for his views on heliocentrism in 1615. The Roman Inquisition concluded that his theory could only be supported as a possibility, not as an established fact. Galileo later defended his views in \"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\" (1632), which attacked Pope Urban VIII and thus alienated him and the Jesuits, who had both supported Galileo up until that point.\nHe was tried by the Inquisition in 1633. Galileo was found \"vehemently suspect of heresy\", forced to recant, and the \"Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems\" was placed on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (Index of Forbidden Books). He spent the rest of his life under house arrest at his villa in Arcetri near the city of Florence.\nJohn Bargrave.\n17th century English traveler and author, John Bargrave, gave an account of his interactions with the Roman Inquisition. Arriving in the city of Reggio (having travelled from Modena), Bargrave was stopped by the city guard who inspected his books on suspicion some may have been on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\". Bargrave was brought before the city's chief inquisitor who suggested they converse in Latin rather than Italian so that the guards might be prevented from understanding them. The inquisitor told him that the inquisition were not accustomed to stopping visitors or travellers unless someone had suggested they do so (Bargrave suspected that Jesuits in Rome had made accusations against him). Nonetheless, Bargrave was told he was required to hold a license from the inquisition. Even with a license, Bargrave was prohibited from carrying any books \"printed at any heretical city, as Geneva, Amsterdam, Leyden, London, or the like\". Bargrave provided a catalogue of his books to the inquisition and was provided with a license to carry them for the rest of his journey.\nOthers.\nAmong the subjects of this Inquisition were Franciscus Patricius, Giordano Bruno, Tommaso Campanella, Gerolamo Cardano, Cesare Cremonini and Camilla Erculiani an Italian apothecary, writer, natural philosopher, and a women's advocate. Of these, only Bruno was executed, in 1600. The miller Domenico Scandella was also burned at the stake on the orders of Pope Clement VIII in 1599 for his belief that God was created from chaos. The friar Fulgenzio Manfredi, who had preached against the pope, was tried by the Inquisition and executed in 1610.\nThe Inquisition also concerned itself with the Benandanti in the Friuli region, but considered them a lesser danger than the Protestant Reformation and only handed out light sentences.\nInquisition in Italy and Malta.\nThe Inquisition in Malta (1561 to 1798) is generally considered to have been gentler.\nItalian historian Andrea Del Col estimates that out of 51,000\u201375,000 cases judged by Inquisition in Italy after 1542, around 1,250 resulted in a death sentence.\nHistoriography and witchcraft accusations.\nThe Inquisitions have long been one of the primary subjects in the scholarly debates regarding witchcraft accusations of the early modern period. Historian Henry Charles Lea places an emphasis on torture methods employed to force confessions from the convicted. Carlo Ginzburg, in \"The Night Battles\", discussed how Inquisitorial propaganda of demonology distorted popular folk beliefs. In similar light, Elliott P. Currie saw the Inquisitions as one singular, ongoing phenomenon, which drove the witch-hunt to its peak. Currie argued that the methods pioneered by the Inquisition indirectly guided continental Europe to a series of persecutions motivated by profit. Second-wave feminism also saw a surge of historical interpretation of the witch-hunt. A number of 100,000 to 9,000,000 executions was given, all of which was attributed to the Inquisition. Feminist scholars Claudia Honeger and Nelly Moia saw the early modern witch-craze as a product of Inquisitorial influence, namely the \"Malleus Maleficarum\". Feminist writers Mary Daly, Barbara Walker, and Witch Starhawk argued that the Inquisitions were responsible for countless, \"hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions\", deaths, most of them women. This notion was similarly echoed by third-wave feminism writer Elizabeth Connor, who agreed with the notion of \"gynocide\", or \"woman hunting\", inaugurated by the \"Malleus\". The same sentiment regarding the Inquisition's notorious reputation of torture was shared by American writer and attorney Jonathan Kirsch. In his book, \"The Grand Inquisitor's Manual: A History of Terror in the Name of God\", Kirsch argued that the Inquisition's use of torture not only applied to the witch-craze which peaked in early 17th century, but also to the Salem witch trials. This model of repressive system, Kirsch argued, was also applied in Nazism, Soviet Russia, Japanese internment camps, McCarthyism, and most recently, the war on terror.\nThrough further research and available evidence, the Roman Inquisition was seen in a different light. In contrast with feminist arguments historians like Clarke Garrett, Brian P. Levack, John Tedeschi, Matteo Duni, and Diane Purkiss pointed out that most witch trials and executions were conducted by local and secular authorities. Clarke Garrett mentioned the quick decline and insignificance of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\". In-depth historical research regarding minor details of different types of magic, theological heresies, and political climate of The Reformation further revealed that Inquisitorial procedures greatly restrained witch hunting in Italy. Scholars specializing in the Renaissance and Early Modern period such as Guido Ruggiero, Christopher F. Black, and Mary O'Neil also discussed the importance of proper procedures and sparse use of torture. The low rate of torture and lawful interrogation, Black argued, means that trials tended to focus more on individual accusation, instead of groups. For the same reason, the notion of the Black Sabbath was much less accepted in contemporary Italian popular culture. The Holy Office's function in the disenchantment of popular culture also helped advance rationalism by getting rid of superstitions. Jeffrey R. Watt refutes the feminist claim that the Inquisition was responsible for the death of so many women. Watt points out that in 1588 the Roman Curia stated it would only allow testimony about participation in a Sabbath by the practitioners themselves and not by outside witnesses. Additionally, the Inquisition would eventually ban torture for the procurement of a witchcraft confession. The Holy Office also began seeking less harsh punishment for witches and viewed witches as those who had simply lost their way and who could be redeemed, not as apostates deserving death.\nHistorians who leaned toward the witch-hunt-restraining argument were more inclined to differentiate different Inquisitions, and often drew contrast between Italy versus Central Europe. The number of executed witches is also greatly lowered, to between 45,000 and 60,000. Those who argued for the fault of the Inquisition in the witch-craze are more likely to contrast continental Europe to England, as well as seeing the Inquisitions as one singular event which lasted 600 years since its founding in the 11th or 12th century. The significance and emphasis of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" is seen more frequently in arguments which hold the Inquisition accountable for the witch-craze.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26156", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26156", "title": "Radioactive", "text": ""}
{"id": "26157", "revid": "51022272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26157", "title": "Romare Bearden", "text": "American artist, author, and songwriter (1911\u20131988)\nRomare Howard Bearden (, ) (September 2, 1911 \u2013 March 12, 1988) was an American artist, author, and songwriter. He worked with many types of media including cartoons, oils, and collages. Born in Charlotte, North Carolina, Bearden grew up in New York City and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and graduated from New York University in 1935.\nHe began his artistic career creating scenes of the American South. Later, he worked to express the humanity he felt was lacking in the world after his experience in the US Army during World War II on the European front. He returned to Paris in 1950 and studied art history and philosophy at the Sorbonne.\nBearden's early work focused on unity and cooperation within the African-American community. After a period during the 1950s when he painted more abstractly, the theme reemerged in his collage works of the 1960s. \"The New York Times\" described Bearden as \"the nation's foremost collagist\" in his 1988 obituary. Bearden became a founding member of the Harlem-based art group known as Spiral, formed to discuss the responsibility of the African-American artist in the civil rights movement.\nBearden was the author or coauthor of several books. He also was a songwriter, known as co-writer of the jazz classic \"Sea Breeze\", which was recorded by Billy Eckstine, a former high school classmate at Peabody High School, and Dizzy Gillespie. He had long supported young, emerging artists and he and his wife established the Bearden Foundation to continue this work, as well as to support young scholars. In 1987, Bearden was awarded the National Medal of Arts.\nEarly life and education.\nBearden was born September 2, 1911, in Charlotte. Bearden and his family moved to New York City when he was a toddler, as part of the Great Migration. After enrolling in P.S. 5 in 1917, on 141 Street and Edgecombe Avenue in Harlem, he attended P.S. 139 and then DeWitt Clinton High School. In 1927 he moved to East Liberty, Pittsburgh with his grandparents and then returned to New York City. The Bearden household soon became a meeting place for major figures of the Harlem Renaissance. His father, R. Howard Bearden, was a grocer and pianist. Romare's mother, Bessye Bearden, played an active role with the New York City Board of Education, and also was the founder and president of the Colored Women's Democratic League. She was a New York correspondent for \"The Chicago Defender\", an African-American newspaper. Romare had Cherokee, Italian, and African ancestry. \"The Washington Post\" described him as \"African American\". His fair skin allowed him to cross boundaries which many other Black people were unable to access.\nIn 1929, Romare Bearden graduated from Peabody High School in Pittsburgh. He enrolled in Lincoln University, the nation's second oldest historically Black college, founded in 1854. He transferred to Boston University where he served as the art director for \"Beanpot\", Boston University's student humor magazine. He continued his studies at New York University (NYU), where he started to focus more on his art and less on athletics, and became a lead cartoonist and art editor for \"The Medley\", the monthly journal of the secretive Eucleian Society at NYU. Bearden studied art, education, science, and mathematics graduating with a degree in science and education in 1935.\nBearden continued his artistic study under German artist George Grosz at the Art Students League in 1936 and 1937. During this time he supported himself by working as a political cartoonist for African-American newspapers, including the \"Baltimore Afro-American,\" where he published a weekly cartoon from 1935 until 1937.\nSemi-professional baseball career.\nAs a child, Bearden played baseball in empty lots in his neighborhood. He enjoyed sports, throwing discus for his high school track team and trying out for football. After his mother became the New York editor for the \"Chicago Defender\", he did some writing for the paper, including some stories about baseball. But once Bearden transferred from Lincoln University to Boston University, he became the starting fullback for the school football team (1931-2) and then began pitching - first for the freshman team and eventually for the school's varsity baseball team. He was awarded a certificate of merit for his pitching at BU, which he hung with pride in subsequent homes throughout his life.\nWhile at Boston University he played for the Boston Tigers, a semi-professional, all Black team based in the neighborhood of Roxbury. He tended to play with them during the BU baseball off-season and had opportunities to play both iconic Negro League and white baseball teams. For example, he pitched against Satchel Paige while playing for the Pittsburgh Crawfords for a summer, and played exhibition games against teams such as the House of David and the Kansas City Monarchs. When Philadelphia Athletics catcher, Mickey Cochrane, brought a number of teammates to play a game against BU, Bearden gave up only one hit\u2014impressing Athletics owner Connie Mack. Mack offered Bearden a place on the Athletics fifteen years before Jackie Robinson became the first Black player in major league baseball. There are conflicting sources as to whether Mack thought Bearden was white or told Bearden he would have to pass for white. Despite the Athletics winning the World Series in 1929 and 1930, and the American League pennant in 1931, Bearden decided he did not want to hide his identity and chose not to play for the Athletics. After two summers with the Boston Tigers, an injury made him rethink the attention he was giving to baseball and he put greater focus into his art, instead.\nCareer as an artist.\nBearden grew as an artist by exploring his life experiences. His early paintings were often of scenes in the American South, and his style was strongly influenced by the Mexican muralists, especially Diego Rivera and Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco. In 1935, Bearden became a case worker for the Harlem office of the New York City Department of Social Services. Throughout his career as an artist, Bearden worked as a case worker off and on to supplement his income. During World War II, Bearden joined the United States Army, serving from 1942 until 1945, largely in Europe.\nAfter serving in the army, Bearden joined the Samuel Kootz Gallery, a commercial gallery in New York that featured avant-garde art. He produced paintings at this time in \"an expressionistic, linear, semi-abstract style.\" He returned to Europe in 1950 to study philosophy with Gaston Bachelard and art history at the Sorbonne, under the auspices of the G.I. Bill. Bearden traveled throughout Europe, visiting Picasso and other artists.\nMaking major changes in his art, he started producing abstract representations of what he deemed as human, specifically scenes from the Passion of Jesus. He had evolved from what Edward Alden Jewell, a reviewer for the \"New York Times\", called a \"debilitating focus on Regionalist and ethnic concerns\" to what became known as his stylistic approach, which participated in the post-war aims of avant-garde American art. His works were exhibited at the Samuel M. Kootz gallery until it was deemed not abstract enough.\nDuring Bearden's success in the gallery, however, he produced \"Golgotha,\" a painting from his series of the Passion of Jesus (see Figure 1). \"Golgotha\" is an abstract representation of the Crucifixion. The eye of the viewer is drawn to the middle of the image first, where Bearden has rendered Christ's body. The body parts are stylized into abstract geometric shapes, yet are still too realistic to be concretely abstract; this work has a feel of early Cubism. The body is in a central position and darkly contrasted with the highlighted crowds. The crowds of people are on the left and right, and are encapsulated within large spheres of bright colors of purple and indigo. The background of the painting is depicted in lighter jewel tones dissected with linear black ink. Bearden used these colors and contrasts because of the abstract influence of the time, but also for their meanings.\nBearden wanted to explore the emotions and actions of the crowds gathered around the Crucifixion. He worked hard to \"depict myths in an attempt to convey universal human values and reactions.\" According to Bearden, Christ's life, death, and resurrection are the greatest expressions of man's humanism, because of the idea of him that lived on through other men. It is why Bearden focuses on Christ's body first, to portray the idea of the myth, and then highlights the crowd, to show how the idea is passed on to men.\nBearden was focusing on the spiritual intent. He wanted to show ideas of humanism and thought that cannot be seen by the eye, but \"must be digested by the mind\". This is in accordance with his times, during which other noted artists created abstract representations of historically significant events, such as Robert Motherwell's commemoration of the Spanish Civil War, Jackson Pollock's investigation of Northwest Coast Indian art, Mark Rothko's and Barnett Newman's interpretations of Biblical stories, etc. Bearden depicted humanity through abstract expressionism after feeling he did not see it during the war. Bearden's work was less abstract than these other artists, and Sam Kootz's gallery ended its representation of him.\nBearden turned to music, co-writing the hit song \"Sea Breeze\", which was recorded by Billy Eckstine and Dizzy Gillespie. It is still considered a jazz classic.\nIn the late 1950s, Bearden's work became more abstract. He used layers of oil paint to produce muted, hidden effects. In 1956, Bearden began studying with a Chinese calligrapher, whom he credits with introducing him to new ideas about space and composition which he used in painting. He also spent much time studying famous European paintings he admired, particularly the work of the Dutch artists Johannes Vermeer, Pieter de Hooch, and Rembrandt. He began exhibiting again in 1960. About this time he and his wife established a second home on the Caribbean island of St. Maarten. In 1961, Bearden joined the Cordier and Ekstrom Gallery in New York City, which would represent him for the rest of his career.\nIn the early 1960s in Harlem, Bearden was a founding member of the art group known as Spiral, formed \"for the purpose of discussing the commitment of the Negro artist in the present struggle for civil liberties, and as a discussion group to consider common aesthetic problems.\" The first meeting was held in Bearden's studio on July 5, 1963, and was attended by Bearden, Hale Woodruff, Charles Alston, Norman Lewis, James Yeargans, Felrath Hines, Richard Mayhew, and William Pritchard. Woodruff was responsible for naming the group Spiral, suggesting the way in which the Archimedean spiral ascends upward as a symbol of progress. Over time the group expanded to include Merton Simpson, Emma Amos, Reginald Gammon, Alvin Hollingsworth, Calvin Douglas, Perry Ferguson, William Majors and Earle Miller. Stylistically the group ranged from Abstract Expressionists to social protest painters.\nBearden's collage work began in 1963 or 1964. He first combined images cut from magazines and colored paper, which he would often further alter with the use of sandpaper, bleach, graphite or paint. Bearden enlarged these collages through the photostat process. Building on the momentum from a successful exhibition of his photostat pieces at the Cordier and Ekstrom Gallery in 1964, Bearden was invited to do a solo exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. This heightened his public profile. Bearden's collage techniques changed over the years, and in later pieces he would use blown-up photostat photographic images, silk-screens, colored paper, and billboard pieces to create large collages on canvas and fiberboard. In 1970, he was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for Fine Arts.\nIn 1971, the Museum of Modern Art held a retrospective exhibition of Bearden's work, which traveled to the University Art Museum in Berkeley, California. The City of Berkeley then commissioned Bearden to create a mural for the City Council chambers. The sixteen-foot-wide mural, incorporating many visual aspects of the city in collage style, was installed in late 1973 and received positive reviews. It was taken down and loaned to a National Gallery of Art Bearden retrospective in 2003 that traveled to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the Dallas Museum of Art, the High Museum of Art, and the Whitney Museum of American Art. Following that tour it has been in storage while the City Hall building has awaited a seismic retrofit and the city council has been meeting elsewhere. A portion of the mural inspired the city's current logo.\nDuring the 1970s, he participated in a community art space called Communications Village operated by printmaker Benjamin Leroy Wigfall in Kingston, NY. Andrews made prints with the help of printer assistants who had been taught printmaking by Wigfall, and he exhibited there.\nIn the early 1980s, the Maryland Transit Authority commissioned Bearden $114,000 to create \"Baltimore Uproar\", a 14' x 46' Venetian glass mosaic for the Upton\u2013Avenue Market station. Featuring Baltimore-native Billie Holiday, the mosaic was first built in Italy, and then reassembled upon arrival in Baltimore, before being unveiled in December 1982.\nFollowing Bearden's death in March 1988, the Metropolitan Transit Authority in New York City unveiled \"City of Glass\", a colored-glass installation situated within the Westchester Sq-E Tremont Av station on the 6 line, made by the artist in collaboration with Benoit Gilsoul and Helmut Schardt, the fabricators. Bearden had originally worked on the project in 1982.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1954, at age 42, Bearden married Nanette Rohan, a 27-year-old dancer from Staten Island, New York. She later became an artist and critic. The couple eventually created the Bearden Foundation to assist young artists.\nBearden died in New York City on March 12, 1988, due to complications from bone cancer. The \"New York Times\" described Bearden in its obituary as \"one of America's pre-eminent artists\" and \"the nation's foremost collagist\".\nEarly works.\nHis early works suggest the importance of African Americans' unity and cooperation. For instance, \"The Visitation\" implies the importance of collaboration of Black communities by depicting intimacy between two Black women who are holding hands. Bearden's vernacular realism represented in the work makes \"The Visitation\" noteworthy; he describes two figures in \"The Visitation\" somewhat realistically but does not fully follow pure realism, and distorts and exaggerates some parts of their bodies to \"convey an experiential feeling or subjective disposition.\" Bearden said, \"the Negro artists [...] must not be content with merely recording a scene as a machine. He must enter wholeheartedly into the situation he wishes to convey.\"\nIn 1942, Bearden produced \"Factory Workers\" (gouache on casein on brown kraft paper mounted on board), which was commissioned by \"Forbes\" magazine to accompany an article titled \"The Negro's War\". The article \"examined the social and financial costs of racial discrimination during wartime and advocated for full integration of the American workplace.\" \"Factory Workers\" and its companion piece \"Folk Musicians\" serve as prime examples of the influence that Mexican muralists played in Bearden's early work.\nCollage.\nBearden had struggled with two artistic sides of himself: his background as \"a student of literature and of artistic traditions, and being a black human being involves very real experiences, figurative and concrete,\" which was at combat with the mid-twentieth century \"exploration of abstraction\". His frustration with abstraction won over, as he himself described his paintings' focus as coming to a plateau. Bearden then turned to a completely different medium at a very important time for the country.\nDuring the civil rights movement, Bearden started to experiment again, this time with forms of collage. After helping to found an artists group in support of civil rights, Bearden expressed representational and more overtly socially conscious aspects in his work. He used clippings from magazines, which in and of itself was a new medium, as glossy magazines were fairly new. He used these glossy scraps to incorporate modernity in his works, trying to show how African-American rights were moving forward, and so was his socially conscious art. In 1964, he held an exhibition he called \"Projections\", where he introduced his new collage style. These works were very well received and are generally considered to be his best work.\nBearden had numerous museum and gallery shows of his work since then, including a 1971 show at the Museum of Modern Art entitled \"Prevalence of Ritual;\" an exhibition of his prints, entitled \"A Graphic Odyssey\" showing the work of the last fifteen years of his life; \"Exactitude Ain't Interesting\", a 1992 show at Louis Stern's gallery in Beverly Hills which included late collages and watercolor; and the 2005 National Gallery of Art retrospective entitled \"The Art of Romare Bearden\". In 2011, Michael Rosenfeld Gallery exhibited its second show of the artist's work, \"Romare Bearden (1911\u20131988): Collage, A Centennial Celebration\", an intimate grouping of 21 collages produced between 1964 and 1983.\nOne of his most famous series, \"Prevalence of Ritual\", concentrates mostly on southern African-American life. He used these collages to show his rejection of the Harmon Foundation's (a New York City arts organization) emphasis on the idea that African Americans must reproduce their culture in their art. Bearden found this approach to be a burden on African artists, because he saw the idea as creating an emphasis on reproduction of something that already exists in the world. He used this new series to speak out against this limitation on Black artists, and to emphasize modern art.\nIn this series, one of the pieces is entitled \"Baptism\". Bearden was influenced by Francisco de Zurbar\u00e1n, and based \"Baptism\" on Zurbar\u00e1n's painting \"The Virgin Protectress of the Carthusians\". Bearden wanted to show how the water that is about to be poured on the subject being baptized is always moving, giving the whole collage a feel and sense of temporal flux. He wanted to express how African Americans' rights were always changing, and society itself was in a temporal flux at the time. Bearden wanted to show that nothing is fixed, and expressed this idea throughout the image: not only is the subject about to have water poured from the top, but the subject is also to be submerged in water. Every aspect of the collage is moving and will never be the same more than once, which was congruent with society at the time.\nIn \"The Art of Romare Bearden\", Ruth Fine describes his themes as \"universal\". \"A well-read man whose friends were other artists, writers, poets and jazz musicians, Bearden mined their worlds as well as his own for topics to explore. He took his imagery from both the everyday rituals of African American rural life in the south and urban life in the north, melding those American experiences with his personal experiences and with the themes of classical literature, religion, myth, music and daily human ritual.\"\nIn 2008 a 1984 mural by Romare Bearden in the Gateway Center subway station in Pittsburgh was estimated as worth $15 million, more than the cash-strapped transit agency expected. It raised questions about how it should be cared for once it is removed before the station is demolished.\n\"We did not expect it to be that much,\" Port Authority of Allegheny County spokeswoman Judi McNeil said. \"We don't have the wherewithal to be a caretaker of such a valuable piece.\" It would cost the agency more than $100,000 a year to insure the tile mural, McNeil said. Bearden was paid $90,000 for the project, titled \"Pittsburgh Recollections\". It was installed in 1984.\nBefore his death, Bearden claimed the collage fragments aided him to usher the past into the present: \"When I conjure these memories, they are of the present to me, because after all, the artist is a kind of enchanter in time.\"\n\"The Return of Odysseus\", one of his collage works held by the Art Institute of Chicago, exemplifies Bearden's effort to represent African-American rights in a form of collage. This collage describes one of the scenes in Homer's epic \"Odyssey\", in which the hero Odysseus is returning home from his long journey. The viewer's eye is first captured by the main figure, Odysseus, situated at the center of the work and reaching his hand to his wife. All the figures are black, enlarging the context of the Greek legend. This is one of the ways in which Bearden works to represent African-American rights; by replacing white characters with blacks, he attempts to defeat the rigidity of historical roles and stereotypes and open up the possibilities and potential of blacks. \"Bearden may have seen Odysseus as a strong mental model for the African-American community, which had endured its own adversities and setbacks.\" By portraying Odysseus as black, Bearden maximizes the potential for empathy by black audiences.\nBearden said that he used collage because \"he felt that art portraying the lives of African Americans did not give full value to the individual. [...] In doing so he was able to combine abstract art with real images so that people of different cultures could grasp the subject matter of the African American culture: The people. This is why his theme always exemplified people of color.\" In addition, he said that collage's technique of gathering several pieces together to create one assembled work \"symbolizes the coming together of tradition and communities.\"\nMusic.\nIn addition to painting, collage, and athletics, Bearden enjoyed music and even composed a number of songs.\nIn 1960, Loften Mitchell released the three act play, \"Star of the Morning\", for which he wrote the script and music, and Bearden and Clyde Fox wrote the lyrics.\nA selection of them can be heard on the 2003 album \"Romare Bearden Revealed,\" created by the Branford Marsalis Quartet.\nLegacy.\nThe Romare Bearden Foundation was founded two years after his death. The non-profit organization is not only Bearden's official estate; it helps \"to preserve and perpetuate the legacy of this preeminent American artist.\" As of 2015 it has been developing grant-giving programs aimed at funding and supporting children, young (emerging) artists, and scholars.\nIn Charlotte, a street was named after Bearden, intersecting West Boulevard on the west side of the city. Romare Bearden Drive is lined by the West Boulevard Public Library and rows of townhouses.\nInside the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Main Library (310 N. Tryon Street) is Bearden's mosaic, \"Before Dawn\". After Bearden's death Nanette Rohan, his widow, selected a collage of his to be recreated in smalti (glass tiles) by Crovatto Mosaics in Spilimbergo, Italy for the grand reopening gala (June 18, 1989) of the \"new\" library. She was honored at the ceremony for her contribution. The reinterpreted work is tall and wide.\nThe ground breaking for Romare Bearden Park in Charlotte was on September 2, 2011 and the completed park opened in late August 2013. It is situated on a parcel which is located in Third Ward between Church and Mint streets. Bearden lived near the new park for a time as a child, at the corner of what is now MLK Boulevard and Graham Street. The park design is based on work of public artist Norie Sato. Her concepts were inspired by his multimedia collages. Fittingly, the park serves as an entryway to a minor league baseball stadium, BB&amp;T Charlotte Knights Ballpark.\nBearden's home in Harlem, New York is a Historic Landmark Preservation site.\nIn 2004, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited \"Romare Bearden at the Met\", drawing on works in the Metropolitan Museum of Art collection including his 1971 \"The Block\".\nDC Moore Gallery currently represents the estate of Romare Bearden. The first exhibition of his works at the gallery was in September 2008. In 2014-15, Columbia University hosted a major Smithsonian Institution travelling exhibition of Bearden's work and an accompanying series of lectures, readings, performances, and other events celebrating the artist. On display at the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Gallery on Columbia's Morningside campus, and also at Columbia's Global Centers in Paris and Istanbul, \"Romare Bearden: A Black Odyssey\" focused on the cycle of collages and watercolors Bearden completed in 1977 based on Homer's epic poem, \"The Odyssey\".\nFor a 2005 U.S. postal stamp sheet commemorating ten important milestones of the Civil Rights Movement, Beardon's 1984 lithograph \"The Lamp\" was selected to illustrate the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision.\nIn 2011, the U.S. Postal Service released a set of Forever stamps featuring four of Bearden's paintings during a first-day-of-issuance ceremony at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.\nFrom January 15\u2013August 8, 2010, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited Romare Bearden's \"The Block\", Bearden's 1971 mural collage, including preliminary sketches and photographs (all in the Met's collection). From August 30, 2011 \u2013 March 4, 2012, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited \"Romare Bearden (1911\u20131988): A Centennial Celebration\".\nIn 2017, the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts in Richmond announced acquisition of Romare Bearden's collage, \"Three Folk Musicians\", as part of the museum's permanent collection. The collage, which shows two guitar players and a banjo player, is often cited in art history books. It was shown at the VMFA for the first time in February 2017 in the museum's mid- to late 20th-century galleries.\nFrom November 21, 2019 to 8 March 2020, the British Museum exhibited \"Troy: Myth and Reality\" which included the 1977 collage \"The Sirens' Song\".\nFrom May 3\u2013September 15, 2024, the Saint Louis Art Museum exhibited \"Romare Bearden: Resonances\", that \u201chighlight[ed] modernist artist Romare Bearden and his relationships with other artists in the Museum\u2019s collection.\u201d\nPublished works.\ncoauthor:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26158", "revid": "43940844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26158", "title": "REO Motor Car Company", "text": "American automotive company\nThe REO Motor Car Company (\"REO\" pronounced , not letter by letter) was a company based in Lansing, Michigan, which produced automobiles and trucks from 1905 to 1975. At one point, the company also manufactured buses on its truck platforms.\nRansom E. Olds was an entrepreneur who founded multiple companies in the automobile industry. In 1897 Olds founded Oldsmobile. In 1905 Olds left Oldsmobile and established a new company, REO Motor Car Company, in Lansing, Michigan. Olds had 52% of the stock and the titles of president and general manager. To ensure a reliable supply of parts, he organized a number of subsidiary firms, like the National Coil Company, the Michigan Screw Company, and the Atlas Drop Forge Company.\nOriginally the company was to be called \"R. E. Olds Motor Car Company\", but the owner of Olds' previous company, then called Olds Motor Works, objected and threatened legal action on the grounds of likely confusion of names by consumers.\nOlds then changed the name to his initials. Olds Motor Works soon adopted the popular name of its vehicles, Oldsmobile (which, along with Buick and Cadillac, became a founding division of General Motors Corporation).\nThe company's name was spelled alternately in all capitals REO or with only an initial capital as Reo, and the company's own literature was inconsistent in this regard, with early advertising using all capitals, and later advertising using the \"Reo\" capitalization. The pronunciation, however, was as a single word. Lansing is home to the R.\u00a0E. Olds Transportation Museum.\nEarly production.\nBy 1907, REO had gross sales of $4.5 million, and the company was one of the four wealthiest automobile manufacturers in the U.S. After 1908, however, despite the introduction of improved cars designed by Olds, REO's share of the automobile market decreased due in part to competition from emerging companies like Ford and General Motors.\nREO added a truck-manufacturing division and a Canadian plant in St Catharines, Ontario, in 1910. Two years later, Olds claimed that he had built the best car he could, a tourer able to seat two, four, or five, with a engine, wheelbase, and wheels, for $1,055 (not including top, windshield, or gas tank, which were US$100 extra); self-starter was $25 on top of that.\nIn 1915, Olds relinquished the title of general manager to his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Richard H. Scott, and eight years later he ended his tenure as the company's presidency as well, retaining the position of chairman of the board.\nPerhaps the most famous REO episode was the 1912 Trans-Canada journey. Traveling from Halifax, Nova Scotia, to Vancouver, British Columbia, in a 1912 REO special touring car, mechanic/driver Fonce V. (Jack) Haney and journalist Thomas W. Wilby made the first trip by automobile across Canada (including one short jaunt into northeastern Washington State when the Canadian roads were virtually impassable).\nFrom 1915 to 1925, under Scott's direction, REO remained profitable. In 1923, the company sold an early recreational vehicle, called the \"Motor Pullman Car\". Designed by Battle Creek, Michigan, newspaper editor J.\u00a0H. Brown, the automobile included a drop-down sleeping extension, a built-in gas cooking range, and a refrigerator. During 1925, however, Scott, like many of his contemporaries/competitors, began an ambitious expansion program designed to make the company more competitive with other automobile manufacturers by offering cars in different price ranges. The failure of this program and the effects of the Great Depression caused such losses that Olds ended his retirement during 1933 and assumed control of REO again, but resigned in 1934. During 1936, REO abandoned the manufacture of automobiles to concentrate on trucks. In 1935, REO sold 5101 units and in 1936 it was 4227 trucks. In 1938, REO sold 2929 units and in 1939 it was 853 trucks.\nNumber of Motor Vehicles produced by REO\nReo Flying Cloud and Reo Royale.\nREO's two most memorable cars were its Reo Flying Cloud introduced in 1927 and the Reo Royale 8 of 1931.\nThe Flying Cloud was the first car to use Lockheed's new hydraulic internal expanding brake system and featured styling by Fabio Segardi. While Ned Jordan is credited with changing the way advertising was written with his \"Somewhere West of Laramie\" ads for his Jordan Playboy, Reo's Flying Cloud\u2014a name that provoked evocative images of speed and lightness\u2014changed the way automobiles would be named in the future. It had a wheelbase. The final REO model of 1936 was a Flying Cloud.\nIn April 1927, Reo introduced the Wolverine brand of cars as a companion model to the Flying Cloud. With a Continental engine, artillery wheels, and a different pattern of horizontal radiator louvers from the Flying Cloud, the Wolverine was made until 1928.\nThe 1931 Reo Royale was a trendsetting design, introducing design elements that were a precedent for true automotive streamlining in the American market. The 8-cylinder model was sold through 1933 with minor updates. The name was used on a lower-priced 6-cylinder model through 1935. Beverly Rae Kimes, editor of the \"Standard Catalog of American Cars,\" terms the Royale \"the most fabulous Reo of all\". In addition to its coachwork by Murray designed by their Amos Northup, the Royale also provided buyers with a straight-eight with a nine-bearing crankshaft, one-shot lubrication, and thermostatically-controlled radiator shutters. The Royale rode upon factory wheelbases of (Model 8-31) and (Model 8-35); a 1932 custom version rode upon a wheelbase (Model 8-52). As many as 3 Dietrich coachbuilt bodies were built on wheelbases in 1931. Beginning in 1933, the Royale also featured as an option REO's semi-automatic transmission, the Self-Shifter. This unit was unreliable, and Consumers Union Reports advised readers to avoid it. The Model 8-31 was priced at $2,145. The model 8-35 was priced from $2,745 for the sedan to $3,000 for the convertible coupe. The coachbuilt cars were priced close to $6,000. A convertible Victoria was listed at $3,195 but only one is known to have been built. The 8-35 &amp; 8-52 are considered full CCCA classics.\nAfter passenger cars.\nAlthough truck orders during World War II enabled it to revive somewhat, the company remained unstable in the postwar era, resulting in a bankruptcy reorganization. In 1954, the company was still underperforming, and sold its vehicle manufacturing operations (the primary asset of the company) to the Bohn Aluminum and Brass Corporation of Detroit. Three years later, in 1957, Reo's vehicle manufacturing operation became a subsidiary of White Motor Corporation White then merged REO with Diamond T Trucks in 1967 to form Diamond Reo Trucks. Volvo later took over White and thus currently owns the rights to the REO brand name.\nMeanwhile, after selling Reo's vehicle manufacturing operation to Bohn in 1954, management began liquidating the remainder of the company. For tax reasons a group of shareholders successfully challenged the liquidation in a proxy fight in September 1955, and forced REO to take over a tiny nuclear services company called Nuclear Consultants, Inc. in a reverse takeover. The resulting Nuclear Corporation of America, Inc., diversified and purchased other companies to become a conglomerate, spreading into an array of fields including prefabricated housing and steel joist manufacturing in addition to nuclear services. Most of these businesses failed and the company was bankrupt again by 1966. After reorganizing, only the successful steel-joist business remained; the company started producing recycled steel and eventually renamed itself Nucor.\nStudebaker agreement.\nMost Studebaker US6 trucks were built by Studebaker. However, during the Second World War, REO produced a number of them under license from Studebaker. The REO versions of the truck had some changes, such as different door handles and a more powerful engine. It is estimated that REO produced around 20,000 of these trucks and, unlike the original Studebaker trucks which were also used by the United States, the REO versions were only for export to the Soviet Union.\nProducts.\nCars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrucks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26159", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26159", "title": "Rehavam Ze'evi", "text": "Israeli politician (1926\u20132001)\nRehavam Ze'evi ( ; 20 June 1926\u00a0\u2013 17 October 2001) was an Israeli general and politician who founded the far-right nationalist Moledet party. He mainly advocated for complete cleansing of the Palestinian population through population transfer.\nHe was assassinated by Hamdi Quran of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine's (PFLP) Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades in retaliation for Israel's assassination of Abu Ali Mustafa, the Secretary General of the PFLP.\nBiography.\nZe'evi was born on 20 June 1926 in Jerusalem to a religious Jewish family from the Yemin Moshe neighborhood that had lived in Jerusalem for six generations. He was raised on a collective farm. He joined the Palmach in 1944, and served in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) after the creation of the State of Israel.\nDuring his youth, Ze'evi went to school in Givat HaShlosha. One night he shaved his head, wrapped a towel round his waist and entered the food hall. The shaved head and towel around his waist gave an appearance reminiscent of Mohandas Gandhi and earned him \"Gandhi\" as his nickname, which stuck with him for the rest of his life. The nickname is also attributed to a long Arab dress he wore during his underground days in the Palmach. Ze'evi had five children, named Palmach, Sayar, Masada, Tze'ela and Arava. Palmach is also a member of Moledet and competed with Binyamin Elon for the party's leadership.\nMilitary career.\nIn 1948, Ze'evi was a platoon commander in the IDF. From 1964 to 1968, he served as Chief of the Department of Staff in the Israeli General Staff. In the late 1960s, Ze'evi formed the elite Sayeret Kharuv, an anti-terror battalion. This came at the time when IDF Chief of Staff Haim Bar-Lev had begun to focus manpower and budget on armoured tank units, resulting in huge cutbacks in infantry forces. Over the next five years he served as the Commander of the Central Military District (). He retired in September 1973, but rejoined the army when the Yom Kippur War broke out on 6 October 1973. A close friend of IDF Chief of Staff David Elazar, he was appointed Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff. He retired with the rank of (Major-General) in 1973.\nZe'evi, known for his concern for Israel's captured or missing soldiers, wore a military identity disc with their names around his neck.\nIt was revealed in 2004 that Ze'evi had covertly helped build the nascent Singapore Armed Forces at a time when he was deputy head of the Operations Branch in IDF. He secretly visited the city-state in 1965, after which he appointed Yaakov (Jack) Elazari to head a secret military delegation train the Singapore Armed Forces. They were nicknamed \"Mexicans\" during their stay in Singapore.\nPolitical career.\nIn 1974, Ze'evi became a consultant on combating terrorism in the government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. The following year he became the prime minister's adviser on matters of intelligence. Ze'evi resigned from this position in 1977, when Likud's Menachem Begin became prime minister. In 1988, Ze'evi established the Moledet (Homeland) party advocating the population transfer of Arabs from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to the neighboring Arab countries. In the election of that year, he won a seat in the Knesset which he held until his death. \nAfter the Madrid Conference of 1991, Ze'evi withdrew from the Likud government of Yitzhak Shamir. He would remain in the opposition for a decade. He disagreed strongly with the Labour governments of 1992\u20131996 led by Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres and 1999\u20132001 led by Ehud Barak. However, he looked favourably on the Netanyahu government of 1996\u20131999 and supported it from the outside.\nIn 1999, Moledet united with Herut \u2013 The National Movement and Tkuma into a single faction, the National Union. Following the election of Ariel Sharon in February 2001, Ze'evi joined the coalition and was appointed as Tourism Minister of Israel. Just two days before his killing he tendered his resignation from the post of Tourism Minister.\nEretz Yisrael Museum.\nIn 1981, Ze'evi was appointed chairman of the board of what was then the Israel Museum in Tel Aviv, a role he would hold for a decade. He was instrumental in its name being changed to the Eretz Israel Museum. The change had political connotations, given the associations with Eretz Israel. In 1987, he co-edited a series of books describing various aspects of the Land of Israel, based on artifacts from the museum. Ze'evi was famous for having one of the largest collections of books about Israel and its history.\nAssassination.\nZe'evi was shot in the Dan Jerusalem Hotel, at the time called the Jerusalem Hyatt Hotel, in Mount Scopus on 17 October 2001 by four Palestinian gunmen. He was taken to the Hadassah Medical Center hospital where he died before 10\u00a0am. He was buried in the military cemetery in Mount Herzl in Jerusalem. The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) took credit for the killing and stated that it was in revenge for the assassination of their secretary-general Abu Ali Mustafa, who was killed by Israel in August that year. Israel alleged that Ahmed Saadat ordered Ze'evi's assassination. Thousands took part in his funeral. The four gunmen, Hamdi Quran, Basel al-Asmar, Majdi Rahima Rimawi, and Ahad Olma, fled to the Palestinian National Authority. Israel placed Yasser Arafat under siege in the Ramallah compound to force the handing over of the suspects. In April 2002 the United States brokered a plan where the suspects were to be jailed in Jericho instead. The four killers were arrested together with the head of PFLP, Ahmad Sa'adat. They were imprisoned in a jail in Jericho and guarded by American and British forces. On 14 March 2006, the American and British guards left the jail, charging that the Palestinian Authority was not adhering to the agreement reached with Israel. Israel then launched Operation Bringing Home the Goods, in which it raided the Jericho prison and seized the five.\nIn December 2007, Hamdi Quran confessed in an Israeli court to assassinating Ze'evi together with Basel al-Asmar after being instructed by PFLP member Majdi Rahima Rimawi. He was sentenced to life imprisonment. \nIn August 2007, Basel al-Asmar was convicted of murder by an Israeli court. In May 2008, he was sentenced to 45 years in prison.\nIn July 2008, Majdi Rahima Rimawi was convicted of murder by an Israeli court for his part in planning the assassination. According to the verdict, Rahima was the one who supplied the gunmen with a photo of Ze'evi, details of the hotel in which he would be staying and information on the hotel layout. He was sentenced to life in prison and an additional 80 years.\nAhad Olma, who was the head of the PLFP's military wing at the time of the assassination, was sentenced to 30 years in prison for his role in instigating and planning the assassination in December 2008.\nIn December 2008, an Israeli military court sentenced Ahmad Sa'adat, leader of the PFLP, to 30 years in prison for heading an \"illegal terrorist organization\" and for his responsibility for all actions carried out by his organization.\nPolitical views.\nA few days after the Six-Day War, Ze'evi submitted a plan for the creation of a Palestinian state called the State of Ishmael, with Nablus as its capital. He urged Israel's leaders to establish this state as soon as possible, claiming that \"Protracted Israeli military rule will expand the hate and the abyss between the residents of the West Bank and Israel, due to the objective steps that will have to be taken in order to ensure order and security.\"\nZe'evi later advocated the population transfer by agreement of 3.3 million residents of the West Bank and Gaza Strip to Arab nations. He believed this could be accomplished by making life difficult so they would relocate on their own, through use of military force during wartime, or by agreement with Arab nations. In July 1987, Ze'evi presented his ideas at a forum in Tel Aviv, describing the plan as a voluntary transfer and the only way to make peace with the Arabs. After the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990, Ze'evi proposed transferring Palestinians to the east side of the Jordan River to serve as a buffer zone against any Iraqi attempt to attack Israel.\nIn a radio interview in July 2001, Ze'evi stated that 180,000 Palestinians worked and lived illegally in Israel. He described them as a \"cancer\" and said Israel should rid itself of those who were not Israeli citizens \"the same way you get rid of lice.\" He called for denying the vote to Arab citizens who did not serve in the army. He believed that Jordan historically belonged to the Tribes of Israel, specifically Gad, Reuven, and Menashe. Zeevi urged Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to \"lay waste to the Palestinian Authority\" and assassinate Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat.\nReporting his assassination, the BBC described Ze'evi as \"one of the most controversial politicians in Israel\" who \"repeatedly called for Arabs to be transferred out of the state and is notorious for using the line: 'Let the Arabs go back to Mecca'\". Binyamin Elon, leader of the Moledet party after Ze'evi's murder, maintains that Ze'evi did not hate Arabs. Despite being accused of racism, one of Ze'evi's closest friends was the Muslim Israeli-Arab officer and war hero Amos Yarkoni. Ze'evi and Yarkoni had worked together in the IDF. After Yarkoni's death Ze'evi loudly criticised the decision not to bury him in a military cemetery for reasons.\nControversies.\nIn 1975, Ehud Olmert, who later became Prime Minister of Israel, accused Ze'evi of protecting organized crime figures. Ze'evi sued Olmert for libel but lost the case. In September 1991, while serving as Minister without Portfolio, he called then U.S. President George H. W. Bush an \"anti-Semite.\"\nIn 1997, he called then U.S. Ambassador to Israel, Martin Indyk a \"\" (\"jewboy\") and challenged him to a fistfight. Indyk responded by calling him a \"son of a bitch\". The insult was apparently because the ambassador was urging Israel to make concessions in talks with the Palestinians.\nA report in 2016 from a television news magazine aired allegations that Ze'evi killed unarmed Bedouins, conspired in an attempted murder of a reporter, and raped a soldier under his command. The publication drew calls for an end to government funding for programs honoring Ze'evi.\nLegacy and commemoration.\nIn July 2005, the Knesset passed a law to commemorate Ze'evi's memory. Route 90 was renamed Gandhi's Road in his honor. Eilat's promenade was named for him and there is a life-size statue of him there. The community settlement of Merhav Am and the West Bank settlement Ma'ale Rehav'am also bear his name.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26161", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26161", "title": "Robert Fulton", "text": "American engineer and inventor (1765\u20131815)\nRobert Fulton (November 14, 1765 \u2013 February 24, 1815) was an American engineer and inventor who is widely credited with developing the world's first commercially successful steamboat, the (also known as \"Clermont\"). In 1807, that steamboat traveled on the Hudson River with passengers from New York City to Albany and back again, a round trip of , in 62 hours. The success of his steamboat changed river traffic and trade on major American rivers.\nFulton became interested in steam engines and the idea of steamboats in 1777 when he was around age 12 and visited state delegate William Henry of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, who was interested in this topic. Henry had learned about inventor James Watt and his Watt steam engine on an earlier visit to England.\nIn 1800, Fulton had been commissioned by Napoleon Bonaparte, leader of France, to attempt to design a submarine; he then produced , the first practical submarine in history. Fulton is also credited with inventing some of the world's earliest naval torpedoes for use by the Royal Navy.\nEarly life.\nRobert Fulton was born on a farm in Little Britain, Pennsylvania, on November 14, 1765. His father, Robert Fulton, married Mary Smith, daughter of Captain Joseph Smith and sister of Col. Lester Smith, a comparatively well off family. He had three sisters, Isabella, Elizabeth, and Mary, and a younger brother, Abraham.\nFor six years, he lived in Philadelphia, where he painted portraits and landscapes, drew houses and machinery, and was able to send money home to help support his mother. In 1785, Fulton bought a farm at Hopewell Township in Washington County near Pittsburgh for \u00a380 (equivalent to $ in 2018), and moved his mother and family into it.\nCareer.\nCareer in Europe (1786\u20131806).\nIn early 1786, Fulton developed symptoms of tuberculosis and was advised by an eminent doctor to take an ocean voyage for the benefit of his health. Fulton traveled to Europe, where he would live for the next twenty years. He left for England in the autumn of 1786, carrying several letters of introduction to Americans abroad from prominent individuals he had met in Philadelphia. He already corresponded with artist Benjamin West; their fathers had been close friends. West took Fulton into his home, where Fulton lived for several years and studied painting. Fulton gained many commissions painting portraits and landscapes, which allowed him to support himself. He continued to experiment with mechanical inventions.\nFulton became caught up in the enthusiasm of the \"Canal Mania\". In 1793, he began developing his ideas for canals with inclined planes instead of locks. He obtained a patent for this idea in 1794, and also began working on ideas for the steam power of boats. He published a pamphlet about canals and patented a dredging machine and several other inventions. In 1794, he moved to Manchester to gain practical knowledge of English canal engineering. While there he became friendly with Robert Owen, a cotton manufacturer and early socialist. Owen agreed to finance the development and promotion of Fulton's designs for inclined planes and earth-digging machines; he was instrumental in introducing the American to a canal company, which awarded him a sub-contract. But Fulton was not successful at this practical effort and he gave up the contract after a short time.\nAs early as 1793, Fulton proposed plans for steam-powered vessels to both the United States and British governments. The first steamships had appeared considerably earlier. The earliest steam-powered ship, in which the engine moved oars, was built by Claude de Jouffroy in France. Called \"Palmip\u00e8de\", it was tested on the Doubs in 1776. In 1783, de Jouffroy built , the first paddle steamer, which sailed successfully on the Sa\u00f4ne. The first successful trial run of a steamboat in America had been made by inventor John Fitch, on the Delaware River on August 22, 1787. William Symington had successfully tried steamboats in 1788, and it seems probable that Fulton was aware of these developments.\nIn Britain, Fulton met the Duke of Bridgewater, Francis Egerton, whose canal, the first to be constructed in the country, was being used for trials of a steam tug. Fulton became very enthusiastic about the canals, and wrote a 1796 treatise on canal construction, suggesting improvements to locks and other features. Working for the Duke of Bridgewater between 1796 and 1799, Fulton had a boat constructed in the Duke's timber yard, under the supervision of Benjamin Powell. After installation of the machinery supplied by the engineers Bateman and Sherratt of Salford, the boat was duly christened \"Bonaparte\" in honour of Fulton having served under Napoleon. After expensive trials, because of the configuration of the design, the team feared the paddles might damage the clay lining of the canal and eventually abandoned the experiment. In 1801, Bridgewater instead ordered eight vessels for his canal based on , constructed by Symington.\nIn 1797, Fulton went to Paris, where he was well known as an inventor. He studied French and German, along with mathematics and chemistry. Fulton also exhibited the first panorama painting to be shown in Paris, Pierre Pr\u00e9vost's \"Vue de Paris depuis les Tuileries\" (1800), on what is still called \"Rue des Panoramas\" (Panorama Street) today. While living in France, Fulton designed the first working muscle-powered submarine, , between 1793 and 1797. He also experimented with torpedoes. When tested, his submarine operated underwater for 17 minutes in 25 feet of water. He asked the government to subsidize its construction, but he was turned down twice. Eventually, he approached the Minister of Marine and, in 1800, was granted permission to build. The shipyard Perrier in Rouen built it, and the submarine sailed first in July 1800 on the Seine River in the same city.\nIn France, Fulton met Robert R. Livingston, who was appointed U.S. Ambassador to France in 1801. He also had a scientifically curious mind, and the two men decided to collaborate on building a steamboat and to try operating it on the Seine. Fulton experimented with the water resistance of various hull shapes, made drawings and models, and had a steamboat constructed. At the first trial the boat ran perfectly, but the hull was later rebuilt and strengthened. On August 9, 1803, when this boat was driven up the River Seine, it sank. The boat was long, with an beam, and made between against the current.\nIn 1804, Fulton switched allegiance and moved to Britain, where he was commissioned by Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger to build a range of weapons for use by the Royal Navy during Napoleon's invasion scares. Among his inventions were the world's first modern naval \"torpedoes\" (modern \"mines\"). These were tested, along with several other of his inventions, during the 1804 Raid on Boulogne, but met with limited success. Although Fulton continued to develop his inventions with the British until 1806, the crushing naval victory by Admiral Horatio Nelson at the 1805 Battle of Trafalgar greatly reduced the risk of French invasion. Fulton was increasingly sidelined as a result.\nCareer in the United States (1806\u20131815).\nIn 1806, Fulton returned to the United States. In 1807, he and Robert R. Livingston built the first commercially successful steamboat, (later known as \"Clermont\"). Livingston's shipping company began using it to carry passengers between New York City and up the Hudson River to the state capital Albany. \"Clermont\" made the trip in 32 hours. Passengers on the maiden voyage included a lawyer Jones and his family from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. His infant daughter Alexandra Jones later served as a Union nurse on a steamboat hospital in the American Civil War.\nThe Clermont was the first successful steamboat in America. While it was being built people called it \"Fulton's Folly\". The Clermont had sails as well as a steam engine. At each end of the boat was a short mast with a small square sail that could be unfurled when needed. The engine was in the center of the boat and was surrounded by cord wood. The engine was 24-horsepower. Above the engine was a tall and slender smoke stack. On each side was a big paddle wheel that was open and uncovered. The diameter of the paddle wheels was . The boat itself was long and wide. Its displacement was 160 tons. Fulton received two patents for his steamboat, one in 1809 and the other in 1811.\nFrom 1811 until his death, Fulton was a member of the Erie Canal Commission, appointed by the Governor of New York.\nFulton's final design was the floating battery . This, the first steam-driven warship in the world, was built for the United States Navy for the War of 1812. The heavy vessel was not completed until after Fulton's death and was named in his honor.\nFrom October 1811 to January 1812, Fulton, along with Livingston and Nicholas Roosevelt (1767\u20131854), worked together on a joint project to build a new steamboat, , sturdy enough to take down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to New Orleans, Louisiana. It traveled from industrial Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where it was built, with stops at Wheeling, West Virginia; Cincinnati, Ohio; past the \"Falls of the Ohio\" at Louisville, Kentucky; to near Cairo, Illinois, and the confluence with the Mississippi River; and down past Memphis, Tennessee, and Natchez, Mississippi, to New Orleans some by river from the Gulf of Mexico coast. This was less than a decade after the United States had acquired the Louisiana Territory from France. These rivers were not well settled, mapped, or protected. By achieving this first breakthrough voyage and also proving the ability of the steamboat to travel upstream against powerful river currents, Fulton changed the entire trade and transportation outlook for the American heartland.\nFulton was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1814.\nPersonal life.\nPrior to his marriage in 1808, Robert Fulton had a variety of homosexual and polyamorous relationships. Famous among them was a m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois with noted philanthropist couple Ruth and Joel Barlow while living in Paris with them for six years. Letters between them reveal a sexual relationship among all three, including notes from American Revolutionary and patriot Joel Barlow requesting in baby-talk language for him \"to have a wonderful summer of sexual pleasure with his wife\" while he was away, and, importantly, that \"he must not let...his beautiful body be deranged, and if he does anything wrong, he'll come and cut off his penis.\" After he left Paris, he lived for two years at the castle of William Courtenay, 9th Earl of Devon, a known homosexual, although there is no confirmed epistolary evidence of an explicit sexual relationship between them\nOn January 8, 1808, Fulton married Harriet Livingston (1783\u20131826), the daughter of Walter Livingston and niece of Robert R. Livingston, prominent men in the Hudson River area, whose family dated to the colonial era. During his marriage, he proposed a foursome with himself, his wife, and Ruth and Joel Barlow in Washington, DC, but Harriet rejected the offer. Harriet, who was nineteen years his junior, was well educated and was an accomplished amateur painter and musician. Together, they had four children:\nFulton died in 1815 in New York City from tuberculosis (then known as \"consumption\"). He had been walking home on the frozen Hudson River when one of his friends, Thomas Addis Emmet, fell through the ice. In rescuing his friend, Fulton got soaked with icy water. He is believed to have contracted pneumonia. When he got home, his sickness worsened. He was diagnosed with consumption and died at 49 years old. After his death, his widow married Charles Augustus Dale on November 26, 1816.\nHe is buried in the Trinity Church Cemetery for Trinity Church (Episcopal) at Wall Street in New York City, near other notable Americans such as former U.S. Secretaries of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton and Albert Gallatin. His descendants include Cory Lidle, a former Major League Baseball pitcher.\nLegacy.\nPosthumous honors.\nThe Commonwealth of Pennsylvania donated a marble statue of Fulton to the National Statuary Hall Collection in the United States Capitol. Fulton was also honored for his development of steamship technology in New York City's Hudson-Fulton Celebration of the Centennial in 1909. A replica of his first steam-powered steam vessel, \"Clermont\", was built for the occasion.\nFive ships of the United States Navy have borne the name in honor of Robert Fulton.\nFulton Hall at the United States Merchant Marine Academy houses the Department of Marine Engineering and included laboratories for diesel and steam engineering, refrigeration, marine engineering, thermodynamics, materials testing, machine shop, mechanical engineering, welding, electrical machinery, control systems, electric circuits, engine room simulators and graphics.\nBronze statues of Fulton and Christopher Columbus represent commerce on the balustrade of the galleries of the Main Reading Room in the Thomas Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. They are two of 16 historical figures, each pair representing one of the 8 pillars of civilization.\nThe Guatemalan government in 1910 erected a bust of Fulton in one of the parks of Guatemala City.\nIn 2006, Fulton was inducted into the \"National Inventors Hall of Fame\" in Alexandria, Virginia.\nPlaces named for Fulton.\nMany places in the U.S. are named for Robert Fulton, including:\nCounties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\n20th Century-Fox's 1940 film, \"Little Old New York\", based on a 1920 play by Rida Johnson Young, is a fictionalized version of Fulton's life from his arrival in New York to the first sailing of \"Clermont\". British actor Richard Greene starred as Fulton with Brenda Joyce as Harriet Livingston. Alice Faye and Fred MacMurray played wharf friends who help Fulton overcome problems to realize his dream.\nA fictionalized account of Fulton's role was produced by BBC television during the 1960s. In the first serial, \"Triton\" (1961, re-made in 1968), two British naval officers, Captain Belwether and Lieutenant Lamb, are involved in spying on Fulton while he is working for the French. In the sequel, \"Pegasus\" (1969), they are surprised to find themselves working with Fulton after he changed sides. In the 1961 series, Fulton was played by Reed De Rouen, in the 1968 and 1969 series he was played by Robert Cawdron.\nA Robert Fulton cartoon character appears in the 1955 Casper the Friendly Ghost short film \"Red, White, and Boo\".\nAuthor James McGee used Fulton's experiments in early submarine warfare (against wooden warships) as a major plot element in his 2006 novel \"Ratcatcher\".\n\"Invasion\" (2009), the tenth novel in the \"Kydd\" naval warfare series by Julian Stockwin, uses Fulton and his submarine as an important plot element.\nUntil 2016, Disney Springs at Walt Disney World had a restaurant named Fulton's Crab House with a building in the shape of a steamboat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26162", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26162", "title": "Real-Time Streaming Protocol", "text": "Computer network protocol\nThe Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) is an application-level network protocol designed for multiplexing and packetizing multimedia transport streams (such as interactive media, video and audio) over a suitable transport protocol.\nRTSP is used in entertainment and communications systems to control streaming media servers.\nThe protocol is used for establishing and controlling media sessions between endpoints.\nClients of media servers issue commands such as \"play\", \"record\" and \"pause\" to facilitate real-time control of the media streaming from the server to a client (video on demand) or from a client to the server (voice recording).\nHistory.\nRTSP was developed by RealNetworks, Netscape and Columbia University.\nThe first draft was submitted to IETF in October 1996 by Netscape and Progressive Networks, after which Henning Schulzrinne from Columbia University submitted \"RTSP\u055a\" (\"RTSP prime\") in December 1996.\nThe two drafts were merged for standardization by the Multiparty Multimedia Session Control Working Group (MMUSIC WG) of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and further drafts were published by the working group.\nThe Proposed Standard for RTSP was published as RFC 2326 in 1998.\nRTSP 2.0 was published as RFC 7826 in 2016 as a replacement of RTSP 1.0.\nVersion 2.0 is based on version 1.0 but is not backwards compatible other than in the basic version negotiation mechanism, and remains a Proposed Standard.\nRTP.\nThe transmission of streaming data itself is not a task of RTSP. Most RTSP servers use the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) in conjunction with Real-time Control Protocol (RTCP) for media stream delivery. However, some vendors implement proprietary transport protocols. The RTSP server software from RealNetworks, for example, also used RealNetworks' proprietary Real Data Transport (RDT).\nProtocol directives.\nWhile similar in some ways to HTTP, RTSP defines control sequences useful in controlling multimedia playback. While HTTP is stateless, RTSP has a state; an identifier is used when needed to track concurrent sessions. Like HTTP, RTSP uses TCP to maintain an end-to-end connection and, while most RTSP control messages are sent by the client to the server, some commands travel in the other direction (i.e., from server to client).\nPresented here are the basic RTSP requests. Some typical HTTP requests, like the OPTIONS request, are also available. The default transport layer port number is 554 for both TCP and UDP, the latter being rarely used for the control requests.\n An OPTIONS request returns the request types the server will accept.\n A DESCRIBE request includes an RTSP codice_1 URL, and the type of reply data that can be handled. This reply includes the presentation description, typically in Session Description Protocol (SDP) format. Among other things, the presentation description lists the media streams controlled with the aggregate URL. In the typical case, there is one media stream each for audio and video streams. The media stream URLs are either obtained directly from the SDP control fields or are obtained by appending the SDP control field to the aggregate URL.\n A SETUP request specifies how a single media stream must be transported. This must be done before a PLAY request is sent. The request contains the media stream URL and a transport specifier. This specifier typically includes a local port for receiving RTP data (audio or video), and another for RTCP data (meta information). The server reply usually confirms the chosen parameters and fills in the missing parts, such as the server's chosen ports. Each media stream must be configured using SETUP before an aggregate play request may be sent.\n A PLAY request will cause one or all media streams to be played. Play requests can be stacked by sending multiple PLAY requests. The URL may be the aggregate URL (to play all media streams), or a single media stream URL (to play only that stream). A range can be specified. If no range is specified, the stream is played from the beginning and plays to the end, or, if the stream is paused, it is resumed at the point it was paused.\n A PAUSE request temporarily halts one or all media streams, so it can later be resumed with a PLAY request. The request contains an aggregate or media stream URL. A range parameter on a PAUSE request specifies when to pause. When the range parameter is omitted, the pause occurs immediately and indefinitely.\n This method initiates recording a range of media data according to the presentation description. The timestamp reflects the start and end time(UTC). If no time range is given, use the start or end time provided in the presentation description. If the session has already started, commence recording immediately. The server decides whether to store the recorded data under the request URI or another URI. If the server does not use the request URI, the response should be 201 and contain an entity that describes the states of the request and refers to the new resource, and a Location header.\nANNOUNCE.\nThe ANNOUNCE method serves two purposes:\n When sent from client to server, ANNOUNCE posts the description of a presentation or media object identified by the request URL to a server. When sent from server to client, ANNOUNCE updates the session description in real time. If a new media stream is added to a presentation (e.g., during a live presentation), the whole presentation description should be sent again, rather than just the additional components, so that components can be deleted.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\n A TEARDOWN request is used to terminate the session. It stops all media streams and frees all session-related data on the server.\n The GET_PARAMETER request retrieves the value of a parameter of a presentation or stream specified in the URI. The content of the reply and response is left to the implementation. GET_PARAMETER with no entity body may be used to test client or server liveness (\"ping\").\n This method requests to set the value of a parameter for a presentation or stream specified by the URI.\n A REDIRECT request informs the client that it must connect to another server location. It contains the mandatory header Location, which indicates that the client should issue requests for that URL. It may contain the parameter Range, which indicates when the redirection takes effect. If the client wants to continue to send or receive media for this URI, the client MUST issue a TEARDOWN request for the current session and a SETUP for the new session at the designated host.\n Certain firewall designs and other circumstances may force a server to interleave RTSP methods and stream data. This interleaving should generally be avoided unless necessary, since it complicates client and server operation and imposes additional overhead. Interleaved binary data SHOULD only be used if RTSP is carried over TCP. Stream data, such as RTP packets, is encapsulated by an ASCII dollar sign (24 hexadecimal), followed by a one-byte channel identifier, followed by the length of the encapsulated binary data as a binary, two-byte integer in network byte order. The stream data follows immediately afterwards, without a CRLF, but including the upper-layer protocol headers. Each $ block contains exactly one upper-layer protocol data unit, e.g., one RTP packet.\nRTSP over HTTP.\nRTSP over HTTP was defined by Apple in 1999 It interleaves the RTP Video and Audio data into the RTSP Command Connection (as defined in RFC2326), and then sends the RTSP Command Connection via a pair of HTTP connections. One is a long running GET connection, and the other is a long running POST connection.\nThis method is also used in the ONVIF IP Camera standard and can be combined with HTTPS for secure and encrypted video and audio.\nRTSP Encryption and RTSPS.\nThere are several different methods for encrypting RTSP command messages and the RTP Video and Audio data.\nRTSP 2.0 (RFC7826) defines several methods for encryption and introduces a new codice_2 URL and many of these have been incorporated into RFC2326 RTSP 1.0 Clients and Servers.\nIANA have reserved the codice_2 URL prefix and Port 322 for RTSPS. As of September 2024, RTSP over HTTPS has been implemented in several ONVIF IP Cameras and RTSPS (using the codice_2 URL) has been implemented by Axis and Bosch CCTV Cameras, FFmpeg, GStreamer, MediaMTX, Ant Media Server and SharpRTSP.\nRate adaptation.\nRTSP using RTP and RTCP allows for the implementation of rate adaptation.\nImplementations.\nServer.\nMany CCTV / Security cameras, often called IP cameras, support RTSP streaming too, especially those with ONVIF profiles G, S, T.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26163", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26163", "title": "Real-time Transport Protocol", "text": "Protocol for delivering audio and video over IP networks\nThe Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) is a network protocol for delivering audio and video over IP networks. RTP is used in communication and entertainment systems that involve streaming media, such as telephony, video teleconference applications including WebRTC, television services and web-based push-to-talk features.\nRTP typically runs over User Datagram Protocol (UDP). RTP is used in conjunction with the RTP Control Protocol (RTCP). While RTP carries the media streams (e.g., audio and video), RTCP is used to monitor transmission statistics and quality of service (QoS) and aids synchronization of multiple streams. RTP is one of the technical foundations of voice over IP and in this context is often used in conjunction with a signaling protocol such as the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) which establishes connections across the network.\nRTP was developed by the Audio-Video Transport Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and first published in 1996 as , which was then superseded by in 2003.\nOverview.\nResearch on audio and video over packet-switched networks dates back to the early 1970s. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) published in 1977 and began developing RTP in 1992, and would go on to develop Session Announcement Protocol (SAP), the Session Description Protocol (SDP), and the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).\nRTP is designed for end-to-end, real-time transfer of streaming media. The protocol provides facilities for jitter compensation and detection of packet loss and out-of-order delivery, which are common, especially during UDP transmissions on an IP network. RTP allows data transfer to multiple destinations through IP multicast. RTP is regarded as the primary standard for audio/video transport in IP networks and is used with an associated profile and payload format. The design of RTP is based on the architectural principle known as application-layer framing where protocol functions are implemented in the application as opposed to the operating system's protocol stack.\nReal-time multimedia streaming applications require timely delivery of information and often can tolerate some packet loss to achieve this goal. For example, loss of a packet in an audio application may result in loss of a fraction of a second of audio data, which can be made unnoticeable with suitable error concealment algorithms. The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), although standardized for RTP use, is not normally used in RTP applications because TCP favors reliability over timeliness. Instead, the majority of the RTP implementations are built on the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Other transport protocols specifically designed for multimedia sessions are SCTP and DCCP, although, as of 2012[ [update]], they were not in widespread use.\nRTP was developed by the Audio/Video Transport working group of the IETF standards organization. RTP is used in conjunction with other protocols such as H.323 and RTSP. The RTP specification describes two protocols: RTP and RTCP. RTP is used for the transfer of multimedia data, and the RTCP is used to periodically send control information and QoS parameters.\nThe data transfer protocol, RTP, carries real-time data. Information provided by this protocol includes timestamps (for synchronization), sequence numbers (for packet loss and reordering detection) and the payload format, which indicates the encoded format of the data. The control protocol, RTCP, is used for quality of service (QoS) feedback and synchronization between the media streams. The bandwidth of RTCP traffic compared to RTP is small, typically around 5%.\nRTP sessions are typically initiated between communicating peers using a signaling protocol, such as H.323, the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), RTSP, or Jingle (XMPP). These protocols may use the Session Description Protocol to specify the parameters for the sessions.\nAn RTP session is established for each multimedia stream. Audio and video streams may use separate RTP sessions, enabling a receiver to selectively receive components of a particular stream. The RTP and RTCP design is independent of the transport protocol. Applications most typically use UDP with port numbers in the unprivileged range (1024 to 65535). The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) and the Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) may be used when a reliable transport protocol is desired. The RTP specification recommends even port numbers for RTP and the use of the next odd port number for the associated RTCP session. A single port can be used for RTP and RTCP in applications that multiplex the protocols.\nRTP is used by real-time multimedia applications such as voice over IP, audio over IP, WebRTC, Internet Protocol television, and professional video over IP including SMPTE 2022 and SMPTE 2110.\nProfiles and payload formats.\nRTP is designed to carry a multitude of multimedia formats, which permits the development of new formats without revising the RTP standard. To this end, the information required by a specific application of the protocol is not included in the generic RTP header. For each class of application (e.g., audio, video), RTP defines a \"profile\" and associated \"payload formats\". Every instantiation of RTP in a particular application requires a profile and payload format specifications.\nThe profile defines the codecs used to encode the payload data and their mapping to payload format codes in the protocol field \"Payload Type\" (PT) of the RTP header. Each profile is accompanied by several payload format specifications, each of which describes the transport of particular encoded data. Examples of audio payload formats are G.711, G.723, G.726, G.729, GSM, QCELP, MP3, and DTMF, and examples of video payloads are H.261, H.263, H.264, H.265 and MPEG-1/MPEG-2. The mapping of MPEG-4 audio/video streams to RTP packets is specified in , and H.263 video payloads are described in .\nExamples of RTP profiles include:\nPacket header.\nRTP packets are created at the application layer and handed to the transport layer for delivery. Each unit of RTP media data created by an application begins with the RTP packet header.\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|4\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|8\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|64\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|12\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|96\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|&amp;vellip;\nThe RTP header has a minimum size of 12 bytes. After the header, optional header extensions may be present. This is followed by the RTP payload, the format of which is determined by the particular class of application. The fields in the header are as follows:\n;Profile-specific Extension Header ID: 16 bits:a profile-specific identifier\n;Extension Header Length: 16 bits:indicates the length of the extension in 32-bit units, excluding the 32 bits of the extension header.\n;Extension Header Data: Variable:The data of the extension header.\nApplication design.\nA functional multimedia application requires other protocols and standards used in conjunction with RTP. Protocols such as SIP, Jingle, RTSP, H.225 and H.245 are used for session initiation, control and termination. Other standards, such as H.264, MPEG and H.263, are used for encoding the payload data as specified by the applicable RTP profile.\nAn RTP sender captures the multimedia data, then encodes, frames and transmits it as RTP packets with appropriate timestamps and increasing timestamps and sequence numbers. The sender sets the \"payload type\" field in accordance with connection negotiation and the RTP profile in use. The RTP receiver detects missing packets and may reorder packets. It decodes the media data in the packets according to the payload type and presents the stream to its user.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26165", "revid": "128551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26165", "title": "Rough ER", "text": ""}
{"id": "26166", "revid": "42412221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26166", "title": "Rijn", "text": ""}
{"id": "26167", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26167", "title": "Robert Calvert", "text": "English poet, writer, musician (1945\u20131988)\nRobert Newton Calvert (9 March 1945 \u2013 14 August 1988) was a South African-British writer, poet, and musician. He is principally known for his role as lyricist, performance poet and lead vocalist of the space rock band Hawkwind.\nEarly life.\nCalvert was born in Pretoria, South Africa, and moved with his parents to England when he was two. He attended school in London and Margate, living in a flat in Arlington House. Having finished school he joined the Air Training Corps, in which he became a corporal and played trumpet for the 438 Squadron band. He then went on to college in Canterbury. After leaving college, and having been denied his childhood dream of becoming a fighter pilot, he slowly acquainted himself with the UK's bohemian scene. Calvert began his career in earnest by writing poetry.\nCareer.\nIn 1967 he formed the street theatre group 'Street Dada Nihilismus'.\nAt the end of the 1960s, he returned to London and joined the city's flourishing psychedelic subculture. He soon became one of its most active members; joining, amongst other activities, \"Frendz\", one of the leading underground magazines of the time. During that time he acquainted himself with New Wave science fiction writers and befriended author Michael Moorcock. Calvert's poems were published in \"New Worlds\" and other magazines. Although he was influenced by the New Wave, Calvert developed a distinct style of his own. His ability to change fluently between poetry, music and theatre allowed him to develop into a multimedia artist.\nHawkwind.\nA childhood friend of Hawkwind co-founder Nik Turner, Calvert joined Hawkwind as a lyricist, performance poet and occasional lead vocalist in 1971. Following a two-year absence, he rejoined as the band's principal lead vocalist in 1975 before leaving once again in 1979. Calvert co-wrote Hawkwind's hit single \"Silver Machine\", which reached No. 3 in the UK Singles Chart. Although Lemmy sings on the single version, this is an overdub of a live recording taken at the Roundhouse in London with Calvert on vocals. \"They tried everyone else singing it except me\", Lemmy later said. Calvert also directed the \"Space Ritual\" tour, which is widely perceived as the band's artistic zenith.\nDuring periods away from Hawkwind duties, Calvert worked on his solo career; his solo creative output included albums, stage plays, poetry, and a novel. His first solo album, \"Captain Lockheed and the Starfighters\", was released in 1974. The record is a concept album, an amalgam of music and theatre focused around the Lockheed bribery scandals. In 1975, he won the Capital Radio poetry competition with his poem \"Circle Line\". In 1975, musician and producer Brian Eno produced and played on Calvert's second solo album, \"Lucky Leif and the Longships\", a concept album which looked at the history of the US and the Vikings, who crossed the Atlantic to reach America before Columbus. In 1977, Hawkwind performed \"Quark, Strangeness and Charm\" on Marc Bolan's TV series, \"Marc\".\nAs well as Michael Moorcock and Brian Eno, Calvert's collaborators included Arthur Brown, Steve Peregrin Took, Jim Capaldi, Steve Pond, Inner City Unit, Vivian Stanshall, Nektar, John Greaves, Adrian Wagner, Amon D\u00fc\u00fcl II and, posthumously, Spirits Burning, Dave Brock, and Krankschaft.\nCalvert suffered from bipolar disorder, which often caused a fractious relationship with his fellow musicians. At one point he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act.\nDeath.\nAged 43, Calvert died of a heart attack in 1988 in Ramsgate, England, outside of the \"Corner House\" caf\u00e9. As he approached the street, he reached for a pay phone, but the nearest phone had been disconnected. He was buried in Minster Cemetery at Minster-in-Thanet. His gravestone is engraved with the line \"Love's not Time's fool\", from William Shakespeare's sonnet 116.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26168", "revid": "28634655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26168", "title": "Rhythm and blues", "text": "Music genre originating in the 1940s in the United States\nRhythm and blues, frequently abbreviated as R&amp;B or R'n'B, is a genre of popular music that originated within African American communities in the 1940s. The term was originally used by record companies to describe recordings marketed predominantly to African Americans, at a time when \"rocking, jazz based music\u00a0... [with a] heavy, insistent beat\" was starting to become more popular.\nIn the commercial rhythm and blues music typical of the 1950s through the 1970s, the bands usually consisted of a piano, one or two guitars, bass, drums, one or more saxophones, and sometimes background vocalists. R&amp;B lyrical themes often encapsulate the African-American history and experience of pain and the quest for freedom and joy, as well as triumphs and failures in terms of societal racism, oppression, relationships, economics, and aspirations.\nThe term \"rhythm and blues\" has undergone a number of shifts in meaning. In the early 1950s, it was frequently applied to blues records. Starting in the mid-1950s, after this style of music had contributed to the development of rock and roll, the term \"R&amp;B\" became used in a wider context. It referred to music styles that developed from and incorporated electric blues, as well as gospel and soul music. By the 1970s, the term \"rhythm and blues\" had changed once again and was used as a blanket term for soul and funk.\nIn the late 1980s, a newer style of R&amp;B developed, becoming known as \"contemporary R&amp;B\". This contemporary form combines rhythm and blues with various elements of pop, soul, funk, disco, hip hop, and electronic music.\nEtymology, definitions and description.\nAlthough Jerry Wexler of \"Billboard\" magazine is credited with coining the term \"rhythm and blues\" as a musical term in the United States in 1948, the term had been used in \"Billboard\" as early as 1943. However, the company's first list of songs popular among African Americans was named Harlem Hit Parade; created in 1942, it listed the \"most popular records in Harlem,\" and is the predecessor to the \"Billboard\" RnB chart. \"Rhythm and Blues\" replaced the common term \"race music\", a term coined by Okeh producer Ralph Peer based on the common self description by the African American press as \"people of race.\" The term \"rhythm and blues\" was then used by \"Billboard\" in its chart listings from June 1949 until August 1969, when its \"Hot Rhythm &amp; Blues Singles\" chart was renamed as \"Best Selling Soul Singles\".\nBefore the \"Rhythm and Blues\" name was instated, various record companies had already begun replacing the term \"race music\" with the term \"sepia series\". \"Rhythm and blues\" is often abbreviated as \"R&amp;B\" or \"R'n'B\".\nIn the early 1950s, the term \"rhythm &amp; blues\" was frequently applied to blues records. Writer and producer Robert Palmer defined rhythm &amp; blues as \"a catchall term referring to any music that was made by and for black Americans\". He has also used the term \"R&amp;B\" as a synonym for jump blues. However, AllMusic separates it from jump blues because of R&amp;B's stronger gospel influences. Lawrence Cohn, author of \"Nothing but the Blues\", writes that \"rhythm and blues\" was an umbrella term invented for industry convenience. According to him, the term embraced all black music except classical music and religious music, unless a gospel song sold enough to break into the charts. Well into the 21st century, the term R&amp;B continues in use (in some contexts) to categorize music made by black musicians, as distinct from styles of music made by other musicians.\nIn the commercial rhythm and blues music typical of the 1950s through the 1970s, the bands usually consisted of piano, one or two guitars, bass, drums, and saxophone. Arrangements were rehearsed to the point of effortlessness and were sometimes accompanied by background vocalists. Simple repetitive parts mesh, creating momentum and rhythmic interplay producing mellow, lilting, and often hypnotic textures while calling attention to no individual sound. While singers are emotionally engaged with the lyrics, often intensely so, they remain cool, relaxed, and in control. The bands dressed in suits, and even uniforms, a practice associated with the modern popular music that rhythm and blues performers aspired to dominate. Lyrics often seemed fatalistic, and the music typically followed predictable patterns of chords and structure. R&amp;B lyrical themes often encapsulate the African-American experience of pain and the quest for freedom and joy, as well as triumphs and failures in terms of relationships, economics, and aspirations.\nOne publication of the Smithsonian Institution provided this summary of the origins of the genre in 2016.\"A distinctly African-American music drawing from the deep tributaries of African American expressive culture, it is an amalgam of jump blues, big band swing, gospel, boogie, and blues that was initially developed during a thirty-year period that bridges the era of legally sanctioned racial segregation, international conflicts, and the struggle for civil rights\".\nThe Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame defines some of the originators of R&amp;B, including Joe Turner's big band, Louis Jordan's Tympany Five, James Brown and LaVern Baker. In fact, this source states that \"Louis Jordan joined Turner in laying the foundation for R&amp;B in the 1940s, cutting one swinging rhythm &amp; blues masterpiece after another\". Other artists who were \"cornerstones of R&amp;B and its transformation into rock &amp; roll\" include Etta James, Fats Domino, Roy Brown, Little Richard and Ruth Brown. The \"doo wop\" groups were also noteworthy, including the Orioles, the Ravens and the Dominoes.\nThe term \"rock and roll\" had a strong sexual connotation in jump blues and R&amp;B, but when DJ Alan Freed referred to rock and roll on mainstream radio in the mid-1950s, \"the sexual component had been dialed down enough that it simply became an acceptable term for dancing\".\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nThe great migration of Black Americans to the urban industrial centers of Chicago, Detroit, New York City, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C. and elsewhere in the 1920s and 1930s created a new market for jazz, blues, and related genres of music. The migration of African Americans to urban centers in the 1920s and 1930s helped shape rhythm and blues by blending jazz, blues, and urban influences. These genres of music were often performed by full-time musicians, either working alone or in small groups. The precursors of rhythm and blues came from jazz and blues, which overlapped in the late-1920s and 30s through the work of musicians such as the Harlem Hamfats, with their 1936 hit \"Oh Red\", as well as Lonnie Johnson, Leroy Carr, Cab Calloway, Count Basie, and T-Bone Walker. There was also increasing emphasis on the electric guitar as a lead instrument, as well as the piano and saxophone.\nLate 1940s.\nR&amp;B originated in African-American communities in the 1940s. In 1948, RCA Victor was marketing black music under the name \"Blues and Rhythm\". In that year, Louis Jordan dominated the top five listings of the R&amp;B charts with three songs, and two of the top five songs were based on the boogie-woogie rhythms that had come to prominence during the 1940s. Jordan's band, the Tympany Five (formed in 1938), consisted of him on saxophone and vocals, along with musicians on trumpet, tenor saxophone, piano, bass and drums. Lawrence Cohn described the music as \"grittier than his boogie-era jazz-tinged blues\". Robert Palmer described it as \"urbane, rocking, jazz-based music\u00a0... [with a] heavy, insistent beat\". Jordan's music, along with that of Big Joe Turner, Roy Brown, Billy Wright, and Wynonie Harris, before 1949, was referred to as jump blues. Then, Paul Gayten, Roy Brown, and others had had hits in the style now referred to as rhythm and blues. In 1948, Wynonie Harris's remake of Brown's 1947 recording \"Good Rockin' Tonight\" reached number two on the charts, following band leader Sonny Thompson's \"Long Gone\" at number one.\nIn 1949, the term \"Rhythm and Blues\" (R&amp;B) replaced the Billboard category \"Harlem Hit Parade\". Also in that year, \"The Huckle-Buck\", recorded by band leader and saxophonist Paul Williams, was the number one R&amp;B tune, remaining on top of the charts for nearly the entire year. Written by musician and arranger Andy Gibson, the song was described as a \"dirty boogie\" because it was risque and raunchy. Paul Williams and His Hucklebuckers' concerts were sweaty riotous affairs that got shut down on more than one occasion. Their lyrics, by Roy Alfred (who later co-wrote the 1955 hit \"(The) Rock and Roll Waltz\"), were mildly sexually suggestive, and one teenager from Philadelphia said \"That Hucklebuck was a very nasty dance\". Also in 1949, a new version of a 1920s blues song, \"Ain't Nobody's Business\" was a number four hit for Jimmy Witherspoon, and Louis Jordan and the Tympany Five once again made the top five with \"Saturday Night Fish Fry\". Many of these hit records were issued on new independent record labels, such as Savoy (founded 1942), King (founded 1943), Imperial (founded 1945), Specialty (founded 1946), Chess (founded 1947), and Atlantic (founded 1948).\nAfro-Cuban rhythmic influence.\nAfrican American music began incorporating Afro-Cuban rhythmic motifs in the 1800s with the popularity of the Cuban contradanza (known outside of Cuba as the habanera). The \"habanera rhythm\" can be thought of as a combination of tresillo and the backbeat.\nFor the more than a quarter-century in which the cakewalk, ragtime and proto-jazz were forming and developing, the Cuban genre \"habanera\" exerted a constant presence in African American popular music. Jazz pioneer Jelly Roll Morton considered the tresillo/habanera rhythm (which he called the Spanish tinge) to be an essential ingredient of jazz. There are examples of tresillo-like rhythms in some African American folk music such as the hand-clapping and foot-stomping patterns in ring shout, post-Civil War drum and fife music, and New Orleans second line music. Wynton Marsalis considers tresillo to be the New Orleans \"clave\" (although technically, the pattern is only half a clave). Tresillo is the most basic duple-pulse rhythmic cell in Sub-Saharan African music traditions, and its use in African American music is one of the clearest examples of African rhythmic retention in the United States. The use of tresillo was continuously reinforced by the consecutive waves of Cuban music, which were adopted into North American popular culture. In 1940 Bob Zurke released \"Rhumboogie\", a boogie-woogie with a tresillo bass line, and lyrics proudly declaring the adoption of Cuban rhythm:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Harlem's got a new rhythm, man it's burning up the dance floors because it's so hot! They took a little rhumba rhythm and added boogie-woogie and now look what they got! Rhumboogie, it's Harlem's new creation with the Cuban syncopation, it's the killer! Just plant your both feet on each side. Let both your hips and shoulder glide. Then throw your body back and ride. There's nothing like rhumbaoogie, rhumboogie, boogie-woogie. In Harlem or Havana, you can kiss the old Savannah. It's a killer!\nAlthough originating in the metropolis at the mouth of the Mississippi River, New Orleans blues, with its Afro-Caribbean rhythmic traits, is distinct from the sound of the Mississippi Delta blues. In the late 1940s, New Orleans musicians were especially receptive to Cuban influences precisely at the time when R&amp;B was first forming. The first use of tresillo in R&amp;B occurred in New Orleans. Robert Palmer, who sampled R&amp;B on his album Don\u2019t Explain, recalls:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;New Orleans producer-bandleader Dave Bartholomew first employed this figure (as a saxophone-section riff) on his own 1949 disc \"Country Boy\" and subsequently helped make it the most over-used rhythmic pattern in 1950s rock 'n' roll. On numerous recordings by Fats Domino, Little Richard and others, Bartholomew assigned this repeating three-note pattern not just to the string bass, but also to electric guitars and even baritone sax, making for a very heavy bottom. He recalls first hearing the figure\u00a0\u2013 as a bass pattern on a Cuban disc.\nIn a 1988 interview, Bartholomew (who had the first R&amp;B studio band), revealed how he initially superimposed tresillo over swing rhythm:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I heard the bass playing that part on a 'rumba' record. On 'Country Boy' I had my bass and drums playing a straight swing rhythm and wrote out that 'rumba' bass part for the saxes to play on top of the swing rhythm. Later, especially after rock 'n' roll came along, I made the 'rumba' bass part heavier and heavier. I'd have the string bass, an electric guitar and a baritone all in unison.\nBartholomew referred to the Cuban son by the misnomer \"rumba\", a common practice of that time. Fats Domino's \"Blue Monday\", produced by Bartholomew, is another example of this now classic use of tresillo in R&amp;B. Bartholomew's 1949 tresillo-based \"Oh Cubanas\" is an attempt to blend African American and Afro-Cuban music. The word \"mambo\", larger than any of the other text, is placed prominently on the record label. In his composition \"Misery\", New Orleans pianist Professor Longhair plays a habanera-like figure in his left hand. The deft use of triplets is a characteristic of Longhair's style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGerhard Kubik notes that with the exception of New Orleans, early blues lacked complex polyrhythms, and there was a \"very specific absence of asymmetric time-line patterns (key patterns) in virtually all early-twentieth-century African-American music... only in some New Orleans genres does a hint of simple time line patterns occasionally appear in the form of transient so-called 'stomp' patterns or stop-time chorus. These do not function in the same way as African timelines.\" In the late 1940s, this changed somewhat when the two-celled timeline structure was brought into the blues. New Orleans musicians such as Bartholomew and Longhair incorporated Cuban instruments, as well as the clave pattern and related two-celled figures in songs such as \"Carnival Day\", (Bartholomew 1949) and \"Mardi Gras In New Orleans\" (Longhair 1949). While some of these early experiments were awkward fusions, the Afro-Cuban elements were eventually integrated fully into the New Orleans sound.\nIn the 1940s, Professor Longhair listened to and played with musicians from the islands and \"fell under the spell of Perez Prado's mambo records.\" He was especially enamored with Afro-Cuban music. Michael Campbell states: \"Professor Longhair's influence was... far-reaching. In several of his early recordings, Professor Longhair blended Afro-Cuban rhythms with rhythm and blues. The most explicit is 'Longhair's Blues Rhumba,' where he overlays a straightforward blues with a clave rhythm.\" Longhair's particular style was known locally as \"rumba-boogie\". In his \"Mardi Gras in New Orleans\", the pianist employs the 2\u20133 clave onbeat/offbeat motif in a rumba boogie \"guajeo\".\nThe syncopated, but straight subdivision feel of Cuban music (as opposed to swung subdivisions) took root in New Orleans R&amp;B during this time. Alexander Stewart states that the popular feel was passed along from \"New Orleans\u2014through James Brown's music, to the popular music of the 1970s,\" adding: \"The singular style of rhythm &amp; blues that emerged from New Orleans in the years after World War II played an important role in the development of funk. In a related development, the underlying rhythms of American popular music underwent a basic, yet generally unacknowledged transition from a triplet or shuffle feel to even or straight eighth notes. Concerning the various funk motifs, Stewart states that this model \"...is different from a time line (such as clave and tresillo) in that it is not an exact pattern, but more of a loose organizing principle.\"\nJohnny Otis released the R&amp;B mambo \"Mambo Boogie\" in January 1951, featuring congas, maracas, claves, and mambo saxophone guajeos in a blues progression. Ike Turner recorded \"Cubano Jump\" (1954) an electric guitar instrumental, which is built around several 2\u20133 clave figures, adopted from the mambo. The Hawketts, in \"Mardi Gras Mambo\" (1955) (featuring the vocals of a young Art Neville), make a clear reference to Perez Prado in their use of his trademark \"Unhh!\" in the break after the introduction.\nNed Sublette states: \"The electric blues cats were very well aware of Latin music, and there was definitely such a thing as \"rhumba blues\"; you can hear Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf playing it.\" He also cites Otis Rush, Ike Turner and Ray Charles, as R&amp;B artists who employed this feel.\nThe use of clave in R&amp;B coincided with the growing dominance of the backbeat, and the rising popularity of Cuban music in the U.S. In a sense, clave can be distilled down to tresillo (three-side) answered by the backbeat (two-side).\nThe \"Bo Diddley beat\" (1955) is perhaps the first true fusion of 3\u20132 clave and R&amp;B/rock 'n' roll. Bo Diddley has given different accounts of the riff's origins. Sublette asserts: \"In the context of the time, and especially those maracas [heard on the record], 'Bo Diddley' has to be understood as a Latin-tinged record. A rejected cut recorded at the same session was titled only 'Rhumba' on the track sheets.\" Johnny Otis's \"Willie and the Hand Jive\" (1958) is another example of this successful blend of 3\u20132 claves and R&amp;B. Otis used the Cuban instruments claves and maracas on the song.\nAfro-Cuban music was the conduit by which African American music was \"re-Africanized\", through the adoption of two-celled figures like clave and Afro-Cuban instruments like the conga drum, bongos, maracas and claves. According to John Storm Roberts, R&amp;B became the vehicle for the return of Cuban elements into mass popular music. Ahmet Ertegun, producer for Atlantic Records, is reported to have said that \"Afro-Cuban rhythms added color and excitement to the basic drive of R&amp;B.\" As Ned Sublette points out though: \"By the 1960s, with Cuba the object of a United States embargo that still remains in effect today, the island nation had been forgotten as a source of music. By the time people began to talk about rock and roll as having a history, Cuban music had vanished from North American consciousness.\"\nEarly to mid-1950s.\nAt first, only African Americans were buying R&amp;B discs. According to Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records, sales were localized in African-American markets; there were no white sales or white radio play. During the early 1950s, more white teenagers started to become aware of R&amp;B and began purchasing the music. For example, 40% of 1952 sales at Dolphin's of Hollywood record shop, located in an African-American area of Los Angeles, were to whites. Eventually, white teens across the country turned their musical taste toward rhythm and blues.\nJohnny Otis, who had signed with the Newark, New Jersey\u2013based Savoy Records, produced many R&amp;B hits in 1951, including \"Double Crossing Blues\", \"Mistrustin' Blues\" and \"Cupid's Boogie\", all of which hit number one that year. Otis scored ten top ten hits that year. Other hits include \"Gee Baby\", \"Mambo Boogie\" and \"All Nite Long\". The Clovers, a quintet consisting of a vocal quartet with accompanying guitarist, sang a distinctive-sounding combination of blues and gospel. They had the number five hit of the year with \"Don't You Know I Love You\" on Atlantic. Also in July 1951, Cleveland, Ohio DJ Alan Freed started a late-night radio show called \"The Moondog Rock Roll House Party\" on WJW (850 AM). Freed's show was sponsored by Fred Mintz, whose R&amp;B record store had a primarily African-American clientele. Freed began referring to the rhythm and blues music he played as \"rock and roll\".\nIn 1951 Little Richard Penniman began recording for RCA Records in the jump blues style of late 1940s stars Roy Brown and Billy Wright. However, it was not until he recorded a demo in 1954 that caught the attention of Specialty Records that the world would start to hear his new uptempo funky rhythm and blues that would catapult him to fame in 1955 and help define the sound of rock 'n' roll. A rapid succession of rhythm and blues hits followed, beginning with \"Tutti Frutti\" and \"Long Tall Sally\", which would influence performers such as James Brown, Elvis Presley, and Otis Redding.\nAlso in 1951, the song Rocket 88 was recorded by Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm at a studio owned by Sam Phillips with the vocal by Jackie Brenston. This song is often cited as a precursor to rock and roll or as one of the first records in that genre. In a later interview, however, Ike Turner offered this comment: \"I don't think that 'Rocket 88' is rock 'n' roll. I think that 'Rocket 88' is R&amp;B, but I think 'Rocket 88' is the \"cause\" of rock and roll existing\".\nRuth Brown, performing on the Atlantic label, placed hits in the top five every year from 1951 through 1954: \"Teardrops from My Eyes\", \"Five, Ten, Fifteen Hours\", \"(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean\" and \"What a Dream\". Faye Adams's \"Shake a Hand\" made it to number two in 1952. In 1953, the R&amp;B record-buying public made Big Mama Thornton's original recording of Leiber and Stoller's \"Hound Dog\" the year's number three hit. Ruth Brown was very prominent among female R&amp;B stars; her popularity most likely came from \"her deeply rooted vocal delivery in African American tradition\". That same year The Orioles, a doo-wop group, had the number four hit of the year with \"Crying in the Chapel\".\nFats Domino made the top 30 of the pop charts in 1952 and 1953, then the top 10 with \"Ain't That a Shame\". Ray Charles came to national prominence in 1955 with \"I Got a Woman\". Big Bill Broonzy said of Charles's music: \"He's mixing the blues with the spirituals... I know that's wrong.\"\nIn 1954 the Chords' \"Sh-Boom\" became the first hit to cross over from the R&amp;B chart to hit the top 10 early in the year. Late in the year, and into 1955, \"Hearts of Stone\" by the Charms made the top 20.\nAt Chess Records in the spring of 1955, Bo Diddley's debut record \"Bo Diddley\"/\"I'm a Man\" climbed to number two on the R&amp;B charts and popularized Bo Diddley's own original rhythm and blues clave-based vamp that would become a mainstay in rock and roll.\nAt the urging of Leonard Chess at Chess Records, Chuck Berry reworked a country fiddle tune with a long history, entitled \"Ida Red\". The resulting \"Maybellene\" was not only a number three hit on the R&amp;B charts in 1955, but also reached into the top 30 on the pop charts. Alan Freed, who had moved to the much larger market of New York City in 1954, helped the record become popular with white teenagers. Freed had been given part of the writing credit by Chess in return for his promotional activities, a common practice at the time.\nR&amp;B was also a strong influence on rock and roll. A 1985 article in \"The Wall Street Journal\", titled, \"Rock! It's Still Rhythm and Blues\" reported that the \"two terms were used interchangeably\" until about 1957. The other sources quoted in the article said that rock and roll combined R&amp;B with pop and country music.\nFats Domino was not convinced that there was any new genre. In 1957, he said, \"What they call rock 'n' roll now is rhythm and blues. I've been playing it for 15 years in New Orleans\". According to \"Rolling Stone\", \"this is a valid statement ... all Fifties rockers, black and white, country born and city bred, were fundamentally influenced by R&amp;B, the black popular music of the late Forties and early Fifties\".\nLate 1950s.\nIn 1956, an R&amp;B \"Top Stars of '56\" tour took place, with headliners Al Hibbler, Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, and Carl Perkins, whose \"Blue Suede Shoes\" was very popular with R&amp;B music buyers. Some of the performers completing the bill were Chuck Berry, Cathy Carr, Shirley &amp; Lee, Della Reese, Sam \"T-Bird\" Jensen, the Cleftones, and the Spaniels with Illinois Jacquet's Big Rockin' Rhythm Band. Cities visited by the tour included Columbia, South Carolina; Annapolis, Maryland; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Syracuse, Rochester and Buffalo, New York; and other cities. In Columbia, the concert ended with a near riot as Perkins began his first song as the closing act. Perkins is quoted as saying, \"It was dangerous. Lot of kids got hurt\". In Annapolis, 50,000 to 70,000 people tried to attend a sold-out performance with 8,000 seats. Roads were clogged for seven hours.\nFilmmakers took advantage of the popularity of \"rhythm and blues\" musicians as \"rock n roll\" musicians beginning in 1956. Little Richard, Chuck Berry, Fats Domino, Big Joe Turner, the Treniers, the Platters, and the Flamingos all made it onto the big screen.\nTwo Elvis Presley records made the R&amp;B top five in 1957: \"Jailhouse Rock\"/\"Treat Me Nice\" at number one, and \"All Shook Up\" at number five, an unprecedented acceptance of a non-African American artist into a music category known for being created by blacks. Nat King Cole, also a jazz pianist who had two hits on the pop charts in the early 1950s (\"Mona Lisa\" at number two in 1950 and \"Too Young\" at number one in 1951), had a record in the top five in the R&amp;B charts in 1958, \"Looking Back\"/\"Do I Like It\".\nIn 1959, two black-owned record labels, one of which would become hugely successful, made their debut: Sam Cooke's Sar and Berry Gordy's Motown Records. Brook Benton was at the top of the R&amp;B charts in 1959 and 1960 with one number one and two number two hits. Benton had a certain warmth in his voice that attracted a wide variety of listeners, and his ballads led to comparisons with performers such as\nNat King Cole, Frank Sinatra and Tony Bennett. Lloyd Price, who in 1952 had a number one hit with \"Lawdy Miss Clawdy\", regained predominance with a version of \"Stagger Lee\" at number one and \"Personality\" at number five in 1959.\nThe white bandleader of the Bill Black Combo, Bill Black, who had helped start Elvis Presley's career and was Elvis's bassist in the 1950s, had a hit among black listeners with \"Smokie, Part 2\". The single reached number 17 on the U.S. pop charts and number 1 on the R&amp;B charts, selling over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc by the RIAA. Hi Records did not feature pictures of the Combo on early records.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nSam Cooke's number five hit \"Chain Gang\" is indicative of R&amp;B in 1960, as is pop rocker Chubby Checker's number five hit \"The Twist\". By the early 1960s, the music industry category previously known as rhythm and blues was being called soul music, and similar music by white artists was labeled blue-eyed soul. Motown Records had its first million-selling single in 1960 with the Miracles' \"Shop Around\", and in 1961, Stax Records had its first hit with Carla Thomas's \"Gee Whiz (Look at His Eyes)\". Stax's next major hit, The Mar-Keys' instrumental \"Last Night\" (also released in 1961), introduced the rawer Memphis soul sound for which Stax became known. In Jamaica, R&amp;B influenced the development of ska. In 1969, black culture and rhythm and blues reached another great achievement when the Grammys added the Rhythm and Blues category, giving academic recognition to the category.\nBy the 1970s, the term \"rhythm and blues\" was being used as a blanket term for soul, funk, and disco.\nSince the 1980s.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, hip-hop started to capture the imagination of America's youth. R&amp;B started to become homogenized, with a group of high-profile producers responsible for most R&amp;B hits. It was hard for R&amp;B artists of the era to sell their music or even have their music heard because of the rise of hip-hop, but some adopted a \"hip-hop\" image, were marketed as such, and often featured rappers on their songs. Teddy Riley, Guy, Keith Sweat and Today gained new jack swing hits. In 1990, \"Billboard\" reintroduced R&amp;B to categorize all of Black popular music other than hip-hop. Newer artists such as Usher, R. Kelly, Janet Jackson, TLC, Aaliyah, Brandy, Destiny's Child, Tevin Campbell and Mary J. Blige enjoyed success. L.A. Reid, the CEO of LaFace Records, was responsible for some of R&amp;B's greatest successes in the 1990s in the form of Usher, TLC and Toni Braxton. Later, Reid successfully marketed Boyz II Men. In 2004, 80% of the songs that topped the R&amp;B charts were also at the top of the Hot 100. That period was the all-time peak for R&amp;B and hip hop on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and on Top 40 Radio. From about 2005 to 2013, R&amp;B sales declined. However, since 2010, hip-hop has started to take cues from the R&amp;B sound, choosing to adopt a softer, smoother sound that incorporates traditional R&amp;B with rappers such as Drake, who has opened an entire new door for the genre. This sound has gained in popularity and created great controversy for both hip-hop and R&amp;B as to how to identify it. In 2010, the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame was founded by LaMont \"ShowBoat\" Robinson.\nJewish influence in the business end of rhythm and blues.\nAccording to the Jewish writer, music publishing executive, and songwriter Arnold Shaw, during the 1940s in the US, there was generally little opportunity for Jews in the WASP-controlled realm of mass communications, but the music business was \"wide open for Jews as it was for blacks\". Jews played a key role in developing and popularizing African American music, including rhythm and blues, and the independent record business was dominated by young Jewish men who promoted the sounds of black music.\nFor example, Milt Gabler was born to Jewish immigrants and grew up in Harlem. In the late 1930s, he created his own record label, Commodore Records, primarily recording, producing and promoting black singers and groups. Gabler recorded many of the leading jazz artists of the day. In 1939, he released the Billie Holiday hit song \"Strange Fruit\" on Commodore, boosting her career with what \"Time\" magazine 60 years later named 'Best Song of the Century\u2019. Based on the success of Commodore, the major label Decca Records recruited and hired Gabler in 1941. His Jewish brother-in-law, Jack Crystal, (father of Billy Crystal), took over Commodore. \nAt Decca, Gabler worked with many of the biggest stars of the 1940s, producing a series of hits, as well as being the first to bring Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald together on record. Decca then placed him in charge of their subsidiary label Coral, where he continued to advance the careers of black musicians including the Ink Spots, Sammy Davis Jr. and Louis Jordan. \u00a0\nGabler was responsible for many innovations in the recording industry of the 20th century. These included being the first person to deal in record reissues, the first to sell records by mail order, and the first to credit all the musicians on the recordings. In 1991, Gabler received the Grammy Trustees Award from The Recording Academy, for his significant contributions to the field of recording. In 1993, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by his nephew Billy Crystal.\nBritish rhythm and blues.\nBritish rhythm and blues and blues rock developed in the early 1960s, largely as a response to the recordings of American artists, often brought over by African American servicemen stationed in Britain or seamen visiting ports such as London, Liverpool, Newcastle and Belfast. Many bands, particularly in the developing London club scene, tried to emulate black rhythm and blues performers, resulting in a \"rawer\" or \"grittier\" sound than the more popular \"beat groups\". During the 1960s, Geno Washington, the Foundations, and the Equals gained pop hits. Many British black musicians helped form the British R&amp;B scene. These included Geno Washington, an American singer stationed in England with the Air Force. He was invited to join what became Geno Washington &amp; the Ram Jam Band by guitarist Pete Gage in 1965 and enjoyed top 40 hit singles and two top 10 albums before the band split up in 1969. Another American GI, Jimmy James, born in Jamaica, moved to London after two local number one hits in 1960 with The Vagabonds, who built a strong reputation as a live act. They released a live album and their studio debut, \"The New Religion,\" in 1966 and achieved moderate success with a few singles before the original Vagabonds broke up in 1970. White blues rock musician Alexis Korner formed new jazz rock band CCS in 1970. Interest in the blues would influence major British rock musicians, including Eric Clapton, Mick Taylor, Peter Green, and John Mayall, the groups Free and Cream adopted an interest in a wider range of rhythm and blues styles.\nThe Rolling Stones became the second most popular UK band (after the Beatles) and led the \"British Invasion\" of the US pop charts. The Rolling Stones covered Bobby Womack &amp; the Valentinos' song \"It's All Over Now\", giving them their first UK number one in 1964. Under the influence of blues and R&amp;B, bands such as the Rolling Stones, the Yardbirds, and the Animals, and more jazz-influenced bands like the Graham Bond Organisation and Zoot Money, had blue-eyed soul albums. White R&amp;B musicians popular in the UK included Steve Winwood, Frankie Miller, Scott Walker &amp; the Walker Brothers, the Animals from Newcastle, the Spencer Davis Group, and Van Morrison &amp; Them from Belfast. None of these bands exclusively played rhythm and blues, but it remained at the core of their early albums.\nChampion Jack Dupree was a New Orleans blues and boogie woogie pianist who toured Europe and settled there from 1960, living in Switzerland and Denmark, then in Halifax, England, in the 1970s and 1980s, before finally settling in Germany. Average White Band and Ian Dury released funky singles. From the 1970s to 1980s, Carl Douglas, Hot Chocolate, Delegation, Junior, Central Line, Princess, Jaki Graham, Loose Ends, the Pasadenas Ruby Turner, and Soul II Soul gained hits on the pop or R&amp;B charts. UK R&amp;B acts who gained success during the 1990s include Mark Morrison, Eternal, the Chimes, Carleen Anderson, D'Influence, Nu Colourz, Omar, and Bryan Powell. The music of the British mod subculture grew out of rhythm and blues and later soul performed by artists who were not available to the small London clubs where the scene originated. In the late 1960s, the Who performed American R&amp;B songs such as the Motown hit \"Heat Wave\", a song which reflected the young mod lifestyle. Many of these bands enjoyed national success in the UK, but found it difficult to break into the American music market. The British white R&amp;B bands produced music which was very different in tone from that of African-American artists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26169", "revid": "36087022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26169", "title": "Ren\u00e9 Laennec", "text": "French physician (1781\u20131826)\nRen\u00e9-Th\u00e9ophile-Hyacinthe Laennec (; 17\u00a0February 1781 \u2013 13\u00a0August 1826) was a French physician and musician. His skill at carving his own wooden flutes led him to invent the stethoscope in 1816, while working at the H\u00f4pital Necker. He pioneered its use in diagnosing various chest conditions.\nHe became a lecturer at the in 1822 and professor of medicine in 1823. His final appointments were that of head of the medical clinic at the H\u00f4pital de la Charit\u00e9 and professor at the Coll\u00e8ge de France. He went into a coma and subsequently died of tuberculosis on 13 August 1826, at age\u00a045.\nEarly life.\nLaennec was born in Quimper (Brittany). His mother died of tuberculosis when he was five years old, and he went to live with his great-uncle the Abb\u00e9 Laennec (a priest). As a child, Laennec became ill with fatigue and repeated instances of fever. Laennec was also thought to have asthma. At the age of twelve, he proceeded to Nantes, where his uncle, Guillaime-Fran\u00e7ois Laennec, worked in the faculty of medicine at the university. Laennec was a gifted student.\nHis father (a lawyer) later discouraged him from continuing as a doctor and Ren\u00e9 then had a period of time where he took long walks in the country, danced, studied Greek, and wrote poetry. However, in 1799 he returned to study. Laennec studied medicine at the University of Paris under several famous physicians, including Dupuytren and Jean-Nicolas Corvisart-Desmarets. There he was trained to use sound as a diagnostic aid. Corvisart advocated the re-introduction of percussion during the French Revolution.\nInvention of the stethoscope.\nRen\u00e9 Laennec wrote in the classic treatise \"De l'Auscultation M\u00e9diate\",\nIn 1816, [he was] consulted by a young woman laboring under general symptoms of diseased heart, and in whose case percussion and the application of the hand were of little avail on account of the great degree of fatness. The other method just mentioned direct auscultation being rendered inadmissible by the age and sex of the patient, I happened to recollect a simple and well-known fact in acoustics, ... the great distinctness with which we hear the scratch of a pin at one end of a piece of wood on applying our ear to the other. Immediately, on this suggestion, I rolled a quire of paper into a kind of cylinder and applied one end of it to the region of the heart and the other to my ear, and was not a little surprised and pleased to find that I could thereby perceive the action of the heart in a manner much more clear and distinct than I had ever been able to do by the immediate application of my ear.\nLaennec had discovered that the new stethoscope was superior to the normally used method of placing the ear over the chest, particularly if the patient was overweight. A stethoscope also avoided the embarrassment of placing the ear against the chest of a woman.\nLaennec is said to have seen school children playing with a long piece of solid wood in the days leading up to his innovation.\nThe children held their ear to one end of the stick while the opposite end was scratched with a pin, the stick transmitted and amplified the scratch. His skill as a flautist may also have inspired him. He built his first instrument as a 25\u00a0cm by 2.5\u00a0cm hollow wooden cylinder, which he later refined into three detachable parts. The refined design featured a funnel-shaped cavity to augment the sound, separable from the body of the stethoscope.\nHis clinical work allowed him to follow chest patients from bedside to the autopsy table. He was therefore able to correlate sounds captured by his new instruments with specific pathological changes in the chest, in effect pioneering a new non-invasive diagnostic tool. Tuberculosis, for example, was one ailment he could more clearly identify using his knowledge of typical and atypical chest sounds. Laennec was the first to classify and discuss the terms rales, rhonchi, crepitance, and egophony \u2013 terms that doctors now use on a daily basis during physical exams and diagnoses. La\u00ebnnec presented his findings and research on the stethoscope to the French Academy of Sciences, and in 1819 he published his masterpiece \"On Mediate Auscultation\".\nLaennec coined the phrase \"mediate auscultation\" (indirect listening), as opposed to the popular practice at the time of directly placing the ear on the chest (immediate auscultation). He named his instrument the stethoscope, from the Greek words \"\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2[stethos]\" (chest), and \"\u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c0\u03cc\u03c2[skopos]\" (examination).\nThe stethoscope quickly gained popularity as \"De l'Auscultation M\u00e9diate\" was translated and distributed across France, England, Italy, and Germany in the early 1820s. However, not all doctors readily embraced the new stethoscope. Although the \"New England Journal of Medicine\" reported the invention of the stethoscope two years later in 1821, as late as 1885, a professor of medicine stated, \"He that hath ears to hear, let him use his ears and not a stethoscope.\" Even the founder of the American Heart Association, L.A. Connor (1866\u20131950), carried a silk handkerchief with him to place on the wall of the chest for ear auscultation.\nLaennec often referred to the stethoscope as \"the cylinder\", and as he neared death only a few years later, he bequeathed his own stethoscope to his nephew, referring to it as \"the greatest legacy of my life\".\nThe modern type, with two earpieces, was invented in 1851 by A. Leared; in 1852 G.P. Cammann perfected the design of the instrument for commercial production, which has become the current standard form.\nOther medical contributions.\nHe developed the understanding of peritonitis and cirrhosis. Although the disease of cirrhosis was known, Laennec gave cirrhosis its name, using the Greek word (\u03ba\u03b9\u03c1\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \"kirrhos\", tawny) that referred to the tawny, yellow nodules characteristic of the disease.\nHe coined the term \"melanoma\" and described \"metastases\" of melanoma to the lungs. In 1804, while still a medical student, he was the first person to lecture on melanoma. This lecture was subsequently published in 1805. Laennec actually used the term \"melanose\", which he derived from the Greek (\u03bc\u03b5\u03bb\u03b1\u03bd, \"melan\", \"mela\") for \"black\". Over the years, there were bitter exchanges between Laennec and Dupuytren, the latter objecting that there was no mention of his work in this area and his role in its discovery.\nHe also studied phthisis pulmonalis (tuberculosis). Coincidentally, his nephew, M\u00e9riadec Laennec, is said to have diagnosed tuberculosis in Laennec using Laennec's stethoscope. Laennec wrote \"A Treatise on the Disease of the Chest\", in which he focused on diseases of the chest such as tuberculosis and diagnostics such as \"pectoriloquy\". He discussed the symptoms of Phthisis pulmonalis and what parts of the body it affects. It was written in an academic manner for learning purposes.\nLaennec advocated objective scientific observation. Professor Benjamin Ward Richardson stated in \"Disciples of Aesculapius\" that \"the true student of medicine reads Laennec's treatise on mediate auscultation and the use of the stethoscope once in two years at least as long as he is in practice. It ranks with the original work of Vesalius, Harvey and Hippocrates.\"\nReligious views.\nLaennec \"was intensely religious and was a devout Catholic all his life\". He was noted as a very kind man and his charity to the poor became proverbial. Austin Flint, the 1884 president of the American Medical Association, said that \"Laennec's life affords a striking instance among others disproving the vulgar error that the pursuit of science is unfavourable to religious faith.\"\nIn J. Forbes' annotated translation of Laennec's treatise, Forbes reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Laennec was a man of the greatest probity, habitually observant of his religious and social duties. He was a sincere Christian, and a good Catholic, adhering to his religion and his church through good report and bad report.\" His death (says M.\u00a0Bayle) was that of a Christian. Supported by the hope of a better life, prepared by the constant practice of virtue, he saw his end approach with much composure and resignation. His religious principles, imbibed with his earliest knowledge, were strengthened by the conviction of his maturer reason. He took no pains to conceal them when they were disadvantageous to his worldly interests; and he made no boast of them, when their avowal might have been a title to favour and advancement.\"\nLegacy and tribute.\nHonors:\nMedical terms named after Laennec:\nLaennec in fiction.\nA Rene Laennec appears in Rudyard Kipling's \"Rewards and Fairies\", the second of two books where two children, Dan and Una, encounter past inhabitants of England. In the short section \"Marlake Witches\", set during the Napoleonic Wars, Una meets a consumptive young lady who speaks of being treated by a French doctor, a prisoner on parole, one Rene Laennec. This prisoner discusses with a local herbalist the use of 'wooden trumpets' for listening to patients' chests, much to the distrust of the local doctor. Obviously, Kipling was aware of Laennec's work and invented an English connection.\nHe was the subject of a 1949 French film \"Doctor Laennec\" in which he was played by Pierre Blanchar.\nLaennec's landmarks in Paris.\nOn the exterior wall of the \"H\u00f4pital Necker \u2013 Enfants Malades\", where Laennec wrote \"Mediate auscultation\", near the entrance of the hospital in 149, Rue de S\u00e8vres, there is a marble memorial tablet with an engraved portrait of Laennec and this inscription: \"Dans cet h\u00f4pital Laennec d\u00e9couvrit l'auscultation. 1781\u20131826\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26171", "revid": "40886413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26171", "title": "Robin Hood", "text": "Heroic outlaw in English folklore\nRobin Hood is a legendary heroic outlaw originally depicted in English folklore and subsequently featured in literature, theatre, and cinema. According to legend, he was a highly skilled archer and swordsman. In some versions of the legend, he is depicted as being of noble birth, and in modern retellings he is sometimes depicted as having fought in the Crusades before returning to England to find his lands taken by the Sheriff of Nottingham. In the oldest known versions, he is instead a member of the yeoman class. He is traditionally depicted dressed in Lincoln green. Today, he is most closely associated with his stance of \"robbing the rich to give to the poor\".\nThrough retellings, additions, and variations, a body of familiar characters associated with Robin Hood has been created. These include his lover, Maid Marian; his band of outlaws, the Merry Men; and his chief opponent, the Sheriff of Nottingham. The Sheriff is often depicted as assisting Prince John in usurping the rightful but absent King Richard, to whom Robin Hood remains loyal. He became a popular folk figure in the Late Middle Ages, and his partisanship of the common people and opposition to the Sheriff are some of the earliest-recorded features of the legend, whereas his political interests and setting during the Angevin era developed in later centuries. The earliest known ballads featuring him are from the 15th century.\nThere have been numerous variations and adaptations of the story over the subsequent years, and the story continues to be widely represented in literature, film, and television media today. Robin Hood is considered one of the best-known tales of English folklore. In popular culture, the term \"Robin Hood\" is often used to describe a heroic outlaw or rebel against tyranny.\nThe origins of the legend as well as the historical context have been debated for centuries. There are numerous references to historical figures with similar names that have been proposed as possible evidence of his existence, some dating back to the late 13th century. At least eight plausible origins to the story have been mooted by historians and folklorists, including suggestions that \"Robin Hood\" was a stock alias used by or in reference to bandits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBallads and tales.\nThe first clear reference to \"rhymes of Robin Hood\" is from the alliterative poem \"Piers Plowman\", thought to have been composed in the 1370s, followed shortly afterwards by a quotation of a later common proverb, \"many men speak of Robin Hood and never shot his bow\", in \"Friar Daw's Reply\" (c. 1402) and a complaint in \"Dives and Pauper\" (1405\u20131410) that people would rather listen to \"tales and songs of Robin Hood\" than attend Mass. Robin Hood is also mentioned in a Lollard tract dated to the first half of the 15th century (thus also possibly predating his other earliest historical mentions) alongside several other folk heroes such as Guy of Warwick, Bevis of Hampton, and Sir Lybeaus.\nHowever, the earliest surviving copies of the narrative ballads date to the second half of the 15th century or the first decade of the 16th century. In these early accounts, Robin Hood's partisanship of the lower classes, his devotion to the Virgin Mary and associated special regard for women, his outstanding skill as an archer, his anti-clericalism, and his particular animosity towards the Sheriff of Nottingham are already clear. Little John, Much the Miller's Son, and Will Scarlet (as Will \"Scarlok\" or \"Scathelocke\") all appear, although not yet Maid Marian or Friar Tuck. The friar has been part of the legend since at least the later 15th century, when he is mentioned in a Robin Hood play script.\nIn modern popular culture, Robin Hood is typically seen as a contemporary and supporter of the late-12th-century King Richard the Lionheart, Robin being driven to outlawry during the misrule of Richard's brother John while Richard was away at the Third Crusade. This view first gained currency in the 16th century. It is not supported by the earliest ballads. The early compilation, \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\", names the king as 'Edward'; and while it does show Robin Hood accepting the king's pardon, he later repudiates it and returns to the greenwood. The oldest surviving ballad, \"Robin Hood and the Monk\", gives even less support to the picture of Robin Hood as a partisan of the true king. The setting of the early ballads is usually attributed by scholars to either the 13th or 14th century, although it is recognised they are not necessarily historically consistent.\nThe early ballads are also quite clear on Robin Hood's social status: he is a yeoman. While the meaning of this term changed over time, including free retainers of an aristocrat and small landholders, it always referred to commoners. The essence of it in the present context was \"neither a knight nor a peasant or 'husbonde' but something in between\". Artisans (such as millers) were among those regarded as 'yeomen' in the 14th century. From the 16th century on, there were attempts to elevate Robin Hood to the nobility, such as in Richard Grafton's \"Chronicle at Large\"; Anthony Munday presented him at the end of the century as the Earl of Huntingdon in two extremely influential plays, as he is still commonly presented in modern times.\nThe legend was also transmitted by 'Robin Hood games' or plays that were an important part of the late medieval and early modern May Day festivities. The first record of a Robin Hood game was in 1426 in Exeter, but the reference does not indicate how old or widespread this custom was at the time. The Robin Hood games are known to have flourished in the later 15th and 16th centuries. It is commonly stated as fact that Maid Marian and a jolly friar (at least partly identifiable with Friar Tuck) entered the legend through the May Games.\nEarly ballads.\nThe earliest surviving text of a Robin Hood ballad is the 15th-century \"Robin Hood and the Monk\". This is preserved in Cambridge University manuscript Ff.5.48. Written after 1450, it contains many of the elements still associated with the legend, from the Nottingham setting to the bitter enmity between Robin and the local sheriff.\nThe first printed version is \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\" (c. 1500), a collection of separate stories that attempts to unite the episodes into a single continuous narrative. After this comes \"Robin Hood and the Potter\", contained in a manuscript of c. 1503. \"The Potter\" is markedly different in tone from \"The Monk\": whereas the earlier tale is \"a thriller\" the latter is more comic, its plot involving trickery and cunning rather than straightforward force. Other early texts are dramatic pieces, the earliest being the fragmentary \"Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham\" (c. 1475). These are particularly noteworthy as they show Robin's integration into May Day rituals towards the end of the Middle Ages; \"Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham\", among other points of interest, contains the earliest reference to Friar Tuck. The plots of neither \"the Monk\" nor \"the Potter\" are included in the \"Gest\"; and neither is the plot of \"Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne\", which is probably at least as old as those two ballads although preserved in a more recent copy. Each of these three ballads survived in a single copy, so it is unclear how much of the medieval legend has survived, and what has survived may not be typical of the medieval legend. It has been argued that the fact that the surviving ballads were preserved in written form in itself makes it unlikely they were typical; in particular, stories with an interest for the gentry were by this view more likely to be preserved. The story of Robin's aid to the 'poor knight' that takes up much of the \"Gest\" may be an example.\nThe character of Robin in these first texts is rougher edged than in his later incarnations. In \"Robin Hood and the Monk\", for example, he is shown as quick tempered and violent, assaulting Little John for defeating him in an archery contest; in the same ballad, Much the Miller's Son casually kills a \"little page\" in the course of rescuing Robin Hood from prison. No extant early ballad actually shows Robin Hood \"giving to the poor\", although in \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\" Robin does make a large loan to an unfortunate knight, which he does not in the end require to be repaid; and later in the same ballad Robin Hood states his intention of giving money to the next traveller to come down the road if he happens to be poor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs it happens the next traveller is not poor, but it seems in context that Robin Hood is stating a general policy. The first explicit statement to the effect that Robin Hood habitually robbed from the rich to give the poor can be found in John Stow's \"Annales of England\" (1592), about a century after the publication of \"Gest\". But from the beginning Robin Hood is on the side of the poor; \"Gest\" quotes Robin Hood as instructing his men that when they rob:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd in its final lines \"Gest\" sums up:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWithin Robin Hood's band, medieval forms of courtesy rather than modern ideals of equality are generally in evidence. In the early ballad, Robin's men usually kneel before him in obedience: in \"Gest,\" the king even observes that \"\" Their social status, as yeomen, is shown by their weapons: they use swords rather than quarterstaffs. The only character to use a quarterstaff in the early ballads is the Potter, and Robin Hood does not take to a staff until the 17th-century \"Robin Hood and Little John\".\nThe political and social assumptions underlying the early Robin Hood ballads have long been controversial. J. C. Holt influentially argued that the Robin Hood legend was cultivated in the households of the gentry, and that it would be mistaken to see in him a figure of peasant revolt. He is not a peasant but a yeoman, and his tales make no mention of the complaints of the peasants, such as oppressive taxes. He appears not so much as a revolt against societal standards as an embodiment of them, being generous, pious, and courteous, opposed to stingy, worldly, and churlish foes. Other scholars have by contrast stressed the subversive aspects of the legend, and see in the medieval Robin Hood ballads a plebeian literature hostile to the feudal order.\nEarly plays, May Day games, and fairs.\nBy the early 15th century at the latest, Robin Hood had become associated with May Day celebrations, with revellers dressing as Robin or as members of his band for the festivities. This was not common throughout England, but in some regions the custom lasted until Elizabethan times, and during the reign of Henry VIII was briefly popular at court. Henry disguised himself as Robin in January 1510, with eleven courtiers and a Maid Marian to surprise Catherine of Aragon in her chamber.\nRobin was often allocated the role of a May King, presiding over games and processions, but plays were also performed with the characters in the roles, sometimes performed at church ales, a means by which churches raised funds. A complaint of 1492, brought to the Star Chamber, accuses men of acting riotously by coming to a fair as Robin Hood and his men; the accused defended themselves on the grounds that the practice was a long-standing custom to raise money for churches, and they had not acted riotously but peaceably.\nIt is from the association with the May Games that Robin's romantic attachment to Maid Marian (or Marion) apparently stems. A \"Robin and Marion\" figured in 13th-century French 'pastourelles' (of which \"Jeu de Robin et Marion\" c. 1280 is a literary version) and preside over the French May festivities; \"This Robin and Marion tended to preside, in the intervals of the attempted seduction of the latter by a series of knights, over a variety of rustic pastimes.\" In the \"Jeu de Robin and Marion\", Robin and his companions have to rescue Marion from the clutches of a \"lustful knight\". This play is distinct from the English legends, although Dobson and Taylor regard it as 'highly probable' that this French Robin's name and functions travelled to the English May Games, where they fused with the Robin Hood legend. Both Robin and Marian were certainly associated with May Day festivities in England (as was Friar Tuck), but these may have been originally two distinct types of performance. Alexander Barclay in his \"Ship of Fools\", writing in c. 1500, refers to \" \u2013 but the characters were brought together. Marian did not immediately gain the unquestioned role; in \"Robin Hood's Birth, Breeding, Valor, and Marriage\", his sweetheart is \"Clorinda the Queen of the Shepherdesses\". Clorinda survives in some later stories as an alias of Marian.\n\"Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham\" appears to tell the story of Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne. There is also an early playtext appended to a 1560 printed edition of \"Gest\". This includes a dramatic version of the story of Robin Hood and the Curtal Friar and a version of the first part of the story of Robin Hood and the Potter. (Neither of these ballads is known to have existed in print at the time, and there is no earlier record known of the \"Curtal Friar\" story.) The publisher describes the text as a \", but does not seem to be aware that the text actually contains two separate plays. An especial point of interest in the \"Friar\" play is the appearance of a ribald woman who is unnamed but apparently to be identified with the bawdy Maid Marian of the May Games. She does not appear in extant versions of the ballad.\nEarly modern stage.\nIn May 1585, James VI of Scotland was entertained by a Robin Hood play at Dirleton Castle produced by his favourite the Earl of Arran, while there was plague in Edinburgh. In 1598, Anthony Munday wrote a pair of plays on the Robin Hood legend, \"The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington\" (published 1601). These plays drew on a variety of sources, including apparently \"Gest\", and were influential in fixing the story of Robin Hood to the period of Richard I. Stephen Thomas Knight has suggested that Munday drew heavily on Fulk Fitz Warin, a historical 12th century outlawed nobleman and enemy of King John, in creating his Robin Hood. The play identifies Robin Hood as Robert, Earl of Huntingdon, following in Richard Grafton's association of Robin Hood with the gentry, and identifies Maid Marian with \"one of the semi-mythical Matildas persecuted by King John\". The plays are complex in plot and form, the story of Robin Hood appearing as a play-within-a-play presented at the court of Henry VIII and written by the poet, priest and courtier John Skelton, with Skelton playing Friar Tuck. Some scholars have conjectured that Skelton may have indeed written a lost Robin Hood play for Henry VIII's court, and that this play may have been one of Munday's sources. Henry VIII with eleven of his nobles had impersonated \"Robyn Hodes men\" as part of his \"Maying\" in 1510. Robin Hood is known to have appeared in a number of other lost and extant Elizabethan plays. In 1599, the play \"George a Green, the Pinner of Wakefield\" places Robin Hood in the reign of Edward IV. \"Edward I\", a play by George Peele first performed in 1590\u201391, incorporates a Robin Hood game played by the characters. Llywelyn the Great, the last independent Prince of Wales, is presented playing Robin Hood.\nFixing the Robin Hood story to the 1190s had been first proposed by John Major in his \"Historia Majoris Britanni\u00e6\" (1521), (and he also may have been influenced in so doing by the story of FitzWarin); this was the period in which King Richard was absent from the country, fighting in the Third Crusade.\nWilliam Shakespeare makes reference to Robin Hood in his late-16th-century play \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\". In it, the character Valentine is banished from Milan and driven out through the forest where he is approached by outlaws who, upon meeting him, desire him as their leader. They comment, \"By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar, This fellow were a king for our wild faction!\" Robin Hood is also mentioned in \"As You Like It\". When asked about the exiled Duke Senior, the character of Charles says that he is \"already in the forest of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England\". Justice Silence sings a line from an unnamed Robin Hood ballad, the line is \"Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John\" in Act 5 scene 3 of Henry IV, part 2. In Henry IV part 1 Act 3 scene 3, Falstaff refers to Maid Marian, implying she is a by-word for unwomanly or unchaste behaviour.\nBen Jonson produced the incomplete masque \"The Sad Shepherd, or a Tale of Robin Hood\" in part as a satire on Puritanism. It is about half finished, and his death in 1637 may have interrupted writing. Jonson's only pastoral drama, it was written in sophisticated verse and included supernatural action and characters. It has had little impact on the Robin Hood tradition but earns mention as the work of a major dramatist.\nThe 1642 London theatre closure by the Puritans interrupted the portrayal of Robin Hood on the stage. The theatres would reopen with the Restoration in 1660. Robin Hood did not appear on the Restoration stage, except for \"Robin Hood and his Crew of Souldiers\" acted in Nottingham on the day of the coronation of Charles II in 1661. This short play adapts the story of the king's pardon of Robin Hood to refer to the Restoration. However, Robin Hood appeared on the 18th-century stage in various farces and comic operas. Alfred, Lord Tennyson would write a four-act Robin Hood play at the end of the 19th century, \"The Forrestors\". It is fundamentally based on \"Gest\" but follows the traditions of placing Robin Hood as the Earl of Huntingdon in the time of Richard I and making the Sheriff of Nottingham and Prince John rivals with Robin Hood for Maid Marian's hand. The return of King Richard brings a happy ending.\nBroadside ballads and garlands.\nWith the advent of printing came the Robin Hood broadside ballads. When they displaced the oral tradition of Robin Hood ballads is unknown but the process seems to have been completed by the end of the 16th century. Near the end of the 16th century an unpublished prose life of Robin Hood was written and included in the Sloane Manuscript. Largely a paraphrase of \"Gest\", it also contains material revealing that the author was familiar with early versions of a number of the Robin Hood broadside ballads. Not all of the medieval legend was preserved in the broadside ballads; there is no broadside version of \"Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne\" or of \"Robin Hood and the Monk\", which did not appear in print until the 18th and 19th centuries respectively. However, \"Gest\" was reprinted from time to time throughout the 16th and 17th centuries.\nNo surviving broadside ballad can be dated with certainty before the 17th century, but during that century, the commercial broadside ballad became the main vehicle for the popular Robin Hood legend. These broadside ballads were in some cases newly fabricated but were mostly adaptations of the older verse narratives. The broadside ballads were fitted to a small repertoire of pre-existing tunes resulting in an increase of \"stock formulaic phrases\" making them \"repetitive and verbose\", they commonly feature Robin Hood's contests with artisans: tinkers, tanners, and butchers. Among these ballads is \"Robin Hood and Little John,\" telling the famous story of the quarterstaff fight between the two outlaws.\nDobson and Taylor wrote, 'More generally the Robin of the broadsides is a much less tragic, less heroic and in the last resort less mature figure than his medieval predecessor'. In most of the broadside ballads Robin Hood remains a plebeian figure, a notable exception being Martin Parker's attempt at an overall life of Robin Hood, \"A True Tale of Robin Hood,\" which also emphasises the theme of Robin Hood's generosity to the poor more than the broadsheet ballads do in general. The 17th century introduced the minstrel Alan-a-Dale. He first appeared in a 17th-century broadside ballad and, unlike many of the characters thus associated, managed to adhere to the legend. The prose life of Robin Hood in Sloane Manuscript contains the substance of the Alan-a-Dale ballad but tells the story about Will Scarlet.\nIn the 18th century, the stories began to develop a slightly more farcical vein. From this period there are a number of ballads in which Robin is severely 'drubbed' by a succession of tradesmen including a tanner, a tinker, and a ranger. In fact, the only character who does not get the better of Robin Hood is the luckless Sheriff. Yet even in these ballads Robin is more than a mere simpleton: on the contrary, he often acts with great shrewdness. The tinker, setting out to capture Robin, only manages to fight with him after he has been cheated out of his money and the arrest warrant he is carrying. In \"Robin Hood's Golden Prize\", Robin disguises himself as a friar and cheats two priests out of their cash. Even when Robin is defeated, he usually tricks his foe into letting him sound his horn, summoning the Merry Men to his aid. When his enemies do not fall for this ruse, he persuades them to drink with him instead (see Robin Hood's Delight).\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, the Robin Hood ballads were mostly sold in \"Garlands\" of 16 to 24 Robin Hood ballads; these were crudely printed chap books aimed at the poor. The garlands added nothing to the substance of the legend but ensured that it continued after the decline of the single broadside ballad. In the 18th century also, Robin Hood frequently appeared in criminal biographies and histories of highwaymen compendia.\nRediscovery: Percy and Ritson.\nIn 1765, Thomas Percy (bishop of Dromore) published \"Reliques of Ancient English Poetry\", including ballads from the 17th-century Percy Folio manuscript which had not previously been printed, most notably Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne which is generally regarded as in substance a genuine late medieval ballad.\nIn 1795, Joseph Ritson published an enormously influential edition of the Robin Hood ballads \"Robin Hood: A collection of all the Ancient Poems Songs and Ballads now extant, relative to that celebrated Outlaw\". 'By providing English poets and novelists with a convenient source book, Ritson gave them the opportunity to recreate Robin Hood in their own imagination,' Ritson's collection includes \"Gest\" and put the Robin Hood and the Potter ballad in print for the first time. The only significant omission was Robin Hood and the Monk which would eventually be printed in 1806. In all, Ritson printed 33 Robin Hood ballads (and a 34th, now commonly known as Robin Hood and the Prince of Aragon that he included as the second part of Robin Hood Newly Revived which he had retitled \"Robin Hood and the Stranger\"). Ritson's interpretation of Robin Hood was also influential, having influenced the modern concept of stealing from the rich and giving to the poor as it exists today. Himself a supporter of the principles of the French Revolution and admirer of Thomas Paine, Ritson held that Robin Hood was a genuinely historical and heroic character who had stood up against tyranny in the interests of the common people. J.\u00a0C. Holt has been quick to point out, however, that Ritson \"began as a Jacobite and ended as a Jacobin,\" and \"certainly reconstructed him [Robin] in the image of a radical.\"\nIn his preface to the collection, Ritson assembled an account of Robin Hood's life from the various sources available to him and concludes that Robin Hood was born in around 1160, and thus had been active in the reign of Richard I. He thought that Robin was of aristocratic extraction, with at least 'some pretension' to the title of Earl of Huntingdon, that he was born in an unlocated Nottinghamshire village of Locksley and that his original name was Robert Fitzooth. Ritson gives the date of Robin Hood's death as 18 November 1247, when he would have been around 87 years old. In copious and informative notes Ritson defends every point of his version of Robin Hood's life. In reaching his conclusion Ritson relies or gives weight to a number of unreliable sources, such as the Robin Hood plays of Anthony Munday and the Sloane Manuscript. Nevertheless, Dobson and Taylor credit Ritson with having 'an incalculable effect in promoting the still continuing quest for the man behind the myth', and note that his work remains an 'indispensable handbook to the outlaw legend even now'. Ritson's friend Walter Scott used Ritson's anthology collection as a source for his picture of Robin Hood in \"Ivanhoe\", written in 1818, which did much to shape the modern legend.\nChild ballads.\nIn the decades following the publication of Ritson's book, other ballad collections would occasionally publish stray Robin Hood ballads Ritson had missed. In 1806, Robert Jamieson published the earliest known Robin Hood ballad, \"Robin Hood and the Monk\" in Volume II of his \"Popular Ballads and Songs From Tradition\". In 1846, the Percy Society included The Bold Pedlar and Robin Hood in its collection, \"Ancient Poems, Ballads, and Songs of the Peasantry of England\". In 1850, John Mathew Gutch published his own collection of Robin Hood ballads, \"Robin Hood Garlands and Ballads, with the tale of the lytell Geste\", that in addition to all of Ritson's collection, also included Robin Hood and the Pedlars and Robin Hood and the Scotchman.\nIn 1858, Francis James Child published his \"English and Scottish Ballads\" which includes a volume grouping all the Robin Hood ballads in one volume, including all the ballads published by Ritson, the four stray ballads published since then, as well as some ballads that either mentioned Robin Hood by name or featured characters named Robin Hood but were not traditional Robin Hood stories. For his more scholarly work, \"The English and Scottish Popular Ballads\", in his volume dedicated to the Robin Hood ballads, published in 1888, Child removed the ballads from his earlier work that were not traditional Robin Hood stories, gave the ballad Ritson titled \"Robin Hood and the Stranger\" back its original published title Robin Hood Newly Revived, and separated what Ritson had printed as the second part of \"Robin Hood and the Stranger\" as its own separate ballad, Robin Hood and the Prince of Aragon. He also included alternate versions of ballads that had distinct, alternate versions. He numbered these 38 Robin Hood ballads among the 305 ballads in his collection as Child Ballads Nos. 117\u2013154, which is how they are often referenced in scholarly works.\n19th century.\nIn the 19th century, the Robin Hood legend was first specifically adapted for children. Children's editions of the garlands were produced, and in 1820 a children's edition of Ritson's \"Robin Hood\" collection was published. Children's novels began to appear shortly thereafter. It is not that children did not read Robin Hood stories before, but this is the first appearance of a Robin Hood literature specifically aimed at them. A very influential example of these children's novels was Pierce Egan the Younger's \"Robin Hood and Little John\" (1840). This was adapted into French by Alexandre Dumas in \"Le Prince des Voleurs\" (1872) and \"Robin Hood Le Proscrit\" (1873). Egan made Robin Hood of noble birth but raised by the forestor Gilbert Hood.\nAnother very popular version for children was Howard Pyle's \"The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood\", which influenced accounts of Robin Hood through the 20th century. Pyle's version firmly stamps Robin as a staunch philanthropist, a man who takes from the rich to give to the poor. Nevertheless, the adventures are still more local than national in scope: while King Richard's participation in the Crusades is mentioned in passing, Robin takes no stand against Prince John and plays no part in raising the ransom to free Richard. These developments are part of the 20th-century Robin Hood myth. Pyle's Robin Hood is a yeoman and not an aristocrat.\nThe idea of Robin Hood as a high-minded Saxon fighting Norman lords also originates in the 19th century. The most notable contributions to this idea of Robin are Jacques Nicolas Augustin Thierry's \"\" (1825) and Sir Walter Scott's \"Ivanhoe\" (1819). In this last work in particular, the modern Robin Hood\u2014'King of Outlaws and prince of good fellows!' as Richard the Lionheart calls him\u2014makes his debut.\nForresters Manuscript.\nIn 1993, a previously unknown manuscript of 21 Robin Hood ballads (including two versions of \"The Jolly Pinder of Wakefield\") turned up in an auction house and eventually wound up in the British Library. Called The Forresters Manuscript, after the first and last ballads which are both titled Robin Hood and the Forresters, it was published in 1998 as \"Robin Hood: The Forresters Manuscript\". It appears to have been written in the 1670s. While all the ballads in the manuscript had already been known and published during the 17th and 18th centuries (although most of the ballads in the manuscript have different titles than ones they have listed under the Child Ballads), 13 of the ballads in Forresters are noticeably different from how they appear in the broadsides and garlands. Nine of these ballads are significantly longer and more elaborate than the versions of the same ballads found in the broadsides and garlands. For four of these ballads, the Forresters Manuscript versions are the earliest known versions.\n20th century onwards.\nThe 20th century grafted still further details on to the original legends. The 1938 film \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\", starring Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, portrays Robin as a hero on a national scale, leading the oppressed Saxons in revolt against their Norman overlords while Richard the Lionheart fought in the Crusades; this movie established itself so definitively that many studios resorted to movies about his son (invented for that purpose) rather than compete with the image of this one.\nIn 1953 a Republican member of the Indiana Textbook Commission called for a ban of Robin Hood from all Indiana school books for its alleged communist connotations. This proposal prompted a short-lived college protest against McCarthyism and book censorship in the United States that was launched on the Indiana University Bloomington campus and within a course of weeks had grown into a nationwide campus movement, known as the Green Feather Movement.\nIn the 1973 animated Disney film \"Robin Hood\", the title character is portrayed as an anthropomorphic fox voiced by Brian Bedford. Years before \"Robin Hood\" had even entered production, Disney had considered doing a project on Reynard the Fox; however, due to concerns that Reynard was unsuitable as a hero, animator Ken Anderson adapted some elements from Reynard into the Disney character Robin Hood, making him a fox.\nThe 1976 British-American film \"Robin and Marian\", starring Sean Connery as Robin Hood and Audrey Hepburn as Maid Marian, portrays the figures in later years after Robin has returned from service with Richard the Lionheart in a foreign crusade and Marian has gone into seclusion in a nunnery. This is the first in popular culture to portray King Richard as less than perfect.\nSince the 1980s, it has become commonplace to include a Saracen (Arab/Muslim) among the Merry Men, a trend that began with the character Nasir in the 1984 ITV \"Robin of Sherwood\" television series. Later versions of the story have followed suit: a version of Nasir appears in the 1991 movie ' (Azeem) and the 2006 BBC TV series \"Robin Hood\" (Djaq). Spoofs have also followed this trend, with the 1990s BBC sitcom \"Maid Marian and her Merry Men\" parodying the Moorish character with Barrington, a Rastafarian rapper played by Danny John-Jules, and Mel Brooks comedy ' featuring Isaac Hayes as Asneeze and Dave Chappelle as his son Ahchoo. The 2018 adaptation \"Robin Hood\" portrays the character of Little John as a Muslim named Yahya, played by Jamie Foxx.\nBetween 1963 and 1966, French television broadcast a medievalist series entitled \"Thierry La Fronde\" (\"Thierry the Sling\"). This successful series, which was also shown in Canada, Poland (\"Thierry \u015amia\u0142ek\"), Australia (\"The King's Outlaw\"), and the Netherlands (\"Thierry de Slingeraar\"), transposes the English Robin Hood narrative into late medieval France during the Hundred Years' War. The original ballads and plays, including the early medieval poems and the latter broadside ballads and garlands have been edited and translated for the first time in French in 2017 by Jonathan Fruoco. Until then, the texts had been unavailable in France.\nHistoricity.\nThe historicity of Robin Hood has been debated for centuries. A difficulty with any such historical research is that Robert was a very common given name in medieval England, and 'Robin' (or Robyn) was its very common diminutive, especially in the 13th century; it is a French hypocorism, already mentioned in the \"Roman de Renart\" in the 12th century. The surname Hood (by any spelling) was also fairly common because it referred either to a hooder, who was a maker of hoods, or alternatively to somebody who wore a hood as a head covering. It is therefore unsurprising that medieval records mention a number of people called \"Robert Hood\" or \"Robin Hood\", some of whom are known criminals.\nAnother view on the origin of the name is expressed in the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" which remarks that \"hood\" was a common dialectical form of \"wood\" (compare Dutch , , also meaning \"wood\"), and that the outlaw's name has been given as \"Robin Wood\". There are a number of references to Robin Hood as Robin Wood, or Whood, or Whod, from the 16th and 17th centuries. The earliest recorded example, in connection with May games in Somerset, dates from 1518.\nEarly references.\nThe oldest references to Robin Hood are not historical records or even ballads recounting his exploits, but hints and allusions found in various works. From 1261 onward, the names \"Robinhood\", \"Robehod\", or \"Robbehod\" occur in the rolls of several English justices as nicknames or descriptions of malefactors. The majority of these references date from the late 13th century. Between 1261 and 1300, there are at least eight references to \"Rabunhod\" in various regions across England, from Berkshire in the south to York in the north.\nLeaving aside the reference to the \"rhymes\" of Robin Hood in the poem \"Piers Plowman\" in the 1370s, and the scattered mentions of his \"tales and songs\" in various religious tracts dating to the early 15th century, the first mention of a quasi-historical Robin Hood is given in Andrew of Wyntoun's \"Orygynale Chronicle\", written in about 1420. The following lines occur with little contextualisation under the year 1283:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn a petition presented to Parliament in 1439, the name is used to describe an itinerant felon. The petition cites one Piers Venables of Aston, Derbyshire, \"who having no liflode, ne sufficeante of goodes, gadered and assembled unto him many misdoers, beynge of his clothynge, and, in manere of insurrection, wente into the wodes in that countrie, like as it hadde be Robyn Hude and his meyne.\"\nThe next historical description of Robin Hood is a statement in the \"Scotichronicon\", composed by John of Fordun between 1377 and 1384 and revised by Walter Bower in about 1440. Among Bower's many interpolations is a passage that directly refers to Robin. It is inserted after Fordun's account of the defeat of Simon de Montfort and the punishment of his adherents, and is entered under the year 1266 in Bower's account. Robin is represented as a fighter for de Montfort's cause. This was in fact true of the historical outlaw of Sherwood Forest Roger Godberd, whose points of similarity to the Robin Hood of the ballads have often been noted.\nThen arose the famous murderer, Robert Hood, as well as Little John, together with their accomplices from among the disinherited, whom the foolish populace are so inordinately fond of celebrating both in tragedies and comedies, and about whom they are delighted to hear the jesters and minstrels sing above all other ballads.\nThe word translated here as 'murderer' is the Latin \"sicarius\" (literally 'dagger-man' but actually meaning, in classical Latin, 'assassin' or 'murderer'), from the Latin \"sica\" for 'dagger', and descends from its use to describe the Sicarii, assassins operating in Roman Judea. Bower goes on to relate an anecdote about Robin Hood in which he refuses to flee from his enemies while hearing Mass in the greenwood, and then gains a surprise victory over them, apparently as a reward for his piety; the mention of \"tragedies\" suggests that some form of the tale relating his death, as per \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\", might have been in currency already.\nAnother reference, discovered by Julian Luxford in 2009, appears in the margin of the \"Polychronicon\" in the Eton College library. Written around 1460 by a monk in Latin, it says:\nAround this time [i.e., reign of Edward I], according to popular opinion, a certain outlaw named Robin Hood, with his accomplices, infested Sherwood and other law-abiding areas of England with continuous robberies.\nFollowing this, John Major mentions Robin Hood within his \"Historia Majoris Britanni\u00e6\" (1521), casting him in a positive light by mentioning his and his followers' aversion to bloodshed and ethos of only robbing the wealthy; Major also fixed his \"floruit\" not to the mid-13th century but the reigns of Richard I and his brother John. Richard Grafton in his \"Chronicle at Large\" (1569) goes further when discussing Major's description of \"Robert Hood\", identifying him for the first time as a member of the gentry, albeit possibly \"being of a base stock and linaege, was for his manhood and chivalry advanced to the noble dignity of an Earl\" and not the yeomanry, foreshadowing Anthony Munday's casting of him as the dispossessed Earl of Huntingdon. The name nevertheless still had a reputation of sedition and treachery in 1605, when Guy Fawkes and his associates were branded \"Robin Hoods\" by Robert Cecil. In 1644, jurist Edward Coke described Robin Hood as a historical figure who had operated in the reign of King Richard I around Yorkshire; he interpreted the contemporary term \"roberdsmen\" (outlaws) as meaning followers of Robin Hood.\nRobert Hod of York.\nThe earliest known legal records mentioning a person called Robin Hood (Robert Hod) are from 1226, found in the York Assizes, when that person's goods, worth 32 shillings and 6 pence, were confiscated and he became an outlaw. Robert Hod owed the money to St. Peter's in York. The following year, he was called \"Hobbehod\", and also came to known as \"Robert Hood\". Robert Hod of York is the only early Robin Hood known to have been an outlaw. In 1936, L.V.D. Owen floated the idea that Robin Hood might be identified with an outlawed Robert Hood, or Hod, or Hobbehod, all apparently the same man, referred to in nine successive Yorkshire Pipe Rolls between 1226 and 1234. There is no evidence however that this Robert Hood, although an outlaw, was also a bandit.\nRobert and John Deyville.\nHistorian Oscar de Ville discusses the careers of John Deyville and his brother Robert, along with their kinsmen Jocelin and Adam, during the Second Barons' War, specifically their activities after the Battle of Evesham. John Deyville was granted authority by the faction led by Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester over York Castle and the Northern Forests during the war in which they sought refuge after Evesham. John, along with his relatives, led the remaining rebel faction on the Isle of Ely following the Dictum of Kenilworth. De Ville connects their presence there with Bower's mention of \"Robert Hood\" during the aftermath of Evesham in his annotations to the \"Scotichronicon\".\nWhile John was eventually pardoned and continued his career until 1290, his kinsmen are no longer mentioned by historical records after the events surrounding their resistance at Ely, and de Ville speculates that Robert remained an outlaw. Other exploits forming the inspiration for Robin Hood include their properties in Barnsdale, John's settlement of a mortgage worth \u00a3400 paralleling Robin Hood's charity of identical value to Sir Richard at the Lee, relationship with Sir Richard Foliot, a possible inspiration for the former figure, and ownership of a fortified home at Hood Hill, near Kilburn, North Yorkshire. The last of these is suggested to be the inspiration for Robin Hood's second name as opposed to the more common theory of a head covering. Perhaps not coincidentally, a \"Robertus Hod\" is mentioned in records among the holdouts at Ely.\nAlthough de Ville does not explicitly connect John and Robert Deyville to Robin Hood, he discusses these parallels in detail and suggests that they formed prototypes for this ideal of heroic outlawry during the tumultuous reign of Henry III's grandson and Edward I's son, Edward II of England.\nRoger Godberd.\nDavid Baldwin identifies Robin Hood with the historical outlaw Roger Godberd, who was a die-hard supporter of Simon de Montfort, which would place Robin Hood around the 1260s. There are certainly parallels between Godberd's career and that of Robin Hood as he appears in \"Gest\". John Maddicott has called Godberd \"that prototype Robin Hood\". Some problems with this theory are that there is no evidence that Godberd was ever known as Robin Hood and no sign in the early Robin Hood ballads of the specific concerns of de Montfort's revolt.\nRobin Hood of Wakefield.\nThe 19th century antiquarian Joseph Hunter believed that Robin Hood had inhabited the forests of Yorkshire during the early decades of the 14th century. Hunter points to two men whom, believing them to be the same person, he identified with the legendary outlaw:\nHunter developed a fairly detailed theory implying that Robert Hood had been an adherent of the rebel Earl of Lancaster, who was defeated by Edward II at the Battle of Boroughbridge in 1322. According to this theory, Robert Hood was thereafter pardoned and employed as a bodyguard by King Edward, and in consequence he appears in the 1323 court roll under the name of \"Robyn Hode\". Hunter's theory has long been recognised to have serious problems, one of the most serious being that recent research has shown that Hunter's Robyn Hood had been employed by the king before he appeared in the 1323 court roll, thus casting doubt on this Robyn Hood's supposed earlier career as outlaw and rebel.\nAlias.\nIt has long been suggested, notably by John Maddicott, that \"Robin Hood\" was a stock alias used by thieves. What appears to be the first known example of \"Robin Hood\" as a stock name for an outlaw dates to 1262 in Berkshire, where the surname \"Robehod\" was applied to a man apparently because he had been outlawed. This could suggest two main possibilities: either that an early form of the Robin Hood legend was already well established in the mid-13th century; or that the name \"Robin Hood\" preceded the outlaw hero that we know; so that the \"Robin Hood\" of legend was so called because that was seen as an appropriate name for an outlaw.\nMythology.\nThere is at present little or no scholarly support for the view that tales of Robin Hood have stemmed from mythology or folklore, from fairies or other mythological origins, any such associations being regarded as later development. It was once a popular view, however. The \"mythological theory\" dates back at least to 1584, when Reginald Scot identified Robin Hood with the Germanic goblin \"Hudgin\" or Hodekin and associated him with the fairy Robin Goodfellow. 21st century historian Maurice Keen provides a brief summary and useful critique of the evidence for the view Robin Hood had mythological origins. While the outlaw often shows great skill in archery, swordplay and disguise, his feats are no more exaggerated than those of characters in other ballads, such as \"Kinmont Willie\", which were based on historical events.\nRobin Hood has also been claimed for the pagan witch-cult supposed by Margaret Murray to have existed in medieval Europe, and his anti-clericalism and Marianism interpreted in this light. The existence of the witch cult as proposed by Murray is now generally discredited.\nAssociated locations.\nSherwood Forest.\nThe early ballads link Robin Hood to identifiable real places. In popular culture, Robin Hood and his band of Merry Men are portrayed as living in Sherwood Forest, in Nottinghamshire. Notably, the \"Lincoln Cathedral Manuscript\", which is the first officially recorded Robin Hood song (dating from approximately 1420), makes an explicit reference to the outlaw that states that \"Robyn hode in scherewode stod\". In a similar fashion, a monk of Witham Priory (1460) suggested that the archer had 'infested shirwode'. His chronicle entry reads: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Around this time, according to popular opinion, a certain outlaw named Robin Hood, with his accomplices, infested Sherwood and other law-abiding areas of England with continuous robberies'.\nNottinghamshire.\nSpecific sites in the county of Nottinghamshire directly linked to the Robin Hood legend include Robin Hood's Well, near Newstead Abbey (within the boundaries of Sherwood Forest), the Church of St. Mary in the village of Edwinstowe and most famously of all, the Major Oak also in the village of Edwinstowe. The Major Oak, which resides in the heart of Sherwood Forest, is popularly believed to have been used by the Merry Men as a hide-out. Dendrologists have contradicted this claim by estimating the tree's true age at around 800 years; it would have been relatively a sapling in Robin's time, at best.\nYorkshire.\nNottinghamshire's claim to Robin Hood's heritage is disputed, with Yorkists staking a claim to the outlaw. In demonstrating Yorkshire's Robin Hood heritage, historian J. C. Holt drew attention to the fact that although Sherwood Forest is mentioned in \"Robin Hood and the Monk\", there is little information about the topography of the region, and thus suggested that Robin Hood was drawn to Nottinghamshire through his interactions with the city's sheriff. Moreover, linguist Lister Matheson has observed that the language of \"A\" \"Gest of Robyn Hode\" is written in a definite northern dialect, probably that of Yorkshire. In consequence, it seems probable that the Robin Hood legend actually originates from the county of Yorkshire. Robin Hood's Yorkshire origins are generally accepted by historians. The backdrop of St Mary's Abbey, York plays a central role in \"Gest\" as the poor knight whom Robin aids owes money to the abbot.\nBarnsdale.\nA tradition dating back at least to the end of the 16th century gives Robin Hood's birthplace as Loxley, Sheffield, in South Yorkshire. The original ballads set events in the medieval forest of Barnsdale. Barnsdale was a wooded area covering an expanse of no more than 30 square miles, ranging six miles from north to south, with the River Went at Wentbridge near Pontefract forming its northern boundary and the villages of Skelbrooke and Hampole forming the southernmost region. From east to west the forest extended about five miles, from Askern on the east to Badsworth in the west. During the medieval age Wentbridge was sometimes locally referred to by the name of Barnsdale because it was the predominant settlement in the forest. Wentbridge is mentioned in \"Robin Hood and the Potter\", which reads, \"Y mete hem bot at Went breg,' syde Lyttyl John\". And, while Wentbridge is not directly named in \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\", the poem does appear to make a cryptic reference to the locality by depicting a poor knight explaining to Robin Hood that he 'went at a bridge' where there was wrestling'. A commemorative blue plaque has been placed on the bridge that crosses the River Went by Wakefield City Council. \nSaylis.\nThe \"Gest\" makes a specific reference to the Saylis at Wentbridge. Credit is due to Joseph Hunter, who correctly identified the site of the Saylis. From this location it was once possible to look out over the Went Valley and the Great North Road. The Saylis is recorded as having contributed towards the aid that was granted to Edward III in 1346\u201347 for the knighting of the Black Prince. An acre of landholding is listed within a glebe terrier of 1688 relating to Kirk Smeaton, which later came to be called \"Sailes Close\". Dobson and Taylor indicate that such evidence of continuity makes it virtually certain that the Saylis that was so well known to Robin Hood is preserved today as \"Sayles Plantation\". It is this location that provides a vital clue to Robin Hood's Yorkshire heritage. \nChurch of Saint Mary Magdalene at Campsall.\nHistorian John Paul Davis wrote of Robin's connection to the Church of Saint Mary Magdalene at Campsall in South Yorkshire. \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\" states that the outlaw built a chapel in Barnsdale that he dedicated to Mary Magdalene:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDavis indicates that there is only one church dedicated to Mary Magdalene within what one might reasonably consider to have been the medieval forest of Barnsdale, and that is the church at Campsall. The church was built in the early 12th century by Robert de Lacy, the 2nd Baron of Pontefract. Local legend suggests that Robin Hood and Maid Marion were married at the church.\nGrave at Kirklees.\nAt Kirklees Priory in West Yorkshire stands an alleged grave with a spurious inscription, which relates to Robin Hood. The ballads relate that before he died, Robin told Little John where to bury him. He shot an arrow from the priory window, and where the arrow landed was to be the site of his grave. \"Gest\" states that the prioress was a relative of Robin's. Robin was ill and staying at the priory where the prioress was supposedly caring for him. However, she betrayed him, his health worsened, and he eventually died there. The inscription on the grave reads,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDespite the unconventional spelling, the verse is in Modern English, not the Middle English of the 13th century. The date is also incorrectly formatted \u2013 using the Roman calendar, \"24 kal Decembris\" would be the 23rd day \"before\" the beginning of December, that is, 8 November. The tomb probably dates from the late 18th century. The grave with the inscription is within sight of the ruins of the Kirklees Priory, behind the Three Nuns pub in Mirfield, West Yorkshire. Though local folklore suggests that Robin is buried in the grounds of Kirklees Priory, this theory has now largely been abandoned by historians.\nAll Saints' Church at Pontefract.\nAnother theory is that Robin Hood died at Kirkby, Pontefract. Michael Drayton's \"Poly-Olbion\" Song 28 (67\u201370), published in 1622, speaks of Robin Hood's death and clearly states that the outlaw died at 'Kirkby'. This is consistent with the view that Robin Hood operated in the Went Valley, located three miles to the southeast of the town of Pontefract. The location is approximately three miles from the site of Robin's robberies at Saylis. In the Anglo-Saxon period, Kirkby was home to All Saints' Church, Pontefract. All Saints' Church had a priory hospital attached to it. Historian Richard Grafton states that the prioress who murdered Robin Hood buried the outlaw beside the road,\nWhere he had used to rob and spoyle those that passed that way ... and the cause why she buryed him there was, for that common strangers and travailers, knowing and seeing him there buryed, might more safely and without feare take their journeys that way, which they durst not do in the life of the sayd outlaes.\nAll Saints' Church is consistent with Grafton's description because a road ran from Wentbridge to the hospital at Kirkby.\nPlace-name locations.\nWithin close proximity of Wentbridge reside several notable landmarks relating to Robin Hood. One such place-name location occurred in a cartulary deed of 1422 from Monkbretton Priory, which makes direct reference to a landmark named Robin Hood's Stone, which resided upon the eastern side of the Great North Road, a mile south of Barnsdale Bar. Dobson and Taylor suggest that on the opposite side of the road once stood Robin Hood's Well, which has since been relocated six miles north-west of Doncaster, on the south-bound side of the Great North Road. Over the next three centuries, the name popped up all over the place, such as at Robin Hood's Bay near Whitby in Yorkshire, Robin Hood's Butts in Cumbria, and Robin Hood's Walk at Richmond, Surrey.\nRobin Hood type place-names occurred particularly everywhere except Sherwood. The first place-name in Sherwood does not appear until 1700. The fact that the earliest Robin Hood type place-names originated in West Yorkshire is deemed to be historically significant because, generally, place-name evidence originates from the locality where legends begin. The overall picture from the surviving early ballads and other early references indicate that Robin Hood was based in the Barnsdale area of what is now South Yorkshire, which borders Nottinghamshire.\nOther place-names and references.\nThe Sheriff of Nottingham also had jurisdiction in Derbyshire that was known as the \"Shire of the Deer\", and this is where the Royal Forest of the Peak is found, which roughly corresponds to today's Peak District National Park. The Royal Forest included Bakewell, Tideswell, Castleton, Ladybower and the Derwent Valley near Loxley. The Sheriff of Nottingham possessed property near Loxley, among other places both far and wide including Hazlebadge Hall, Peveril Castle and Haddon Hall. Mercia, to which Nottingham belonged, came to within three miles of Sheffield City Centre. But before the Law of the Normans was the Law of the Danes, The Danelaw had a similar boundary to that of Mercia but had a population of free peasantry that were known to have resisted the Norman occupation. Many outlaws could have been created by the refusal to recognise Norman Forest Law. The supposed grave of Little John can be found in Hathersage, also in the Peak District.\nFurther indications of the legend's connection with West Yorkshire (and particularly Calderdale) are noted in the fact that there are pubs called the Robin Hood in both nearby Brighouse and at Cragg Vale; higher up in the Pennines beyond Halifax, where Robin Hood Rocks can also be found. Robin Hood Hill is near Outwood, West Yorkshire, not far from Lofthouse. There is a village in West Yorkshire called Robin Hood, on the A61 between Leeds and Wakefield and close to Rothwell and Lofthouse. Considering these references to Robin Hood, it is not surprising that the people of both South and West Yorkshire lay some claim to Robin Hood, who, if he existed, could easily have roamed between Nottingham, Lincoln, Doncaster and West Yorkshire.\nA British Army Territorial (reserves) battalion formed in Nottingham in 1859 was known as The Robin Hood Battalion through various reorganisations until the \"Robin Hood\" name finally disappeared in 1992. With the 1881 Childers Reforms that linked regular and reserve units into regimental families, the Robin Hood Battalion became part of The Sherwood Foresters (Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment).\nA Neolithic causewayed enclosure on Salisbury Plain has acquired the name Robin Hood's Ball, although had Robin Hood existed it is doubtful that he would have travelled so far south.\nList of traditional ballads.\nBallads dating back to the 15th century are the oldest existing form of the Robin Hood legends, although none of them were recorded at the time of the first allusions to him, and many are from much later. They share many common features, often opening with praise of the greenwood and relying heavily on disguise as a plot device, but include a wide variation in tone and plot. The ballads are sorted into four groups, very roughly according to date of first known free-standing copy. Ballads whose first recorded version appears (usually incomplete) in the Percy Folio may appear in later versions and may be much older than the mid-17th century when the Folio was compiled. Any ballad may be older than the oldest copy that happens to survive, or descended from a lost older ballad. For example, the plot of \"Robin Hood's Death\", found in the Percy Folio, is summarised in \"A Gest of Robyn Hode\", and it also appears in an 18th-century version.\nIn 17th-century Percy Folio.\nNB. The first two ballads listed here (the \"Death\" and \"Gisborne\"), although preserved in 17th-century copies, are generally agreed to preserve the substance of late medieval ballads. The third (the \"Curtal Friar\") and the fourth (the \"Butcher\"), also probably have late medieval origins. An * before a ballad's title indicates there is also a version of this ballad in the Forresters Manuscript.\nIn 17th-century Forresters Manuscript.\nNB: An * before a ballad's title indicates that the Forresters version of this ballad is the earliest known version.\nOther ballads.\nSome ballads, such as \"Erlinton\", feature Robin Hood in some variants, where the folk hero appears to be added to a ballad pre-existing him and in which he does not fit very well. He was added to one variant of \"Rose Red and the White Lily\", apparently on no more connection than that one hero of the other variants is named \"Brown Robin\". Francis James Child indeed retitled Child ballad 102; though it was titled \"The Birth of Robin Hood\", its clear lack of connection with the Robin Hood cycle (and connection with other, unrelated ballads) led him to title it \"Willie and Earl Richard's Daughter\" in his collection.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26173", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26173", "title": "Ramadan", "text": "Month-long fasting event in Islam\nRamadan is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar. It is observed by Muslims worldwide as a month of fasting (\"sawm\"), communal prayer (salah), reflection, and community. It is also the month in which the Quran is believed to have been revealed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The annual observance of Ramadan is regarded as one of the five pillars of Islam and lasts twenty-nine to thirty days, from one sighting of the crescent moon to the next.\nFasting from dawn to sunset is obligatory (\"fard\") for all adult Muslims who are not acutely or chronically ill, travelling, elderly, breastfeeding, pregnant, or menstruating. The predawn meal is referred to as \"suhur\", and the nightly feast that breaks the fast is called \"iftar\". Although rulings (\"fatawa\") have been issued declaring that Muslims who live in regions with a midnight sun or polar night should follow the timetable of Mecca, it is common practice to follow the timetable of the closest country in which night can be distinguished from day.\nThe spiritual rewards (\"thawab\") of fasting are believed to be multiplied during Ramadan. Accordingly, during the hours of fasting, Muslims refrain not only from food and drink, but also from all behavior deemed to be sinful in Islam, devoting themselves instead to prayer and study of the Quran.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Ramadan\" derives from the Arabic root \"R-M-\u1e0c\" () 'scorching heat', which is the Classical Arabic verb \"rami\u1e0da\" () meaning 'become intensely hot \u2013 become burning; become scorching; be blazing; be glowing'.\nRamadan is thought of as one of the names of God in Islam by some, and as such it is reported in many hadiths that it is prohibited to say only \"Ramadan\" in reference to the calendar month and that it is necessary to say \"month of Ramadan\", as reported in Sunni, Shia and Zaydi sources. However, the report has been graded by others as Maw\u1e0d\u016b\u02bb (fabricated) and inauthentic.\nIn the Persian language, the Arabic letter (\"\u1e0c\u0101d\") is pronounced as /z/. The Muslim communities in some countries with historical Persian influence, such as Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iran, India, Pakistan and Turkey, use the word \"Ramazan\" or \"Ramzan\". The word \"Romzan\" is used in Bangladesh.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ramadan is the month on which the Quran was revealed as a guide for humanity with clear proofs of guidance and the standard \u02f9to distinguish between right and wrong\u02fa. So whoever is present this month, let them fast. But whoever is ill or on a journey, then \u02f9let them fast\u02fa an equal number of days \u02f9after Rama\u1e0d\u00e2n\u02fa. Allah intends ease for you, not hardship, so that you may complete the prescribed period and proclaim the greatness of Allah for guiding you, and perhaps you will be grateful.\nMuslims hold that all scriptures were revealed during Ramadan, the scrolls of Abraham, Torah, Psalms, Gospel, and Quran having been handed down during that month. Muhammad is said to have received his first quranic revelation on \"Laylat al-Qadr\", one of five odd-numbered nights that fall during the last ten days of Ramadan.\nAlthough Muslims were first commanded to fast in the second year of \"Hijra\" (624 CE), they believe that the practice of fasting is not in fact an innovation of monotheism but rather has always been necessary for believers to attain fear of God (\"taqwa\").[Quran https://] They point to the fact that the pre-Islamic pagans of Mecca fasted on the tenth day of Muharram to expiate sin and avoid drought. Philip Jenkins argues that the observance of Ramadan fasting grew out of \"the strict Lenten discipline of the Syrian Churches\", a postulation corroborated by other scholars, including theologian Paul-Gordon Chandler, but disputed by some Muslim academics. The Quran itself emphasizes that the fast it prescribes had already been prescribed to earlier biblical communities (2:183), even though an explicit intertext for this pre-Islamic practice does not exist.\nImportant dates.\nThe Islamic calendar is a lunar one, where each month begins when the first crescent of a new moon is sighted. The Islamic year consists of 12 lunar cycles, and consequently it is 10 to 11 days shorter than the solar year, and as it contains no intercalation, Ramadan migrates throughout the seasons. The Islamic day starts after sunset. The estimated start and end dates for Ramadan, based on the Umm al-Qura calendar of Saudi Arabia, are:\nMany Muslims insist on the local physical sighting of the moon to mark the beginning of Ramadan, but others use the calculated time of the new moon or the Saudi Arabian declaration to determine the start of the month. Since the new moon is not in the same state at the same time globally, the beginning and ending dates of Ramadan depend on what lunar sightings are received in each respective location. As a result, Ramadan dates vary in different countries, but usually only by a day. This is due to the cycles of the moon; the moon may not meet the criteria to qualify as a waxing crescent, which delineates the change in months, at the time of sundown in one location while later meeting it in another location. Astronomical projections that approximate the start of Ramadan are available.\nIn Shia Islam, one of the special dates of this month is the day of the assassination of Ali, the fourth Rashidun caliph and the first Shia Imam. Ali was struck during morning prayer on the 19th day of Ramadan, 40 AH, and he died on the 21st day of the month. They engage in mourning and prayer on these nights, especially in Iran.\nBeginning.\nBecause the \"hil\u0101l\", or crescent moon, typically occurs approximately one day after the new moon, Muslims can usually estimate the beginning of Ramadan; however, many Muslims prefer to confirm the opening of Ramadan by direct visual observation of the crescent.\n\"Laylat al-Qadr\".\nThe \"Laylat al-Qadr\" () or \"Night of Power\" is the night that Muslims believe the Quran was first sent down to the world, and Muhammad received his first quranic revelation from it. The night is considered to be the holiest night of the year. It is generally believed to have occurred on an odd-numbered night during the last ten days of Ramadan; the Dawoodi Bohra believe that \"Laylat al-Qadr\" was the twenty-third night of Ramadan.\n\"Eid\".\nThe holiday of \"Eid al-Fitr\" (Arabic: \u0639\u064a\u062f \u0627\u0644\u0641\u0637\u0631), which marks the end of Ramadan and the beginning of \"Shawwal\", the next lunar month, is declared after a crescent new moon has been sighted or after completion of thirty days of fasting if no sighting of the moon is possible. \"Eid\" celebrates the return to a more natural disposition (\"fitra\") of eating, drinking, and marital intimacy.\nReligious practices.\nThe common practice is to fast from dawn to sunset. The pre-dawn meal before the fast is called the \"suhur\", while the meal at sunset that breaks the fast is called \"iftar\".\nMuslims devote more time to prayer and acts of charity, striving to improve their self-discipline, motivated by hadith: \"When Ramadan arrives, the gates of Paradise are opened and the gates of hell are locked up and devils are put in chains.\"\nFasting.\nRamadan is a time of spiritual reflection, self-improvement, and heightened devotion and worship. Muslims are expected to put more effort into following the teachings of Islam. The fast (\"sawm\") begins at dawn and ends at sunset. In addition to abstaining from eating and drinking, Muslims abstain from sexual relations and sinful speech and behaviour during Ramadan. Fasting is said to redirect the heart away from worldly activities, and to cleanse the soul by freeing it from harmful impurities. Muslims believe that Ramadan teaches them to practice self-discipline, self-control, sacrifice, and empathy for those who are less fortunate, thus encouraging actions of generosity and compulsory charity (\"zakat\").\nExemptions from fasting include those traveling, menstruating, severely ill, pregnant, or breastfeeding. Those unable to fast are obligated to make up the missed days later.\n\"Suhur\".\nEach day before dawn, Muslims observe a pre-fast meal called the \"suhur\". After stopping a short time before dawn, Muslims begin the first prayer of the day, Fajr.\n\"Iftar\".\nAt sunset, families break the fast with the \"iftar\", traditionally opening the meal by eating dates to commemorate Muhammad's practice of breaking the fast with three dates. They then adjourn for Maghrib, the fourth of the five required daily prayers, after which the main meal is served.\nSocial gatherings, many times in buffet style, are frequent at \"iftar\". Traditional dishes are often highlighted, including traditional desserts, particularly those made only during Ramadan. Water is usually the beverage of choice, but juice and milk are also often available, as are soft drinks and caffeinated beverages.\nIn the Middle East, \"iftar\" consists of water, juices, dates, salads and appetizers; one or more main dishes; and rich desserts, with dessert considered the most important aspect of the meal. Typical main dishes include lamb stewed with wheat berries, lamb kebabs with grilled vegetables, and roasted chicken served with chickpea-studded rice pilaf. Desserts may include lokma, baklava or knafeh.\nOver time, the practice of \"iftar\" has evolved into banquets that may accommodate hundreds or even thousands of diners. The Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi, the largest mosque in the UAE, feeds up to thirty thousand people every night. \nCharity.\n\"Zakat\", often translated as \"the poor-rate\", is the fixed percentage of income a believer is required to give to the poor; the practice is obligatory as one of the pillars of Islam. Muslims believe that good deeds are rewarded more handsomely during Ramadan than at any other time of the year; consequently, many Muslims donate a larger portion\u00a0\u2013 or even all\u00a0\u2013 of their yearly \"zakat\" during this month.\nNightly prayers.\n\"Tarawih\" () are extra nightly prayers performed during the month of Ramadan. Contrary to popular belief, they are not compulsory.\nRecitation of the Quran.\nMuslims are encouraged to read the entire Quran, which comprises thirty \"juz\"' (sections), over the thirty days of Ramadan.\nCultural practices.\nIn some Islamic countries, lights (\"fanous\") are strung up in public squares and across city streets, a tradition believed to have originated during the Fatimid Caliphate, where the rule of Caliph al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah was acclaimed by people holding lanterns.\nAn old tradition of Old Dhaka, Bangladesh is during the time of sehri, groups of people would sing qasidas to wake up the Muslims in the neighbourhood. Chowk Bazaar is a place with great significance in Bengali culture during Ramadan. Shahi jilapi is unique delicacy from Chowk Bazaar iftar market, popular for its large size.\nOn the island of Java, many believers bathe in holy springs to prepare for fasting, a ritual known as \"Padusan\". The city of Semarang marks the beginning of Ramadan with the Dugderan carnival, which involves parading the warak ngendog, a horse-dragon hybrid creature allegedly inspired by the Buraq. In the Chinese-influenced capital city of Jakarta, firecrackers are widely used to celebrate Ramadan, although they are officially illegal. Towards the end of Ramadan, most employees receive a one-month bonus known as \"Tunjangan Hari Raya\". Certain kinds of food are especially popular during Ramadan, such as large beef or buffalo in Aceh and snails in Central Java. The iftar meal is announced every evening by striking the bedug, a giant drum, in the mosque.\nCommon greetings during Ramadan include \"Ramadan mubarak\" and \"Ramadan kareem\", which mean (have a) \"blessed Ramadan\" and \"generous Ramadan\" respectively.\nDuring Ramadan in the Middle East, a \"mesaharati\" beats a drum across a neighbourhood to wake people up to eat the suhoor meal. Similarly in Southeast Asia, the \"kentongan\" slit drum is used for the same purpose.\nRamadan attracts significant increases in television viewership, as the usual prime time hours coincide with the \"iftar\", and are commonly extended into the late-night hours to coincide with the s\"uhur\". Broadcasters in the Arab world traditionally premiere serial dramas known as \"musalsal\" during Ramadan; they are similar in style to Latin American telenovelas, and are typically around 30 episodes in length so that they run over the length of the month. Advertisers in the region have considered Ramadan to be comparable to the Super Bowl on U.S. television in terms of impact and importance; the cost of a 30-second commercial in peak time during Ramadan is usually more than double than normal.\nObservance.\nAccording to a 2012 Pew Research Centre study, there was widespread Ramadan observance, with a median of 93 percent across the thirty-nine countries and territories studied. Regions with high percentages of fasting among Muslims include Southeast Asia, South Asia, Middle East and North Africa, Horn of Africa and most of Sub-Saharan Africa. Percentages are lower in Central Asia and Southeast Europe.\nRamadan in polar regions.\nThe length of the dawn to sunset time varies in different parts of the world according to summer or winter solstices of the Sun. Most Muslims fast for eleven to sixteen hours during Ramadan. However, in polar regions, the period between dawn and sunset may exceed twenty-two hours in summer. For example, in 2014, Muslims in Reykjavik, Iceland, and Trondheim, Norway, fasted almost twenty-two hours, while Muslims in Sydney, Australia, fasted for only about eleven hours. In areas characterized by continuous night or day, some Muslims follow the fasting schedule observed in the nearest city that experiences sunrise and sunset, while others follow Mecca time.\nRamadan in Earth orbit.\nAs sunrise and sunset occur sixteen times each a day in low-Earth orbit, Muslim astronauts in space schedule religious practices around the time zone of the last place on Earth they were on. For example, this means an astronaut from Malaysia launching from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would center their fast according to sunrise and sunset times in Cape Canaveral, in Florida's Eastern Time. This includes times for daily prayers, as well as sunset and sunrise for Ramadan.\nLaws.\nIn some Muslim countries, eating in public during daylight hours in Ramadan is a crime. The sale of alcohol becomes prohibited during Ramadan in Egypt. The penalty for publicly eating, drinking or smoking during Ramadan can result in fines or incarceration in the countries of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Algeria and Malaysia. In the United Arab Emirates, the punishment is community service.\nIn some countries, on the contrary, the observance of Ramadan has been restricted by governments. In the USSR, the practice of Ramadan was suppressed by officials. In Albania, Ramadan festivities were banned during the communist period. However, many Albanians continued to fast secretly during this period.\nChina is reported to have banned Ramadan fasting for officials, students, and teachers in Xinjiang since 2012. Radio Free Asia alleges that residents in Kashgar Prefecture are compelled to film proof of eating for officials and are encouraged to report those who fasted to the authorities. The ban has been denied by Chinese diplomats and Muslim associations in Xinjiang. Antara News, \"Daily Times\", and \"Pakistan Today\" have also brought up accounts of residents in Xinjiang fasting. According to a 2024 visit to Xinjiang by a reporter from the British magazine The Economist, many Uyghurs do not fast during Ramadan because, according to locals, \"the Chinese government guarantees freedom of religion\".\nEmployment during Ramadan.\nMuslims continue to work during Ramadan; however, in some countries, such as Oman and Lebanon, working hours are shortened. It is often recommended that working Muslims inform their employers if they are fasting, given the potential for the observance to impact performance at work. The extent to which Ramadan observers are protected by religious accommodation varies by country. Policies putting them at a disadvantage compared to other employees have been met with discrimination claims in the United Kingdom and the United States. An Arab News article reported that Saudi Arabian businesses were unhappy with shorter working hours during Ramadan, some reporting a decline in productivity of 35\u201350%. The Saudi businesses proposed awarding salary bonuses in order to incentivize longer hours. Despite the reduction in productivity, merchants can enjoy higher profit margins in Ramadan due to increase in demand.\nSome countries impose modified work schedules. In the UAE, Qatar, Oman, Bahrain and Kuwait, employees may work no more than six hours per day and thirty-six hours per week.\nHealth effects.\nThere are various health effects of fasting in Ramadan. Ramadan fasting is considered safe for healthy individuals; it may pose risks for individuals with certain pre-existing conditions. Most Islamic scholars hold that fasting is not required for those who are ill. Additionally, the elderly and pre-pubertal children are exempt from fasting. Pregnant or lactating women are also exempt from fasting during Ramadan. There are known health risks involved in pregnant women who fast, which include the potential of induced labour and gestational diabetes.\nThere are some health benefits of fasting in Ramadan including increasing insulin sensitivity and reducing insulin resistance. It has also been shown that there is a significant improvement in 10-year coronary heart disease risk score and other cardiovascular risk factors such as lipid profile, systolic blood pressure, weight, BMI and waist circumference in subjects with a previous history of cardiovascular disease. The fasting period is usually associated with modest weight loss, but weight can return afterwards.\nIn many cultures, it is associated with heavy food and water intake during Suhur and Iftar times, which may do more harm than good. Ramadan fasting is safe for healthy people provided that overall food and water intake is adequate but those with medical conditions should seek medical advice if they encounter health problems before or during fasting.\nThe education departments of Berlin and the United Kingdom have tried to discourage students from fasting during Ramadan, as they claim that not eating or drinking can lead to concentration problems and bad grades.\nA review of the literature by an Iranian group suggested fasting during Ramadan might produce renal injury in patients with moderate (GFR under 60mL/min) or severe kidney disease but was not injurious to renal transplant patients with good function or most stone-forming patients.\nA study on 55 professional Algerian soccer players showed that performance during Ramadan declined significantly for speed, agility, dribbling speed and endurance, and most stayed low 2weeks after the conclusion of Ramadan.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26174", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26174", "title": "Julio-Claudian family tree", "text": "Family tree\nAround the start of the Common Era, the family trees of the gens Julia and the gens Claudia became intertwined into the Julio-Claudian family tree as a result of marriages and adoptions.\nDescendancy of the emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.\nThe Julio-Claudian dynasty was the first dynasty of Roman emperors. All emperors of that dynasty descended from Julii Caesares and/or from Claudii. Marriages between descendants of Sextus Julius Caesar and Claudii had occurred from the late stages of the Roman Republic, but the intertwined Julio-Claudian family tree resulted mostly from adoptions and marriages in Imperial Rome's first decades. Note that descendancy of the Julii Caesares before the generation of Julius Caesar's grandfather is in part conjectural, but as presented by scholars.\nBy generation.\nIn the Julio-Claudian dynasty of Roman emperors, the lineage of the Julii Caesares was separated from those of the Claudii up to Augustus' generation. The next generation had both Claudii with a Julia as ancestor, as Claudii adopted into the Julii Caesares family. After Tiberius, the remaining three emperors of the dynasty had, outside adoptions, ancestors in both the Julian and the Claudian families.\nGeneration of Julius Caesar's grandfather.\nGaius Julius Caesar II and Lucius Julius Caesar II may have had Sextus Julius Caesar, the military tribune of 181 BC, as a common ancestor.\nGeneration of Julius Caesar's father.\nThis generation of Julii Caesares has two consuls: Sextus Julius Caesar in 91 BC, and Lucius Julius Caesar the next year. This generation has also two female descendants very close to the centers of power by their marriages: Julia, the daughter of Gaius Julius Caesar II was married to seven-times consul Gaius Marius, while Julia, the daughter of Lucius Julius Caesar II was married to the two-times consul and Roman dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla, who had successfully challenged Marius' power. For ensuing generations, Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul of Asia), married to a consul's daughter, and Lucius Julius Caesar proved to be quintessential ancestors of those who held Imperial power in the Julio-Claudian dynasty.\nJulius Caesar's generation.\nFollowing Sulla's example Julius Caesar's and Pompey's first marriages were with women of their own generation, later marrying women of a younger generation. After being betrothed to Cossutia, Julius Caesar's first wife was Cornelia, the mother of Julia. The younger of Caesar's two sisters married Marcus Atius Balbus: they were ancestors of all the Julio-Claudian emperors, apart from Tiberius.\nThis is also the generation of Mark Antony's parents. Mark Antony's mother Julia was the daughter of Lucius Julius Caesar: she was an ancestor of the last three emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.\nGeneration of Julius Caesar's daughter.\nBy this time marriages with a political agenda among the powerful families were in full swing, however not yet between Julii Caesares and Claudii. Pompey married Julius Caesar's daughter Julia. Julius Caesar's second wife Pompeia, possibly a great-granddaughter of Lucius Julius Caesar II, was a granddaughter of Sulla. His third wife Calpurnia is said to be younger than his daughter. His son Caesarion resulted from his relation with Cleopatra.\nAtia, the daughter of Julius Caesar's sister, married Gaius Octavius: they became the parents of the first emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, then still called Octavianus. Their daughter Octavia the Younger became an ancestor to the last three emperors of that dynasty. In this generation Mark Antony had children by, among others, Antonia Hybrida Minor, and Fulvia.\nGeneration of the Octavias.\nThe Claudii were a powerful gens with consuls and other high ranking politicians in several of its families across several generations. In this generation the first marriages between Claudii and descendants of the Julii Caesares took place. This however didn't mean yet that the dynastic family trees of both gentes got merged into a single one: that didn't happen until the adoption of Claudii by (adopted) Julii Caesares in the generations to come.\nOctavia the Younger's first husband was a Claudius from the Marcelli family. Claudia, descending from Claudii, became the first wife of Octavian, who by then was adopted in the Julii Caesares family by the testament of his uncle Julius Caesar. After her first husband's death, Octavia married Mark Antony, who besides the offspring of his first three marriages had had children by Cleopatra.\nAugustus daughter Julia the Elder's first marriage was to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa; their daughter Julia the Younger married Lucius Aemilius Paullus; their youngest child was Junia Lepida married to Gaius Cassius Longinus (consul AD 30). Junia and Gaius granddaughter Domitia Longina married twice: 1) Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus and 2) Emperor Domitian of the Flavian dynasty. Issue from Domitia Longina first marriage was Lucius Fundanius Lamia Aelianus and Plautia, their children married into the Antonine dynasty.\n \nAntonia Major's generation.\nOctavianus, becoming Augustus the first Roman emperor, married Scribonia who gave him a daughter (Julia the Elder). His last marriage was with Livia, a Claudia who had been married to a Claudius. Their son Tiberius, by birth a Claudius, was later adopted by Augustus, thus, like his stepfather Augustus, becoming one of the Julii Caesares by adoption.\nAntonia Minor's generation.\nAntonia Minor's husband Nero Claudius Drusus, a.k.a. Drusus the Elder, was a Claudian like his brother emperor Tiberius: they were the sons of Tiberius Claudius Nero, the praetor of 42 BC.\nAgrippina the Elder's generation.\nWithout son, Augustus had adopted his grandsons (by his only daughter Julia) Gaius, Lucius and Postumus, and his stepson Tiberius, in order to ensure an heir and successor. Around the time of his death only Tiberius remained and he became the next emperor. Tiberius, a Claudius by birth had become one of the Julii Caesares by adoption: from this moment this first dynasty of Roman emperors was both Julian and Claudian. The further emperors of this dynasty had both Julian and Claudian ancestors.\nAgrippina the Younger's generation.\nCaligula was the last emperor adopted into the family of the Julii Caesares. He was a Claudius by descendance, although he had Julii Caesares among his ancestors, from both his mother's and his father's side.\nMost marriages remained childless and many potential successors in the dynasty were eliminated after rampant accusations.\nClaudius, the fourth emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, was a brother to Caligula's father Germanicus. He belonged to the gens Claudia with, from his mother's side, Julian ancestors.\nPoppaea Sabina's generation.\nNero, the last emperor of the dynasty, was by birth a Domitius with as well Julian ancestors (from both his mother's as his father's side), as Claudian (from his mother's side). He became a Claudian himself, by adoption by his stepfather emperor Claudius, a brother to his grandfather from his mother's side, or, from his father's side, a son of his grandmother's sister.\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26175", "revid": "9612106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26175", "title": "Rainhill trials", "text": "Locomotive motive power competition (1829)\nThe Rainhill trials were a competition run from 6 to 14 October 1829 to test George Stephenson's argument that locomotives would have the best motive power for the nearly-completed Liverpool and Manchester Railway (L&amp;MR). Ten locomotives were entered, of which five were able to compete, running along a length of level track at Rainhill in Lancashire (now Merseyside).\nStephenson's Rocket was the only locomotive to complete the trials and was declared the winner. The directors of the L&amp;MR accepted that locomotives should operate services on their new line, and George and Robert Stephenson were given the contract to produce locomotives for the railway.\nBackground.\nThe directors of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway had originally intended to use stationary steam engines to haul trains along the railway using cables. They had appointed George Stephenson as their engineer of the line in 1826, and he strongly advocated for the use of steam locomotives instead. As the railway was approaching completion, the directors decided to hold a competition to decide whether locomotives could be used to pull the trains; these became the Rainhill trials. A prize of \u00a3500 (equal to \u00a3 today) was offered to the winner of the trials.\nThree engineers were selected as judges: John Urpeth Rastrick, a locomotive engineer of Stourbridge; Nicholas Wood, a mining engineer from Killingworth with considerable locomotive design experience; and John Kennedy, a Manchester cotton spinner and a major proponent of the railway.\nRules.\nThe L&amp;MR company set the rules for the trials. The rules went through several revisions; the final set, under which the competition was held, was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The weight of the Locomotive Engine, with its full complement of water in the boiler, shall be ascertained at the Weighing Machine, by eight o'clock in the morning, and the load assigned to it shall be three times the weight thereof. The water in the boiler shall be cold, and there shall be no fuel in the fireplace. As much fuel shall be weighed, and as much water shall be measured and delivered into the Tender Carriage, as the owner of the Engine may consider sufficient for the supply of the Engine for a journey of thirty-five miles. The fire in the boiler shall then be lighted, and the quantity of fuel consumed for getting up the steam shall be determined, and the time noted.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Tender Carriage, with the fuel and water, shall be considered to be, and taken as a part of the load assigned to the Engine.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Those engines which carry their own fuel and water, shall be allowed a proportionate deduction from their load, according to the weight of the Engine.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Engine, with the carriages attached to it, shall be run by hand up to the Starting Post, and as soon as the steam is got up to fifty pounds per square inch (), the engine shall set out upon its journey.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The distance the Engine shall perform each trip shall be one mile and three quarters () each way, including one-eighth of a mile () at each end for getting up the speed and for stopping the train; by this means the Engine, with its load, will travel one and a-half mile () each way at full speed.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Engines shall make ten trips, which will be equal to a journey of ; whereof shall be performed at full speed, and the average rate of travelling shall not be less than ten miles per hour ().\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"As soon as the Engine has performed this task (which will be equal to the travelling from Liverpool to Manchester), there shall be a fresh supply of fuel and water delivered to her; and, as soon as she can be got ready to set out again, she shall go up to the Starting Post, and make ten trips more, which will be equal to the journey from Manchester back again to Liverpool.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The time of performing every trip shall be accurately noted, as well as the time occupied in getting ready to set out on the second journey.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The gauge of the railway to be .\"\nEntries.\nTen locomotives were officially entered for the trials, but on the day the competition began \u2013 6 October 1829 \u2013 only five were available to run:\nCompetition.\nThe length of the L&amp;MR that ran past Rainhill village was straight and level for over and was chosen as the site for the trials. The locomotives were to run at Kenrick's Cross, on the mile east from the Manchester side of Rainhill Bridge. Two or three locomotives ran each day, and several tests for each locomotive were performed over the course of six days. Between 10,000 and 15,000 people turned up to watch the trials, and bands provided musical entertainment.\n\"Cycloped\" was the first to drop out of the competition. It used a horse walking on a drive belt for power and was withdrawn after an accident caused the horse to burst through the floor of the engine.\nThe next locomotive to retire was \"Perseverance\", which was damaged in transit to the competition. Burstall spent the first five days of the trials repairing his locomotive, and though it ran on the sixth day, it failed to reach the required speed and was withdrawn from the trial. It was granted a \u00a325 consolation prize (equal to \u00a3 today).\n\"Sans Pareil\" nearly completed the trials, though at first there was some doubt as to whether it would be allowed to compete as it was overweight. It completed eight trips before cracking a cylinder. Despite the failure it was purchased by the L&amp;MR, where it ran for two years before being leased to the Bolton and Leigh Railway.\nThe last locomotive to drop out was \"Novelty\" which used advanced technology for the time and was lighter and considerably faster than the other locomotives in the competition. It was the crowd favourite and reached a then-astonishing on the first day of competition. It later suffered damage to a boiler pipe which could not be fixed properly on site. Nevertheless, it ran the next day and reached before the repaired pipe failed and damaged the engine severely enough that it had to be withdrawn.\nThe \"Rocket\" was the only locomotive that completed the trials. It averaged and achieved a top speed of hauling 13 tons, so it was declared the winner of the \u00a3500 prize (equal to \u00a3 today). The Stephensons were given the contract to produce locomotives for the L&amp;MR.\n\"The Times\" carried a full report of the trials on 12 October 1829, from which the following extract are taken:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;THURSDAY \u2013 THIRD DAY: Mr. Stephenson's engine, \"The Rocket,\" weighing 4 tons 3 cwt., performed, to-day, the work required by the original conditions. The following is a correct account of the performance: The engine, with its complement of water, weighed 4 tons 5 cwt., and the load attached to it was 12 tons 15 cwt., and, with a few persons who rode, made it about 13 tons. The Journey was 1.21 mile each way, with an additional length of 220 yards at each end to stop the engine in, making in one Journey 3[?] miles. The first experiment was of 35 miles, which is exactly ten journeys, and, including all the stoppages at the ends, was performed in 3 hours and 10 minutes, being upwards of 11 miles an hour. After this a fresh supply of water was taken in, which occupied 16 minutes, when the engine again started, and ran 35 miles in 2 hours and 52 minutes, which is upwards of 12 miles an hour, including all stoppages. The speed of the engine, with its load when in full motion, was from 14 to 17 miles an hour; and had the whole distance been in one continuing direction, there is no doubt but the result would have been 16 miles an hour. The consumption of coke was very moderate, not exceeding half a ton in the whole 70 miles. At several parts of the journey the engine moved at 18 miles an hour.\nSATURDAY \u2013 FIFTH DAY: In the expectation of witnessing the Novelty perform its appointed task, the attendance of company on the ground was more numerous today than it had been on several of the preceding days. Three times its own weight having been attached to the engine, the machine commenced its task, and performed it at the rate of 16 miles in the hour. Mr. Stephenson's engine, the Rocket, also exhibited today. Its tender was completely detached from it, and the engine alone shot along the road at the almost incredible rate of 32 miles in the hour. So astonishing was the celerity with which the engine, without its apparatus, darted past the spectators, that it could be compared to nothing but the rapidity with which the swallow darts through the air. Their astonishment was complete, every one exclaiming involuntarily, \"The power of steam\".\nAdditional trials.\nAfter the Rainhill trials, \"Rocket\" was tested on the Whiston incline and was able to haul eight tons at and 12 tons at up the 1:96 gradient.\nRe-enactments.\n\"Rocket\" 150.\nIn May 1980, the \"Rocket 150\" celebration was held to mark the 150th anniversary of the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway and the trials the year before.\nA replica of \"Novelty\" was built for the event, which was also attended by replicas of \"Sans Pareil\" and \"Rocket\" (plus coach). On the first day of the Trials, the \"Rocket\" came off the rails as it was exiting the Bold Colliery sidings and buckled the rim of one of its large drive wheels. That evening, senior staff from a St Helens road transport company met a former colleague of the builder of the \"Rocket\" replica at a Liverpool hotel and agreed that, in the early hours of the following morning, they would urgently manufacture some steel parts (wedges) in their nearby workshops, to fix the bent drive wheel before the second day's parade commenced. At the same time, British Rail agreed to put a team of staff into the sidings at Bold to straighten the bent rails. Both activities were achieved on time and the \"Rocket\" ran successfully on the following two days of the Trials, though \"Sans Pareil\" was pushed by \"Lion\" and \"Novelty\" was on a wagon hauled by LMS Stanier Class 5 4-6-0 5000. As the line was then not electrified, the Advanced Passenger Train was also pushed, but by the latest diesel, Class 56, 077.\nThe 'Grand Cavalcade' on each of the three days featured up to 40 steam and diesel locomotives and other examples of modern traction, including:\nTwo Class 86 locomotives 86214 \"Sans Pareil\" and 86235 \"Novelty\" were painted in a variation of the Large Logo Rail Blue livery where the BR logo was replaced by the \"Rocket\" 150 motif on a yellow background.\n2002 Restaging.\nIn a 2002 restaging of the Rainhill trials using replica engines, neither \"Sans Pareil\" (11 out of 20 runs) nor \"Novelty\" (10 out of 20 runs) completed the course. In calculating the speeds and fuel efficiencies, it was found that \"Rocket\" would still have won, as its relatively modern technology made it a much more reliable locomotive than the others. \"Novelty\" almost matched it in terms of efficiency, but its firebox design caused it to gradually slow to a halt due to a buildup of molten ash (called \"clinker\") cutting off the air supply. The restaged trials were run over the Llangollen Railway, Wales, and were the subject of a 2003 BBC \"Timewatch\" documentary.\nFor the restaging, major compromises were made both for television and because of the differences in crew experience and the fuel used, and because of modifications made to the replicas for modern safety rules and modern materials and construction methods, as well as following operating experience. Comparisons were made between the engines only after calculations took into account these differences.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26176", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26176", "title": "Rayleigh scattering", "text": "Light scattering by small particles\nRayleigh scattering ( ) is the scattering or deflection of light, or other electromagnetic radiation, by particles with a size much smaller than the wavelength of the radiation. For light frequencies well below the resonance frequency of the scattering medium (normal dispersion regime), the amount of scattering is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the wavelength (e.g., a blue color is scattered much more than a red color as light propagates through air). The phenomenon is named after the 19th-century British physicist Lord Rayleigh (John William Strutt). \nRayleigh scattering results from the electric polarizability of the particles. The oscillating electric field of a light wave acts on the charges within a particle, causing them to move at the same frequency. The particle, therefore, becomes a small radiating dipole whose radiation we see as scattered light. The particles may be individual atoms or molecules; it can occur when light travels through transparent solids and liquids, but is most prominently seen in gases.\nRayleigh scattering of sunlight in Earth's atmosphere causes diffuse sky radiation. Since blue light wavelengths scatter more, the diffuse sky seen in daytime is blue. At twilight the sunlight on the horizon is missing the scattered blue light wavelengths giving a yellowish to reddish hue to the low Sun.\nScattering by particles with a size comparable to, or larger than, the wavelength of the light is typically treated by the Mie theory, the discrete dipole approximation and other computational techniques. Rayleigh scattering applies to particles that are small with respect to wavelengths of light, and that are optically \"soft\" (i.e., with a refractive index close to 1). Anomalous diffraction theory applies to optically soft but larger particles.\nHistory.\nIn 1869, while attempting to determine whether any contaminants remained in the purified air he used for infrared experiments, John Tyndall discovered that bright light scattering off nanoscopic particulates was faintly blue-tinted. He conjectured that a similar scattering of sunlight gave the sky its blue hue, but he could not explain the preference for blue light, nor could atmospheric dust explain the intensity of the sky's color.\nIn 1871, Lord Rayleigh published two papers on the color and polarization of skylight to quantify Tyndall's effect in water droplets in terms of the tiny particulates' volumes and refractive indices. In 1881, with the benefit of James Clerk Maxwell's 1865 proof of the electromagnetic nature of light, he showed that his equations followed from electromagnetism. In 1899, he showed that they applied to individual molecules, with terms containing particulate volumes and refractive indices replaced with terms for molecular polarizability.\nIt was this paper that established the basic scientific model for the color of the sky.\nSmall size parameter approximation.\nThe size of a scattering particle is often parameterized by the ratio\nformula_1\nwhere \"r\" is the particle's radius, \"\u03bb\" is the wavelength of the light and \"x\" is a dimensionless parameter that characterizes the particle's interaction with the incident radiation such that: Objects with x \u226b 1 act as geometric shapes, scattering light according to their projected area. At the intermediate x \u2243 1 of Mie scattering, interference effects develop through phase variations over the object's surface. Rayleigh scattering applies to the case when the scattering particle is very small (x \u226a 1, with a particle size &lt; 1/10 of wavelength) and the whole surface re-radiates with the same phase. Because the particles are randomly positioned, the scattered light arrives at a particular point with a random collection of phases; it is incoherent and the resulting intensity is just the sum of the squares of the amplitudes from each particle and therefore proportional to the inverse fourth power of the wavelength and the sixth power of its size. The wavelength dependence is characteristic of dipole scattering and the volume dependence will apply to any scattering mechanism. In detail, the intensity of light scattered by any one of the small spheres of radius \"r\" and refractive index \"n\" from a beam of unpolarized light of wavelength \"\u03bb\" and intensity \"I\"0 is given by\nformula_2\nwhere \"R\" is the observer's distance to the particle and \"\u03b8\" is the scattering angle. Averaging this over all angles gives the Rayleigh scattering cross-section of the particles in air:\nformula_3\nHere \"n\" is the refractive index of the spheres that approximate the molecules of the gas; the index of the gas surrounding the spheres is neglected, an approximation that introduces an error of less than 0.05%.\nThe major constituent of the atmosphere, nitrogen, has Rayleigh cross section of at a wavelength of 532\u00a0nm (green light). Over the length of one meter the fraction of light scattered can be approximated from the product of the cross-section and the particle density, that is number of particles per unit volume. For air at atmospheric pressure there are about molecules per cubic meter, and the fraction scattered will be 10\u22125 for every meter of travel.\nFrom molecules.\nThe expression above can also be written in terms of individual molecules by expressing the dependence on refractive index in terms of the molecular polarizability \"\u03b1\", proportional to the dipole moment induced by the electric field of the light. In this case, the Rayleigh scattering intensity for a single particle is given in CGS-units by\nformula_4\nand in SI-units by\nformula_5\nEffect of fluctuations.\nWhen the dielectric constant formula_6 of a certain region of volume formula_7 is different from the average dielectric constant of the medium formula_8, then any incident light will be scattered according to the following equation\nformula_9where formula_10 represents the variance of the fluctuation in the dielectric constant formula_6.\nCause of the blue color of the sky.\nThe blue color of the sky is a consequence of three factors: \nThe strong wavelength dependence of the Rayleigh scattering (~\"\u03bb\"\u22124) means that shorter (blue) wavelengths are scattered more strongly than longer (red) wavelengths. This results in the indirect blue and violet light coming from all regions of the sky. The human eye responds to this wavelength combination as if it were a combination of blue and white light.\nSome of the scattering can also be from sulfate particles. For years after large Plinian eruptions, the blue cast of the sky is notably brightened by the persistent sulfate load of the stratospheric gases. Some works of the artist J. M. W. Turner may owe their vivid red colours to the eruption of Mount Tambora in his lifetime.\nIn locations with little light pollution, the moonlit night sky is also blue, because moonlight is reflected sunlight, with a slightly lower color temperature due to the brownish color of the Moon. The moonlit sky is not perceived as blue, however, because at low light levels human vision comes mainly from rod cells that do not produce any color perception (Purkinje effect).\nOf sound in amorphous solids.\nRayleigh scattering is also an important mechanism of wave scattering in amorphous solids such as glass, and is responsible for acoustic wave damping and phonon damping in glasses and granular matter at low or not too high temperatures. This is because in glasses at higher temperatures the Rayleigh-type scattering regime is obscured by the anharmonic damping (typically with a ~\"\u03bb\"\u22122 dependence on wavelength), which becomes increasingly more important as the temperature rises.\nIn amorphous solids \u2013 glasses \u2013 optical fibers.\nRayleigh scattering is an important component of the scattering of optical signals in optical fibers. Silica fibers are glasses, disordered materials with microscopic variations of density and refractive index. These give rise to energy losses due to the scattered light, with the following coefficient:\nformula_12\nwhere \"n\" is the refraction index, \"p\" is the photoelastic coefficient of the glass, \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant, and \"\u03b2\" is the isothermal compressibility. \"T\"f is a \"fictive temperature\", representing the temperature at which the density fluctuations are \"frozen\" in the material.\nIn porous materials.\nRayleigh-type \"\u03bb\"\u22124 scattering can also be exhibited by porous materials. An example is the strong optical scattering by nanoporous materials. The strong contrast in refractive index between pores and solid parts of sintered alumina results in very strong scattering, with light completely changing direction each five micrometers on average. The \"\u03bb\"\u22124-type scattering is caused by the nanoporous structure (a narrow pore size distribution around ~70\u00a0nm) obtained by sintering monodispersive alumina powder."}
{"id": "26177", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26177", "title": "Robots", "text": ""}
{"id": "26178", "revid": "1040526204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26178", "title": "Rest mass", "text": ""}
{"id": "26179", "revid": "32437858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26179", "title": "Ron Popeil", "text": "American inventor and marketing personality (1935\u20132021)\nRonald Martin Popeil ( ; May 3, 1935 \u2013 July 28, 2021) was an American inventor and marketing personality, and founder of the direct response marketing company Ronco. He made appearances in infomercials for the Showtime Rotisserie and coined the phrase \"Set it, and forget it!\" as well as popularizing the phrase, \"But wait, there's more!\" on television as early as the mid-1950s.\nPersonal life and career.\nPopeil was born to a Jewish family in Manhattan in 1935, the son of Julia (n\u00e9e Schwartz) and Samuel Popeil. When he was six, his parents divorced and he and his brother went to live in Florida with their grandparents. He has a younger half sister, musician and voice coach Lisa Popeil (b. 1956), from his father's second marriage. At age 17 in 1952, he went with his grandparents to work for his father at his company's (Popeil Brothers) manufacturing facility in Chicago. His grandparents later returned to Florida and Popeil remained with his father.\nWhen he was 18, Popeil attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign where he joined Alpha Epsilon Pi before withdrawing after six months. \nAfter returning from college, Popeil continued to work and learn from his father, who was also an inventor and salesman of numerous kitchen-related gadgets, such as the Chop-O-Matic and the Veg-O-Matic. The Chop-O-Matic retailed for US$3.98 and sold over two million units.\nThe invention of the Chop-O-Matic caused a problem that marked the entrance of Ron Popeil into television. The Chop-O-Matic was so efficient at chopping vegetables that it was impractical for salesmen to carry all the vegetables needed for the demonstrations over the course of a day. The solution was to tape the demonstration. Once the demonstration was taped, it was a short step to broadcasting it as a TV commercial.\nPopeil initially operated as a distributor of his father's kitchen products and later formed his own company, Ronco, in 1964. He continued as a distributor for his father and added additional products from other manufacturers. Ron Popeil and his father became competitors in the 1970s for the same retail store business.\nPopeil received the Ig Nobel Prize in Consumer Engineering in 1993. The awards committee described him as the \"incessant inventor and perpetual pitchman of late night television\" and awarded the prize in recognition of his \"redefining the industrial revolution\" with his devices. He was a past member of the board of directors of Mirage Resorts, where he served for 22 years under Steve Wynn, as well as a past member of the board of directors of MGM Hotels for seven years under Kirk Kerkorian. He became the recipient of the Electronic Retail Association's Lifetime Achievement award in 2001 and he is listed in the Direct Response Hall of Fame.\nPopeil was previously a member of the advisory board for University of California, Los Angeles' Business, Management, and Legal Programs. In August 2005, he sold his company, Ronco, to Fi-Tek VII, a Denver holding company, for US$55 million, with plans to continue serving as the spokesman and inventor while being able to spend more time with his family.\nIn 1956, Popeil married Marilyn Greene, with whom he had two daughters; they divorced in 1963. He married Lisa Boehne some time after this and had one daughter with her. He and Boehne divorced sometime before 1995, when he married Robin Angers, with whom he had two more daughters. Ashley Tisdale and Jennifer Tisdale are his cousins.\nDeath.\nPopeil died on July 28, 2021, at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center at age 86. He had been sent there a day earlier for a medical emergency. No cause of death was given. According to his half-sister, Lisa Popeil, the cause of death was a brain hemorrhage.\nInventions.\nPopeil is noted for marketing and in some cases inventing a wide variety of products. Among the better known and more successful are the Chop-O-Matic hand food processor (\"Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to show you the greatest kitchen appliance ever made\u00a0... All your onions chopped to perfection without shedding a single tear.\"), the Dial-O-Matic successor to the Veg-O-Matic (\"Slice a tomato so thin it only has one side.\"), and the Ronco Pocket Fisherman. Popeil is also well known for his housewares inventions like his Giant Dehydrator and Beef Jerky Machine, his Electric Pasta Maker and his Showtime Rotisserie &amp; BBQ. His Showtime Rotisserie &amp; BBQ sold over eight million units in the US alone, helping Ronco's housewares sales exceed $1 billion in sales. After retiring, Popeil continued to invent products including the 5-in-1 Turkey Fryer &amp; Food Cooking System which he had been developing for over ten years.\nPopular culture.\nPopeil's success in infomercials, memorable marketing personality, and ubiquity on American television have allowed him and his products to appear in a variety of popular media environments including cameo appearances on television shows such as \"The X-Files\", \"Futurama\", \"King of the Hill\", \"The Simpsons\", \"Sex and the City\", \"The Daily Show\", and \"The West Wing\". Parodies of Popeil's infomercials were done on the comedy show \"Saturday Night Live\" by Dan Aykroyd and Eddie Murphy and the \"Veg-O-Matic\" may have provided comedian Gallagher inspiration for the \"Sledge-O-Matic\" routine since the 1980s. The animated series \"VeggieTales\" once featured a parody of the \"Veg-O-Matic\" dubbed as the \"Forgive-O-Matic\". \"Additionally, the professional wrestling tag team The Midnight Express dubbed their finishing move the Veg-O-Matic. \nPopeil was voted by \"Self\" magazine readers as one of the 25 people who have changed the way we eat, drink and think about food.\nPopeil has been referenced in the music of Alice Cooper, the Beastie Boys, and \"Weird Al\" Yankovic. Yankovic's song \"Mr. Popeil\" was a tribute to his father, Samuel (and featured his half sister Lisa Popeil on backing vocals). Ron Popeil later used this song in some of his infomercials.\nIn the 2007 film \"Funny Games\", one of the characters is channel surfing and briefly flicks past an infomercial for Ron Popeil's Vegetable Dehydrator. In the 1996 horror film \"Scream\", the catchphrase is said (\"But wait, there's more!\"), itself in the tradition of a horror film's saying of a famous TV catchphrase, in the 1980s horror film \"The Shining\"'s saying of \"Here's Johnny!\" (Carson) by announcer Ed McMahon.\nIn Malcolm Gladwell's book \"What the Dog Saw: And Other Adventures\", Popeil is interviewed and many of his products, most notably the Veg-O-Matic and Showtime Rotisserie, are discussed. Gladwell's 2000 \"New Yorker\" piece \"The Pitchman\" about Popeil won Gladwell the 2001 National Magazine award.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26180", "revid": "32367558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26180", "title": "REO Speedwagon", "text": "American rock band\nREO Speedwagon (originally stylized as R.E.O. Speedwagon), or simply REO, was an American rock band from Champaign, Illinois. \nFormed in 1966, the band cultivated a following during the 1970s and achieved significant commercial success throughout the 1980s. Their best-selling album, \"Hi Infidelity\" (1980), contained four US Top 40 hits and sold more than 10 million copies.\nREO Speedwagon sold more than 40 million records and charted 13 Top 40 hits, including the number ones \"Keep On Loving You\" and \"Can't Fight This Feeling\".\nHistory.\nFormation.\nIn the fall of 1966, Neal Doughty was a junior at the University of Illinois in Champaign, Illinois. On his first night of classes, he met fellow student Alan Gratzer. Doughty had learned some Beatles songs on his parents' piano, and Gratzer had been a drummer in local bands since high school. The two held an impromptu jam session in the basement of their Illinois Street Residence Hall dormitory.\nGratzer continued to perform with his band (which had a keyboard-playing lead singer), and Doughty began turning up at gigs. Doughty eventually began sitting in on a few songs. On the last day of the university's spring semester, guitarist Joe Matt called the band's leader and told him that he and the other members (Gratzer and bassist Mike Blair) had decided to start a new band with Doughty where everyone but Doughty would sing.\nThe new band made a list of songs to learn over the summer break. Doughty landed a summer job and bought his first organ. On his Farfisa organ, he learned The Doors' \"Light My Fire\". The members returned to school in the fall of 1967 and had their first rehearsal before classes started. They named the band REO Speedwagon, from the REO Speed Wagon, a 1915 truck designed by Ransom Eli Olds. Doughty had seen the name written on the blackboard when he walked into his History of Transportation class on the first day they had decided to look for a name. Rather than pronouncing REO as a single word as the motor company did (\"REE-oh\"), they chose to spell the word out, pronouncing each letter individually (\"R-E-O\"). An advertisement in the school newspaper produced their first job, a fraternity party that turned into a food fight. They continued to perform cover songs in campus bars, fraternity parties and university events.\nIn early 1968, Terry Luttrell became lead singer and Bob Crownover joined as the guitarist, replacing Matt after he graduated. When Mike Blair left the band in mid-1968, Gregg Philbin replaced Blair and Joe McCabe played sax until he moved on to Southern Illinois University. Marty Shepard then came aboard on trumpet, soon joined by a second trumpeter named Steve (last name unknown). Doughty joined them as a third horn player on some tunes. But Shepard left during the following year and horns were dropped from the group altogether by the summer of 1969.\nBob Crownover played guitar for the group until mid-1969, when Bill Fiorio replaced him. Fiorio then departed in late 1969, eventually assuming the name Duke Tumatoe, and went on to form the All Star Frogs. Steve Scorfina (who went on to found the band Pavlov's Dog) came aboard for over a year, composing with the band and performing live, before being replaced by Gary Richrath in late 1970.\nRichrath had driven 100 miles (160\u00a0km) to see the band and become a part of it, saying, \"I'm going to be a part of that band whether they like it or not.\" He was a Peoria, Illinois-based guitarist and prolific songwriter who brought original compositions. With him on board, the band's regional popularity grew tremendously. The St. Louis-based radio station KSHE, one of the United States of America's most influential rock stations, began supporting it, elevating the band's profile outside its Midwestern stronghold.\nEpic Records signed the band to a recording contract in 1971 after Paul Leka, an East Coast record producer, saw them play before an enthusiastic outdoor crowd in Peoria during a rainstorm and brought the band to his recording studio in Bridgeport, Connecticut, where it recorded original material for its first album. The lineup on the first album consisted of Richrath, Gratzer, Doughty, Philbin and Luttrell.\nEarly years.\nIn the early days, REO was managed by its University of Illinois classmate Irving Azoff, who later managed the Eagles and many others, becoming one of the most powerful people in the recording industry.\nWith its equipment hauled to gigs in a friend's station wagon, REO played bars and clubs all over the Midwest. Its debut album, \"R.E.O. Speedwagon\", was released on Epic Records in October 1971. The most popular track on this record was \"157 Riverside Avenue\"; it remains an in-concert favorite. The title is the address in Westport, Connecticut, where the band stayed while recording in Leka's studio in Bridgeport.\nAlthough the rest of the band's lineup remained stable, REO Speedwagon switched lead vocalists three times for their first three albums. Luttrell left the band in early 1972, eventually becoming the vocalist for Starcastle. He was replaced by Kevin Cronin. Cronin recorded one album with the band, 1972's \"R.E.O./T.W.O.\" but left during the recording sessions for 1973's \"Ridin' the Storm Out\" because of internal conflicts. \"Ridin' the Storm Out\" was completed with Michael Bryan Murphy on lead vocal, and featured Doughty's \"wailing storm siren\" synthesizer intro on the title track. Murphy stayed for two more albums, \"Lost in a Dream\" (1974) and \"This Time We Mean It\" (1975), before Cronin returned in January 1976 and recorded \"R.E.O.\", released in July of that year.\nCronin's return came after Greg X. Volz turned down the position for lead vocalist after becoming a Christian.\nIn 1977, REO convinced Epic Records that its strength was live performances. Epic agreed to let them produce the band's first live album, \"\" (January 1977), which was eventually certified platinum. That same year, the band moved to Los Angeles.\nAlso in 1977, Philbin left the band, either because he was disenchanted with the new corporate-structure REO where Cronin and Richrath got bigger slices of the pie instead of the equal credit they once shared as a \"garage band\", or because he was asked to leave as his lifestyle issues affected the music quality. He was replaced by another Centennial High School alumnus, Bruce Hall, to record \"You Can Tune a Piano but You Can't Tuna Fish\". The album was released in March 1978 and has received much FM radio airplay over the years, thanks to songs like \"Roll with the Changes\" and \"Time for Me to Fly\". It was REO's first to make the Top 40, peaking at No. 29. It sold over two million copies in the US, ultimately achieving double platinum status.\nIn July 1979 the band turned back to hard rock with the release of \"Nine Lives\".\nMainstream success.\nOn November 21, 1980, Epic released \"Hi Infidelity\", which represented a change in sound, going from hard rock to more pop-oriented material. \"Hi Infidelity\" spawned four hit singles by Richrath and Cronin, including the chart-topping \"Keep On Loving You\" (Cronin), \"Take It on the Run\" (No. 5) (Richrath), \"In Your Letter\" (No. 20) (Richrath), and \"Don't Let Him Go\" (No. 24) (Cronin). It remained on the charts for 65 weeks, 32 of which were spent in the top ten, including 15 weeks atop the \"Billboard\" 200. \"Hi Infidelity\" sold over ten million copies.\nThe band's follow-up album, \"Good Trouble\", was released in June 1982. Though not as successful as its predecessor, it performed moderately well commercially and featured the hit singles \"Keep the Fire Burnin'\" (U.S. No. 7), \"Sweet Time\" (U.S. No. 26), and the Album Rock chart hit \"The Key\".\nIn November 1984, the band released \"Wheels Are Turnin\"', an album that included the No. 1 hit single \"Can't Fight This Feeling\" and three more hits: \"I Do' Wanna Know\" (U.S. No. 29), \"One Lonely Night\" (U.S. No. 19), and \"Live Every Moment\" (U.S. No. 34).\nREO Speedwagon toured the US in 1985, including a sold-out concert in Madison, Wisconsin, in May. On July 13, on the way to a show in Milwaukee, the band stopped in Philadelphia to play at the US leg of Live Aid, which broke a record for number of viewers. They performed \"Can't Fight This Feeling\" and \"Roll with the Changes\" with members of the Beach Boys, the band members' families, and Paul Shaffer on stage for backing vocals.\n1987's \"Life as We Know It\" saw a decline in sales, but still managed to provide the band with the top-20 hits \"That Ain't Love\" (U.S. No. 16) and \"In My Dreams\" (U.S. No. 19).\n\"The Hits\" was a 1988 compilation album which contained the new tracks \"I Don't Want to Lose You\" and \"Here with Me\". These were the last songs recorded with Richrath and Gratzer. \"Here with Me\" cracked the Top 20 of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and the top ten on the Adult Contemporary chart and was the group's final Top 40 hit.\nChanges in the 1990s.\nBy the late 1980s, the band's popularity was starting to decline. Gratzer left in September 1988 after he decided to retire from music to open a restaurant. In early 1989, Richrath left the band after tensions between him and Cronin boiled over. Cronin had been playing in The Strolling Dudes, a jazz ensemble that included jazz trumpet player Rick Braun (who had co-written \"Here with Me\" with Cronin), Miles Joseph on lead guitar, and Graham Lear on drums. Lear had already been invited to join REO in September 1988 as Gratzer's successor and Joseph was brought in as a temporary stand-in for Richrath. Backup singers Carla Day and Melanie Jackson were also added. This lineup did only one show, on January 7, 1989, in Vi\u00f1a del Mar, Chile, where it won the award for best group at the city's annual International Song Festival. After that, Joseph and the backup singers were dropped in favor of former Ted Nugent guitarist Dave Amato (brought aboard in May 1989) and keyboardist/songwriter/producer Jesse Harms.\nThe 1990 release \"The Earth, a Small Man, His Dog and a Chicken\", with Bryan Hitt (formerly of Wang Chung) on drums, was a commercial disappointment. The album produced only one \"Billboard\" Hot 100 single, to date the band's last, \"Love Is a Rock\", which peaked at No. 65. Disenchanted by the album's failure, Harms left the group in early 1991.\nShortly after his departure, Richrath assembled former members of the Midwestern band Vancouver to form a namesake band, Richrath. After touring for several years, Richrath (the band) released \"Only the Strong Survive\" in 1992 on the GNP Crescendo label. Richrath continued to perform for several years before disbanding in the late 1990s. In September 1998, Gary Richrath briefly joined REO onstage at the County Fair in Los Angeles to play on the band's encore song, \"157 Riverside Avenue\". He rejoined REO in Los Angeles in May 2000 for the same encore, but no serious plans for a reunion ever materialized.\nHaving lost its recording contract with Epic, REO Speedwagon released \"Building the Bridge\" (July 1996) on the Priority/Rhythm Safari label. When that label went bankrupt, the album was released on Castle Records, which also experienced financial troubles. REO ultimately self-financed this effort, which failed to chart, though the title track made R&amp;R's AC Top 30 chart.\nRevival of the hits.\nThe commercial failure of the band's newer material with its revised lineup demanded a change in marketing strategy. As a consequence, Epic began rereleasing recordings from older albums with updated artwork and design. Since 1995, Epic has released over a dozen compilation albums featuring greatest hits, including 1999's \"The Ballads\", which features two new songs: \"Just for You\" (Cronin and Jim Peterik) and \"Till The River's Run Dry\" (Cronin).\nIn 2000, REO teamed up with Styx for a joint tour, which included a June 9 appearance at Riverport Amphitheater in St. Louis, which was released as the live concert video \"\" (September 2000). REO's portion of the show was released again under three separate titles: \"Live - Plus\" (2001), \"Live Plus 3\" (2001) and \"Extended Versions\" (2001), which was certified gold by the RIAA on April 26, 2006. REO once again teamed with Styx in 2003 for the Classic Rock's Main Event tour, which included another band from their common rock era, Journey.\n2000\u20132025.\nThe band released a self-financed album entitled \"Find Your Own Way Home\" in April 2007. Though it did not chart as an album, it produced two singles, \"I Needed to Fall\" and \"Find Your Own Way Home\", that appeared on \"Billboard\"'s Adult Contemporary radio chart.\nREO Speedwagon continued to tour regularly, mostly performing their classic hits. It teamed up with Styx to record a new single, \"Can't Stop Rockin'\", released in March 2009, as well as for a full tour that included special guest .38 Special.\nIn November 2009 REO Speedwagon released a Christmas album, \"Not So Silent Night...Christmas with REO Speedwagon.\" On December 2, the band released an online video game, \"Find Your Own Way Home\", produced by digital design agency Curious Sense. The game was the first \"downloadable casual game\" produced with a rock band and was cited by numerous publications as an innovative marketing product for a music act. In mid-2010, the band\u2014then touring with Pat Benatar\u2014announced that it would release a 30th anniversary deluxe edition reissue of \"Hi Infidelity\".\nREO Speedwagon headlined the M&amp;I Classic Rock Stage at Summerfest in Milwaukee Wisconsin on June 30, 2011. On March 11, 2012, Cronin appeared on the Canadian reality TV series \"Star Acad\u00e9mie\". He sang a sampling of REO's hits with the show's singing finalists.\nOn November 22, 2013, REO announced a benefit concert with Styx, \"Rock to the Rescue\", to raise money for families affected by the tornadoes in central Illinois. The concert was held on December 4, 2013, in Bloomington, Illinois. Richard Marx joined REO on stage for a joint performance of two of his hit songs. Gary Richrath reunited with REO one final time for a performance of \"Ridin' the Storm Out\" to end REO's set at the sold-out concert. He stayed on stage to help with the encore of \"With a Little Help From My Friends\", along with Styx, Marx, and others. Richrath was originally from East Peoria, which was damaged during the storm. Families affected by the storm and first responders sat near the stage for this concert.\nIn early 2014, it was announced that REO Speedwagon and Chicago would team up for 15 dates throughout 2014. Gary Richrath died on September 13, 2015, of complications from surgery. In 2016, REO toured with Def Leppard and Tesla.\nThe band and Pitbull performed the song \"Messin' Around\" live on the ABC TV show \"Greatest Hits in 2016\"; that version of the song was released as a single on iTunes. The band toured the UK arena circuit with Status Quo in December 2016. The band toured the US with Styx and former Eagles guitarist Don Felder on the \"United We Rock\" tour, debuting June 20, 2017, at the Sunlight Supply Amphitheater. In 2017, the \"Hi Infidelity\" album received the Diamond Award for official U.S. sales of over ten million copies. REO and Chicago teamed up again in 2018 for a 30-city tour.\nThe band appeared in an episode in the third season of the American TV series \"Ozark\", which was released on Netflix on March 27, 2020. After the appearance, four of REO's songs reentered the \"Billboard\" rock charts. The song \"Take it on the Run\" features prominently in a 2018 episode of the first season of the TV series \"Cobra Kai\"; Daniel and Johnny are riding in Johnny's car when the song comes on the radio. Both men begin nodding their heads to the song, and Johnny, with some surprise, says to Daniel, \"You like Speedwagon?\" Daniel replies, \"What kind of man doesn't!\"\nIn 2021 REO Speedwagon was inducted into the Hall of Fame at the Illinois Rock &amp; Roll Museum in Joliet. The group spent mid 2022 touring with Styx, on the \"Live and Unzoomed Tour\", with Loverboy serving as the opening act.\nGregg Philbin died on October 24, 2022.\nOn January 4, 2023, the band announced that its sole remaining original member, Neal Doughty, would retire from touring with the band after 55 years. Bassist Bruce Hall said Doughty would always be part of the REO brotherhood, and left open the opportunity for Doughty to appear at select dates. The band announced Derek Hilland (ex-Iron Butterfly) as a touring replacement for Doughty.\nOn November 7, 2023, Hall announced he was taking a leave of absence from touring to prepare for and undergo back surgery for an accident he had a number of years earlier. Hall was expected to rejoin the band on tour in 2024. Later that day, Cronin announced that bassist/singer Matt Bissonette would be Hall's touring replacement.\nOn September 16, 2024, the band announced that they will cease touring effective from January 1, 2025. The announcement said that Hall had not sufficiently recovered from his back surgery the year before, and that the situation had led to irreconcilable differences between Cronin and Hall. Other posts on the band's Facebook page in the days leading up to the announcement said that Cronin had experienced illness and had undergone emergency surgery, resulting in cancelled tour dates. On December 21, 2024, Cronin confirmed that the show from that night was the last that would be performed under the REO Speedwagon moniker and that the name would be retired. However, he would continue to play solo concerts with the same final touring lineup (as the Kevin Cronin Band) and would still perform REO Speedwagon songs.\nAlso in December, it was announced that the Kevin Cronin Band (Cronin, Dave Amato, Bryan Hitt, Derek Hilland, and Matt Bissonette) would co-headline the \"Brotherhood of Rock Tour\" with Styx in summer 2025, with Don Felder as their opening act (reuniting most of the three-act lineup from 2017's \"United We Rock Tour\", minus Doughty and Hall). It was later announced that the Kevin Cronin Band would be performing REO Speedwagon's \"Hi Infidelity\" album in full on the tour, along with playing other hits and classics (Styx would likewise be performing their album \"The Grand Illusion\" on tour, along with playing other hits and classics, while Felder would be performing a mix of his solo songs and hits from his time in the Eagles).\nOn June 14, 2025, REO Speedwagon reunited for a one-off show in its hometown, Champaign, Illinois. The show featured Doughty, Hall, and original drummer Alan Gratzer, alongside early members Terry Luttrell (vocals), Steve Scorfina (guitar), and Mike Murphy (vocals). Richrath's son, Eric, also participated. Kevin Cronin, Dave Amato, and Bryan Hitt did not appear due to their tour overlapping with the date.\nOn September 28, 2025, the band's classic lineup (minus the late Gary Richrath) reunited onstage for a performance alongside the University of Illinois Marching Illini for the 2025 Illinois homecoming halftime show. The performance included Hall, Gratzer and Doughty performing \"Ridin' the Storm Out\", \"Roll With The Changes\", and \"157 Riverside Avenue\", backed by the marching band. While Cronin did not sing (as the melodies were provided by the marching band), it was the first time Cronin, Hall, Doughty, and Gratzer shared a stage since December 31, 1988. The band members officially reunited the previous day as Grand Marshals in the University's homecoming parade. The band members were reportedly unsure about any potential future reunions.\nBand members.\nFinal lineup\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26181", "revid": "50908488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26181", "title": "Ray Bradbury", "text": "American writer (1920\u20132012)\nRay Douglas Bradbury ( ; August 22, 1920\u00a0\u2013 June 5, 2012) was an American author and screenwriter. One of the most celebrated 20th-century American writers, he worked in a variety of genres, including fantasy, science fiction, horror, mystery, and realistic fiction.\nBradbury is best known for his novel \"Fahrenheit 451\" (1953) and his short-story collections \"The Martian Chronicles\" (1950), \"The Illustrated Man\" (1951), and \"The October Country\" (1955). Other notable works include the coming of age novel \"Dandelion Wine\" (1957), the dark fantasy \"Something Wicked This Way Comes\" (1962) and the fictionalized memoir \"Green Shadows, White Whale\" (1992). He also wrote and consulted on screenplays and television scripts, including \"Moby Dick\" and \"It Came from Outer Space\". Many of his works were adapted into television and film productions as well as comic books. Bradbury also wrote poetry which has been published in several collections, such as \"They Have Not Seen the Stars\" (2001).\n\"The New York Times\" called Bradbury \"An author whose fanciful imagination, poetic prose, and mature understanding of human character have won him an international reputation\" and \"the writer most responsible for bringing modern science fiction into the literary mainstream.\"\nEarly life.\nBradbury was born on August 22, 1920, in Waukegan, Illinois, to Esther (n\u00e9e Moberg) Bradbury (1888\u20131966), a Swedish immigrant, and Leonard Spaulding Bradbury (1890\u20131957), a power and telephone lineman of English ancestry. He was given the middle name \"Douglas\" after actor Douglas Fairbanks.\nBradbury was surrounded by an extended family during his early childhood and formative years in Waukegan. His grandparents lived next door, and an aunt read him short stories when he was a child. This period provided foundations for both the author and his stories. In Bradbury's fiction, 1920s Waukegan becomes Green Town, Illinois.\nThe Bradbury family lived in Tucson, Arizona, during 1926\u20131927 and 1932\u20131933 while their father pursued employment, each time returning to Waukegan. While in Tucson, Bradbury attended Amphi Junior High School and Roskruge Junior High School. They eventually settled in Los Angeles in 1934 when Bradbury was 14. The family arrived with only US$40 (), which paid for rent and food until his father finally found a job making wire at a cable company for $14 a week (), allowing them to stay in Hollywood.\nBradbury attended Los Angeles High School and was active in the drama club. He often roller-skated through Hollywood in hopes of meeting celebrities. Among the creative people he met were special-effects pioneer Ray Harryhausen and radio star George Burns. Bradbury's first pay as a writer, at age 14, was for a joke he sold to George Burns to use on the \" Burns and Allen\" radio show.\nBradbury was fascinated with carnivals from a young age, and they would feature in such works as \"The Illustrated Man\" and \"Something Wicked This Way Comes\". He related a formative event of his youth:\nI suppose the most important memory is of Mr. Electrico. On Labor Day weekend, 1932, when I was twelve years old, he came to my hometown with the Dill Brothers ... He was a performer sitting in an electric chair and a stagehand pulled a switch and he was charged with fifty thousand volts of pure electricity. Lightning flashed in his eyes and his hair stood on end. I sat below, in the front row, and he reached down with a flaming sword full of electricity and he tapped me on both shoulders and then the tip of my nose and he cried, \"Live, forever!\" And I thought, \"God, that's wonderful. How do you do that?\" ... So when I left the carnival that day I stood by the carousel and I watched the horses running around and around to the music of \"Beautiful Ohio\" and I cried. Tears streamed down my cheeks because I knew something important had happened to me that day because of Mr. Electrico. I felt changed. And so I went home and within days I started to write. And I've never stopped.\nInfluences.\nLiterature.\nThroughout his youth, Bradbury was an avid reader and writer and knew at a young age that he was \"going into one of the arts.\" Bradbury began writing his own stories at age 12 (1931), sometimes writing on butcher paper.\nIn his youth, he spent much time in the Carnegie Library in Waukegan, reading such authors as H. G. Wells, Jules Verne and Edgar Allan Poe. At 12, he began writing traditional horror stories and said he tried to imitate Poe until he was about 18. Bradbury's favorite writers growing up included Katherine Anne Porter, Edith Wharton, and Jessamyn West. He loved the work of Edgar Rice Burroughs, especially his John Carter of Mars series; \"The Warlord of Mars\" impressed him so much that at age 12, he wrote his own sequel. The young Bradbury was also a cartoonist and loved to illustrate. He wrote about Tarzan and drew his own Sunday panels. He listened to the radio show \"Chandu the Magician\", and every night when the show went off the air, he wrote out the entire script from memory.\nAs a teen in Beverly Hills, he often visited his mentor and friend, science-fiction writer Bob Olsen, sharing ideas and maintaining contact. In 1936, at a secondhand bookstore in Hollywood, Bradbury discovered a handbill promoting meetings of the Los Angeles Science Fiction Society. Excited to find others who shared his interest, he joined a Thursday-night conclave at age 16.\nBradbury cited Verne and Wells as his primary science-fiction influences. He identified with Verne, saying: \"He believes the human being is in a strange situation in a very strange world, and he believes that we can triumph by behaving morally.\" Bradbury admitted that he stopped reading science-fiction books in his 20s and embraced a broad field of literature that included poets Alexander Pope and John Donne. He had just graduated from high school when he met Robert A. Heinlein, then 31. Bradbury recalled: \"He was well known, and he wrote humanistic science fiction, which influenced me to dare to be human instead of mechanical.\" During his young adulthood, Bradbury read stories published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\", and read everything by Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke, as well as the early writings of Theodore Sturgeon and A. E. van Vogt.\nHollywood.\nThe family lived about four blocks from the Fox Uptown Theatre on Western Avenue in Los Angeles, the flagship theater for MGM and Fox. There, Bradbury learned how to sneak in and watched previews almost every week. He roller skated there, as well as all over town, as he put it, \"hell-bent on getting autographs from glamorous stars. It was glorious.\" Among stars the young Bradbury was thrilled to encounter were Norma Shearer, Laurel and Hardy, and Ronald Colman. Sometimes he spent all day in front of Paramount Pictures or Columbia Pictures, then skated to the Brown Derby to watch the stars who came and went for meals. He recounted seeing Cary Grant, Marlene Dietrich, and Mae West, who, he learned, made a regular appearance every Friday night, bodyguard in tow.\nCareer.\nBradbury was free to start a career in writing when, owing to his bad eyesight, he was rejected for induction into the military during World War II. Inspired by science-fiction heroes such as Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers, he began publishing science-fiction stories in fanzines in 1938. He was invited by Forrest J. Ackerman to attend the Los Angeles Science Fiction Society, which at the time met at Clifton's Cafeteria in downtown Los Angeles. There he met Robert A. Heinlein, Emil Petaja, Fredric Brown, Henry Kuttner, Leigh Brackett and Jack Williamson. Bradbury's first published story was \"Hollerbochen's Dilemma\", in the January 1938 number of Ackerman's fanzine \"Imagination!\". In July 1939, Ackerman and his girlfriend Morojo gave 19-year-old Bradbury the money to head to New York for the First World Science Fiction Convention in New York City, and funded Bradbury's fanzine, \"Futuria Fantasia\". Bradbury wrote most of its four issues, each volume printed in limited number due to publishing costs. Between 1940 and 1947, he was a contributor to Rob Wagner's film magazine, \"Script\".\nIn 1939, Bradbury joined Laraine Day's Wilshire Players Guild, where for two years he wrote and acted in several plays. They were, as Bradbury later described, \"so incredibly bad\" that he gave up play-writing for two decades. His first paid piece, \"Pendulum\", written with Henry Hasse, was published in the pulp magazine \"Super Science Stories\" in November 1941, for which he earned $15.\nBradbury sold his first solo story, \"The Lake\", for $13.75 at 22 and became a full-time writer by 24. His first collection of short stories, \"Dark Carnival\", was published in 1947 by Arkham House, a small press in Sauk City, Wisconsin, owned by August Derleth. Reviewing \"Dark Carnival\" for the \"New York Herald Tribune\", Will Cuppy proclaimed Bradbury \"suitable for general consumption\" and predicted that he would become a writer of the caliber of British fantasist John Collier.\nAfter a rejection notice from the pulp \"Weird Tales\", Bradbury submitted \"Homecoming\" to \"Mademoiselle\", where it was spotted by a young editorial assistant named Truman Capote. Capote picked the Bradbury manuscript from a slush pile, which led to its publication. \"Homecoming\" won a place in the O. Henry Award Stories of 1947.\nBradbury first published \"The Fireman\", a short story about 25,000 words long, in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" in February 1951. Bradbury was asked to extend it by 25,000 words so that it would be published as a novel. Bradbury got the title after the Los Angeles fire chief told him that book paper burns at 451\u00a0\u00b0F. In UCLA's Powell Library, in a study room with typewriters for rent for ten cents per half-hour, Bradbury wrote his classic story of a book burning future, \"Fahrenheit 451\", which was about 50,000 words long, costing him $9.80 in typewriter rental fees. \"Fahrenheit 451\" was also published in serial form in the March, April and May 1954 issues of Playboy Magazine. \"Fahrenheit 451\" remains a staple in discussions about censorship and dystopian futures.\nA chance encounter in a Los Angeles bookstore with British expatriate writer Christopher Isherwood gave Bradbury the opportunity to put \"The Martian Chronicles\" into the hands of a respected critic. Isherwood's glowing review followed.\nWriting.\nBradbury attributed his lifelong habit of writing every day to two incidents. The first, when he was three years old, was his mother's taking him to see Lon Chaney in the 1923 silent film \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\". The second occurred in 1932, when a carnival entertainer, one Mr. Electrico, knighted the young man with an electrified sword and intoned: \"Live forever!\" Bradbury remarked: \"I felt that something strange and wonderful had happened to me because of my encounter with Mr.\u00a0Electrico\u00a0... [he] gave me a future\u00a0... I began to write, full-time. I have written every single day of my life since that day 69 years ago.\" At that age, Bradbury first started to do magic, which was his first great love. He said that had he not discovered writing, he would have become a magician.\nBradbury claimed a wide variety of influences, and described discussions he might have had with his favorite writers, among them Robert Frost, William Shakespeare, John Steinbeck, Aldous Huxley, and Thomas Wolfe. From Steinbeck, he learned \"how to write objectively and yet insert all of the insights without too much extra comment.\" He studied Eudora Welty for her \"remarkable ability to give you atmosphere, character, and motion in a single line.\"\nBradbury was once described as a \"Midwest surrealist\" and is often labeled a science-fiction writer. He resisted that categorization, however, defining science fiction as \"the art of the possible.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First of all, I don't write science fiction. I've only done one science fiction book and that's \"Fahrenheit 451\", based on reality. Science fiction is a depiction of the real. Fantasy is a depiction of the unreal. So \"Martian Chronicles\" is not science fiction, it's fantasy. It couldn't happen, you see? That's the reason it's going to be around a long time\u2014because it's a Greek myth, and myths have staying power.\nBradbury recounted when he came into his own as a writer, the afternoon he wrote a short story about his first encounter with death. When he was a boy, he met a young girl at a lake edge and she went out into the water and never came back. Years later, as he wrote about it in \"The Lake\", tears flowed from him. He recognized he had taken the leap from emulating the many writers he admired to connecting with his voice as a writer.\nWhen later asked about source of the lyrical power of his prose, he replied: \"From reading so much poetry every day of my life. My favorite writers have been those who've said things well.\" He said: \"If you're reluctant to weep, you won't live a full and complete life.\"\nIn high school, Bradbury was active in the poetry and drama clubs. Planning to become an actor, he became serious about writing as his high-school years progressed. He graduated from Los Angeles High School, where he took poetry classes with Snow Longley Housh and short-story writing courses taught by Jeannet Johnson. The teachers recognized his talent and furthered his interest in writing, but he did not attend college. Instead, he sold newspapers at the corner of South Norton Avenue and Olympic Boulevard. In regard to his education, Bradbury said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Libraries raised me. I don't believe in colleges and universities. I believe in libraries because most students don't have any money. When I graduated from high school, it was during the Depression and we had no money. I couldn't go to college, so I went to the library three days a week for 10 years. So I graduated from the library when I was twenty-eight years old.\nHe told \"The Paris Review\": \"You can't learn to write in college. It's a very bad place for writers because the teachers always think they know more than you do\u2014and they don't.\"\nHe considered science to be 'incidental' to his writing. He claimed not to be interested in the development of science, but hoped to use it as a form of social commentary and as an allegorical technique.\nHe described his inspiration: \"My stories run up and bite me in the leg\u2014I respond by writing them down\u2014everything that goes on during the bite. When I finish, the idea lets go and runs off.\"\n\"Green Town\".\nAn imagined version of Waukegan, Green Town is a symbol of safety and home, which is often the setting for tales of the macabre and the dark fantastic. It serves as the setting of his semiautobiographical classics \"Dandelion Wine\", \"Something Wicked This Way Comes\", and \"Farewell Summer\", as well as many of his short stories. In Green Town, Bradbury's favorite uncle sprouts wings, traveling carnivals conceal supernatural powers, and his grandparents provide room and board to Charles Dickens. Perhaps the definitive use of Green Town is in \"Summer Morning, Summer Night\", a collection of short stories and vignettes exclusively set in the town. Bradbury returns to the signature locale as a look back at the rapidly disappearing small-town world of the American heartland, which was the foundation of his roots.\nCultural contributions.\nBradbury wrote many short essays on culture and the arts, attracting the attention of critics in this field, using his fiction to explore and criticize his culture and society. He observed, for example, that \"Fahrenheit 451\" touched on the alienation of people by media:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In writing the short novel \"Fahrenheit 451\" I thought I was describing a world that might evolve in four or five decades. But only a few weeks ago, in Beverly Hills one night, a husband and wife passed me, walking their dog. I stood staring after them, absolutely stunned. The woman held in one hand a small cigarette-package-sized radio, its antenna quivering. From this sprang tiny copper wires which ended in a dainty cone plugged into her right ear. There she was, oblivious to man and dog, listening to far winds and whispers and soap opera cries, sleep walking, helped up and down curbs by a husband who might just as well not have been there. This was not fiction.\nBradbury stated that the novel worked as a critique of the later development of political correctness:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn a 1982 essay, he wrote: \"People ask me to predict the Future, when all I want to do is prevent it.\" This intent had been expressed earlier by other authors, most of whom attributed it to him.\nOn May 24, 1956, Bradbury appeared on the popular quiz show \"You Bet Your Life\" hosted by Groucho Marx. During his introductory comments and on-air banter with Marx, Bradbury briefly discussed some of his books and other works, including giving an overview of \"The Veldt\", his short story published six years earlier in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" under the title \"The World the Children Made\".\nBradbury was a consultant for the United States Pavilion at the 1964 New York World's Fair and wrote the narration script for The American Journey attraction there. He also worked on the original exhibit in Epcot's Spaceship Earth geosphere at Walt Disney World. He focused on detective fiction in the 1980s. In the latter half of the 1980s and early 1990s, he hosted \"The Ray Bradbury Theater\", a televised anthology series based on his short stories.\nBradbury was a strong supporter of public libraries, raising money to prevent the closure of several libraries in California facing budgetary cuts. He said \"libraries raised me\", and shunned colleges and universities, comparing his own lack of funds during the Depression with poor contemporary students. His opinion varied on modern technology. In 1985 Bradbury wrote: \"I see nothing but good coming from computers. When they first appeared on the scene, people were saying, 'Oh my God, I'm so afraid.' I hate people like that\u2014I call them the neo-Luddites\" and: \"In a sense, [computers] are simply books. Books are all over the place, and computers will be, too.\" He resisted the conversion of his work into e-books, saying in 2010: \"We have too many cellphones. We've got too many internets. We have got to get rid of those machines. We have too many machines now.\" When the publishing rights for \"Fahrenheit 451\" came up for renewal in December 2011, Bradbury permitted its publication in electronic form provided that the publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, allowed the e-book to be digitally downloaded by any library patron. The title remains the only book in the Simon &amp; Schuster catalog for which this is possible.\nSeveral comic-book writers have adapted Bradbury's stories, particularly the authors of EC Comics's line of horror and science-fiction comics. Initially, the writers plagiarized his stories, but a diplomatic letter from Bradbury led to the company's paying him and negotiating properly licensed adaptations of his work. The comics featuring Bradbury's stories included \"Tales from the Crypt\", \"Weird Science\", \"Weird Fantasy\", \"Crime SuspenStories\", and \"The Haunt of Fear\".\nBradbury remained an enthusiastic playwright all his life, leaving a rich theatrical legacy as well as literary. He headed the Pandemonium Theatre Company in Los Angeles for many years, and had a five-year relationship with the Fremont Centre Theatre in South Pasadena.\nBradbury is featured prominently in two documentaries related to his classic 1950s\u20131960s era: Jason V Brock's \"Charles Beaumont: The Life of Twilight Zone's Magic Man\", detailing his troubles with Rod Serling and his friendships with writers Charles Beaumont, George Clayton Johnson, and most especially his dear friend William F. Nolan; and Brock's \"The AckerMonster Chronicles!\", which delves into the life of former Bradbury agent, close friend, mega-fan and \"Famous Monsters of Filmland\" editor Forrest J Ackerman.\nBradbury's legacy was celebrated by the bookstore Fahrenheit 451 Books in Laguna Beach, California, in the 1970s and 1980s. He and his favorite illustrator, Joseph Mugnaini, attended the opening of an addition to the store in the mid-1980s. It closed its doors in 1987, but in 1990, another shop of the same name (with different owners) opened in Carlsbad, California.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Bradbury served on the advisory board of the Los Angeles Student Film Institute.\nBradbury was also the opening-night speaker at the Santa Barbara Writers Conference for well over 30 years, providing inspiration and advice to other writers. He was an integral part of the conference since its beginnings in 1972, and spoke at the first conference in 1973.\nPersonal life.\nBradbury lived in his parents' home until, in 1947, at age 27, he married Marguerite McClure (January 16, 1922\u00a0\u2013 November 24, 2003). They remained married until her death. Maggie, as she was affectionately called, was the only woman he ever dated. They had four daughters: Susan, Ramona, Bettina, and Alexandra. Bradbury never obtained a driver's license, but used public transportation or his bicycle.\nHe was raised Baptist by his parents, who were infrequent churchgoers. As an adult, Bradbury said he considered himself a \"delicatessen religionist\" who resisted categorization of his beliefs and took guidance from both Eastern and Western faiths. He felt that his career was \"a God-given thing, and I'm so grateful, so, so grateful. The best description of my career as a writer is 'At play in the fields of the Lord'.\"\nBradbury was a close friend of Charles Addams, and Addams illustrated 1946's \"Homecoming\", the first of Bradbury's stories about the Elliotts, a family that resembled Addams's own Addams Family, transplanted to rural Illinois. Addams and Bradbury planned a larger collaborative work that would tell the family's complete history, but it never materialized, and according to a 2001 interview, they went their separate ways. In October 2001, Bradbury published all the Family stories he had written in one book with a connecting narrative, \"From the Dust Returned\", featuring a wraparound Addams cover of the original \"Homecoming\" illustration.\nAnother of Bradbury's close friends was the special-effects expert Ray Harryhausen, who was best man at Bradbury's wedding. During a BAFTA 2010 awards tribute honoring Harryhausen's 90th birthday, Bradbury spoke about having first met him at Forrest J Ackerman's house when they were both 18. Their shared love for science fiction, \"King Kong\", and \"The Fountainhead\" was the beginning of a lifelong friendship. These early influences inspired them to believe in themselves and to affirm their career choices. After their first meeting, they kept in touch at least once a month: their friendship lasted more than 70 years.\nBradbury told of the following encounter with Sergei Bondarchuk, director of the 1966\u20131967 Soviet epic film \"War and Peace\", at a Hollywood award ceremony in Bondarchuk's honor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They formed a long queue and as Bondarchuk was walking along it he recognized several people: \"Oh Mr. Ford, I like your film.\" He recognized the director, Greta Garbo, and someone else. I was standing at the very end of the queue and silently watched this. Bondarchuk shouted to me; \"Ray Bradbury, is that you?\" He rushed up to me, embraced me, dragged me inside, grabbed a bottle of Stolichnaya, sat down at his table where his closest friends were sitting. All the famous Hollywood directors in the queue were bewildered. They stared at me and asked each other \"Who is this Bradbury?\" And, swearing, they left, leaving me alone with Bondarchuk\u00a0...\nLate in life, Bradbury retained his dedication and passion despite the \"devastation of illnesses and deaths of many good friends.\" Among them was the death of \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry, an intimate friend for many years. They remained close for nearly 30 years, after Roddenberry asked him to write for \"Star Trek\"; Bradbury declined, claiming that he \"never had the ability to adapt other people's ideas into any sensible form.\"\nBradbury suffered a stroke in 1999 that left him partially dependent on a wheelchair. He made regular appearances at science-fiction conventions until 2009, when he retired from the circuit. He continued to write, contributing an essay to the science-fiction issue of \"The New Yorker\" about his inspiration for writing; it was published a week before his death.\nBradbury chose a burial place at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles, with a headstone that reads \"Author of Fahrenheit 451\". On February 6, 2015, \"The New York Times\" reported that the house Bradbury had lived and written in for 50 years, at 10265 Cheviot Drive in Cheviot Hills, Los Angeles, California, had been demolished by the buyer, architect Thom Mayne. Bradbury's home office was moved and recreated in the Ray Bradbury Center in Indianapolis.\nPolitics.\nBradbury considered himself a political independent. Raised a Democrat, he voted for the Democratic Party until 1968. In 1952, he took out an advertisement in \"Variety\" as an open letter to Republicans, stating: \"Every attempt that you make to identify the Democratic Party as the party of Communism, as the 'left-wing' or 'subversive' party, I will attack with all my heart and soul.\" However, Lyndon B. Johnson's handling of the Vietnam War left Bradbury disenchanted, and from 1968 on he voted for the Republican Party in every presidential election with the exception of 1976, when he voted for Jimmy Carter. According to Bradbury's biographer Sam Weller, Carter's inept handling of the economy \"pushed [Bradbury] permanently away from the Democrats\".\nBradbury called Ronald Reagan \"the greatest president\" whereas he dismissed Bill Clinton, calling him a \"shithead\". In August 2001, shortly before the September 11 attacks, he described George W. Bush as \"wonderful\" and stated that the American education system was a \"monstrosity\". He later criticized Barack Obama for ending NASA's crewed space flight program.\nIn 2010, he criticized big government, saying that there was \"too much government\" in America, and \"I don't believe in government. I hate politics. I'm against it. And I hope that sometimes this fall, we can destroy part of our government, and next year destroy even more of it. The less government, the happier I will be\". Bradbury was against affirmative action, condemned what he called \"all this political correctness that's rampant on campuses\", and called for a ban of quotas in higher education. He asserted that \"[e]ducation is purely an issue of learning\u2014we can no longer afford to have it polluted by damn politics\".\nDeath.\nBradbury died in Los Angeles, California, on June 5, 2012, at the age of 91, after a lengthy illness. His personal library was willed to the Waukegan Public Library, where he had many of his formative reading experiences.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" credited him with the ability \"to write lyrically and evocatively of lands an imagination away, worlds he anchored in the here and now with a sense of visual clarity and small-town familiarity\". His grandson, Danny Karapetian, said Bradbury's works had \"influenced so many artists, writers, teachers, scientists, and it's always really touching and comforting to hear their stories\". \"The Washington Post\" noted several modern-day technologies that Bradbury had envisioned much earlier, such as the idea of banking ATMs and earbuds and Bluetooth headsets in \"Fahrenheit 451\", and the concepts of artificial intelligence in \"I Sing the Body Electric\".\nLegacy.\nOn June 6, 2012, in an official public statement from the White House Press Office, President Barack Obama said:\nSeveral authors and filmmakers paid tribute to Bradbury, noting the influence of his works on their own. Steven Spielberg said that Bradbury was \"my muse for the better part of my sci-fi career\u00a0... On the world of science fiction and fantasy and imagination he is immortal.\" Neil Gaiman said that \"the landscape of the world we live in would have been diminished if we had not had him in our world\". Joanne Harris called him \"a bright, burning spark.\" Stephen King released a statement on his website saying:\nMargaret Atwood said she was \"warped early by Ray Bradbury.\" She wrote that Bradbury was:\nThe Ray Bradbury Center was established in 2007 as the Center for Ray Bradbury Studies and received many of Bradbury's papers and artifacts following his death. It continues the work of documenting, preserving, and providing public access to Bradbury's material legacy.\nBibliography.\nBradbury authored \"more than 27 novels and story collections\", which included many of his 600 short stories. More than eight million copies of his works, published in over 36 languages, have been sold around the world.\nFirst novel.\nIn 1949, Bradbury and his wife were expecting their first child. He took a Greyhound bus to New York and checked into a room at the YMCA for 50 cents a night. He took his short stories to a dozen publishers, but no one wanted them. Just before getting ready to go home, Bradbury had dinner with an editor at Doubleday. When Bradbury recounted that everyone wanted a novel and he did not have one, the editor, coincidentally named Walter Bradbury, asked if the short stories might be tied together into a book-length collection. The title was the editor's idea; he suggested: \"You could call it \"The Martian Chronicles\".\" Bradbury liked the idea and recalled making notes in 1944 to do a book set on Mars. That evening, he stayed up all night at the YMCA and typed out an outline. He took it to the Doubleday editor the next morning, who read it and wrote Bradbury a check for $750. When Bradbury returned to Los Angeles, he connected all the short stories that became \"The Martian Chronicles\".\nIntended first novel.\nWhat was later issued as a collection of stories and vignettes, \"Summer Morning, Summer Night\", started out to be Bradbury's first true novel. The core of the work was Bradbury's witnessing of the American small-town life in the American heartland.\nIn the winter of 1955\u201356, after a consultation with his Doubleday editor, Bradbury deferred publication of a novel based on Green Town, the pseudonym for his hometown. Instead, he extracted 17 stories and, with three other Green Town tales, bridged them into his 1957 book \"Dandelion Wine\". Later, in 2006, Bradbury published the original novel remaining after the extraction, and retitled it \"Farewell Summer\". These two titles show what stories and episodes Bradbury decided to retain as he created the two books out of one.\nThe most significant of the remaining unpublished stories, scenes, and fragments were published under the originally intended name for the novel, \"Summer Morning, Summer Night\", in 2007.\nAdaptations to other media.\nFrom 1950 to 1954, 31 of Bradbury's stories were adapted by Al Feldstein for EC Comics (seven of them uncredited in six stories, including \"Kaleidoscope\" and \"Rocket Man\" being combined as \"Home To Stay\"\u2014for which Bradbury was retroactively paid\u2014and EC's first version of \"The Handler\" under the title \"A Strange Undertaking\") and 16 of these were collected in the paperbacks, \"The Autumn People\" (1965) and \"Tomorrow Midnight\" (1966), both published by Ballantine Books with cover illustrations by Frank Frazetta.\nAlso in the early 1950s, adaptations of Bradbury's stories were televised in several anthology shows, including \"Tales of Tomorrow\", \"Lights Out\", \"Out There\", \"Suspense\", \"CBS Television Workshop\", \"The Jane Wyman Show\", \"Star Tonight\", \"Windows\" and \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\". \"The Merry-Go-Round\", a half-hour film adaptation of Bradbury's \"The Black Ferris\", praised by \"Variety\", was shown on \"Starlight Summer Theater\" in 1954 and NBC's \"Sneak Preview\" in 1956. During that same period, several stories were adapted for radio drama, notably on the science fiction anthologies \"Dimension X\" and its successor \"X Minus One\".\nProducer William Alland first brought Bradbury to movie theaters in 1953 with \"It Came from Outer Space\", a Harry Essex screenplay developed from Bradbury's screen treatment \"Atomic Monster\". Three weeks later came the release of Eug\u00e8ne Louri\u00e9's \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\" (1953), which featured one scene based on Bradbury's \"The Fog Horn\", about a sea monster mistaking the sound of a fog horn for the mating cry of a female. Bradbury's close friend Ray Harryhausen produced the stop-motion animation of the creature. Bradbury later returned the favor by writing a short story \"Tyrannosaurus Rex\" about a stop-motion animator who strongly resembled Harryhausen. Over the next 50 years, more than 35 features, shorts, and TV movies were based on Bradbury's stories or screenplays. Bradbury was hired in 1953 by director John Huston to work on the screenplay for his film version of Melville's \"Moby Dick\" (1956), which stars Gregory Peck as Captain Ahab, Richard Basehart as Ishmael, and Orson Welles as Father Mapple. A significant result of the film was Bradbury's book \"Green Shadows, White Whale\", a semifictionalized account of the making of the film, including Bradbury's dealings with Huston and his time in Ireland, where exterior scenes that were set in New Bedford, Massachusetts, were filmed.\nBradbury's short story \"I Sing the Body Electric\" (from the book of the same name) was adapted for the 100th episode of \"The Twilight Zone\". The episode was first aired on May 18, 1962.\nBradbury and director Charles Rome Smith co-founded the Pandemonium Theatre Company in 1964. Its first production was \"The World of Ray Bradbury\", consisting of one-act adaptations of \"The Pedestrian\", \"The Veldt\", and \"To the Chicago Abyss\". It ran for four months at the Coronet Theatre in Los Angeles (October 1964 \u2013 February 1965); an off-Broadway production was presented in October 1965. Another Pandemonium Theatre Company production was mounted at the Coronet Theatre in 1965, again presenting adaptations of three Bradbury short stories: \"The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit\", \"The Day It Rained Forever\", and \"Device Out of Time\". (The last was adapted from his 1957 novel \"Dandelion Wine\"). The original cast for this production featured Booth Coleman, Joby Baker, Fredric Villani, Arnold Lessing, Eddie Sallia, Keith Taylor, Richard Bull, Gene Otis Shane, Henry T. Delgado, F. Murray Abraham, Anne Loos, and Len Lesser. The director, again, was Charles Rome Smith.\nOskar Werner and Julie Christie starred in \"Fahrenheit 451\" (1966), an adaptation of Bradbury's novel directed by Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut.\nIn 1966, Bradbury helped Lynn Garrison create \"AVIAN\", a specialist aviation magazine. For the first issue, Bradbury wrote a poem \"Planes That Land on Grass\".\nIn 1969, \"The Illustrated Man\" was brought to the big screen, starring Rod Steiger, Claire Bloom, and Robert Drivas. Containing the prologue and three short stories from the book, the film received mediocre reviews. The same year, Bradbury approached composer Jerry Goldsmith, who had worked with Bradbury in dramatic radio of the 1950s and later scored the film version, to compose a cantata \"Christus Apollo\" based on Bradbury's text. The work premiered in late 1969, with the California Chamber Symphony performing with narrator Charlton Heston at UCLA.\n\"Something Wicked This Way Comes\" was adapted for a low-budget 1972 British film, produced by the Forest Hill Film Unit &amp; Drama Troupe and directed by Colin Finbow.\n In 1972, \"The Screaming Woman\" was adapted as an ABC Movie-of-the-Week starring Olivia de Havilland.\n\"The Martian Chronicles\" became a three-part TV miniseries starring Rock Hudson, which was first broadcast by NBC in 1980. Bradbury found the miniseries \"just boring\".\nThe 1982 television movie \"The Electric Grandmother\" was based on Bradbury's short story \"I Sing the Body Electric\".\nThe 1983 horror film \"Something Wicked This Way Comes\", starring Jason Robards and Jonathan Pryce, is based on the Bradbury novel of the same name.\nIn 1984, Michael McDonough of Brigham Young University produced \"Bradbury 13\", a series of 13 audio adaptations of famous stories from Bradbury, in conjunction with National Public Radio. The full-cast dramatizations featured adaptations of \"The Ravine\", \"Night Call, Collect\", \"The Veldt\", \"There Was an Old Woman\", \"Kaleidoscope\", \"Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed\", \"The Screaming Woman\", \"A Sound of Thunder\", \"The Man\", \"The Wind\", \"The Fox and the Forest\", \"Here There Be Tygers\", and \"The Happiness Machine\". Voiceover actor Paul Frees provided narration, while Bradbury was responsible for the opening voiceover; Greg Hansen and Roger Hoffman scored the episodes. The series won a Peabody Award and two Gold Cindy awards and was released on CD on May 1, 2010. The series began airing on BBC Radio 4 Extra on June 12, 2011.\nFrom 1985 to 1992, Bradbury hosted a syndicated anthology television series, \"The Ray Bradbury Theater\", for which he adapted 65 of his stories. Each episode began with a shot of Bradbury in his office, gazing over mementoes of his life, which he states (in narrative) are used to spark ideas for stories. After the first two seasons, Bradbury also provided additional voiceover narration specific to the featured story.\nDeeply respected in the USSR, Bradbury's fiction has been adapted into six episodes of the Soviet science-fiction TV series \"This Fantastic World\" which adapted the stories film version of \"Forever and the Earth\", \"I Sing The Body Electric\", \"The Smile\", \"Fahrenheit 451\", \"A Piece of Wood\", and \"To the Chicago Abyss\". In 1984 a cartoon adaptation of \"There Will Come Soft Rains\" (\u00ab\u0411\u0443\u0434\u0435\u0442 \u043b\u0430\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0439 \u0434\u043e\u0436\u0434\u044c\u00bb) came out by Uzbek director Nazim Tulyakhodzhayev. He made a film adaptation of \"The Veldt\" in 1987. In 1985, film adaptation of \"I Sing The Body Electric\" (\u00ab\u042d\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0442\u0440\u043e\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0431\u0430\u0431\u0443\u0448\u043a\u0430\u00bb) came out by Lithuanian director Algimantas Puipa. In 1989, a cartoon adaptation of \"Here There Be Tygers\" (\u00ab\u0417\u0434\u0435\u0441\u044c \u043c\u043e\u0433\u0443\u0442 \u0432\u043e\u0434\u0438\u0442\u044c\u0441\u044f \u0442\u0438\u0433\u0440\u044b\u00bb) by director Vladimir Samsonov came out. In 1993, \"The Smile\" has been adapted as Viktor Chaika's music video \"Mona Lisa\" which included footage from Soviet TV series \"This Fantastic World\".\nBradbury wrote and narrated the 1993 animated television version of \"The Halloween Tree\", based on his 1972 novel.\nThe 1998 film \"The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit\", released by Touchstone Pictures, was written by Bradbury. It was based on his story \"The Magic White Suit\" originally published in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" in 1957. The story had also previously been adapted as a play, a musical, and a 1958 television version.\nIn 2002, Bradbury's own Pandemonium Theatre Company production of \"Fahrenheit 451\" at Burbank's Falcon Theatre combined live acting with projected digital animation by the Pixel Pups. In 1984, Telarium released a game for Commodore 64 based on \"Fahrenheit 451\".\nIn 2005, the film \"A Sound of Thunder\" was released, loosely based upon the short story of the same name. The film \"The Butterfly Effect\" revolves around the same theory as \"A Sound of Thunder\" and contains many references to its inspiration. Short film adaptations of \"A Piece of Wood\" and \"The Small Assassin\" were released in 2005 and 2007, respectively.\nIn 2005, it was reported that Bradbury was upset with filmmaker Michael Moore for using the title \"Fahrenheit 9/11\", which is an allusion to Bradbury's \"Fahrenheit 451\", for his documentary about the George W. Bush administration. Bradbury expressed displeasure with Moore's use of the title, but stated that his resentment was not politically motivated, though Bradbury was conservative-leaning politically. Bradbury asserted that he did not want any of the money made by the movie, nor did he believe that he deserved it. He pressured Moore to change the name, but to no avail. Moore called Bradbury two weeks before the film's release to apologize, saying that the film's marketing had been set in motion a long time ago and it was too late to change the title.\nIn 2008, the film \"Ray Bradbury's Chrysalis\" was produced by Roger Lay Jr. for Urban Archipelago Films, based upon the short story of the same name. The film won the best feature award at the International Horror and Sci-Fi Film Festival in Phoenix. The film has international distribution by Arsenal Pictures and domestic distribution by Lightning Entertainment.\nIn 2010, \"The Martian Chronicles\" was adapted for radio by \"Colonial Radio Theatre on the Air\".\nBradbury's works and approach to writing are documented in Terry Sanders's film \"Ray Bradbury: Story of a Writer\" (1963).\nBradbury's poem \"Groon\" was voiced as a tribute in 2012.\nBradbury's story \"Pendulum\" was adapted into the second episode of the science fiction podcast \"DUST\" (2019).\nAwards and honors.\nThe Ray Bradbury Award for excellency in screenwriting was occasionally presented by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America \u2013 presented to six people on four occasions from 1992 to 2009. Beginning 2010, the Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation is presented annually according to Nebula Awards rules and procedures, although it is not a Nebula Award. The revamped Bradbury Award replaced the Nebula Award for Best Script.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26184", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26184", "title": "Radio Row", "text": "Urban area with a large number of businesses selling radio equipment\nRadio Row is a nickname for an urban street or district specializing in the sale of radio and electronic equipment and parts. Radio Rows arose in many cities with the 1920s rise of broadcasting and declined after the middle of the 20th century.\nNew York City.\nConstruction and existence.\nNew York City's Radio Row, which existed from 1921 to 1966, was a warehouse district on the Lower West Side of Manhattan, New York City. Major firms that started there include Arrow Electronics, Avnet (founded by Charles Avnet in 1921), and Schweber Electronics.\nThe first of many radio-related stores was City Radio, opened in 1921 by Harry Schneck on Cortlandt Street, which became the central axis of a several-block area of electronics stores.\n\"The New York Times\" made an early reference to \"Radio Row\" in 1927, when Cortlandt Street celebrated a \"Radio Jubilee\". The \"Times\" reported that \"Today ... Cortlandt Street is 'Radio Row,' while Broadway is just a thoroughfare.\" The street was closed for vehicular traffic and decorated with flags and bunting, and the \"Times\" reported plans for New York's acting mayor Joseph V. McKee to present a \"key to Cortland Street\" to the then-reigning Miss New York, Frieda Louise Mierse, while a contest was held to name a \"Miss Downtown Radio.\"\nPete Hamill recalled that, as a child, \"On Saturday mornings, I used to venture from Brooklyn with my father to Radio Row on Cortlandt Street in Lower Manhattan, where he and hundreds of other New York men moved from stall to stall in search of the elusive tube that would make the radio work again. Later, my brothers went there with him in search of television components. Radio Row was a piece of all our interior maps.\"\nIn 1930, \"The New York Times\" described Radio Row as located on Greenwich Street \"where Cortlandt Street intersects it and the Ninth Avenue Elevated forms a canopy over the roadway...The largest concentration is in the block bounded by Dey Street on the north and Cortlandt on the south, but Radio Row does not stop there; it overflows around the corner, around several corners, embracing in all some five crowded blocks.\" It estimated 40 or 50 stores in the vicinity, \"all going full blast at the same time. There may be regulations prohibiting this vociferous practice, but if the radio dealers have anything to say it about it, it will never have the slightest effect along Radio Row...The clamor is heard even as one walks through the subway tunnel to the street exit...The first impression, and in fact the only one, is auditory, a reverberating bedlam, a confusion of sounds which only an army of loudspeakers could produce.\" It noted, in addition to merchants selling radio sets, \"others display mostly accessories...one shopkeeper last week featured a crystal set small enough to fit into a pocket, and another gave prominent position to a bucket of condensers about an inch in side.\"\nIn 1944, during World War II, \"The New York Times\" lamented that the \"one-time repository of nearly everything from a tube socket to a complete radio station\" was \"bargainless and practically setless, too, due to wartime scarcities\" but that it still catered to \"tinkerers and engineers\" and that an \"old spirit\" and \"magical quality\" were still there. One shop said it was practically able to stay in business just by \"making repairs on the electric meters burned out by the students of the city schools who were studying radio,\" and all were optimistic about growing public interest in \"two new kinds of radio: FM and television.\"\nBut Radio Row rebounded. The used radios, war surplus electronics (e.g., ARC-5 radios), junk, and parts often piled so high they would spill out onto the street, attracting collectors and scroungers. According to a business writer, it also was the origin of the electronic component distribution business.\nDemolition.\nRadio Row was torn down in 1966 to make room for the World Trade Center. Five years earlier, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey rejected a proposal to build the new complex on the east side of Lower Manhattan's Financial District. Instead, officials chose a site on the west side, near Hudson Terminal, and began planning to use eminent domain to remove the shops in the area bounded by Vesey, Church, Liberty, and West streets.\nLocal opposition arose to the decision to raze the streets on the west side for the World Trade Center. Sam Slate reported on this for WCBS Radio in 1962:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The city also objected to the compensation given for the streets themselves obscured by the superblock.\nA committee of small business owners led by Oscar Nadel took exception to the Port Authority's offer of $30,000 to any business in the condemned area, regardless of its size or age. Nadel's group, who estimated that businesses in the area employed 30,000 people and generated $300 million per year, sued the Port Authority. But the court ultimately threw out the case, called \"Courtesy Sandwich Shop v. Port of New York Authority,\" in November 1963 \"for want of a substantial federal question\".\nAfter the closing of these stores, the concentration of radio retailers was not duplicated elsewhere in New York. Some clusters of radio and electronics stores were created or added to in the Canal Street and Union Square areas. A large black-and-white photo mural of Radio Row can be viewed at the PATH's World Trade Center station.\nOther meanings.\nBoston residences.\nIn 1923, \"The Boston Globe\" reported that a section of Boston's North End had been dubbed \"Radio Row\" because of its many radio antennas. \"The hurdy-gurdy has a rival,\" wrote the \"Globe\". \"No skyline anywhere else in the city or the suburbs is filled with so many antennae as the blocks stretching along some sections of Hanover and Salem sts. Many residents have three or four aerials\u2014one has six\u2014with wires leading down to receiving sets of all descriptions, in the homes of the foreign-born residents. It has all come about in a few months...All stairways lead to the roof, where [some residents] are arranging to rig up a loudspeaker, connected with instruments below. A survey of housetops...shows a whole population getting ready.\"\nCleveland stores.\nAccording to \"The Plain Dealer\" in 1928, a section of Downtown Cleveland along Prospect Ave. from East 4th to East 9th Street was known as \"Radio Row\" for its radio and electronic-goods shops.\nLos Angeles broadcasting.\nIn Los Angeles during the 1940s and 1950s, \"Radio Row\" referred to the area near the intersection of Sunset Boulevard and Vine Street in Hollywood, where all four major radio networks had broadcasting facilities.\nPhiladelphia stores.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, Philadelphia's Arch Street from 6th to 11th Streets was known as Radio Row, after its electronic-goods stores.\nMedia event broadcasting.\nRadio Row may also refer to a large grouping of sports talk radio stations that broadcast from the Super Bowl media center during the week before the annual major football game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe early computer hobbyists relied on surplus electronic parts.\nExternal links.\nMedia"}
{"id": "26185", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26185", "title": "Ralph Cudworth", "text": "English clergyman, theologian, philosopher, and Cambridge Platonist (1617\u20131688)\nRalph Cudworth (; 1617\u00a0\u2013 26 June 1688) was an English Anglican clergyman, Christian Hebraist, classicist, theologian and philosopher, and a leading figure among the Cambridge Platonists who became 11th Regius Professor of Hebrew (1645\u20131688), 26th Master of Clare Hall (1645\u20131654), and 14th Master of Christ's College (1654\u20131688). A leading opponent of Hobbes's political and philosophical views, his \"magnum opus\" was his \"The True Intellectual System of the Universe\" (1678).\nFamily background.\nCudworth's family reputedly originated in Cudworth (near Barnsley), Yorkshire, moving to Lancashire with the marriage (c.1377) of John de Cudworth (died 1384) and Margery (died 1384), daughter of Richard de Oldham (living 1354), lord of the manor of Werneth, Oldham. The Cudworths of Werneth Hall, Oldham, were lords of the manor of Werneth/Oldham, until 1683. Ralph Cudworth (the philosopher)'s father, Ralph Cudworth (Snr), was the posthumous-born second son of Ralph Cudworth (d.1572) of Werneth Hall, Oldham.\nThe philosopher's father, Ralph Cudworth (1572/73\u20131624), was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA (1592/93, MA (1596). Emmanuel College (founded by Sir Walter Mildmay (1584), and under the direction of its first Master, Laurence Chaderton) was, from its inception, a stronghold of Reformist, Puritan and Calvinist teaching, which shaped the development of puritan ministry, and contributed largely to the emigrant ministry in America. Ordained in 1599 and elected to a college fellowship by 1600, Cudworth Snr was much influenced by William Perkins, whom he succeeded, in 1602, as Lecturer of the Parish Church of St Andrew the Great, Cambridge. He was awarded the degree of Bachelor of Divinity in 1603. He edited Perkins's \"Commentary\" on St Paul's Epistle to the Galatians (1604), with a dedication to Robert, 3rd Lord Rich (later 1st Earl of Warwick), adding a commentary of his own with dedication to Sir Bassingbourn Gawdy. Lord Rich presented him to the Vicariate of Coggeshall, Essex (1606) to replace the deprived minister Thomas Stoughton, but he resigned this position (March 1608), and was licensed to preach from the pulpit by the Chancellor and Scholars of the University of Cambridge (November 1609). He then applied for the rectorate of Aller, Somerset (an Emmanuel College living) and, resigning his fellowship, was appointed to it in 1610.\nHis marriage (1611) to Mary Machell, (who had been \"nutrix\" \u2013 nurse, or preceptor \u2013 to Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales) brought important connections. Cudworth Snr was appointed as one of James I's chaplains. Mary's mother (or aunt) was the sister of Sir Edward Lewknor, a central figure (with the Jermyn and Heigham families) among the puritan East Anglian gentry, whose children had attended Emmanuel College. Mary's Lewknor and Machell connections with the Rich family included her first cousins Sir Nathaniel Rich and his sister Dame Margaret Wroth, wife of Sir Thomas Wroth of Petherton Park near Bridgwater, Somerset, influential promoters of colonial enterprise (and later of nonconformist emigration) in New England. Aller was immediately within their sphere.\nThe children of Ralph Cudworth Snr and Mary (n\u00e9e Machell) Cudworth were:\nCareer.\nEducation.\nThe second son, and third of five (probably six) children, Ralph Cudworth (Jnr) was born at Aller, Somerset, where he was baptised (13 July 1617). Following the death of his father, Ralph Cudworth Snr (1624), John Stoughton (1593\u20131639), (son of Thomas Stoughton of Coggeshall; also a Fellow of Emmanuel College), succeeded as Rector of Aller, and married the widow Mary (n\u00e9e Machell) Cudworth. Dr Stoughton paid careful attention to his stepchildren's education, which Ralph later described as a \"diet of Calvinism\". Letters, to Stoughton, by both brothers James and Ralph Cudworth make this plain; and, when Ralph matriculated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge (1632), Stoughton thought him \"as wel grounded in Scho[o]l-Learning as any Boy of his Age that went to the University\". Stoughton was appointed Curate and Preacher at St Mary Aldermanbury, London (1632), and the family left Aller. Ralph's elder brother, James Cudworth, married and emigrated to Scituate, Plymouth Colony, New England (1634). Mary Machell Cudworth Stoughton died during summer 1634, and Dr Stoughton married a daughter of John Browne of Frampton and Dorchester.\nPensioner, Student and Fellow of Emmanuel College (1630\u20131645).\nFrom a family background embedded in the early nonconformity and a diligent student, Cudworth was admitted (as a pensioner) to his father's old college, Emmanuel College, Cambridge (1630), matriculated (1632), and graduated (BA (1635/36); MA (1639)). After some misgivings (which he confided in his stepfather), he was elected a Fellow of Emmanuel (1639), and became a successful tutor, delivering the Rede Lecture (1641). He published a tract entitled \"The Union of Christ and the Church, in a Shadow\" (1642), and another, \"A Discourse concerning the True Notion of the Lord's Supper\" (1642), in which his readings of Karaite manuscripts (stimulated by meetings with Johann Stephan Rittangel) were influential.\n11th Regius Professor of Hebrew (1645) and 26th Master of Clare Hall (1645\u20131654).\nFollowing sustained correspondence with John Selden (to whom he supplied Karaite literature), he was elected (aged 28) as 11th Regius Professor of Hebrew (1645). In 1645, Thomas Paske had been ejected as Master of Clare Hall for his Anglican allegiances, and Cudworth (despite his immaturity) was selected as his successor, as 26th Master (but not admitted until 1650). Similarly, his fellow-theologian Benjamin Whichcote was installed as 19th Provost of King's College. Cudworth attained the degree of Bachelor of Divinity (1646), and preached a sermon before the House of Commons of England (on 1 John 2, 3\u20134), which was later published with a Letter of Dedication to the House (1647). Despite these distinctions and his presentation, by Emmanuel College, to the rectorate of North Cadbury, Somerset (3 October 1650), he remained comparatively impoverished. He was awarded the degree of Doctor of Divinity (1651), and, in January 1651/2, his friend Dr John Worthington wrote of him, \"If through want of maintenance he should be forced to leave Cambridge, for which place he is so eminently accomplished with what is noble and Exemplarily Academical, it would be an ill omen.\"\nMarriage (1654) and 14th Master of Christ's College (1654\u20131688).\nDespite his worsening sight, Cudworth was elected (29 October 1654) and admitted (2 November 1654), as 14th Master of Christ's College. His appointment coincided with his marriage to Damaris (died 1695), daughter (by his first wife, Damaris) of Matthew Cradock (died 1641), first Governor of the Massachusetts Bay Company. Hence Worthington commented \"After many tossings Dr Cudworth is through God's good Providence returned to Cambridge and settled in Christ's College, and by his marriage more settled and fixed.\"\nIn his Will (1641), Matthew Cradock had divided his estate beside the Mystic River at Medford, Massachusetts (which he had never visited, and was managed on his behalf) into two moieties: one was bequeathed to his daughter Damaris Cradock (died 1695), (later wife of Ralph Cudworth Jnr); and one was to be enjoyed by his widow Rebecca (during her lifetime), and afterwards to be inherited by his brother, Samuel Cradock (1583\u20131653), and his heirs male. Samuel Cradock's son, Samuel Cradock Jnr (1621\u20131706), was admitted to Emmanuel (1637), graduated (BA (1640\u20131); MA (1644); BD (1651)), was later a Fellow (1645\u201356), and pupil of Benjamin Whichcote's. After part of the Medford estate was rented to Edward Collins (1642), it was placed in the hands of an attorney; the widow Rebecca Cradock (whose second and third husbands were Richard Glover and Benjamin Whichcote, respectively), petitioned the General Court of Massachusetts, and the legatees later sold the estate to Collins (1652).\nThe marriage of the widow Rebecca Cradock to Cudworth's colleague Benjamin Whichcote laid the way for the union between Cudworth and her stepdaughter Damaris (died 1695), which reinforced the connections between the two scholars through a familial bond. Damaris had first married (1642) Thomas Andrewes Jnr (died 1653) of London and Feltham, son of Sir Thomas Andrewes (died 1659), (Lord Mayor of London, 1649, 1651\u20132), which union had produced several children. The Andrewes family were also engaged in the Massachusetts project, and strongly supported puritan causes.\nCommonwealth and Restoration.\nCudworth emerged as a central figure among that circle of theologians and philosophers known as the Cambridge Platonists, who were (more or less) in sympathy with the Commonwealth: during the later 1650s, Cudworth was consulted by John Thurloe, Oliver Cromwell's Secretary to the Council of State, with regard to certain university and government appointments and various other matters. During 1657, Cudworth advised Bulstrode Whitelocke's sub-committee of the Parliamentary \"Grand Committee for Religion\" on the accuracy of editions of the English Bible. Cudworth was appointed Vicar of Great Wilbraham, and Rector of Toft, Cambridgeshire Ely diocese (1656), but surrendered these livings (1661 and 1662, respectively) when he was presented, by Dr Gilbert Sheldon, Bishop of London, to the Hertfordshire Rectory of Ashwell (1 December 1662).\nGiven Cudworth's close cooperation with prominent figures in Oliver Cromwell's regime (such as John Thurloe), Cudworth's continuance as Master of Christ's was challenged at the Restoration but, ultimately, he retained this post until his death. He and his family are believed to have resided in private lodgings at the \"Old Lodge\" (which stood between Hobson Street and the College Chapel), and various improvements were made to the college rooms in his time. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1662.\nLater life.\nIn 1665, Cudworth almost quarrelled with his fellow-Platonist, Henry More, because of the latter's composition of an ethical work which Cudworth feared would interfere with his own long-contemplated treatise on the same subject. To avoid any difficulties, More published his \"Enchiridion ethicum\" (1666\u201369), in Latin; However, Cudworth's planned treatise was never published. His own majestic work, \"The True Intellectual System of the Universe\" (1678), was conceived in three parts of which only the first was completed; he wrote: \"there is no reason why this volume should therefore be thought imperfect and incomplete, because it hath not all the Three Things at first Designed by us: it containing all that belongeth to its own particular Title and Subject, and being in that respect no Piece, but a Whole.\"\nCudworth was installed as Prebendary of Gloucester (1678). His colleague, Benjamin Whichcote, died at Cudworth's house in Cambridge (1683), and Cudworth himself died (26 June 1688), and was buried in the Chapel of Christ's College. An oil portrait of Cudworth (from life) hangs in the Hall of Christ's College. During Cudworth's time an outdoor Swimming Pool was created at Christ's College (which still exists), and a carved bust of Cudworth there accompanies those of John Milton and Nicholas Saunderson.\nCudworth's widow, Damaris (n\u00e9e Cradock) Andrewes Cudworth (died 1695), maintained close connections with her daughter, Damaris Cudworth Masham, at High Laver, Essex, which was where she died, and was commemorated in the church with a carved epitaph reputedly composed by the philosopher John Locke.\nChildren.\nThe children of Ralph Cudworth and Damaris (n\u00e9e Cradock) Andrewes Cudworth were:\nThe stepchildren of Ralph Cudworth (children of Damaris (n\u00e9e Cradock) Andrewes and Thomas Andrewes) were:\nPhilosophy.\nCudworth was a member of the Cambridge Platonists, a group of English seventeenth-century thinkers associated with the University of Cambridge who were stimulated by Plato's teachings but also were aware of and influenced by Descartes, Hobbes, Bacon, Boyle and Spinoza.\nPlastic principle.\nThe role of nature was one faced by philosophers in the Age of Reason or Enlightenment. The prevailing view was either that of the Church of a personal deity intervening in his creation, producing miracles, or an ancient pantheism (atheism relative to theism) \u2013 deity pervading all things and existing in all things. However, the \"ideas of an all-embracing providential care of the world and of one universal vital force capable of organizing the world from within.\" presented difficulties for philosophers of a spiritual as well as materialistic bent.\nCudworth countered these mechanical, materialistic views of nature in his \"True intellectual system of the universe\" (1678), with the idea of 'the Plastick Life of Nature', a formative principle that contains both substance and the laws of motion, as well as a nisus or direction that accounts for design and goal in the natural world. He was stimulated by the Cartesian idea of the mind as self-consciousness to see God as consciousness. He first analysed four forms of atheism from ancient times to present, and showed that all misunderstood the principle of life and knowledge, which involved unsentient activity and self-consciousness, addressing the tension between theism and atheism, took both the Stoic idea of Divine Reason poured into the world, and the Platonic idea of the world soul (\"anima mundi\") to posit a power that was polaric \u2013 \"either as a ruling but separate mind or as an informing vital principle \u2013 either nous hypercosmios or nous enkosmios. According to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is in connection with the refutation of hylozoic atheism that he brings forward the celebrated hypothesis, which he held in common with More, of a plastic nature,\u2014a substance intermediate between matter and spirit,\u2014a power which prosecutes certain ends but not freely or intelligently,\u2014an instrument by which laws are able to act without the immediate agency of God\u00a0...\nAll of the atheistic approaches posited nature as unconscious, which for Cudworth was ontologically unsupportable, as a principle that was supposed to be the ultimate source of life and meaning could only be itself self-conscious and knowledgeable, that is, rational, otherwise creation or nature degenerates into inert matter set in motion by random external forces (Coleridge's 'chance whirlings of unproductive particles'). Cudworth saw nature as a vegetative power endowed with plastic (forming) and spermatic (generative) forces, but one with Mind, or a self-conscious knowledge. This idea would later emerge in the Romantic period in German science as Blumenbach's \"Bildungstreib\" (generative power) and the \"Lebenskraft\" (or \"Bildungskraft\"). Guido Giglioni writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0the life of the universe splits into two principles\u00a0\u2013 the one transcendent and intellectual (\u00ab an animalish, sentient and intellectual nature, or a conscious soul and mind, that presided over the whole world \u00bb), the other immanent and devoid of perception (\u00ab a certain plastic nature, or spermatic principle which was properly the fate of all things \u00bb)\nThe essence of atheism for Cudworth was the view that matter was self-active and self-sufficient, whereas for Cudworth the plastic power was unsentient and under the direct control of the universal Mind or \"Logos\". For him atheism, whether mechanical or material could not solve the \"phenomenon of nature.\" Henry More argued that atheism made each substance independent and self-acting such that it 'deified' matter. Cudworth argued that materialism/mechanism reduced \"substance to a corporeal entity, its activity to causal determinism, and each single thing to fleeting appearances in a system dominated by material necessity.\"\nCudworth had the idea of a general plastic nature of the world, containing natural laws to keep all of nature, inert and vital in orderly motion, and particular plastic natures in particular entities, which serve as 'Inward Principles' of growth and motion, but ascribes it to the Platonic tradition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Platonists seem to affirm both these together, namely that there is a Plastick Nature lodged in all particular Souls of Animals, Brutes, and Men, and also that there is a Plastick or Spermatick Principle of the whole Universe distinct from the Higher Mundane Soul, though subordinate to it. (Cudworth, TIS, p. 165)\nFurther, Cudsworth's plastic principle was also a functional polarity. As he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Seminary Reason or Plastick Nature of the Universe opposing the Parts to one another and making them severally Indigent, produces by that means War and Contention. And therefore though it be One, yet notwithstanding it consists of Different and Contrary things. For there being Hostility in its Parts, it is nevertheless Friendly and Agreeable in the Whole; after the same manner as in a Dramatick Poem, Clashings and Contentions are reconciled into one Harmony. And therefore the Seminary or Plastick Nature of the World, may fitly be resembled to the Harmony of Disagreeing things.\nAs another historian notes in conclusion, \"Cudworth's theory of plastic natures is offered as an alternative to the interpretation of all of nature as either governed by blind chance, or, on his understanding of the Malebranchean view, as micro-managed by God.\"\nPlastic principle and mind.\nCudworth's plastic principle also involves a theory of mind that is active, that is, God or the Supreme Mind is \"the spermatic reason\" which gives rise to individual mind and reason. Human mind can also create, and has access to spiritual or super-sensible 'Ideas' in the Platonic sense. Cudworth challenged Hobbesian determinism in arguing that will is not distinct from reason, but a power to act that is internal, and therefore, the voluntary will function involves self-determination, not external compulsion, though we have the power to act either in accordance with God's will or not. Cudworth's 'hegemonikon' (taken from Stoicism) is a function within the soul that combines the higher functions of the soul (voluntary will and reason) on the one hand with the lower animal functions (instinct), and also constitutes the whole person, thus bridging the Cartesian dualism of body and soul or \"psyche\" and \"soma\". This idea provided the basis for a concept of self-awareness and identity of an individual that is self-directed and autonomous, an idea that anticipates John Locke.\nViews on animals.\nCudworth rejected Ren\u00e9 Descartes' animal machine doctrine, which held that animals are mere automata devoid of consciousness. In contrast to Descartes' strict dualism, which limited subjective experience to rational, immaterial human souls, Cudworth argued that animals possess a form of soul marked by internal self-activity and sensibility. He maintained that living beings are distinguished from inanimate matter not only by rationality but also by their capacity for autonomous motion and subjective states. Though based on metaphysical premises not widely held today, Cudworth's account provided a moral and philosophical contrast to mechanistic interpretations of animal life and denied that animals should be regarded as mindless or morally insignificant.\nLegacy.\nLocke examined how man came to knowledge via stimulus (rather than seeing ideas as inherent), which approach led to his idea of the 'thinking' mind, which is both receptive and pro-active. The first involves receiving sensations ('simple ideas') and the second by reflection \u2013 \"observation of its own inner operations\" (inner sense which leads to complex ideas), with the second activity acting upon the first. Thought is set in motion by outer stimuli which 'simple ideas' are taken up by the mind's self-activity, an \"active power\" such that the outer world can only be real-ized as action (natural cause) by the activity of consciousness. Locke also took the issue of life as lying not in substance but in the capacity of the self for consciousness, to be able to organize (associate) disparate events, that is to participate life by means of the sense experiences, which have the capacity to produce every kind of experience in consciousness. These ideas of Locke were taken over by Fichte and influenced German Romantic science and medicine. (See Romantic medicine and Brunonian system of medicine).\nThomas Reid and his \"Common Sense\" philosophy, was also influenced by Cudworth, taking his influence into the Scottish Enlightenment.\nGeorge Berkeley later developed the idea of a plastic life principle with his idea of an 'aether' or 'aetherial medium' that causes 'vibrations' that animate all living beings. For Berkeley, it is the very nature of this medium that generates the 'attractions' of entities to each other.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The refraction of light is also thought to proceed from the different density and elastic force of this \u00e6thereal medium in different places. The vibrations of this medium, alternately concurring with or obstructing the motions of the rays of light, are supposed to produce the fits of easy reflection and transmission. Light by the vibrations of this medium is thought to communicate heat to bodies. Animal motion and sensation are also accounted for by the vibrating motions of this \u00e6thereal medium, propagated through the solid capillaments of the nerves. In a word, all the phenomena and properties of bodies that were before attributed to attraction, upon later thoughts seem ascribed to this \u00e6ther, together with the various attractions themselves. (Berkeley V 107\u20138)\nBerkeley meant this 'aether' to supplant Newton's gravity as the cause of motion (neither seeing the polarity involved between two forces, as Cudworth had in his plastic principle). However, in Berkeley's conception, aether is both the movement of spirit and the motion of nature.\nBoth Cudworth's views and those of Berkeley were taken up by Coleridge in his metaphor of the eolian harp in his 'Effusion XXXV' as one commentator noted: \"what we see in the first manuscript is the articulation of Cudworth's principle of plastic nature, which is then transformed in the published version into a Berkeleyan expression of the causal agency of motion performed by God's immanent activity.\"\nWorks.\nSermons and treatises.\nCudworth's works included \"The Union of Christ and the Church, in a Shadow\" (1642); \"A Sermon preached before the House of Commons\" (1647); and \"A Discourse concerning the True Notion of the Lord's Supper\" (1670). Much of Cudworth's work remains in manuscript. However, certain surviving works have been published posthumously, such as \"A Treatise concerning eternal and immutable Morality, and A Treatise of Freewill. \"\n\"A Treatise concerning eternal and immutable Morality\" (posth.).\nCudworth's \"Treatise on eternal and immutable Morality\", published with a preface by Edward Chandler (1731), is about the historical development of British moral philosophy. It answers, from the standpoint of Platonism, Hobbes's famous doctrine that moral distinctions are created by the state. It argues that just as knowledge contains a permanent intelligible element over and above the flux of sense-impressions, so there exist eternal and immutable ideas of morality.\n\"A Treatise of Freewill\" (posth.).\nAnother posthumous publication was Cudworth's \"A Treatise of Freewill\", edited by John Allen (1838). Both this and the \"Treatise on eternal and immutable Morality\" are connected with the design of his \"magnum opus\", \"The True Intellectual System of the Universe\".\n\"The True Intellectual System of the Universe\" (1678).\nIn 1678, Cudworth published \"The True Intellectual System of the Universe: the first part, wherein all the reason and philosophy of atheism is confuted and its impossibility demonstrated\", which had been given an Imprimatur for publication (29 May 1671).\nThe \"Intellectual System\" arose, according to Cudworth, from a discourse refuting \"fatal necessity\", or determinism. Enlarging his plan, he proposed to prove three matters:\nThese three comprise, collectively, the intellectual (as opposed to the physical) system of the universe; and they are opposed, respectively, by three false principles: atheism, religious fatalism (which refers all moral distinctions to the will of God), and the fatalism of the ancient Stoics (who recognized God and yet identified him with nature). Only the first part, dealing with atheism, was ever published.\nCudworth criticizes two main forms of materialistic atheism: the atomic (adopted by Democritus, Epicurus and Thomas Hobbes); and the hylozoic (attributed to Strato of Lampsacus, which explains everything by the supposition of an inward self-organizing life in matter). Atomic atheism, to which Cudworth devotes the larger part of the work, is described as arising from the combination of two principles, neither of which is, individually, atheistic (namely atomism and corporealism, or the doctrine that nothing exists but body). The example of Stoicism, Cudworth suggests, shows that corporealism may be theistic.\nCudworth discusses the history of atomism at length. It is, in its purely physical application, a theory that he fully accepts. He holds that theistic atomism was taught by Pythagoras, Empedocles and many other ancient philosophers, and was only perverted to atheism by Democritus. Cudworth believes that atomism was first invented before the Trojan War by a Sidonian thinker named Moschus or Mochus (whom he identifies with Moses in the Old Testament).\nCudworth's method in arranging his work was to marshal the atheistic arguments elaborately before refuting them in his final chapter. This led many readers to accuse Cudworth himself of atheism \u2013 as John Dryden remarked, \"he has raised such objections against the being of a God and Providence that many think he has not answered them\". Much attention was also attached to a subordinate matter in the book, the conception of the \"Plastic Medium\" (a revival of Plato's \"World-Soul\") which was intended to explain the existence and laws of nature without referring to the direct operation of God. This theory occasioned a long-drawn controversy between Pierre Bayle and Georges-Louis Leclerc, with the former maintaining, and the latter denying, that the Plastic Medium is favourable to atheism.\nSumming up the work, Andrew Dickson White wrote in 1896:\nTo this day he [Cudworth] remains, in breadth of scholarship, in strength of thought, in tolerance, and in honesty, one of the greatest glories of the English Church ... He purposed to build a fortress which should protect Christianity against all dangerous theories of the universe, ancient or modern ... While genius marked every part of it, features appeared which gave the rigidly orthodox serious misgivings. From the old theories of direct personal action on the universe by the Almighty he broke utterly. He dwelt on the action of law, rejected the continuous exercise of miraculous intervention, pointed out the fact that in the natural world there are \"errors\" and \"bungles\" and argued vigorously in favor of the origin and maintenance of the universe as a slow and gradual development of Nature in obedience to an inward principle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26186", "revid": "468882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26186", "title": "Roswell, New Mexico", "text": "Roswell ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Chaves County, New Mexico, United States. The population was 48,422 at the 2020 census, making it the fifth-most populous city in New Mexico. It is home to the New Mexico Military Institute (NMMI), founded in 1891. The city is also the location of an Eastern New Mexico University campus. Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge is located a few miles northeast of the city on the Pecos River. Bottomless Lakes State Park is located east of Roswell on US 380. Chaves County forms the entirety of the Roswell micropolitan area.\nThe Roswell incident was named after the town, though the crash site of the alleged UFO was some north of Roswell and closer to Corona. The investigation and debris recovery was handled by the local Roswell Army Air Field. On the 50th anniversary of the Roswell incident, an annual UFO Festival was started. In the 1930s, Roswell was a site for much of Robert H. Goddard's early rocketry work. The Roswell Museum and Art Center maintains an exhibit that includes a recreation of Goddard's rocket engine development workshop, and Goddard High School is named after him.\nRoswell's tourism industry is based on ufology museums and businesses, as well as alien-themed and spacecraft-themed iconography. The city also relies on New Mexico and Americana related tourism including the International UFO Museum and Research Center. Local American folk and New Mexico music performances occur near Pioneer Plaza and in parks around the city. It is a center for acequia-like irrigated farming, dairying, and ranching; it is also the location of several manufacturing, distribution, and petroleum related facilities. Roswell has a history of minor league baseball. This regional pride has resulted in Roswell receiving the All-America City Award multiple times, in 1978\u201379 and 2002.\nHistory.\nThe first settlers were a group of pioneers from Missouri, who attempted to start a settlement southwest of what is now Roswell in 1865, but were forced to abandon the site because of a lack of water. It was called Missouri Plaza. It also had many Hispanic people from Lincoln, New Mexico. John Chisum had his famous Jingle Bob Ranch about from the center of Roswell, at South Spring Acres. At the time, it was the largest ranch in the United States.\nVan C. Smith, a businessman from Omaha, Nebraska, and his partner, Aaron Wilburn, constructed two adobe buildings in 1869 that began what is now Roswell. The two buildings became the settlement's general store, post office, and sleeping quarters for paying guests. In 1871, Smith filed a claim with the federal government for the land around the buildings, and on August 20, 1873, he became the town's first postmaster. Smith was the son of Roswell Smith, a prominent lawyer in Lafayette, Indiana, and Annie Ellsworth, daughter of U.S. Patent Commissioner Henry Leavitt Ellsworth. He called the town Roswell, after his father's first name.\nIn 1877, Captain Joseph Calloway Lea and his family bought out Smith and Wilburn's claim and became the owners of most of the land of Roswell and the area surrounding it. The town was relatively quiet during the Lincoln County War (1877\u20131879). A major aquifer was discovered when merchant Nathan Jaffa had a well drilled in his back yard on Richardson Avenue in 1890, resulting in the area's first major growth and development spurt. The growth continued when the Pecos Valley Railroad arrived in 1892.\nDuring World War II, a prisoner-of-war camp was located in nearby Orchard Park. The German prisoners of war were used to do major infrastructure work in Roswell, such as paving the banks of the North Spring River. Some POWs used rocks of different sizes to create the outline of an iron cross among the stones covering the north bank. Later, the iron cross was covered with a thin layer of concrete. In the 1980s, a crew cleaning the river bed cleared off the concrete and revealed the outline once more. The small park just south of the cross was then known as Iron Cross Park. On November 11, 1996, the park was renamed POW/MIA Park. The park displays a piece of the Berlin Wall, presented to the city of Roswell by the German Air Force.\nRoswell was a location of military importance from 1941 to 1967. In 1967, the Walker Air Force Base was decommissioned. After the closure of the base, Roswell capitalized on its pleasant climate and reinvented itself as a retirement community.\nRoswell has benefited from interest in the alleged UFO incident of 1947. It was the report of an object that crashed in the general vicinity in June or July 1947, allegedly an extraterrestrial spacecraft and its alien occupants. Since the late 1970s, the incident has been the subject of intense controversy and of a conspiracy theory regarding a classified program named \"Project Mogul\". Many UFO proponents maintain that an alien craft was found and its occupants were captured, and that the military then engaged in a cover-up. In recent times, the business community has deliberately sought out tourists interested in UFOs, science fiction, and aliens.\nRoswell hosted the record-breaking skydive by Felix Baumgartner on October 14, 2012.\nGeography.\nRoswell is located in the High Great Plains of southeastern New Mexico, approximately west of the Pecos River and some east of highlands that rise to the Sierra Blanca range. U.S. Routes 70, 285 and 380 intersect in the city. US 70 leads northeast to Clovis and west to Alamogordo; US 285 leads north to Santa Fe and south to Carlsbad; and US 380 leads east to Brownfield, Texas, and west to Socorro.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, is land and , or 0.18%, is water.\nClimate.\nRoswell is located in both the High Plains and the Chihuahuan Desert and has four very distinct seasons, giving it a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. Winters are cool, but usually sunny, and snowfall can occur. Spring is mild and usually warm, but can still be cold on occasion. Summers are very hot (as is common with the High Plains of New Mexico and Colorado) and averages around 30 days per year when the temperature rises above , which can be unpleasant. The North American monsoon occurs during the summer, and can bring torrential downpours, severe thunderstorms (with high winds and hail) and sometimes even tornadoes. The rain can provide a cooling relief from the scorching great plains heat. Fall is usually warm and pleasant, but can be cold late in the season. Snow is possible generally from late October to March.\nThe record low in Roswell is on January 11, 1962, and February 8, 1933. The record high is on June 27, 1994.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 48,422 people, 17,929 households, and 11,844 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 20,220 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 54.8% White, 2.2% African American, 1.5% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 20.9% from some other races and 19.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 58.8% of the population. 26.0% of residents were under the age of 18, 6.6% were under 5 years of age, and 15.2% were 65 and older.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $48,298, and per capita income was $25,906 (2018\u20132022 in 2022 dollars). In 2022, 23.2% of the population were living below the poverty line.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 48,366 people, 17,654 households, and _ families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 19,743 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 69.9% White, 2.5% African American, 1.2% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 22.1% from some other races and 3.4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 53.4% of the population. 26.5% of residents were under the age of 18, _% were under 5 years of age, and 15.6% were 65 and older.\nEconomy.\nLeprino Foods, one of the world's largest mozzarella factories, is located here.\nTMC, Nova Bus, and then Millennium Transit Services, manufactured the RTS city bus in Roswell until 2012.\nArts and culture.\nRoswell's tourism industry is based on aerospace engineering and ufology museums and businesses, as well as alien-themed and spacecraft-themed iconography. A yearly UFO festival has been held since 1995.\nThe Roswell Museum maintains an exhibit that includes a recreation of Goddard's rocket engine development workshop, as well as a planetarium and a collection of fine art. The Roswell Artist-in-Residence program has an associated museum, the Anderson Museum of Contemporary Art which features more than 200 artists in the collection.\nSports.\nThe Roswell Invaders play in the Pecos League of professional baseball clubs. The Invaders wear lime-green uniforms to represent the city's extraterrestrial connections. Home games are played at the Joe Bauman Ballpark.\nPreviously, Roswell was home to the Roswell Giants (1923), Roswell Sunshiners (1937), Roswell Rockets (1949\u20131956), and Roswell Pirates (1959), who played in the Panhandle-Pecos Valley League (1923), West Texas-New Mexico League (1937), Longhorn League (1949\u20131955), Southwestern League (1956), and Sophomore League (1959).\nJoe Bauman hit a minor-league record 72 home runs for the 1954 Roswell Rockets, and Baseball Hall of Fame inductee Willie Stargell played for the 1959 Roswell Pirates. Roswell was an affiliate of the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1959.\nRoswell hosted the 2025 National Championship Air Races.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26188", "revid": "49552034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26188", "title": "Relativity", "text": "Relativity may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26189", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26189", "title": "Royal Oak Inn", "text": ""}
{"id": "26190", "revid": "14893258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26190", "title": "Riksdagen", "text": ""}
{"id": "26191", "revid": "39253661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26191", "title": "Red Sea", "text": "Arm of the Indian Ocean between Asia and Africa\nThe Red Sea is a sea inlet of the Indian Ocean, lying between Africa and Asia. Its connection to the ocean is in the south, through the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait and the Gulf of Aden. To its north lies the Sinai Peninsula, the Gulf of Aqaba, and the Gulf of Suez, which leads into to the Suez Canal. It is underlain by the Red Sea Rift, which is part of the Great Rift Valley.\nThe Red Sea has a surface area of roughly , is about long, and wide at its widest point. It has an average depth of , and in the central Suakin Trough, it reaches its maximum depth of .\nThe Red Sea is quite shallow, with approximately 40% at less than deep, and approximately 25% at less than deep. The extensive shallow shelves are noted for their marine life and corals. More than 1,000 invertebrate species and 200 types of soft and hard coral live in the sea. The Red Sea is the world's northernmost tropical sea and has been designated a Global 200 ecoregion.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Red Sea as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"On the North.\" The Southern limits of the Gulfs of Suez [A line running from R\u00e0s Muhammed (27\u00b043'N) to the South point of Shadwan Island (34\u00b002'E) and thence Westward on a parallel (27\u00b027'N) to the coast of Africa] and Aqaba [A line running from R\u00e0s al Fasma Southwesterly to Requin Island () through Tiran Island to the Southwest point thereof and thence Westward on a parallel (27\u00b054'N) to the coast of the Sinai Peninsula].\n\"On the South.\" A line joining Husn Murad () and Ras Siyyan ().\nExclusive economic zone.\nExclusive economic zones in Red Sea:\nNote: Hala'ib Triangle disputed between Sudan and Egypt and calculated for both.\nName.\nRed Sea has names in many languages of the region:\nThe English term \"Red Sea\" is a direct translation of the Ancient Greek \"Erythr\u00e0 Th\u00e1lassa\" (). The sea itself was once referred to as the Erythraean Sea by Europeans. As well as \"Mare Rubrum\" in Latin (alternatively \"Sinus Arabicus\", literally \"Arabian Gulf\"), the Romans called it \"Pontus Herculis\" (Sea of Hercules). Other designations include the Arabic (alternatively ); the Coptic ; the Syriac ; the Somali ; and the Tigrinya . The name of the sea may signify the seasonal blooms of the red-coloured \"Trichodesmium erythraeum\" near the water's surface. A theory favored by some modern scholars is that the name \"red\" refers to the direction south, just as the Black Sea's name may refer to the north. The basis of this theory is that some Asiatic languages used color words to refer to the cardinal directions. Herodotus on one occasion uses the Red Sea and Southern Sea interchangeably.\nThe name \"Yam Suph\" () is of biblical origin.\nThe name in Coptic \"Phiom Enhah\" (\"Sea of Hah\") is connected to the Ancient Egyptian root \"\u1e25-\u1e25\" which refers to water and sea (for example the names of the Ogdoad gods Heh and Hauhet).\nHistorically, it was also known to western geographers as \"Mare Mecca\" (Sea of Mecca), and \"Sinus Arabicus\" (Gulf of Arabia). Some ancient geographers called the Red Sea the Arabian Gulf or the Gulf of Arabia.\nThe association of the Red Sea with the biblical account of the Israelites crossing the Red Sea is ancient. It was made explicit in the Septuagint translation of the Book of Exodus from Hebrew to Koine Greek in approximately the third century BC. In that version, the \"Yam Suph\" () is translated as \"Erythra Thalassa\" (Red Sea).\nThe Red Sea is one of four seas named in English after common colours \u2013 the others being the Black Sea, the White Sea and the Yellow Sea. The direct rendition of the Greek \"Erythra thalassa\" in Latin as Mare Erythraeum refers to the north-western part of the Indian Ocean, and also to a region on Mars.\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nThe earliest known exploration of the Red Sea was conducted by ancient Egyptians, as they attempted to establish commercial routes to Punt. One such expedition took place around 2500\u00a0BC, and another around 1500\u00a0BC (by Hatshepsut). Both involved long voyages down the Red Sea.\nThe biblical Book of Exodus tells the story of the Israelites' crossing of the sea, which the Hebrew text calls \"Yam Suph\" (). \"Yam Suph\" was traditionally identified as the Red Sea. Rabbi Saadia Gaon (882\u2012942), in his Judeo-Arabic translation of the Pentateuch, identifies the crossing place of the Red Sea as \"Ba\u1e25ar al-Qulzum\", meaning the Gulf of Suez.\nIn the 6th century BC, Darius the Great, who was a prominent ruler of the Achaemenid Empire in Persia, undertook significant efforts to improve and extend navigation in the Red Sea. He sent reconnaissance missions to explore the Red Sea area and to identify its various navigational hazards, such as rocks and currents. This effort was significant, as it contributed to safer and more efficient navigation routes.\nIn addition to the maritime explorations, during the reign of Darius the Great, a canal was constructed linking the Nile River to the northern end of the Red Sea at Suez. This canal is sometimes referred to as the ancient Suez Canal. It played a pivotal role in improving trade and communication between the Nile Valley and the Red Sea, and beyond to the Indian Ocean. This canal was a predecessor to the modern Suez Canal, which was constructed in the 19th century and continues to be one of the world's most important waterways.\nThe construction of the canal during Darius's reign is evidenced by ancient records, including inscriptions. Darius commemorated the completion of the canal by creating stelae (stone monuments) with inscriptions in several languages, describing the construction and its benefits. The canal not only facilitated trade but also solidified Darius's control over Egypt and enhanced the Achaemenid Empire's economic and political power in the region.\nIn the late 4th century BC, Alexander the Great sent Greek naval expeditions down the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean. Greek navigators continued to explore and compile data on the Red Sea. Agatharchides collected information about the sea in the 2nd century BC. The \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\" (\"Periplus of the Red Sea\"), a Greek periplus written by an unknown author around the 1st century, contains a detailed description of the Red Sea's ports and sea routes. The Periplus also describes how Hippalus first discovered the direct route from the Red Sea to India.\nThe Red Sea was favored for Roman trade with India starting with the reign of Augustus, when the Roman Empire gained control over the Mediterranean, Egypt, and the northern Red Sea. The route had been used by previous states but grew in the volume of traffic under the Romans. From Indian ports goods from China were introduced to the Roman world. Contact between Rome and China depended on the Red Sea, but the route was broken by the Aksumite Empire around the 3rd century AD.\nFrom antiquity until the 20th century, the Red Sea was also a trade route for the Red Sea slave trade from Africa to the Middle East.\nMiddle Ages and modern era.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Red Sea was an important part of the spice trade route. In 1183, Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon launched a raid down the Red Sea to attack the Muslim pilgrim convoys to Mecca. The possibility that Raynald's fleet might sack the holy cities of Mecca and Medina caused fury throughout the Muslim world. However, it appears that Raynald's target was the lightly armed Muslim pilgrim convoys, rather than the well-guarded cities of Mecca and Medina, and the belief in the Muslim world that Raynald was seeking to sack the holy cities, due to the proximity of those cities to the areas that Raynald raided.\nIn 1513, trying to secure that channel to Portugal, Afonso de Albuquerque laid siege to Aden but was forced to retreat. They cruised the Red Sea inside the Bab al-Mandab, as the first fleet from Europe in modern times to have sailed these waters. Later in 1524, the city was delivered to Governor Heitor da Silveira as an agreement for protection from the Ottomans.\nIn 1798, France ordered General Napoleon to invade Egypt and take control of the Red Sea. Although he failed in his mission, the engineer Jean-Baptiste Lep\u00e8re, who took part in it, revitalised the plan for a canal which had been envisaged during the reign of the Pharaohs. Several canals were built in ancient times from the Nile to the Red Sea along or near the line of the present Sweet Water Canal, but none lasted for long. The Suez Canal was opened in November 1869. During the first half of the 20th century, the Red Sea slave trade attracted substantial international condemnation.\nAfter the Second World War, the Americans and Soviets exerted their influence whilst the volume of oil tanker traffic intensified. However, the Six-Day War culminated in the closure of the Suez Canal from 1967 to 1975. Today, despite the patrols by the major maritime fleets in the waters of the Red Sea, the Suez Canal has never recovered its supremacy over the Cape route, which is believed to be less vulnerable to piracy.\nRed Sea crisis.\nIranian-backed Yemini Houthis have attacked Western ships, including warships, next to the Bab al-Mandeb during the Gaza war. One ship was hijacked and taken back to Yemen.\nOceanography.\nThe Red Sea is between arid land, desert and semi-desert. Many regions of the coastal zone of the Red Sea possess large areas of vigorously growing coral and extensive reef complexes. Due to the tidal currents, low human population and the minimal development in this climatically inhospitable region, the Red Sea coral reefs are some of the healthiest reef environments in the world. The Red Sea water mass-exchanges its water with the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean via the Gulf of Aden. These physical factors reduce the effect of high salinity caused by evaporation in the north and relatively hot water in the south.\nThe climate of the Red Sea is the result of two monsoon seasons: a northeasterly monsoon and a southwesterly monsoon. Monsoon winds occur because of differential heating between the land and the sea. Very high surface temperatures and high salinity make this one of the warmest and saltiest bodies of seawater in the world. The average surface water temperature of the Red Sea during the summer is about in the north and in the south, with only about variation during the winter months. The overall average water temperature is . Temperature and visibility remain good to around . The sea is known for its strong winds and unpredictable local currents.\nThe rainfall over the Red Sea and its coasts is extremely low, averaging per year. The rain is mostly short showers, often with thunderstorms and occasionally with dust storms. The scarcity of rainfall and no major source of fresh water to the Red Sea result in excess evaporation as high as per year and high salinity with minimal seasonal variation. A recent underwater expedition to the Red Sea offshore from Sudan and Eritrea found surface water temperatures in winter and up to in the summer, but despite that extreme heat, the coral was healthy with much fish life with very little sign of coral bleaching, with only 9% infected by \"Thalassomonas loyana\", the 'white plague' agent. \"Favia favus\" coral there harbours a virus, BA3, which kills \"T.\u00a0loyana\".\nScientists are investigating the unique properties of these coral and their commensal algae to see if they can be used to salvage bleached coral elsewhere.\nSalinity.\nThe Red Sea is one of the saltiest bodies of water in the world, owing to high evaporation and low precipitation; no significant rivers or streams drain into the sea, and its southern connection to the Gulf of Aden, an arm of the Indian Ocean, is narrow. Its salinity ranges from between ~36\u00a0\u2030 in the southern part and 41\u00a0\u2030 in the northern part around the Gulf of Suez, with an average of 40\u00a0\u2030. (Average salinity for the world's seawater is ~35\u00a0\u2030 on the Practical Salinity Scale, or PSU; that translates to 3.5% of actual dissolved salts).\nTidal range.\nIn general, tide ranges between in the north, near the mouth of the Gulf of Suez and in the south near the Gulf of Aden, but it fluctuates between and away from the nodal point. The central Red Sea (Jeddah area) is therefore almost tideless, and as such the annual water level changes are more significant. Because of the small tidal range, the water during high tide inundates the coastal sabkhas as a thin sheet of water up to a few hundred metres rather than flooding the sabkhas through a network of channels. However, south of Jeddah in the Shoiaba area, the water from the lagoon may cover the adjoining sabkhas as far as , whereas north of Jeddah in the Al-Kharrar area the sabkhas are covered by a thin sheet of water as far as . The prevailing north and northeast winds influence the movement of water in the coastal inlets to the adjacent sabkhas, especially during storms. Winter mean sea level is higher than in summer. Tidal velocities passing through constrictions caused by reefs, sand bars and low islands commonly exceed . Coral reefs in the Red Sea are near Egypt, Eritrea, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan.\nCurrent.\nDetailed information regarding current data is lacking, partially because the currents are weak and both spatially and temporally variable. The variation of temporal and spatial currents is as low as and is governed all by the wind. During the summer, northwesterly winds drive surface water south for about four months at a velocity of , whereas in winter the flow is reversed, resulting in the inflow of water from the Gulf of Aden into the Red Sea. The net value of the latter predominates, resulting in an overall drift to the north end of the Red Sea. Generally, the velocity of the tidal current is with a maximum of at the mouth of the al-Kharrar Lagoon. However, the range of the north-northeast current along the Saudi coast is .\nWind regime.\nThe northern part of the Red Sea is dominated by persistent north-west winds, with speeds ranging between and . The rest of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden are subjected to regular and seasonally reversible winds. The wind regime is characterized by seasonal and regional variations in speed and direction with average speed generally increasing northward.\nThe wind is the driving force in the Red Sea to transport material as suspension or as bedload. Wind-induced currents play an important role in the Red Sea in resuspending bottom sediments and transferring materials from sites of dumping to sites of burial in a quiescent environment of deposition. Wind-generated current measurement is therefore important to determine the sediment dispersal pattern and its role in the erosion and accretion of the coastal rock exposure and the submerged coral beds.\nGeology.\nThe Red Sea was formed by the Arabian Peninsula being split from the Horn of Africa by the movement of the Red Sea Rift. This split started in the Eocene and accelerated during the Oligocene. The sea is still widening (in 2005, following a three weeks of tectonic activity it had grown by ), and it is considered that it will become an ocean in time (as proposed in the model of John Tuzo Wilson). In 1949, a deep water survey reported anomalously hot brines in the central portion of the Red Sea. Later work in the 1960s confirmed the presence of hot, , saline brines and associated metalliferous muds. The hot solutions were emanating from an active subseafloor rift. Lake Asal in Djibouti is eligible as an experimental site to study the evolution of the deep hot brines of the Red Sea. By observing the strontium isotope composition of the Red Sea brines, it is possible to deduce how these salt waters found at the bottom of the Red Sea could have evolved in a similar way to Lake Asal, which ideally represents their compositional extreme. The high salinity of the waters was not hospitable to living organisms.\nSometime during the Tertiary, the Bab el Mandeb closed and the Red Sea evaporated to an empty hot dry salt-floored sink. Effects causing this would have been:\nSeveral volcanic islands rise from the center of the sea. Most are dormant. However, in 2007, Jabal al-Tair island in the Bab el Mandeb strait erupted violently. Two new islands were formed in 2011 and 2013 in the Zubair Archipelago, a small chain of islands owned by Yemen. The first island, Sholan Island, emerged in an eruption in December 2011, and the second island, Jadid, emerged in September 2013. Approximately 40% of the Red Sea is quite shallow at less than deep, with about 25% less than deep.\nOil and gas.\nUndiscovered oil reserves in the region have been estimated at . Undiscovered gas reserves in the region have been estimated at . Undiscovered natural gas reserves have been estimated at . Most of these plays are controlled by the structure of the basin. Normal faults are common as the Red Sea occupies an active diverging margin. These targets are commonly found below the Salt deposits of the Middle Miocene.\nModern development is focused on the following fields. The Durwara 2 Field was discovered in 1963, while the Suakin 1 Field and the Bashayer 1A Field were discovered in 1976, on the Egyptian side of the Red Sea. The Barqan Field was discovered in 1969, and the Midyan Field in 1992, both within the Midyan Basin on the Saudi Arabian side of the Red Sea. The 20-m thick Middle Miocene Maqna Formation is an oil source rock in the basin. Oil seeps occur near the Farasan Islands, the Dahlak Archipelago, along the coast of Eritrea, and in the southeastern Red Sea along the coasts of Saudi Arabia and Yemen.\nMineral resources.\nIn terms of mineral resources the major constituents of the Red Sea sediments are as follows:\n Nanofossils, foraminifera, pteropods, siliceous fossils\nTuffites, volcanic ash, montmorillonite, cristobalite, zeolites\n Quartz, feldspars, rock fragments, mica, heavy minerals, clay minerals\n Sulfide minerals, aragonite, calcite, protodolomite, dolomite, quartz, chalcedony\n Magnesite, gypsum, anhydrite, halite, polyhalite\n Fe-montmorillonite, goethite, hematite, siderite, rhodochrosite, pyrite, sphalerite, anhydrite\nEcosystem.\nThe Red Sea is a rich and diverse ecosystem. For example, more than 1200 fish species have been recorded in the Red Sea, of which 10% are endemic, found nowhere else.\nSince the opening of the Suez Canal in November 1869, over a thousand marine species from the Red Sea\u2014from plankton, seaweeds, invertebrates to fishes\u2014have migrated northward and settled in the Mediterranean Sea. To the point that a number of them now form a significant component of the Mediterranean ecosystem. The resulting change in biodiversity, without precedent in human memory, is currently accelerating, in particular for fishes according to surveys engaged by the Mediterranean Science Commission.\nThe rich diversity of the Red Sea is in part due to the of coral reef extending along its coastline; these fringing reefs are 5000\u20137000 years old and are largely formed of stony acropora and porite corals. The reefs form platforms and sometimes lagoons along the coast and occasionally other features such as cylinders (such as the Blue Hole (Red Sea) at Dahab).\nThe Red Sea also hosts many offshore reefs, including several true atolls. Many of the unusual offshore reef formations defy classic (i.e., Darwinian) coral reef classification schemes, and are generally attributed to the high levels of tectonic activity that characterize the area. Both offshore and coastal reefs are visited by pelagic species of fish, including many of the 44 recorded species of shark, and by many species (over 175) of nudibranch, many of which are endemic to the Red Sea. Other coastal Red Sea habitats include seagrass beds, salt pans, mangroves and salt marshes. Furthermore, the deep Red Sea brine pools have been extensively studied about their microbial life, characterized by their diversity and adaptation to extreme environments.\nThe high marine biodiversity of the area is recognized by the Egyptian government, which set up the Ras Mohammed National Park in 1983. The rules and regulations governing this area protect local marine life. Ras Mohammed is one of the world's top 10 sites recognized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature for effective management of marine ecosystems, and the first marine protected area in Africa and in the Middle East region.\nDue to the high volume of maritime traffic, carrying 12\u201315% of global trade, the Red Sea is considered highly vulnerable to marine pollution, particularly oil spills. Academic literature has increasingly focused on both past disasters and predictive modelling. Studies have modelled spill trajectories and their environmental consequences. Others have analysed the ecological impact of spills on coral reefs and marine biodiversity and assessed how chemical dispersants and specific oil compounds affect marine fauna and coastal ecosystems. Public health literature has raised concerns over the spill's impact on respiratory illness and waterborne contamination in coastal populations.\nList of fauna species found in the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba.\nThe Red Sea is home to a plethora of wildlife, as mentioned earlier. Let's cover them all, including the rare species:\nDesalination plants.\nThere is extensive demand for desalinated water to meet the needs of the population and the industries along the Red Sea.\nThere are at least 18 desalination plants along the Red Sea coast of Saudi Arabia which discharge warm brine and treatment chemicals (chlorine and anti-scalants) that bleach and kill corals and cause diseases in the fish. This is only localized, but it may intensify with time and profoundly impact the fishing industry.\nTrade.\nThe Red Sea serves an important role in the global economy, with cargo vessels traveling between the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea every year, thus shortening the path between Asia and Europe almost by half (as compared to traveling around Africa via the Atlantic Ocean). 12% of global trade passes through the Red Sea. This includes 30% of global container traffic.\nTourism.\nThe sea is known for its recreational diving sites, such as Ras Mohammed, SS Thistlegorm (shipwreck), Elphinstone Reef, The Brothers, Daedalus Reef, St. John's Reef, Rocky Island in Egypt and less known sites in Sudan such as Sanganeb, Abington, Angarosh and Shaab Rumi.\nThe Red Sea became a popular destination for diving after the expeditions of Hans Hass in the 1950s, and later by Jacques-Yves Cousteau. Popular tourist resorts include El Gouna, Hurghada, Safaga and Marsa Alam, on the west shore of the Red Sea, and Sharm-el-Sheikh, Dahab, and Taba on the Egyptian side of Sina\u00ef, as well as Aqaba in Jordan and Eilat in Israel in an area known as the Red Sea Riviera.\nThe popular tourist beach of Sharm el-Sheikh was closed to all swimming in December 2010 due to several serious shark attacks, including a fatality. As of December 2010, scientists are investigating the attacks and have identified, but not verified, several possible causes including overfishing which causes large sharks to hunt closer to shore, tourist boat operators who chum offshore for shark-photo opportunities, and reports of ships throwing dead livestock overboard. The sea's narrowness, significant depth, and sharp drop-offs, all combine to form a geography where large deep-water sharks can roam in hundreds of meters of water, yet be within a hundred meters of swimming areas. The Red Sea Project is building the highest quality accommodation and a wide range of facilities on the coastline in Saudi Arabia. This will allow people to visit the coastline of the Red Sea by the end of 2022 but will be fully finished by 2030.\nTourism to the region has been threatened by occasional terrorist attacks, and by incidents related to food safety standards.\nSecurity.\nThe Red Sea is part of the sea roads between Europe, the Persian Gulf and East Asia, and as such has heavy shipping traffic. Government-related bodies responsible for policing the Red Sea area include the Port Said Port Authority, the Suez Canal Authority and the Red Sea Ports Authority of Egypt, the Jordan Maritime Authority, the Israel Port Authority, the Saudi Ports Authority and the Sea Ports Corporation of Sudan.\nHouthi rebels in Yemen have increased attacks on shipping vessels since mid-November 2023. The blocking of Israeli-linked ships was in response to Israel's war on Gaza. In January 2024, it was reported that Red Sea shipping volumes had dropped to 30% of normal levels due to Houthi intervention. In response, the US has announced a maritime coalition to defend shipping in the Red Sea for the Operation Prosperity Guardian. In addition to the U.S.-led efforts, the European Union launched Operation Aspides in February 2024 to provide naval escorts and protect commercial shipping in the Red Sea. In January 2025, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 2768, calling for an end to Houthi attacks and demanding the release of detained crew from seized vessels.\nBeyond inter-state conflict, the Red Sea region is also shaped by non-traditional security threats, including piracy, illicit trafficking, and 'blue crime' \u2013 a convergence of arms smuggling, illegal fishing, and maritime terrorism within governance gaps. Recent academic assessments highlight the role of 'shadow fleets', unregistered or covert vessels often linked to Iranian or Russian interests, which operate in the Red Sea to evade sanctions and transport illicit goods, including oil, weapons, and narcotics. While international attention has largely focused on missile and drone attacks, scholars also warn of critical infrastructure vulnerabilities, including damage to undersea cables caused by bottom trawling and sabotage.\nBordering countries.\nThe Red Sea may be geographically divided into three sections: the Red Sea proper, and in the north, the Gulf of Aqaba and the Gulf of Suez. The six countries bordering the Red Sea proper are:\nThe Gulf of Suez is entirely bordered by Egypt. The Gulf of Aqaba borders Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.\nIn addition to the standard geographical definition of the six countries bordering the Red Sea cited above, areas such as Somalia are sometimes also described as Red Sea territories. This is primarily due to their proximity to and geological similarities with the nations facing the Red Sea and/or political ties with them.\nTowns and cities.\nTowns and cities on the Red Sea coast (including the coasts of the Gulfs of Aqaba and Suez) include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26192", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26192", "title": "Josh Kirby", "text": "British writer and illustrator\nRonald William \"Josh\" Kirby (27 November 1928 \u2013 23 October 2001) was a British commercial artist. Over a career spanning 60 years, he was the artist for the covers of many science fiction books including Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" novels.\nPersonal life.\nHe was born on 27 November 1928 at 58 Argo Road, Waterloo, Lancashire. His parents were Charles William and Ellen (n\u00e9e Marsh) Kirby who ran a grocery shop together, although his father was also a ship owner's freight clerk. They named him Ronald William Kirby.\nKirby dreamed of a career in art from a young age. When he was seven, he made a trade sign that said \"KIRBY \u2013 ARTIST\". He was also attracted to science fiction and fantasy from images seen in films and magazines.\nAt the beginning of the Second World War, his school was evacuated to Abercraf in South Wales. In 1943, he returned to Liverpool and attended the Junior then Senior Schools of the Liverpool City School of Art from the age of 14 until he was 20. He was trained in drawing, painting and lithography. While he was there, his Old Master-style portraits earned him the nickname \"Josh\" when colleagues likened his work to that of the painter Sir Joshua Reynolds. The nickname stuck. He also met the model June Furlong in 1948 and they remained lifelong friends.\nHe moved to London in 1950. In 1965, he married Dianne Kingston and moved to The Old Rectory, Shelfanger, near Diss in Norfolk. He lived and worked there, in a cramped studio, until his death.\nKirby and Kingston divorced in 1982. He died of natural causes in his sleep at home in Shelfanger at the age of 72 on 23 October 2001 and was survived by his brother Len and two nephews.\nIn 2024, his family were looking for a philanthropist to support the conservation and exhibition of his body of work, around 400 finished paintings and several hundred sketches.\nCareer.\nHe worked as freelance all his career, having left his only employment after half a day.\nAfter leaving art school, Liverpool City Council commissioned him to paint the Lord Mayor, Alderman Joseph Jackson Cleary, in 1950. Kirby carried out the commission but decided against portraiture as a career and turned to illustration for film posters and books.\nIn the early 1950s, Kirby illustrated film posters for studios in both London and Paris and continued to do some film posters until the 1980s. In the 1970s, he undertook film poster art for publicity agency feref. Working alongside designer Eddie Paul, Kirby depicted the characters for Star Wars: \"Return of the Jedi;\" films \"The Beastmaster\" and \"Krull\", among others. He also designed a poster for \"The Life of Brian\" inspired by Pieter Brueghel's Tower Of Babel, but it was not used.\nWhen the market for film poster illustration dried up in the mid 1980s, Kirby switched his attention to role-playing games. He provided cover art for \"Duelmasters\", \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" and \"Wizards &amp; Warriors.\"\nHowever, Kirby's major output between the late 1950s to the 1980s was artwork for book covers for a very wide range of books including westerns, crime novels, science fiction and non-fiction, as well as covers and interior art for science fiction magazines. His first published book cover art was for the 1955 science fiction novel \"Cee-Tee Man\", by Dan Morgan. In 1956, he created a cover for Ian Fleming's book \"Moonraker\". Working for publishers including Panther, Corgi, Four Square and NEL/Mayflower, he illustrated over 400 covers for authors including Brian Aldiss, Isaac Asimov, Ray Bradbury, Stephen Briggs, Edgar Rice Burroughs, Craig Shaw Gardner, Ron Goulart, Robert Heinlein, Alfred Hitchcock, Jack Kerouac, Ursula Le Guin, Richard Matheson, Guy de Maupassant, Terry Pratchett, Robert Rankin, Jimmy Sangster, Jules Verne, and H. G. Wells.\nKirby's most significant work in the 1980s was the covers for the \"Discworld\" series, a commission that Kirby thought would be a \"one-off\". Starting with \"The Colour of Magic\", he eventually produced the covers for 26 of the series until his death in 2001. Upon his passing, his successor Paul Kidby painted a portrait of Kirby into the cover art of the novel \"Night Watch\", in tribute to the artist.\nStyle.\nThroughout his career, Kirby used oils, acrylics, gouache, or watercolor, often using more than one method on a single piece. Ultimately, he preferred oils as they would not dry too quickly and could be manipulated and applied in layers. This allowed them to be retouched or entirely painted over, whatever it took to achieve the result.\nWhen asked about influences, he most often named three past artists. The oldest was Hieronymus Bosch, famous for his fantastic imagery, detailed landscapes and illustrations of religious concepts and narratives; next was Pieter Bruegel, whose religious and mythological depictions expanded the viewer's perspective of reality; and finally muralist Frank Brangwyn, an avant-garde artist-craftsman notable for his boldly coloured murals.\nKirby worked slowly and meticulously. It would take him four to eight weeks to complete a single painting because his process included reading each novel before illustrating it. He would then draw a rough sketch in pencil to be approved by the art editor at the publisher. Unusually, he discussed the concept directly over the phone with Pratchett, rather than his publisher's art director.\nCollections.\nCollections of his work include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26193", "revid": "29160428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26193", "title": "Roger Penrose", "text": "English mathematician, mathematical physicist (born 1931)\nSir Roger Penrose (born 8 August 1931) is an English mathematician, mathematical physicist, philosopher of science and Nobel Laureate in Physics. He is Emeritus Rouse Ball Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford, an emeritus fellow of Wadham College, Oxford, and an honorary fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and University College London.\nPenrose has contributed to the mathematical physics of general relativity and cosmology. He won the Royal Society Science Books Prize for \"The Emperor's New Mind\" (1989), which outlines his views on physics and consciousness. He followed it with \"The Road to Reality\" (2004), billed as \"A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe\". He shared the 1988 Wolf Prize in Physics with Stephen Hawking for the Penrose\u2013Hawking singularity theorems, and the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics with Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez \"for the discovery that black hole formation is a robust prediction of the general theory of relativity\".\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Colchester, Essex, Roger Penrose is a son of Margaret (n\u00e9e Leathes), a physician, and Lionel Penrose, a psychiatrist and geneticist. His paternal grandparents were J. Doyle Penrose, an Irish-born painter, and The Hon. Elizabeth Josephine Peckover, daughter of Alexander Peckover, 1st Baron Peckover; his maternal grandparents were John Beresford Leathes, a physiologist, and Sonia Marie Natanson, a Russian Jew. His uncle was the artist Sir Roland Penrose, whose son with the American photographer Lee Miller is Antony Penrose. Penrose is the brother of the physicist Oliver Penrose, of the geneticist Shirley Hodgson and of the chess grandmaster Jonathan Penrose. Their stepfather was the mathematician and computer scientist Max Newman.\nPenrose spent the Second World War as a child in Canada where his father worked in London, Ontario, at the Ontario Hospital and Western University. Penrose studied at University College School. He then attended University College London, where he obtained a BSc degree with First Class Honours in mathematics in 1952.\nIn 1955, while a doctoral student, Penrose reintroduced the E. H. Moore generalised matrix inverse, also known as the Moore\u2013Penrose inverse, after it had been reinvented by Arne Bjerhammar in 1951. Having started research under the professor of geometry and astronomy W. V. D. Hodge, Penrose received his PhD in algebraic geometry at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1957, with his thesis titled \"Tensor Methods in Algebraic Geometry\" supervised by the algebraist and geometer John A. Todd. He devised and popularised the Penrose triangle in the 1950s in collaboration with his father, describing it as \"impossibility in its purest form\", and exchanged material with the artist M. C. Escher, whose earlier depictions of impossible objects partly inspired it. Escher's \"Waterfall\" and \"Ascending and Descending\" were in turn inspired by Penrose.\nAs the reviewer Manjit Kumar puts it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a student in 1954, Penrose was attending a conference in Amsterdam when by chance he came across an exhibition of Escher's work. Soon he was trying to conjure up impossible figures of his own and discovered the tribar \u2013 a triangle that looks like a real, solid three-dimensional object, but isn't. Together with his father, a physicist and mathematician, Penrose went on to design a staircase that simultaneously loops up and down. An article followed and a copy was sent to Escher. Completing a cyclical flow of creativity, the Dutch master of geometrical illusions was inspired to produce his two masterpieces.\nResearch and career.\nPenrose spent the academic year 1956\u201357 as an assistant lecturer at Bedford College (now Royal Holloway, University of London) and was then a research fellow at St John's College, Cambridge. During that three-year post, he married Joan Isabel Wedge, in 1959. Before the fellowship ended Penrose won a NATO Research Fellowship for 1959\u201361, first at Princeton University and then at Syracuse University. Returning to the University of London, Penrose spent 1961\u20131963 as a researcher at King's College, London, before returning to the United States to spend 1963\u201364 as a visiting associate professor at the University of Texas at Austin. He later held visiting positions at Yeshiva University, Princeton and Cornell University during 1966\u201367 and 1969.\nIn 1964, while a reader at Birkbeck College, London, (and having had his attention drawn from pure mathematics to astrophysics by the cosmologist Dennis Sciama, then at Cambridge) in the words of Kip Thorne of the California Institute of Technology, \"Roger Penrose revolutionised the mathematical tools that we use to analyse the properties of spacetime\". Until then, work on the curved geometry of general relativity had been confined to configurations with sufficiently high symmetry for Einstein's equations to be solvable explicitly, and there was doubt about whether such cases were typical. One approach to this issue was by the use of perturbation theory, as developed under the leadership of John Archibald Wheeler at Princeton. The other, and more radically innovative, approach initiated by Penrose was to overlook the detailed geometrical structure of spacetime and instead concentrate attention just on the topology of the space, or at most its conformal structure, since it is the latter \u2013 as determined by the lay of the lightcones \u2013 that determines the trajectories of lightlike geodesics, and hence their causal relationships. The importance of Penrose's paper \"Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities\" (summarised roughly as that if an object such as a dying star implodes beyond a certain point, then nothing can prevent the gravitational field getting so strong as to form some kind of singularity) was not its only result. It also showed a way to obtain similarly general conclusions in other contexts, notably that of the cosmological Big Bang, which he dealt with in collaboration with Sciama's student Stephen Hawking.\nIt was in the local context of gravitational collapse that the contribution of Penrose was most decisive, starting with his 1969 cosmic censorship conjecture, to the effect that any ensuing singularities would be confined within a well-behaved event horizon surrounding a hidden space-time region for which Wheeler coined the term black hole, leaving a visible exterior region with strong but finite curvature, from which some of the gravitational energy may be extractable by what is known as the Penrose process, while accretion of surrounding matter may release further energy that can account for astrophysical phenomena such as quasars.\nFollowing up his \"weak cosmic censorship hypothesis\", Penrose went on, in 1979, to formulate a stronger version called the \"strong censorship hypothesis\". Together with the Belinski\u2013Khalatnikov\u2013Lifshitz conjecture and issues of nonlinear stability, settling the censorship conjectures is one of the most important outstanding problems in general relativity. Also from 1979 dates Penrose's influential Weyl curvature hypothesis on the initial conditions of the observable part of the universe and the origin of the second law of thermodynamics. Penrose and James Terrell independently realised that objects travelling near the speed of light will appear to undergo a peculiar skewing or rotation. This effect has come to be called the Terrell rotation or Penrose\u2013Terrell rotation.\nIn 1967 Penrose invented the twistor theory, which maps geometric objects in Minkowski space into the 4-dimensional complex space with the metric signature (2,2).\nPenrose is well known for his 1974 discovery of Penrose tilings, which are formed from two tiles that can only tile the plane nonperiodically, and are the first tilings to exhibit fivefold rotational symmetry. In 1984 such patterns were observed in the arrangement of atoms in quasicrystals. Another noteworthy contribution is his 1971 invention of spin networks, which later came to form the geometry of spacetime in loop quantum gravity. He was influential in popularising what are commonly known as Penrose diagrams (causal diagrams).\nIn 1983, Penrose was invited to teach at Rice University in Houston, by the then provost Bill Gordon. He worked there from 1983 to 1987. His doctoral students have included, among others, Andrew Hodges, Lane Hughston, Richard Jozsa, Claude LeBrun, John McNamara, Tristan Needham, Tim Poston, Asghar Qadir, and Richard S. Ward.\nIn 2004 Penrose released \"\", a 1,099-page comprehensive guide to the Laws of Physics that includes an explanation of his own theory. The Penrose Interpretation predicts the relationship between quantum mechanics and general relativity, and proposes that a quantum state remains in superposition until the difference of space-time curvature attains a significant level.\nPenrose is the Francis and Helen Pentz Distinguished Visiting professor of Physics and Mathematics at Pennsylvania State University.\nAn earlier universe.\nIn 2010 Penrose reported possible evidence, based on concentric circles found in Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe data of the cosmic microwave background sky, of an earlier universe existing before the Big Bang of the present universe. He mentions this evidence in the epilogue of his 2010 book \"Cycles of Time\", a book in which he presents his reasons, to do with Einstein's field equations, the Weyl curvature C, and the Weyl curvature hypothesis (WCH), that the transition at the Big Bang could have been smooth enough for a previous universe to survive it. He made several conjectures about C and the WCH, some of which were subsequently proved by others, and he also popularized his conformal cyclic cosmology (CCC) theory. In this theory, Penrose postulates that at the end of the universe all matter is eventually contained within black holes, which subsequently evaporate via Hawking radiation. At this point, everything contained within the universe consists of photons, which \"experience\" neither time nor space. There is essentially no difference between an infinitely large universe consisting only of photons and an infinitely small universe consisting only of photons. Therefore, a singularity for a Big Bang and an infinitely expanded universe are equivalent.\nIn simple terms, Penrose believes that the singularity in Einstein's field equation at the Big Bang is only an apparent singularity, similar to the well-known apparent singularity at the event horizon of a black hole. The latter singularity can be removed by a change of coordinate system, and Penrose proposes a different change of coordinate system that will remove the singularity at the big bang. One implication of this is that the major events at the Big Bang can be understood without unifying general relativity and quantum mechanics, and therefore we are not necessarily constrained by the Wheeler\u2013DeWitt equation, which disrupts time. Alternatively, one can use the Einstein\u2013Maxwell\u2013Dirac equations.\nConsciousness.\nPenrose has written books on the connection between fundamental physics and human (or animal) consciousness. In \"The Emperor's New Mind\" (1989), he argues that known laws of physics are inadequate to explain the phenomenon of consciousness. Penrose proposes the characteristics this new physics may have and specifies the requirements for a bridge between classical and quantum mechanics (what he calls \"correct quantum gravity\"). Penrose uses a variant of Turing's halting theorem to demonstrate that a system can be deterministic without being algorithmic. (For example, imagine a system with only two states, ON and OFF. If the system's state is ON when a given Turing machine halts and OFF when the Turing machine does not halt, then the system's state is completely determined by the machine; nevertheless, there is no algorithmic way to determine whether the Turing machine stops.)\nPenrose believes that such deterministic yet non-algorithmic processes may come into play in the quantum mechanical wave function reduction, and may be harnessed by the brain. He argues that computers today are unable to have intelligence because they are algorithmically deterministic systems. He argues against the viewpoint that the rational processes of the mind are completely algorithmic and can thus be duplicated by a sufficiently complex computer. This contrasts with supporters of strong artificial intelligence, who contend that thought can be simulated algorithmically. He bases this on claims that consciousness transcends formal logic because factors such as the insolubility of the halting problem and G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem prevent an algorithmically based system of logic from reproducing such traits of human intelligence as mathematical insight. These claims were originally espoused by the philosopher John Lucas of Merton College, Oxford.\nThe Penrose\u2013Lucas argument about the implications of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem for computational theories of human intelligence has been criticised by mathematicians, computer scientists and philosophers. Many experts in these fields assert that Penrose's argument fails, though different authors choose different aspects of the argument to attack. Marvin Minsky, a leading proponent of artificial intelligence, was particularly critical, writing that Penrose \"tries to show, in chapter after chapter, that human thought cannot be based on any known scientific principle.\" Minsky's position is exactly the opposite \u2013 he believed that humans are, in fact, machines, whose functioning, although complex, is fully explainable by current physics. Minsky maintained that \"one can carry that quest [for scientific explanation] too far by only seeking new basic principles instead of attacking the real detail. This is what I see in Penrose's quest for a new basic principle of physics that will account for consciousness.\"\nPenrose responded to criticism of \"The Emperor's New Mind\" with his follow-up 1994 book \"Shadows of the Mind\", and in 1997 with \"The Large, the Small and the Human Mind\". In those works, he also combined his observations with those of anesthesiologist Stuart Hameroff.\nPenrose and Hameroff have argued that consciousness is the result of quantum gravity effects in microtubules, which they dubbed Orch-OR (orchestrated objective reduction). Max Tegmark, in a paper in \"Physical Review E\", calculated that the time scale of neuron firing and excitations in microtubules is slower than the decoherence time by a factor of at least 10 billion. The paper's reception is summed up by this statement in Tegmark's support: \"Physicists outside the fray, such as IBM's John A. Smolin, say the calculations confirm what they had suspected all along. 'We're not working with a brain that's near absolute zero. It's reasonably unlikely that the brain evolved quantum behavior'\". Tegmark's paper has been widely cited by critics of the Penrose\u2013Hameroff position.\nPhillip Tetlow, although himself supportive of Penrose's views, acknowledges that Penrose's ideas about the human thought process are a minority view in scientific circles, citing Minsky's criticisms and quoting the science journalist Charles Seife's description of Penrose as \"one of a handful of scientists\" who believe that the nature of consciousness suggests a quantum process.\nIn January 2014 Hameroff and Penrose ventured that a discovery of quantum vibrations in microtubules by Anirban Bandyopadhyay of the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan supports the hypothesis of Orch-OR theory. A reviewed and updated version of the theory was published along with critical commentary and debate in the March 2014 issue of \"Physics of Life Reviews\".\nPublications.\nHis popular publications include:\nHis co-authored publications include:\nHis academic books include:\nHis forewords to other books include:\nAwards and honours.\nPenrose has been awarded many prizes for his contributions to science. In 1971 he was awarded the Dannie Heineman Prize for Astrophysics by the American Astronomical Society and American Institute of Physics. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1972. In 1975 Hawking and Penrose were jointly awarded the Eddington Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society. In 1985 he was awarded the Royal Society Royal Medal. Along with Hawking, he was awarded the prestigious Wolf Prize in Physics by the Wolf Foundation (Israel) in 1988.\nIn 1989 Penrose was awarded the Dirac Medal and Prize of the British Institute of Physics. He was also made an Honorary Fellow of the Institute of Physics (HonFInstP). In 1990 Penrose was awarded the Albert Einstein Medal for outstanding work related to the work of Albert Einstein by the Albert Einstein Society (Switzerland). In 1991, he was awarded the Naylor Prize of the London Mathematical Society. Penrose was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree (DSc) from the University of New Brunswick (Canada) in 1992, and an honorary degree from the University of Surrey in 1993. From 1992 to 1995 he served as President of the http://.\nIn 1994 Penrose was knighted for services to science. In the same year, he was also awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Science (DSc) by the University of Bath, and became a member of Polish Academy of Sciences. Penrose was awarded honorary degrees from the University of London in 1995, the University of Glasgow (Doctor of Science, DSc) and University of Essex, both in 1996, from the University of St Andrews in 1997, and the Visva-Bharati University of Santiniketan (India) and Open University (Doctor of the University, DUniv), both in 1998. In 1998 he was elected Foreign Associate of the United States National Academy of Sciences. In 2000 he was appointed a Member of the Order of Merit (OM). He was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Southampton in 2002.\nIn 2004 Penrose was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science (DSc) degree from the University of Waterloo (Ontario, Canada) and was awarded the De Morgan Medal by the London Mathematical Society for his wide and original contributions to mathematical physics. To quote the citation from the society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His deep work on General Relativity has been a major factor in our understanding of black holes. His development of Twistor Theory has produced a beautiful and productive approach to the classical equations of mathematical physics. His tilings of the plane underlie the newly discovered quasi-crystals.\nIn 2005 Penrose received a Doctorate Honoris Causa (Dr.h.c.) from each the Warsaw University (Poland) and the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium), and an honorary Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degree from the Athens University of Economics and Business (Greece). In 2005 he was also awarded the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society Dalton Medal. In 2006 he was conferred the honorary degree of Doctor of the University (DUniv) by the University of York and also won the Dirac Medal given by the University of New South Wales (Australia). In 2008 Penrose was awarded the Copley Medal of the Royal Society. He is also a Distinguished Supporter of Humanists UK and one of the patrons of the Oxford University Scientific Society.\nHe was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2011. The same year, he was also awarded the Fonseca Prize by the University of Santiago de Compostela (Spain).\nIn 2012 Penrose was awarded the Richard R. Ernst Medal by ETH Z\u00fcrich (Switzerland) for his contributions to science and strengthening the connection between science and society. In that year he was also awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Science (DSc) by the Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) as well an honorary doctorate degree by the Igor Sikorsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute (Ukraine).\nIn 2015 Penrose was awarded a Doctorate Honoris Causa (Dr.h.c.) by CINVESTAV (Mexico). In 2017 he was awarded the Commandino Medal at the Urbino University (Italy) for his contributions to the history of science. In that year as well, he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree (DSc) by the University of Edinburgh. In 2018 Penrose received an honorary degree from King's College London.\nIn 2020 Penrose was awarded one half of the Nobel Prize in Physics by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for the discovery that black hole formation is a robust prediction of the general theory of relativity, a half-share also going to Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez for the discovery of a supermassive compact object at the centre of our galaxy. In the same year, he was also awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Science (DSc) by the University of Cambridge.\nIn 2025 Penrose received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nPersonal life.\nPenrose's first marriage was to Joan Isabel Penrose (born Wedge), an American he married in 1959. They had three sons. Penrose is now married to Vanessa Thomas, director of Academic Development at Cokethorpe School in Witney, Oxfordshire, and former head of mathematics at Abingdon School. They have one son.\nReligious views.\nDuring an interview with BBC Radio 4 on 25 September 2010, Penrose stated, \"I'm not a believer myself. I don't believe in established religions of any kind.\" He regards himself as an agnostic. In the 1991 film \"A Brief History of Time\", he also said, \"I think I would say that the universe has a purpose, it's not somehow just there by chance ... some people, I think, take the view that the universe is just there and it runs along\u2014it's a bit like it just sort of computes, and we happen somehow by accident to find ourselves in this thing. But I don't think that's a very fruitful or helpful way of looking at the universe, I think that there is something much deeper about it.\"\nPenrose is a patron of Humanists UK.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26194", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26194", "title": "Restriction enzyme", "text": "Class of enzymes that divide DNA\nA restriction enzyme, restriction endonuclease, REase, ENase or\" restrictase \" is an enzyme that cleaves DNA into fragments at or near specific recognition sites within molecules known as restriction sites. Restriction enzymes are one class of the broader endonuclease group of enzymes. Restriction enzymes are commonly classified into five types, which differ in their structure and whether they cut their DNA substrate at their recognition site, or if the recognition and cleavage sites are separate from one another. To cut DNA, all restriction enzymes make two incisions, once through each sugar-phosphate backbone (i.e. each strand) of the DNA double helix.\nThese enzymes are found in bacteria and archaea and provide a defense mechanism against invading viruses. Inside a prokaryote, the restriction enzymes selectively cut up \"foreign\" DNA in a process called \"restriction digestion\"; meanwhile, host DNA is protected by a modification enzyme (a methyltransferase) that modifies the prokaryotic DNA and blocks cleavage. Together, these two processes form the restriction modification system.\nMore than 3,600 restriction endonucleases are known which represent over 250 different specificities. Over 3,000 of these have been studied in detail, and more than 800 of these are available commercially. These enzymes are routinely used for DNA modification in laboratories, and they are a vital tool in molecular cloning.\nHistory.\nThe term restriction enzyme originated from the studies of phage \u03bb, a virus that infects bacteria, and the phenomenon of host-controlled restriction and modification of such bacterial phage or bacteriophage. The phenomenon was first identified in work done in the laboratories of Salvador Luria, Jean Weigle and Giuseppe Bertani in the early 1950s. It was found that, for a bacteriophage \u03bb that can grow well in one strain of \"Escherichia coli\", for example \"E. coli\" C, when grown in another strain, for example \"E. coli\" K, its yields can drop significantly, by as much as three to five orders of magnitude. The host cell, in this example \"E. coli\" K, is known as the restricting host and appears to have the ability to reduce the biological activity of the phage \u03bb. If a phage becomes established in one strain, the ability of that phage to grow also becomes restricted in other strains. In the 1960s, it was shown in work done in the laboratories of Werner Arber and Matthew Meselson that the restriction is caused by an enzymatic cleavage of the phage DNA, and the enzyme involved was therefore termed a restriction enzyme.\nThe restriction enzymes studied by Arber and Meselson were type I restriction enzymes, which cleave DNA randomly away from the recognition site. In 1970, Hamilton O. Smith, Thomas Kelly and Kent Wilcox isolated and characterized the first type II restriction enzyme, HindII, from the bacterium \"Haemophilus influenzae\". Restriction enzymes of this type are more useful for laboratory work as they cleave DNA at the site of their recognition sequence and are the most commonly used as a molecular biology tool. Later, Daniel Nathans and Kathleen Danna showed that cleavage of simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA by restriction enzymes yields specific fragments that can be separated using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, thus showing that restriction enzymes can also be used for mapping DNA. For their work in the discovery and characterization of restriction enzymes, the 1978 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Werner Arber, Daniel Nathans, and Hamilton O. Smith. The discovery of restriction enzymes allows DNA to be manipulated, leading to the development of recombinant DNA technology that has many applications, for example, allowing the large scale production of proteins such as human insulin used by diabetic patients.\nOrigins.\nRestriction enzymes likely evolved from a common ancestor and became widespread via horizontal gene transfer. In addition, there is mounting evidence that restriction endonucleases evolved as a selfish genetic element.\nRecognition site.\nRestriction enzymes recognize a specific sequence of nucleotides and produce a double-stranded cut in the DNA. The recognition sequences can also be classified by the number of bases in its recognition site, usually between 4 and 8 bases, and the number of bases in the sequence will determine how often the site will appear by chance in any given genome, e.g., a 4-base pair sequence would theoretically occur once every 4^4 or 256bp, 6 bases, 4^6 or 4,096bp, and 8 bases would be 4^8 or 65,536bp. Many of them are palindromic, meaning the base sequence reads the same backwards and forwards. In theory, there are two types of palindromic sequences that can be possible in DNA. The \"mirror-like\" palindrome is similar to those found in ordinary text, in which a sequence reads the same forward and backward on a single strand of DNA, as in GTAATG. The \"inverted repeat\" palindrome is also a sequence that reads the same forward and backward, but the forward and backward sequences are found in complementary DNA strands (i.e., of double-stranded DNA), as in GTATAC (GTATAC being complementary to CATATG). Inverted repeat palindromes are more common and have greater biological importance than mirror-like palindromes.\nEcoRI digestion produces \"sticky\" ends,\nwhereas SmaI restriction enzyme cleavage produces \"blunt\" ends:\nRecognition sequences in DNA differ for each restriction enzyme, producing differences in the length, sequence and strand orientation (5' end or 3' end) of a sticky-end \"overhang\" of an enzyme restriction.\nDifferent restriction enzymes that recognize the same sequence are known as isoschizomers. Different enzymes that recognize the same location, but cut at a different position are known as neoschizomers.\nTypes.\nNaturally occurring restriction endonucleases are categorized into five groups (Types I, II, III, IV, and V) based on their composition and enzyme cofactor requirements, the nature of their target sequence, and the position of their DNA cleavage site relative to the target sequence. DNA sequence analysis of restriction enzymes however show great variations, indicating that there are more than four types. All types of enzymes recognize specific short DNA sequences and carry out the endonucleolytic cleavage of DNA to give specific fragments with terminal 5'-phosphates. They differ in their recognition sequence, subunit composition, cleavage position, and cofactor requirements, as summarised below:\nType l.\nType I restriction enzymes were the first to be identified and were first identified in two different strains (K-12 and B) of \"E. coli\". These enzymes cut at a site that differs, and is a random distance (at least 1000 bp) away, from their recognition site. Cleavage at these random sites follows a process of DNA translocation, which shows that these enzymes are also molecular motors. The recognition site is asymmetrical and is composed of two specific portions\u2014one containing 3\u20134 nucleotides, and another containing 4\u20135 nucleotides\u2014separated by a non-specific spacer of about 6\u20138 nucleotides. These enzymes are multifunctional and are capable of both restriction digestion and modification activities, depending upon the methylation status of the target DNA. The cofactors S-Adenosyl methionine (AdoMet), hydrolyzed adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and magnesium (Mg2+) ions, are required for their full activity. Type I restriction enzymes possess three subunits called HsdR, HsdM, and HsdS; HsdR is required for restriction digestion; HsdM is necessary for adding methyl groups to host DNA (methyltransferase activity), and HsdS is important for specificity of the recognition (DNA-binding) site in addition to both restriction digestion (DNA cleavage) and modification (DNA methyltransferase) activity.\nType II.\nTypical type II restriction enzymes differ from type I restriction enzymes in several ways. They form homodimers, with recognition sites that are usually undivided and palindromic and 4\u20138 nucleotides in length. They recognize and cleave DNA at the same site, and they do not use ATP or AdoMet for their activity\u2014they usually require only Mg2+ as a cofactor. These enzymes cleave the phosphodiester bond of double helix DNA. It can either cleave at the center of both strands to yield a blunt end, or at a staggered position leaving overhangs called sticky ends. These are the most commonly available and used restriction enzymes. In the 1990s and early 2000s, new enzymes from this family were discovered that did not follow all the classical criteria of this enzyme class, and new subfamily nomenclature was developed to divide this large family into subcategories based on deviations from typical characteristics of type II enzymes. These subgroups are defined using a letter suffix.\nType IIB restriction enzymes (e.g., BcgI and BplI) are multimers, containing more than one subunit. They cleave DNA on both sides of their recognition to cut out the recognition site. They require both AdoMet and Mg2+ cofactors. Type IIE restriction endonucleases (e.g., NaeI) cleave DNA following interaction with two copies of their recognition sequence. One recognition site acts as the target for cleavage, while the other acts as an allosteric effector that speeds up or improves the efficiency of enzyme cleavage. Similar to type IIE enzymes, type IIF restriction endonucleases (e.g. NgoMIV) interact with two copies of their recognition sequence but cleave both sequences at the same time. Type IIG restriction endonucleases (e.g., RM.Eco57I) do have a single subunit, like classical Type II restriction enzymes, but require the cofactor AdoMet to be active. Type IIM restriction endonucleases, such as DpnI, are able to recognize and cut methylated DNA. Type IIS restriction endonucleases (e.g. FokI) cleave DNA at a defined distance from their non-palindromic asymmetric recognition sites; this characteristic is widely used to perform in-vitro cloning techniques such as Golden Gate cloning. These enzymes may function as dimers. Similarly, Type IIT restriction enzymes (e.g., Bpu10I and BslI) are composed of two different subunits. Some recognize palindromic sequences while others have asymmetric recognition sites.\nType III.\nType III restriction enzymes (e.g., EcoP15) recognize two separate non-palindromic sequences that are inversely oriented. They cut DNA about 20\u201330 base pairs after the recognition site. These enzymes contain more than one subunit and require AdoMet and ATP cofactors for their roles in DNA methylation and restriction digestion, respectively. They are components of prokaryotic DNA restriction-modification mechanisms that protect the organism against invading foreign DNA. Type III enzymes are hetero-oligomeric, multifunctional proteins composed of two subunits, Res (https://) and Mod (https://). The Mod subunit recognises the DNA sequence specific for the system and is a modification methyltransferase; as such, it is functionally equivalent to the M and S subunits of type I restriction endonuclease. Res is required for restriction digestion, although it has no enzymatic activity on its own. Type III enzymes recognise short 5\u20136 bp-long asymmetric DNA sequences and cleave 25\u201327 bp downstream to leave short, single-stranded 5' protrusions. They require the presence of two inversely oriented unmethylated recognition sites for restriction digestion to occur. These enzymes methylate only one strand of the DNA, at the N-6 position of adenine residues, so newly replicated DNA will have only one strand methylated, which is sufficient to protect against restriction digestion. Type III enzymes belong to the beta-subfamily of N6 adenine methyltransferases, containing the nine motifs that characterise this family, including motif I, the AdoMet binding pocket (FXGXG), and motif IV, the catalytic region (S/D/N (PP) Y/F).\nType IV.\nType IV enzymes recognize modified, typically methylated DNA and are exemplified by the\u00a0McrBC\u00a0and Mrr systems of\u00a0\"E. coli\".\nType V.\nType V restriction enzymes (e.g., the cas9-gRNA complex from CRISPRs) utilize guide RNAs to target specific non-palindromic sequences found on invading organisms. They can cut DNA of variable length, provided that a suitable guide RNA is provided. The flexibility and ease of use of these enzymes make them promising for future genetic engineering applications.\nArtificial restriction enzymes.\nArtificial restriction enzymes can be generated by fusing a natural or engineered DNA-binding domain to a nuclease domain (often the cleavage domain of the type IIS restriction enzyme FokI). Such artificial restriction enzymes can target large DNA sites (up to 36 bp) and can be engineered to bind to desired DNA sequences. Zinc finger nucleases are the most commonly used artificial restriction enzymes and are generally used in genetic engineering applications, but can also be used for more standard gene cloning applications. Other artificial restriction enzymes are based on the DNA binding domain of TAL effectors.\nIn 2013, a new technology CRISPR-Cas9, based on a prokaryotic viral defense system, was engineered for editing the genome, and it was quickly adopted in laboratories. For more detail, read CRISPR (Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats).\nIn 2017, a group from University of Illinois reported using an Argonaute protein taken from \"Pyrococcus furiosus\" (PfAgo) along with guide DNA to edit DNA \"in vitro\" as artificial restriction enzymes.\nArtificial ribonucleases that act as restriction enzymes for RNA have also been developed. A PNA-based system, called a PNAzyme, has a Cu(II)-2,9-dimethylphenanthroline group that mimics ribonucleases for specific RNA sequence and cleaves at a non-base-paired region (RNA bulge) of the targeted RNA formed when the enzyme binds the RNA. This enzyme shows selectivity by cleaving only at one site that either does not have a mismatch or is kinetically preferred out of two possible cleavage sites.\nNomenclature.\nSince their discovery in the 1970s, many restriction enzymes have been identified; for example, more than 3500 different Type II restriction enzymes have been characterized. Each enzyme is named after the bacterium from which it was isolated, using a naming system based on bacterial genus, species and strain. For example, the name of the EcoRI restriction enzyme was derived as shown in the box.\nApplications.\nIsolated restriction enzymes are used to manipulate DNA for different scientific applications.\nThey are used to assist insertion of genes into plasmid vectors during gene cloning and protein production experiments. For optimal use, plasmids that are commonly used for gene cloning are modified to include a short polylinker sequence (called the multiple cloning site, or MCS) rich in restriction recognition sequences. This allows flexibility when inserting gene fragments into the plasmid vector; restriction sites contained naturally within genes influence the choice of endonuclease for digesting the DNA, since it is necessary to avoid restriction of wanted DNA while intentionally cutting the ends of the DNA. To clone a gene fragment into a vector, both plasmid DNA and gene insert are typically cut with the same restriction enzymes, and then glued together with the assistance of an enzyme known as a DNA ligase.\nRestriction enzymes can also be used to distinguish gene alleles by specifically recognizing single base changes in DNA known as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). This is however only possible if a SNP alters the restriction site present in the allele. In this method, the restriction enzyme can be used to genotype a DNA sample without the need for expensive gene sequencing. The sample is first digested with the restriction enzyme to generate DNA fragments, and then the different sized fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. In general, alleles with correct restriction sites will generate two visible bands of DNA on the gel, and those with altered restriction sites will not be cut and will generate only a single band. A DNA map by restriction digest can also be generated that can give the relative positions of the genes. The different lengths of DNA generated by restriction digest also produce a specific pattern of bands after gel electrophoresis, and can be used for DNA fingerprinting.\nIn a similar manner, restriction enzymes are used to digest genomic DNA for gene analysis by Southern blot. This technique allows researchers to identify how many copies (or paralogues) of a gene are present in the genome of one individual, or how many gene mutations (polymorphisms) have occurred within a population. The latter example is called restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP).\nArtificial restriction enzymes created by linking the FokI DNA cleavage domain with an array of DNA binding proteins or zinc finger arrays, denoted zinc finger nucleases (ZFN), are a powerful tool for host genome editing due to their enhanced sequence specificity. ZFN work in pairs, their dimerization being mediated in-situ through the FokI domain. Each zinc finger array (ZFA) is capable of recognizing 9\u201312 base pairs, making for 18\u201324 for the pair. A 5\u20137 bp spacer between the cleavage sites further enhances the specificity of ZFN, making them a safe and more precise tool that can be applied in humans. A recent Phase I clinical trial of ZFN for the targeted abolition of the CCR5 co-receptor for HIV-1 has been undertaken.\nOthers have proposed using the bacteria R-M system as a model for devising human anti-viral gene or genomic vaccines and therapies since the RM system serves an innate defense-role in bacteria by restricting tropism by bacteriophages. There is research on REases and ZFN that can cleave the DNA of various human viruses, including HSV-2, high-risk HPVs and HIV-1, with the ultimate goal of inducing target mutagenesis and aberrations of human-infecting viruses. The human genome already contains remnants of retroviral genomes that have been inactivated and harnessed for self-gain. Indeed, the mechanisms for silencing active L1 genomic retroelements by the three prime repair exonuclease 1 (TREX1) and excision repair cross complementing 1(ERCC) appear to mimic the action of RM-systems in bacteria, and the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) that follows the use of ZFN without a repair template.\nExamples.\nExamples of restriction enzymes include:\nKey:\nN = C or G or T or A\nW = A or T\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26195", "revid": "24593464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26195", "title": "RNA virus", "text": "Subclass of viruses\nAn RNA virus is a virus characterized by a ribonucleic acid (RNA) based genome. The genome can be single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) or double-stranded (dsRNA). Notable human diseases caused by RNA viruses include influenza, SARS, MERS, COVID-19, Dengue virus, hepatitis C, hepatitis E, West Nile fever, Ebola virus disease, rabies, polio, mumps, and measles.\nAll RNA viruses use a homologous RNA-dependent polymerase for replication and are categorized by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) into the realm \"Riboviria\". This includes viruses belonging to \"Group III\", \"Group IV\", \"Group V\", and \"Group VI\" of the Baltimore classification system. Group VI comprises the retroviruses, which have RNA genetic material but use DNA intermediates in their life cycle. \"Riboviria\" does not include viroids and satellite nucleic acids: \"Deltavirus\", \"Avsunviroidae\", and \"Pospiviroidae\" are taxa that were mistakenly included in 2019, but this was corrected in 2020.\nCharacteristics.\nSingle-stranded RNA viruses and RNA Sense.\nRNA viruses can be further classified according to the sense or polarity of their RNA into negative-sense and positive-sense, or ambisense RNA viruses. Positive-sense viral RNA is similar to mRNA and thus can be immediately translated by the host cell. Negative-sense viral RNA is complementary to mRNA and thus must be converted to positive-sense RNA by an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase before translation. Purified RNA of a positive-sense virus can directly cause infection though it may be less infectious than the whole virus particle. In contrast, purified RNA of a negative-sense virus is not infectious by itself as it needs to be transcribed into positive-sense RNA; each virion can be transcribed to several positive-sense RNAs. Ambisense RNA viruses resemble negative-sense RNA viruses, except they translate genes from their negative and positive strands.\nDouble-stranded RNA viruses.\nThe double-stranded (ds)RNA viruses represent a diverse group of viruses that vary widely in host range (humans, animals, plants, fungi, and bacteria), genome segment number (one to twelve), and virion organization (Triangulation number, capsid layers, spikes, turrets, etc.). Members of this group include the rotaviruses, which are the most common cause of gastroenteritis in young children, and picobirnaviruses, which are the most common virus in fecal samples of both humans and animals with or without signs of diarrhea. Bluetongue virus is an economically important pathogen that infects cattle and sheep. In recent years, progress has been made in determining atomic and subnanometer resolution structures of a number of key viral proteins and virion capsids of several dsRNA viruses, highlighting the significant parallels in the structure and replicative processes of many of these viruses.\nMutation rates.\nRNA viruses generally have very high mutation rates compared to DNA viruses, because viral RNA polymerases lack the proofreading ability of DNA polymerases. The genetic diversity of RNA viruses is one reason why it is difficult to make effective vaccines against them. Retroviruses also have a high mutation rate even though their DNA intermediate integrates into the host genome (and is thus subject to host DNA proofreading once integrated), because errors during reverse transcription are embedded into both strands of DNA before integration. Some genes of RNA virus are important to the viral replication cycles and mutations are not tolerated. For example, the region of the hepatitis C virus genome that encodes the core protein is highly conserved, because it contains an RNA structure involved in an internal ribosome entry site.\nSequence complexity.\nOn average, dsRNA viruses show a lower sequence redundancy relative to ssRNA viruses. Contrarily, dsDNA viruses contain the most redundant genome sequences while ssDNA viruses have the least. The sequence complexity of viruses has been shown to be a key characteristic for accurate reference-free viral classification.\nReplication.\nThere are three distinct groups of RNA viruses depending on their genome and mode of replication:\nRecombination.\nNumerous RNA viruses are capable of genetic recombination when at least two viral genomes are present in the same host cell. Very rarely viral RNA can recombine with host RNA. RNA recombination appears to be a major driving force in determining genome architecture and the course of viral evolution among \"Picornaviridae\" ((+)ssRNA), e.g. poliovirus. In the \"Retroviridae\" ((+)ssRNA), e.g. HIV, damage in the RNA genome appears to be avoided during reverse transcription by strand switching, a form of recombination. Recombination also occurs in the \"Reoviridae\" (dsRNA), e.g. reovirus; \"Orthomyxoviridae\" ((-)ssRNA), e.g. influenza virus; and \"Coronaviridae\" ((+)ssRNA), e.g. SARS. Recombination in RNA viruses appears to be an adaptation for coping with genome damage. Recombination can occur infrequently between animal viruses of the same species but of divergent lineages. The resulting recombinant viruses may sometimes cause an outbreak of infection in humans.\nClassification.\nClassification is based principally on the type of genome (double-stranded, negative- or positive-single-strand) and gene number and organization. Currently, there are 5 orders and 47 families of RNA viruses recognized. There are also many unassigned species and genera.\nRelated to but distinct from the RNA viruses are the viroids and the RNA satellite nucleic acids. These are not currently classified as RNA viruses and are described on their own pages.\nA study of several thousand RNA viruses has shown the presence of at least five main taxa: a levivirus and relatives group; a picornavirus supergroup; an alphavirus supergroup plus a flavivirus supergroup; the dsRNA viruses; and the -ve strand viruses. The lentivirus group appears to be basal to all the remaining RNA viruses. The next major division lies between the picornasupragroup and the remaining viruses. The dsRNA viruses appear to have evolved from a +ve RNA ancestor and the -ve RNA viruses from within the dsRNA viruses. The closest relation to the -ve stranded RNA viruses is the Reoviridae.\nPositive-strand RNA viruses.\nThis is the single largest group of RNA viruses and has been organized by the ICTV into the phyla \"Kitrinoviricota\", \"Lenarviricota\", and \"Pisuviricota\" in the kingdom \"Orthornavirae\" and realm \"Riboviria\". \nPositive-strand RNA viruses can also be classified based on the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Three groups have been recognised:\nA division of the alpha-like (Sindbis-like) supergroup on the basis of a novel domain located near the N termini of the proteins involved in viral replication has been proposed. The two groups proposed are: the 'altovirus' group (alphaviruses, furoviruses, hepatitis E virus, hordeiviruses, tobamoviruses, tobraviruses, tricornaviruses and probably rubiviruses); and the 'typovirus' group (apple chlorotic leaf spot virus, carlaviruses, potexviruses and tymoviruses).\nThe alpha like supergroup can be further divided into three clades: the rubi-like, tobamo-like, and tymo-like viruses.\nAdditional work has identified five groups of positive-stranded RNA viruses containing four, three, three, three, and one order(s), respectively. These fourteen orders contain 31 virus families (including 17 families of plant viruses) and 48 genera (including 30 genera of plant viruses). This analysis suggests that alphaviruses and flaviviruses can be separated into two families\u2014the Togaviridae and Flaviridae, respectively\u2014but suggests that other taxonomic assignments, such as the pestiviruses, hepatitis C virus, rubiviruses, hepatitis E virus, and arteriviruses, may be incorrect. The coronaviruses and toroviruses appear to be distinct families in distinct orders and not distinct genera of the same family as currently classified. The luteoviruses appear to be two families rather than one, and apple chlorotic leaf spot virus appears not to be a closterovirus but a new genus of the Potexviridae.\nEvolution.\nThe evolution of the picornaviruses based on an analysis of their RNA polymerases and helicases appears to date to the divergence of eukaryotes. Their putative ancestors include the bacterial group II retroelements, the family of HtrA proteases and DNA bacteriophages.\nPartitiviruses are related to and may have evolved from a totivirus ancestor.\nHypoviruses and barnaviruses appear to share an ancestry with the potyvirus and sobemovirus lineages respectively.\nDouble-stranded RNA viruses.\nThis analysis also suggests that the dsRNA viruses are not closely related to each other but instead belong to four additional classes\u2014Birnaviridae, Cystoviridae, Partitiviridae, and Reoviridae\u2014and one additional order (Totiviridae) of one of the classes of positive ssRNA viruses in the same subphylum as the positive-strand RNA viruses.\nOne study has suggested that there are two large clades: One includes the families \"Caliciviridae\", \"Flaviviridae\", and \"Picornaviridae\" and a second that includes the families \"Alphatetraviridae\", \"Birnaviridae\", \"Cystoviridae\", \"Nodaviridae\", and \"Permutotretraviridae\".\nNegative-strand RNA viruses.\nThese viruses have multiple types of genome ranging from a single RNA molecule up to eight segments. Despite their diversity it appears that they may have originated in arthropods and to have diversified from there.\nSatellite viruses.\nA number of satellite viruses\u2014viruses that require the assistance of another virus to complete their life cycle\u2014are also known. Their taxonomy has yet to be settled. The following four genera have been proposed for positive sense single stranded RNA satellite viruses that infect plants\u2014Albetovirus, Aumaivirus, Papanivirus and Virtovirus. A family\u2014Sarthroviridae which includes the genus Macronovirus\u2014has been proposed for the positive sense single stranded RNA satellite viruses that infect arthropods.\nGroup III\u00a0\u2013 dsRNA viruses.\nThere are twelve families and a number of unassigned genera and species recognised in this group.\nGroup IV\u00a0\u2013 positive-sense ssRNA viruses.\nThere are three orders and 34 families recognised in this group. In addition, there are a number of unclassified species and genera.\nSatellite viruses\nAn unclassified astrovirus/hepevirus-like virus has also been described.\nGroup V\u00a0\u2013 negative-sense ssRNA viruses.\nThis group of viruses has been placed into a single phylum\u2014Negarnaviricota. This phylum has been divided into two subphyla\u2014Haploviricotina and Polyploviricotina. Within the subphylum Haploviricotina four classes are currently recognised: Chunqiuviricetes, Milneviricetes, Monjiviricetes and Yunchangviricetes. In the subphylum Polyploviricotina two classes are recognised: Ellioviricetes and Insthoviricetes.\nSix classes, eight orders, and thirty families are currently recognized in this group. A number of unassigned species and genera are yet to be classified.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26196", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26196", "title": "Rani Lakshmi Bay", "text": ""}
{"id": "26197", "revid": "50465046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26197", "title": "Radiocarbon dating", "text": "Method of determining the age of objects\nRadiocarbon dating (also referred to as carbon dating or carbon-14 dating) is a method for determining the age of an object containing organic material by using the properties of radiocarbon, a radioactive isotope of carbon.\nThe method was developed in the late 1940s at the University of Chicago by Willard Libby. It is based on the fact that radiocarbon (14C) is constantly being created in the Earth's atmosphere by the interaction of cosmic rays with atmospheric nitrogen. The resulting 14C combines with atmospheric oxygen to form radioactive carbon dioxide, which is incorporated into plants by photosynthesis; animals then acquire 14C by eating the plants. When the animal or plant dies, it stops exchanging carbon with its environment, and thereafter the amount of 14C it contains begins to decrease as the 14C undergoes radioactive decay. Measuring the amount of 14C in a sample from a dead plant or animal, such as a piece of wood or a fragment of bone, provides information that can be used to calculate when the animal or plant died. The older a sample is, the less 14C there is to be detected. The half-life of 14C (the period of time after which half of a given sample will have decayed) is about 5,730 years, so the oldest dates that can be reliably measured by this process date to approximately 50,000 years ago, although special preparation methods occasionally make an accurate analysis of older samples possible. Libby received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work in 1960. \nResearch has been ongoing since the 1960s to determine what the proportion of 14C in the atmosphere has been over the past fifty thousand years. The resulting data, in the form of a calibration curve, is now used to convert a given measurement of radiocarbon in a sample into an estimate of the sample's calendar age. Other corrections must be made to account for the proportion of 14C in different types of organisms (fractionation), and the varying levels of 14C throughout the biosphere (reservoir effects). Additional complications come from the burning of fossil fuels, such as coal and oil, and from the above-ground nuclear tests done in the 1950s and 1960s. Because the time it takes to convert biological materials to fossil fuels is substantially longer than the time it takes for their 14C to decay below detectable levels, fossil fuels contain almost no 14C. As a result, beginning in the late 19th century, there was a noticeable drop in the proportion of 14C as the carbon dioxide generated from burning fossil fuels began to accumulate in the atmosphere. Conversely, nuclear testing increased the amount of 14C in the atmosphere, which reached a maximum in about 1965 of almost double the amount present in the atmosphere prior to nuclear testing.\nMeasurement of radiocarbon was originally done by beta-counting devices, which counted the amount of beta radiation emitted by decaying 14C atoms in a sample. More recently, accelerator mass spectrometry has become the method of choice; it counts all the 14C atoms in the sample and not just the few that happen to decay during the measurements; it can therefore be used with much smaller samples (as small as individual plant seeds), and gives results much more quickly. The development of radiocarbon dating has had a profound impact on archaeology. In addition to permitting more accurate dating within archaeological sites than previous methods, it allows comparison of dates of events across great distances. Histories of archaeology often refer to its impact as the \"radiocarbon revolution\". Radiocarbon dating has allowed key transitions in prehistory to be dated, such as the end of the last ice age, and the beginning of the Neolithic and Bronze Age in different regions.\nBackground.\nHistory.\nIn 1939, Martin Kamen and Samuel Ruben of the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley began experiments to determine if any of the elements common in organic matter had isotopes with half-lives long enough to be of value in biomedical research. They synthesized 14C using the laboratory's cyclotron accelerator and soon discovered that the atom's half-life was far longer than had been previously thought. This was followed by a prediction by Serge A. Korff, then employed at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, that the interaction of thermal neutrons with 14N in the upper atmosphere would create 14C. It had previously been thought that 14C would be more likely to be created by deuterons interacting with 13C. At some time during World War II, Willard Libby, who was then at Berkeley, learned of Korff's research and conceived the idea that it might be possible to use radiocarbon for dating.\nIn 1945, Libby moved to the University of Chicago, where he began his work on radiocarbon dating. He published a paper in 1946 in which he proposed that the carbon in living matter might include 14C as well as non-radioactive carbon. Libby and several collaborators proceeded to experiment with methane collected from sewage works in Baltimore, and after isotopically enriching their samples they were able to demonstrate that they contained 14C. By contrast, methane created from petroleum showed no radiocarbon activity because of its age. The results were summarized in a paper in \"Science\" in 1947, in which the authors commented that their results implied it would be possible to date materials containing carbon of organic origin.\nLibby and James Arnold proceeded to test the radiocarbon dating theory by analyzing samples with known ages. For example, two samples taken from the tombs of two Egyptian kings, Zoser and Sneferu, independently dated to 2625 BC \u00b1 75 years, were dated by radiocarbon measurement to an average of 2800 BC \u00b1 250 years. These results were published in \"Science\" in December 1949. Within 11 years of their announcement, more than 20 radiocarbon dating laboratories had been set up worldwide. In 1960, Libby was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work.\nPhysical and chemical details.\nIn nature, carbon exists as three isotopes. Two are stable and not radioactive: carbon-12 (12C), and carbon-13 (13C); and carbon-14 (14C), also known as \"radiocarbon\", which is radioactive. The half-life of 14C (the time it takes for half of a given amount of 14C to decay) is about 5,730 years, so its concentration in the atmosphere might be expected to decrease over thousands of years, but 14C is constantly being produced in the lower stratosphere and upper troposphere, primarily by galactic cosmic rays, and to a lesser degree by solar cosmic rays. These cosmic rays generate neutrons as they travel through the atmosphere which can strike nitrogen-14 (14N) atoms and turn them into 14C. The following nuclear reaction is the main pathway by which 14C is created:\n n + N \u2192 C + p\nwhere n represents a neutron and p represents a proton.\nOnce produced, the 14C quickly combines with the oxygen (O) in the atmosphere to form first carbon monoxide (CO), and ultimately carbon dioxide (CO2).\n14C + O2 \u2192 14CO + O\n14CO + OH \u2192 14CO2 + H\nCarbon dioxide produced in this way diffuses in the atmosphere, is dissolved in the ocean, and is taken up by plants via photosynthesis. Animals eat the plants, and ultimately the radiocarbon is distributed throughout the biosphere. The ratio of 14C to 12C is approximately 1.25 parts of 14C to 1012 parts of 12C. In addition, about 1% of the carbon atoms are of the stable isotope 13C.\nThe equation for the radioactive decay of 14C is:\n C \u2192 N + + \nBy emitting a beta particle (an electron, e\u2212) and an electron antineutrino (), one of the neutrons in the 14C nucleus changes to a proton and the 14C nucleus reverts to the stable (non-radioactive) isotope 14N.\nPrinciples.\nDuring its life, a plant or animal is in equilibrium with its surroundings by exchanging carbon either with the atmosphere or through its diet. It will, therefore, have the same proportion of 14C as the atmosphere, or in the case of marine animals or plants, with the ocean. Once it dies, it ceases to acquire 14C, but the 14C within its biological material at that time will continue to decay, and so the ratio of 14C to 12C in its remains will gradually decrease. Because 14C decays at a known rate, the proportion of radiocarbon can be used to determine how long it has been since a given sample stopped exchanging carbon\u00a0\u2013 the older the sample, the less 14C will be left.\nThe equation governing the decay of a radioactive isotope is:\n formula_1\nwhere \"N\"0 is the number of atoms of the isotope in the original sample (at time \"t\" = 0, when the organism from which the sample was taken died), and \"N\" is the number of atoms left after time \"t\". \"\u03bb\" is a constant that depends on the particular isotope; for a given isotope it is equal to the reciprocal of the mean-life\u00a0\u2013 i.e. the average or expected time a given atom will survive before undergoing radioactive decay. The mean-life, denoted by \"\u03c4\", of 14C is 8,267 years, so the equation above can be rewritten as:\n formula_2\nThe sample is assumed to have originally had the same 14C/12C ratio as the ratio in the atmosphere, and since the size of the sample is known, the total number of atoms in the sample can be calculated, yielding \"N\"0, the number of 14C atoms in the original sample. Measurement of \"N\", the number of 14C atoms currently in the sample, allows the calculation of \"t\", the age of the sample, using the equation above.\nThe half-life of a radioactive isotope (usually denoted by t1/2) is a more familiar concept than the mean-life, so although the equations above are expressed in terms of the mean-life, it is more usual to quote the value of 14C's half-life than its mean-life. The currently accepted value for the half-life of 14C is 5,700 \u00b1 30 years. This means that after 5,700 years, only half of the initial 14C will remain; a quarter will remain after 11,400 years; an eighth after 17,100 years; and so on.\nThe above calculations make several assumptions, such as that the level of 14C in the atmosphere has remained constant over time. In fact, the level of 14C in the atmosphere has varied significantly and as a result, the values provided by the equation above have to be corrected by using data from other sources. This is done by calibration curves (discussed below), which convert a measurement of 14C in a sample into an estimated calendar age. The calculations involve several steps and include an intermediate value called the \"radiocarbon age\", which is the age in \"radiocarbon years\" of the sample: an age quoted in radiocarbon years means that no calibration curve has been used \u2212 the calculations for radiocarbon years assume that the atmospheric 14C/12C ratio has not changed over time.\nCalculating radiocarbon ages also requires the value of the half-life for 14C. In Libby's 1949 paper he used a value of 5720 \u00b1 47 years, based on research by Engelkemeir et al. This was remarkably close to the modern value, but shortly afterwards the accepted value was revised to 5568 \u00b1 30 years, and this value was in use for more than a decade. It was revised again in the early 1960s to 5,730 \u00b1 40 years, which meant that many calculated dates in papers published prior to this were incorrect (the error in the half-life is about 3%). For consistency with these early papers, it was agreed at the 1962 Radiocarbon Conference in Cambridge (UK) to use the \"Libby half-life\" of 5568 years. Radiocarbon ages are still calculated using this half-life, and are known as \"Conventional Radiocarbon Age\". Since the calibration curve (IntCal) also reports past atmospheric 14C concentration using this conventional age, any conventional ages calibrated against the IntCal curve will produce a correct calibrated age. When a date is quoted, the reader should be aware that if it is an uncalibrated date (a term used for dates given in radiocarbon years) it may differ substantially from the best estimate of the actual calendar date, both because it uses the wrong value for the half-life of 14C, and because no correction (calibration) has been applied for the historical variation of 14C in the atmosphere over time.\nCarbon exchange reservoir.\nCarbon is distributed throughout the atmosphere, the biosphere, and the oceans; these are referred to collectively as the carbon exchange reservoir, and each component is also referred to individually as a carbon exchange reservoir. The different elements of the carbon exchange reservoir vary in how much carbon they store, and in how long it takes for the 14C generated by cosmic rays to fully mix with them. This affects the ratio of 14C to 12C in the different reservoirs, and hence the radiocarbon ages of samples that originated in each reservoir. The atmosphere, which is where 14C is generated, contains about 1.9% of the total carbon in the reservoirs, and the 14C it contains mixes in less than seven years. The ratio of 14C to 12C in the atmosphere is taken as the baseline for the other reservoirs: if another reservoir has a lower ratio of 14C to 12C, it indicates that the carbon is older and hence that either some of the 14C has decayed, or the reservoir is receiving carbon that is not at the atmospheric baseline. The ocean surface is an example: it contains 2.4% of the carbon in the exchange reservoir, but there is only about 95% as much 14C as would be expected if the ratio were the same as in the atmosphere. The time it takes for carbon from the atmosphere to mix with the surface ocean is only a few years, but the surface waters also receive water from the deep ocean, which has more than 90% of the carbon in the reservoir. Water in the deep ocean takes about 1,000 years to circulate back through surface waters, and so the surface waters contain a combination of older water, with depleted 14C, and water recently at the surface, with 14C in equilibrium with the atmosphere.\nCreatures living at the ocean surface have the same 14C ratios as the water they live in, and as a result of the reduced 14C/12C ratio, the radiocarbon age of marine life is typically about 400 years. Organisms on land are in closer equilibrium with the atmosphere and have the same 14C/12C ratio as the atmosphere. These organisms contain about 1.3% of the carbon in the reservoir; sea organisms have a mass of less than 1% of those on land and are not shown in the diagram. Accumulated dead organic matter, of both plants and animals, exceeds the mass of the biosphere by a factor of nearly 3, and since this matter is no longer exchanging carbon with its environment, it has a 14C/12C ratio lower than that of the biosphere.\nDating considerations.\nThe variation in the 14C/12C ratio in different parts of the carbon exchange reservoir means that a straightforward calculation of the age of a sample based on the amount of 14C it contains will often give an incorrect result. There are several other possible sources of error that need to be considered. The errors are of four general types:\nAtmospheric variation.\nIn the early years of using the technique, it was understood that it depended on the atmospheric 14C/12C ratio having remained the same over the preceding few thousand years. To verify the accuracy of the method, several artefacts that were datable by other techniques were tested; the results of the testing were in reasonable agreement with the true ages of the objects. Over time, however, discrepancies began to appear between the known chronology for the oldest Egyptian dynasties and the radiocarbon dates of Egyptian artefacts. Neither the pre-existing Egyptian chronology nor the new radiocarbon dating method could be assumed to be accurate, but a third possibility was that the 14C/12C ratio had changed over time. The question was resolved by the study of tree rings: comparison of overlapping series of tree rings allowed the construction of a continuous sequence of tree-ring data that spanned 8,000 years. (Since that time the tree-ring data series has been extended to 13,900 years.) In the 1960s, Hans Suess was able to use the tree-ring sequence to show that the dates derived from radiocarbon were consistent with the dates assigned by Egyptologists. This was possible because although annual plants, such as corn, have a 14C/12C ratio that reflects the atmospheric ratio at the time they were growing, trees only add material to their outermost tree ring in any given year, while the inner tree rings don't get their 14C replenished and instead start losing 14C through decay. Hence each ring preserves a record of the atmospheric 14C/12C ratio of the year it grew in. Carbon-dating the wood from the tree rings themselves provides the check needed on the atmospheric 14C/12C ratio: with a sample of known date, and a measurement of the value of \"N\" (the number of atoms of 14C remaining in the sample), the carbon-dating equation allows the calculation of \"N\"0 \u2013 the number of atoms of 14C in the sample at the time the tree ring was formed \u2013 and hence the 14C/12C ratio in the atmosphere at that time. Equipped with the results of carbon-dating the tree rings, it became possible to construct calibration curves designed to correct the errors caused by the variation over time in the 14C/12C ratio. These curves are described in more detail below.\nCoal and oil began to be burned in large quantities during the 19th century. Both are sufficiently old that they contain little or no detectable 14C and, as a result, the CO2 released substantially diluted the atmospheric 14C/12C ratio. Dating an object from the early 20th century hence gives an apparent date older than the true date. For the same reason, 14C concentrations in the neighbourhood of large cities are lower than the atmospheric average. This fossil fuel effect (also known as the Suess effect, after Hans Suess, who first reported it in 1955) would only amount to a reduction of 0.2% in 14C activity if the additional carbon from fossil fuels were distributed throughout the carbon exchange reservoir, but because of the long delay in mixing with the deep ocean, the actual effect is a 3% reduction.\nA much larger effect comes from above-ground nuclear testing, which released large numbers of neutrons into the atmosphere, resulting in the creation of 14C. From about 1950 until 1963, when atmospheric nuclear testing was banned, it is estimated that several tonnes of 14C were created. If all this extra 14C had immediately been spread across the entire carbon exchange reservoir, it would have led to an increase in the 14C/12C ratio of only a few per cent, but the immediate effect was to almost double the amount of 14C in the atmosphere, with the peak level occurring in 1964 for the northern hemisphere, and in 1966 for the southern hemisphere. The level has since dropped, as this bomb pulse or \"bomb carbon\" (as it is sometimes called) percolates into the rest of the reservoir.\nIsotopic fractionation.\nPhotosynthesis is the primary process by which carbon moves from the atmosphere into living things. In photosynthetic pathways 12C is absorbed slightly more easily than 13C, which in turn is more easily absorbed than 14C. The differential uptake of the three carbon isotopes leads to 13C/12C and 14C/12C ratios in plants that differ from the ratios in the atmosphere. This effect is known as isotopic fractionation.\nTo determine the degree of fractionation that takes place in a given plant, the amounts of both 12C and 13C isotopes are measured, and the resulting 13C/12C ratio is then compared to a standard ratio known as PDB. The 13C/12C ratio is used instead of 14C/12C because the former is much easier to measure, and the latter can be easily derived: the depletion of 13C relative to 12C is proportional to the difference in the atomic masses of the two isotopes, so the depletion for 14C is twice the depletion of 13C. The fractionation of 13C, known as \u03b413C, is calculated as follows:\nformula_3 \u2030\nwhere the \u2030 sign indicates parts per thousand. Because the PDB standard contains an unusually high proportion of 13C, most measured \u03b413C values are negative.\nFor marine organisms, the details of the photosynthesis reactions are less well understood, and the \u03b413C values for marine photosynthetic organisms are dependent on temperature. At higher temperatures, CO2 has poor solubility in water, which means there is less CO2 available for the photosynthetic reactions. Under these conditions, fractionation is reduced, and at temperatures above 14\u00a0\u00b0C the \u03b413C values are correspondingly higher, while at lower temperatures, CO2 becomes more soluble and hence more available to marine organisms. The \u03b413C value for animals depends on their diet. An animal that eats food with high \u03b413C values will have a higher \u03b413C than one that eats food with lower \u03b413C values. The animal's own biochemical processes can also impact the results: for example, both bone minerals and bone collagen typically have a higher concentration of 13C than is found in the animal's diet, though for different biochemical reasons. The enrichment of bone 13C also implies that excreted material is depleted in 13C relative to the diet.\nSince 13C makes up about 1% of the carbon in a sample, the 13C/12C ratio can be accurately measured by mass spectrometry. Typical values of \u03b413C have been found by experiment for many plants, as well as for different parts of animals such as bone collagen, but when dating a given sample it is better to determine the \u03b413C value for that sample directly than to rely on the published values.\nThe carbon exchange between atmospheric CO2 and carbonate at the ocean surface is also subject to fractionation, with 14C in the atmosphere more likely than 12C to dissolve in the ocean. The result is an overall increase in the 14C/12C ratio in the ocean of 1.5%, relative to the 14C/12C ratio in the atmosphere. This increase in 14C concentration almost exactly cancels out the decrease caused by the upwelling of water (containing old, and hence 14C-depleted, carbon) from the deep ocean, so that direct measurements of 14C radiation are similar to measurements for the rest of the biosphere. Correcting for isotopic fractionation, as is done for all radiocarbon dates to allow comparison between results from different parts of the biosphere, gives an apparent age of about 400 years for ocean surface water.\nReservoir effects.\nLibby's original exchange reservoir hypothesis assumed that the 14C/12C ratio in the exchange reservoir is constant all over the world, but it has since been discovered that there are several causes of variation in the ratio across the reservoir.\nMarine effect.\nThe CO2 in the atmosphere transfers to the ocean by dissolving in the surface water as carbonate and bicarbonate ions; at the same time the carbonate ions in the water are returning to the air as CO2. This exchange process brings 14C from the atmosphere into the surface waters of the ocean, but the 14C thus introduced takes a long time to percolate through the entire volume of the ocean. The deepest parts of the ocean mix very slowly with the surface waters, and the mixing is uneven. The main mechanism that brings deep water to the surface is upwelling, which is more common in regions closer to the equator. Upwelling is also influenced by factors such as the topography of the local ocean bottom and coastlines, the climate, and wind patterns. Overall, the mixing of deep and surface waters takes far longer than the mixing of atmospheric CO2 with the surface waters, and as a result water from some deep ocean areas has an apparent radiocarbon age of several thousand years. Upwelling mixes this \"old\" water with the surface water, giving the surface water an apparent age of about several hundred years (after correcting for fractionation). This effect is not uniform\u00a0\u2013 the average effect is about 400 years, but there are local deviations of several hundred years for areas that are geographically close to each other. These deviations can be accounted for in calibration, and users of software such as CALIB can provide as an input the appropriate correction for the location of their samples. The effect also applies to marine organisms such as shells, and marine mammals such as whales and seals, which have radiocarbon ages that appear to be hundreds of years old.\nHemisphere effect.\nThe northern and southern hemispheres have atmospheric circulation systems that are sufficiently independent of each other that there is a noticeable time lag in mixing between the two. The atmospheric 14C/12C ratio is lower in the southern hemisphere, with an apparent additional age of about 40 years for radiocarbon results from the south as compared to the north. This is because the greater surface area of ocean in the southern hemisphere means that there is more carbon exchanged between the ocean and the atmosphere than in the north. Since the surface ocean is depleted in 14C because of the marine effect, 14C is removed from the southern atmosphere more quickly than in the north. The effect is strengthened by strong upwelling around Antarctica.\nOther effects.\nIf the carbon in freshwater is partly acquired from aged carbon, such as rocks, then the result will be a reduction in the 14C/12C ratio in the water. For example, rivers that pass over limestone, which is mostly composed of calcium carbonate, will acquire carbonate ions. Similarly, groundwater can contain carbon derived from the rocks through which it has passed. These rocks are usually so old that they no longer contain any measurable 14C, so this carbon lowers the 14C/12C ratio of the water it enters, which can lead to apparent ages of thousands of years for both the affected water and the plants and freshwater organisms that live in it. This is known as the hard water effect because it is often associated with calcium ions, which are characteristic of hard water; other sources of carbon such as humus can produce similar results, and can also reduce the apparent age if they are of more recent origin than the sample. The effect varies greatly and there is no general offset that can be applied; additional research is usually needed to determine the size of the offset, for example by comparing the radiocarbon age of deposited freshwater shells with associated organic material.\nVolcanic eruptions eject large amounts of carbon into the air. The carbon is of geological origin and has no detectable 14C, so the 14C/12C ratio near the volcano is depressed relative to surrounding areas. Dormant volcanoes can also emit aged carbon. Plants that photosynthesize this carbon also have lower 14C/12C ratios: for example, plants in the neighbourhood of the Furnas caldera in the Azores were found to have apparent ages that ranged from 250 years to 3320 years.\nContamination.\nAny addition of carbon to a sample of a different age will cause the measured date to be inaccurate. Contamination with modern carbon causes a sample to appear to be younger than it really is: the effect is greater for older samples. If a sample that is 17,000 years old is contaminated so that 1% of the sample is modern carbon, it will appear to be 600 years younger; for a sample that is 34,000 years old, the same amount of contamination would cause an error of 4,000 years. Contamination with old carbon, with no remaining 14C, causes an error in the other direction independent of age\u00a0\u2013 a sample contaminated with 1% old carbon will appear to be about 80 years older than it truly is, regardless of the date of the sample.\nSamples.\nSamples for dating need to be converted into a form suitable for measuring the 14C content; this can mean conversion to gaseous, liquid, or solid form, depending on the measurement technique to be used. Before this can be done, the sample must be treated to remove any contamination and any unwanted constituents. This includes removing visible contaminants, such as rootlets that may have penetrated the sample since its burial. Alkali and acid washes can be used to remove humic acid and carbonate contamination, but care has to be taken to avoid removing the part of the sample that contains the carbon to be tested.\nPreparation and size.\nParticularly for older samples, it may be useful to enrich the amount of 14C in the sample before testing. This can be done with a thermal diffusion column. The process takes about a month and requires a sample about ten times as large as would be needed otherwise, but it allows more precise measurement of the 14C/12C ratio in old material and extends the maximum age that can be reliably reported.\nOnce contamination has been removed, samples must be converted to a form suitable for the measuring technology to be used. Where gas is required, CO2 is widely used. For samples to be used in liquid scintillation counters, the carbon must be in liquid form; the sample is typically converted to benzene. For accelerator mass spectrometry, solid graphite targets are the most common, although gaseous CO2 can also be used.\nThe quantity of material needed for testing depends on the sample type and the technology being used. There are two types of testing technology: detectors that record radioactivity, known as beta counters, and accelerator mass spectrometers. For beta counters, a sample weighing at least is typically required. Accelerator mass spectrometry is much more sensitive, and samples containing as little as 0.5 milligrams of carbon can be used.\nMeasurement and results.\nFor decades after Libby performed the first radiocarbon dating experiments, the only way to measure the 14C in a sample was to detect the radioactive decay of individual carbon atoms. In this approach, what is measured is the activity, in number of decay events per unit mass per time period, of the sample. This method is also known as \"beta counting\", because it is the beta particles emitted by the decaying 14C atoms that are detected. In the late 1970s an alternative approach became available: directly counting the number of 14C and 12C atoms in a given sample, via accelerator mass spectrometry, usually referred to as AMS. AMS counts the 14C/12C ratio directly, instead of the activity of the sample, but measurements of activity and 14C/12C ratio can be converted into each other exactly. For some time, beta counting methods were more accurate than AMS, but AMS is now more accurate and has become the method of choice for radiocarbon measurements. In addition to improved accuracy, AMS has two further significant advantages over beta counting: it can perform accurate testing on samples much too small for beta counting, and it is much faster\u00a0\u2013 an accuracy of 1% can be achieved in minutes with AMS, which is far quicker than would be achievable with the older technology.\nBeta counting.\nLibby's first detector was a Geiger counter of his own design. He converted the carbon in his sample to lamp black (soot) and coated the inner surface of a cylinder with it. This cylinder was inserted into the counter in such a way that the counting wire was inside the sample cylinder, in order that there should be no material between the sample and the wire. Any interposing material would have interfered with the detection of radioactivity, since the beta particles emitted by decaying 14C are so weak that half are stopped by a 0.01\u00a0mm thickness of aluminium.\nLibby's method was soon superseded by gas proportional counters, which were less affected by bomb carbon (the additional 14C created by nuclear weapons testing). These counters record bursts of ionization caused by the beta particles emitted by the decaying 14C atoms; the bursts are proportional to the energy of the particle, so other sources of ionization, such as background radiation, can be identified and ignored. The counters are surrounded by lead or steel shielding, to eliminate background radiation and to reduce the incidence of cosmic rays. In addition, anticoincidence detectors are used; these record events outside the counter and any event recorded simultaneously both inside and outside the counter is regarded as an extraneous event and ignored.\nThe other common technology used for measuring 14C activity is liquid scintillation counting, which was invented in 1950, but which had to wait until the early 1960s, when efficient methods of benzene synthesis were developed, to become competitive with gas counting; after 1970 liquid counters became the more common technology choice for newly constructed dating laboratories. The counters work by detecting flashes of light caused by the beta particles emitted by 14C as they interact with a fluorescing agent added to the benzene. Like gas counters, liquid scintillation counters require shielding and anticoincidence counters.\nFor both the gas proportional counter and liquid scintillation counter, what is measured is the number of beta particles detected in a given time period. Since the mass of the sample is known, this can be converted to a standard measure of activity in units of either counts per minute per gram of carbon (cpm/g C), or becquerels per kg (Bq/kg C, in SI units). Each measuring device is also used to measure the activity of a blank sample\u00a0\u2013 a sample prepared from carbon old enough to have no activity. This provides a value for the background radiation, which must be subtracted from the measured activity of the sample being dated to get the activity attributable solely to that sample's 14C. In addition, a sample with a standard activity is measured, to provide a baseline for comparison.\nAccelerator mass spectrometry.\nAMS counts the atoms of 14C and 12C in a given sample, determining the 14C/12C ratio directly. The sample, often in the form of graphite, is made to emit C\u2212 ions (carbon atoms with a single negative charge), which are injected into an accelerator. The ions are accelerated and passed through a stripper, which removes several electrons so that the ions emerge with a positive charge. The ions, which may have from 1 to 4 positive charges (C+ to C4+), depending on the accelerator design, are then passed through a magnet that curves their path; the heavier ions are curved less than the lighter ones, so the different isotopes emerge as separate streams of ions. A particle detector then records the number of ions detected in the 14C stream, but since the volume of 12C (and 13C, needed for calibration) is too great for individual ion detection, counts are determined by measuring the electric current created in a Faraday cup. The large positive charge induced by the stripper forces molecules such as 13CH, which has a weight close enough to 14C to interfere with the measurements, to dissociate, so they are not detected. Most AMS machines also measure the sample's \u03b413C, for use in calculating the sample's radiocarbon age. The use of AMS, as opposed to simpler forms of mass spectrometry, is necessary because of the need to distinguish the carbon isotopes from other atoms or molecules that are very close in mass, such as 14N and 13CH. As with beta counting, both blank samples and standard samples are used. Two different kinds of blank may be measured: a sample of dead carbon that has undergone no chemical processing, to detect any machine background, and a sample known as a process blank made from dead carbon that is processed into target material in exactly the same way as the sample which is being dated. Any 14C signal from the machine background blank is likely to be caused either by beams of ions that have not followed the expected path inside the detector or by carbon hydrides such as 12CH2 or 13CH. A 14C signal from the process blank measures the amount of contamination introduced during the preparation of the sample. These measurements are used in the subsequent calculation of the age of the sample.\nCalculations.\nThe calculations to be performed on the measurements taken depend on the technology used, since beta counters measure the sample's radioactivity whereas AMS determines the ratio of the three different carbon isotopes in the sample.\nTo determine the age of a sample whose activity has been measured by beta counting, the ratio of its activity to the activity of the standard must be found. To determine this, a blank sample (of old, or dead, carbon) is measured, and a sample of known activity is measured. The additional samples allow errors such as background radiation and systematic errors in the laboratory setup to be detected and corrected for. The most common standard sample material is oxalic acid, such as the HOxII standard, 1,000\u00a0lb of which was prepared by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 1977 from French beet harvests.\nThe results from AMS testing are in the form of ratios of 12C, 13C, and 14C, which are used to calculate Fm, the \"fraction modern\". This is defined as the ratio between the 14C/12C ratio in the sample and the 14C/12C ratio in modern carbon, which is in turn defined as the 14C/12C ratio that would have been measured in 1950 had there been no fossil fuel effect.\nBoth beta counting and AMS results have to be corrected for fractionation. This is necessary because different materials of the same age, which because of fractionation have naturally different 14C/12C ratios, will appear to be of different ages because the 14C/12C ratio is taken as the indicator of age. To avoid this, all radiocarbon measurements are converted to the measurement that would have been seen had the sample been made of wood, which has a known \u03b413C value of \u221225\u2030.\nOnce the corrected 14C/12C ratio is known, a \"radiocarbon age\" is calculated using:\nformula_4\nThe calculation uses 8,033 years, the mean-life derived from Libby's half-life of 5,568 years, not 8,267 years, the mean-life derived from the more accurate modern value of 5,730 years. Libby's value for the half-life is used to maintain consistency with early radiocarbon testing results; calibration curves include a correction for this, so the accuracy of final reported calendar ages is not affected.\nErrors and reliability.\nThe reliability of the results can be improved by lengthening the testing time. For example, if counting beta decays for 250 minutes is enough to give an error of \u00b1 80 years, with 68% confidence, then doubling the counting time to 500 minutes will allow a sample with only half as much 14C to be measured with the same error term of 80 years.\nRadiocarbon dating is generally limited to dating samples no more than 50,000 years old, as samples older than that have insufficient 14C to be measurable. Older dates have been obtained by using special sample preparation techniques, large samples, and very long measurement times. These techniques can allow measurement of dates up to 60,000 and in some cases up to 75,000 years before the present.\nRadiocarbon dates are generally presented with a range of one standard deviation (usually represented by the Greek letter sigma as 1\u03c3) on either side of the mean. However, a date range of 1\u03c3 represents only a 68% confidence level, so the true age of the object being measured may lie outside the range of dates quoted. This was demonstrated in 1970 by an experiment run by the British Museum radiocarbon laboratory, in which weekly measurements were taken on the same sample for six months. The results varied widely (though consistently with a normal distribution of errors in the measurements), and included multiple date ranges (of 1\u03c3 confidence) that did not overlap with each other. The measurements included one with a range from about 4,250 to about 4,390 years ago, and another with a range from about 4,520 to about 4,690.\nErrors in procedure can also lead to errors in the results. If 1% of the benzene in a modern reference sample accidentally evaporates, scintillation counting will give a radiocarbon age that is too young by about 80 years.\nCalibration.\nThe calculations given above produce dates in radiocarbon years: i.e. dates that represent the age the sample would be if the 14C/12C ratio had been constant historically. Although Libby had pointed out as early as 1955 the possibility that this assumption was incorrect, it was not until discrepancies began to accumulate between measured ages and known historical dates for artefacts that it became clear that a correction would need to be applied to radiocarbon ages to obtain calendar dates.\nTo produce a curve that can be used to relate calendar years to radiocarbon years, a sequence of securely dated samples is needed which can be tested to determine their radiocarbon age. The study of tree rings led to the first such sequence: individual pieces of wood show characteristic sequences of rings that vary in thickness because of environmental factors such as the amount of rainfall in a given year. These factors affect all trees in an area, so examining tree-ring sequences from old wood allows the identification of overlapping sequences. In this way, an uninterrupted sequence of tree rings can be extended far into the past. The first such published sequence, based on bristlecone pine tree rings, was created by Wesley Ferguson. Hans Suess used this data to publish the first calibration curve for radiocarbon dating in 1967. The curve showed two types of variation from the straight line: a long term fluctuation with a period of about 9,000 years, and a shorter-term variation, often referred to as \"wiggles\", with a period of decades. Suess said he drew the line showing the wiggles by \"cosmic \"schwung\"\", by which he meant that the variations were caused by extraterrestrial forces. It was unclear for some time whether the wiggles were real or not, but they are now well-established. These short term fluctuations in the calibration curve are now known as de Vries effects, after Hessel de Vries.\nA calibration curve is used by taking the radiocarbon date reported by a laboratory and reading across from that date on the vertical axis of the graph. The point where this horizontal line intersects the curve will give the calendar age of the sample on the horizontal axis. This is the reverse of the way the curve is constructed: a point on the graph is derived from a sample of known age, such as a tree ring; when it is tested, the resulting radiocarbon age gives a data point for the graph.\nOver the next thirty years many calibration curves were published using a variety of methods and statistical approaches. These were superseded by the IntCal series of curves, beginning with IntCal98, published in 1998, and updated in 2004, 2009, 2013, and 2020. The improvements to these curves are based on new data gathered from tree rings, varves, coral, plant macrofossils, speleothems, and foraminifera. There are separate curves for the northern hemisphere (IntCal20) and southern hemisphere (SHCal20), as they differ systematically because of the hemisphere effect. The continuous sequence of tree-ring dates for the northern hemisphere goes back to 13,910 BP as of 2020, and this provides close to annual dating for IntCal20 much of the period, reduced where there are calibration plateaus, and increased when short term 14C spikes due to Miyake events provide additional correlation. Radiocarbon dating earlier than the continuous tree ring sequence relies on correlation with more approximate records. SHCal20 is based on independent data where possible and derived from the northern curve by adding the average offset for the southern hemisphere where no direct data was available. There is also a separate marine calibration curve, MARINE20. For a set of samples forming a sequence with a known separation in time, these samples form a subset of the calibration curve. The sequence can be compared to the calibration curve and the best match to the sequence established. This \"wiggle-matching\" technique can lead to more precise dating than is possible with individual radiocarbon dates. Wiggle-matching can be used in places where there is a plateau on the calibration curve, and hence can provide a much more accurate date than the intercept or probability methods are able to produce. The technique is not restricted to tree rings; for example, a stratified tephra sequence in New Zealand, believed to predate human colonization of the islands, has been dated to 1314\u00a0AD \u00b1 12 years by wiggle-matching. The wiggles also mean that reading a date from a calibration curve can give more than one answer: this occurs when the curve wiggles up and down enough that the radiocarbon age intercepts the curve in more than one place, which may lead to a radiocarbon result being reported as two separate age ranges, corresponding to the two parts of the curve that the radiocarbon age intercepted.\nBayesian statistical techniques can be applied when there are several radiocarbon dates to be calibrated. For example, if a series of radiocarbon dates is taken from different levels in a stratigraphic sequence, Bayesian analysis can be used to evaluate dates which are outliers and can calculate improved probability distributions, based on the prior information that the sequence should be ordered in time. When Bayesian analysis was introduced, its use was limited by the need to use mainframe computers to perform the calculations, but the technique has since been implemented on programs available for personal computers, such as OxCal.\nReporting dates.\nSeveral formats for citing radiocarbon results have been used since the first samples were dated. As of 2019, the standard format required by the journal \"Radiocarbon\" is as follows.\nUncalibrated dates should be reported as \"laboratory: &lt;chem&gt;{}^14C&lt;/chem&gt; year \u00b1 range BP\", where:\nFor example, the uncalibrated date \"UtC-2020: 3510 \u00b1 60 BP\" indicates that the sample was tested by the Utrecht van der Graaff Laboratorium (\"UtC\"), where it has a sample number of \"2020\", and that the uncalibrated age is 3510 years before present, \u00b1 60 years. Related forms are sometimes used: for example, \"2.3 ka BP\" means 2,300 radiocarbon years before present (i.e. 350 BC), and \"14C yr BP\" might be used to distinguish the uncalibrated date from a date derived from another dating method such as thermoluminescence.\nCalibrated 14C dates are frequently reported as \"cal BP\", \"cal BC\", or \"cal AD\", again with 'BP' referring to the year 1950 as the zero date. \"Radiocarbon\" gives two options for reporting calibrated dates. A common format is \"cal date-range confidence\", where:\nFor example, \"cal 1220\u20131281 AD (1\u03c3)\" means a calibrated date for which the true date lies between AD 1220 and AD 1281, with a confidence level of '1 sigma', or approximately 68%. Calibrated dates can also be expressed as \"BP\" instead of using \"BC\" and \"AD\". The curve used to calibrate the results should be the latest available IntCal curve. Calibrated dates should also identify any programs, such as OxCal, used to perform the calibration. In addition, an article in \"Radiocarbon\" in 2014 about radiocarbon date reporting conventions recommends that information should be provided about sample treatment, including the sample material, pretreatment methods, and quality control measurements; that the citation to the software used for calibration should specify the version number and any options or models used; and that the calibrated date should be given with the associated probabilities for each range.\nUse in archaeology.\nInterpretation.\nA key concept in interpreting radiocarbon dates is archaeological association: what is the true relationship between two or more objects at an archaeological site? It frequently happens that a sample for radiocarbon dating can be taken directly from the object of interest, but there are also many cases where this is not possible. Metal grave goods, for example, cannot be radiocarbon dated, but they may be found in a grave with a coffin, charcoal, or other material which can be assumed to have been deposited at the same time. In these cases, a date for the coffin or charcoal is indicative of the date of deposition of the grave goods, because of the direct functional relationship between the two. There are also cases where there is no functional relationship, but the association is reasonably strong: for example, a layer of charcoal in a rubbish pit provides a date which has a relationship to the rubbish pit.\nContamination is of particular concern when dating very old material obtained from archaeological excavations and great care is needed in the specimen selection and preparation. In 2014, Thomas Higham and co-workers suggested that many of the dates published for Neanderthal artifacts are too recent because of contamination by \"young carbon\".\nAs a tree grows, only the outermost tree ring exchanges carbon with its environment, so the age measured for a wood sample depends on where the sample is taken from. This means that radiocarbon dates on wood samples can be older than the date at which the tree was felled. In addition, if a piece of wood is used for multiple purposes, there may be a significant delay between the felling of the tree and the final use in the context in which it is found. This is often referred to as the \"old wood\" problem. One example is the Bronze Age trackway at Withy Bed Copse, in England; the trackway was built from wood that had clearly been worked for other purposes before being re-used in the trackway. Another example is driftwood, which may be used as construction material. It is not always possible to recognize re-use. Other materials can present the same problem: for example, bitumen is known to have been used by some Neolithic communities to waterproof baskets; the bitumen's radiocarbon age will be greater than is measurable by the laboratory, regardless of the actual age of the context, so testing the basket material will give a misleading age if care is not taken. A separate issue, related to re-use, is that of lengthy use, or delayed deposition. For example, a wooden object that remains in use for a lengthy period will have an apparent age greater than the actual age of the context in which it is deposited.\nNotable applications.\nPleistocene/Holocene boundary in Two Creeks Fossil Forest.\nThe Pleistocene is a geological epoch that began about 2.6 million years ago. The Holocene, the current geological epoch, begins about 11,700 years ago when the Pleistocene ends. Establishing the date of this boundary \u2212 which is defined by sharp climatic warming \u2212 as accurately as possible has been a goal of geologists for much of the 20th century. At Two Creeks, in Wisconsin, a fossil forest was discovered (Two Creeks Buried Forest State Natural Area), and subsequent research determined that the destruction of the forest was caused by the Valders ice readvance, the last southward movement of ice before the end of the Pleistocene in that area. Before the advent of radiocarbon dating, the fossilized trees had been dated by correlating sequences of annually deposited layers of sediment at Two Creeks with sequences in Scandinavia. This led to estimates that the trees were between 24,000 and 19,000 years old, and hence this was taken to be the date of the last advance of the Wisconsin glaciation before its final retreat marked the end of the Pleistocene in North America. In 1952 Libby published radiocarbon dates for several samples from the Two Creeks site and two similar sites nearby; the dates were averaged to 11,404 BP with a standard error of 350 years. This result was uncalibrated, as the need for calibration of radiocarbon ages was not yet understood. Further results over the next decade supported an average date of 11,350 BP, with the results thought to be the most accurate averaging 11,600 BP. There was initial resistance to these results on the part of Ernst Antevs, the palaeobotanist who had worked on the Scandinavian varve series, but his objections were eventually discounted by other geologists. In the 1990s samples were tested with AMS, yielding (uncalibrated) dates ranging from 11,640 BP to 11,800 BP, both with a standard error of 160 years. Subsequently, a sample from the fossil forest was used in an interlaboratory test, with results provided by over 70 laboratories. These tests produced a median age of 11,788 \u00b1 8 BP (2\u03c3 confidence) which when calibrated gives a date range of 13,730 to 13,550 cal BP. The Two Creeks radiocarbon dates are now regarded as a key result in developing the modern understanding of North American glaciation at the end of the Pleistocene.\nDead Sea Scrolls.\nIn 1947, scrolls were discovered in caves near the Dead Sea that proved to contain writing in Hebrew and Aramaic, most of which are thought to have been produced by the Essenes, a small Jewish sect. These scrolls are of great significance in the study of Biblical texts because many of them contain the earliest known version of books of the Hebrew bible. A sample of the linen wrapping from one of these scrolls, the Great Isaiah Scroll, was included in a 1955 analysis by Libby, with an estimated age of 1,917 \u00b1 200 years. Based on an analysis of the writing style, palaeographic estimates were made of the age of 21 of the scrolls, and samples from most of these, along with other scrolls which had not been palaeographically dated, were tested by two AMS laboratories in the 1990s. The results ranged in age from the early 4th century BC to the mid 4th century AD. In all but two cases the scrolls were determined to be within 100 years of the palaeographically determined age. The Isaiah scroll was included in the testing and was found to have two possible date ranges at a 2\u03c3 confidence level, because of the shape of the calibration curve at that point: there is a 15% chance that it dates from 355 to 295 BC, and an 84% chance that it dates from 210 to 45 BC. Subsequently, these dates were criticized on the grounds that before the scrolls were tested, they had been treated with modern castor oil in order to make the writing easier to read; it was argued that failure to remove the castor oil sufficiently would have caused the dates to be too young. Multiple papers have been published both supporting and opposing the criticism.\nImpact.\nSoon after the publication of Libby's 1949 paper in \"Science\", universities around the world began establishing radiocarbon-dating laboratories, and by the end of the 1950s there were more than 20 active 14C research laboratories. It quickly became apparent that the principles of radiocarbon dating were valid, despite certain discrepancies, the causes of which then remained unknown.\nThe development of radiocarbon dating has had a profound impact on archaeology\u00a0\u2013 often described as the \"radiocarbon revolution\". In the words of anthropologist R.\u00a0E. Taylor, \"14C data made a \"world\" prehistory possible by contributing a time scale that transcends local, regional and continental boundaries\". It provides more accurate dating within sites than previous methods, which usually derived either from stratigraphy or from typologies (e.g. of stone tools or pottery); it also allows comparison and synchronization of events across great distances. The advent of radiocarbon dating may even have led to better field methods in archaeology since better data recording leads to a firmer association of objects with the samples to be tested. These improved field methods were sometimes motivated by attempts to prove that a 14C date was incorrect. Taylor also suggests that the availability of definite date information freed archaeologists from the need to focus so much of their energy on determining the dates of their finds, and led to an expansion of the questions archaeologists were willing to research. For example, from the 1970s questions about the evolution of human behaviour were much more frequently seen in archaeology.\nThe dating framework provided by radiocarbon led to a change in the prevailing view of how innovations spread through prehistoric Europe. Researchers had previously thought that many ideas spread by diffusion through the continent, or by invasions of peoples bringing new cultural ideas with them. As radiocarbon dates began to prove these ideas wrong in many instances, it became apparent that these innovations must sometimes have arisen locally. This has been described as a \"second radiocarbon revolution\". More broadly, the success of radiocarbon dating stimulated interest in analytical and statistical approaches to archaeological data. Taylor has also described the impact of AMS, and the ability to obtain accurate measurements from very small samples, as ushering in a third radiocarbon revolution.\nOccasionally, radiocarbon dating techniques date an object of popular interest, for example, the Shroud of Turin, a piece of linen cloth thought by some to bear an image of Jesus Christ after his crucifixion. Three separate laboratories dated samples of linen from the Shroud in 1988; the results pointed to 14th-century origins, raising doubts about the shroud's authenticity as an alleged 1st-century relic.\nResearchers have studied other isotopes created by cosmic rays to determine if they could also be used to assist in dating objects of archaeological interest; such isotopes include 3He, 10Be, 21Ne, 26Al, and 36Cl. With the development of AMS in the 1980s it became possible to measure these isotopes precisely enough for them to be the basis of useful dating techniques, which have been primarily applied to dating rocks. Naturally occurring radioactive isotopes can also form the basis of dating methods, as with potassium\u2013argon dating, argon\u2013argon dating, and uranium series dating. Other dating techniques of interest to archaeologists include thermoluminescence, optically stimulated luminescence, electron spin resonance, and fission track dating, as well as techniques that depend on annual bands or layers, such as dendrochronology, tephrochronology, and varve chronology.\nUse outside archaeology.\nArchaeology is not the only field that uses radiocarbon dating. Radiocarbon dates can also be used in geology, sedimentology, and lake studies, for example. The ability to date minute samples using AMS has meant that palaeobotanists and palaeoclimatologists can use radiocarbon dating directly on pollen purified from sediment sequences, or on small quantities of plant material or charcoal. Dates on organic material recovered from strata of interest can be used to correlate strata in different locations that appear to be similar on geological grounds. Dating material from one location gives date information about the other location, and the dates are also used to place strata in the overall geological timeline.\nRadiocarbon is also used to date carbon released from ecosystems, particularly to monitor the release of old carbon that was previously stored in soils as a result of human disturbance or climate change. Recent advances in field collection techniques also allow the radiocarbon dating of methane and carbon dioxide, which are important greenhouse gases.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26199", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26199", "title": "Roald Amundsen", "text": "Norwegian polar explorer (1872\u20131928)\nRoald Engelbregt Gravning Amundsen (, ; ; 16 July 1872\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200918 June 1928) was a Norwegian explorer of polar regions. He was a key figure of the period known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration.\nBorn in Borge, \u00d8stfold, Norway, Amundsen began his career as a polar explorer as first mate on Adrien de Gerlache's Belgian Antarctic Expedition of 1897\u20131899. From 1903 to 1906, he led the first expedition to successfully traverse the Northwest Passage on the sloop \"Gj\u00f8a\". In 1909, Amundsen began planning for a South Pole expedition. He left Norway in June 1910 on the ship \"Fram\" and reached Antarctica in January 1911. His party established a camp at the Bay of Whales and a series of supply depots on the Barrier (now known as the Ross Ice Shelf) before setting out for the pole in October. The party of five, led by Amundsen, became the first to reach the South Pole on 14 December 1911.\nFollowing a failed attempt in 1918 to reach the North Pole by traversing the Northeast Passage on the ship \"Maud\", Amundsen began planning for an aerial expedition instead. On 12 May 1926, Amundsen and 15 other men in the airship \"Norge\" became the first explorers verified to have reached the North Pole. Amundsen disappeared in June 1928 while flying on a rescue mission for the airship in the Arctic. The search for his remains, which have not been found, was called off that September.\nEarly life.\nAmundsen was born into a family of Norwegian shipowners and captains in Borge, between the towns Fredrikstad and Sarpsborg. His parents were Jens Amundsen and Hanna Sahlqvist. Roald was the fourth son in the family. His mother wanted him to avoid the family maritime trade and encouraged him to become a doctor, a promise that Amundsen kept until his mother died when he was aged 21. He promptly quit university for a life at sea.\nAmundsen was in the Uranienborg neighbourhood an occasional childhood playmate of the pioneering Antarctica explorer Carsten Borchgrevink.\nWhen he was fifteen years old, Amundsen was enthralled by reading Sir John Franklin's narratives of his overland Arctic expeditions. Amundsen wrote \"I read them with a fervid fascination which has shaped the whole course of my life\".\nPolar treks.\nBelgian Antarctic Expedition.\nAmundsen joined the Belgian Antarctic Expedition as first mate at the age of 25 in 1897. This expedition, led by Adrien de Gerlache using the ship the RV \"Belgica\", became the first expedition to overwinter in Antarctica. The \"Belgica\", whether by mistake or design, became locked in the sea ice at 70\u00b030\u2032S off Alexander Island, west of the Antarctic Peninsula. The crew endured a winter for which they were poorly prepared.\nBy Amundsen's own estimation, the doctor for the expedition, the American Frederick Cook, probably saved the crew from scurvy by hunting for animals and feeding the crew fresh meat. In cases where citrus fruits are lacking, raw meat \u2013 particularly offal \u2013 from animals often contains enough vitamin C to prevent scurvy.\nThe Northwest Passage.\nIn 1903, Amundsen led the first expedition to traverse Canada's Northwest Passage between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. He planned a small expedition of six men in a 45-ton fishing vessel, , to have flexibility. His ship had relatively shallow draft. His technique was to use a small ship and hug the coast. Amundsen had the ship outfitted with a small 13\u00a0horsepower single-screw paraffin (diesel) engine.\nThey travelled via Baffin Bay, the Parry Channel and then south through Peel Sound, James Ross Strait, Simpson Strait and Rae Strait. They spent two winters at King William Island, in the harbor of what is today Gjoa Haven. During this time, Amundsen and the crew learned from the local Netsilik Inuit about Arctic survival skills, which he found invaluable in his later expedition to the South Pole. For example, he learned to use sled dogs for the transport of goods and to wear animal skins in lieu of heavy, woolen parkas, which could not keep out the cold when wet.\nLeaving Gjoa Haven, he sailed west and passed Cambridge Bay, which had been reached from the west by Richard Collinson in 1852. Continuing to the south of Victoria Island, the ship cleared the Canadian Arctic Archipelago on 17 August 1905. It had to stop for the winter before going on to Nome on Alaska's Pacific coast. The nearest telegraph station was away in Eagle. Amundsen travelled there overland to wire a success message on 5 December, then returned to Nome in 1906. While stopped in Alaska, Amundsen had his magnetic instruments (i.e. compasses) adjusted by Don C. Sowers, a physicist from the Carnegie Institution's Department of Terrestrial Magnetism. Later that year Amundsen was elected to the American Antiquarian Society.\nAmundsen learned of the dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden, and that he had a new king. The explorer sent the new king, Haakon VII, news that his traversing the Northwest Passage \"was a great achievement for Norway\". He said he hoped to do more and signed it \"Your loyal subject, Roald Amundsen\". The crew returned to Oslo in November 1906, after almost three and a half years abroad. \"Gj\u00f8a\" was returned to Norway in 1972. After a 45-day trip from San Francisco on a bulk carrier, she was placed on land outside the Fram Museum in Oslo, where she is now situated inside her own building at the museum.\nSouth Pole Expedition.\nAmundsen next planned to take an expedition to the North Pole and explore the Arctic Basin. Finding it difficult to raise funds, when he heard in 1909 that the Americans Frederick Cook and Robert Peary had claimed to reach the North Pole as a result of two different expeditions, he decided to reroute to Antarctica. He was not clear about his intentions, and Robert F. Scott and the Norwegian supporters felt misled. Scott was planning his own expedition to the South Pole that year. Using the ship , earlier used by Fridtjof Nansen, Amundsen left Oslo for the south on 3 June 1910. At Madeira, Amundsen alerted his men that they would be heading to Antarctica, and sent a telegram to Scott: \"Beg to inform you \"Fram\" proceeding Antarctic \u2013 Amundsen.\"\nNearly six months later, the expedition arrived at the eastern edge of the Ross Ice Shelf (then known as \"the Great Ice Barrier\"), at a large inlet called the Bay of Whales, on 14 January 1911. Amundsen established his base camp there, calling it . Amundsen eschewed the heavy wool clothing worn on earlier Antarctic attempts in favour of adopting Inuit-style furred skins.\nUsing skis and dog sleds for transportation, Amundsen and his men created supply depots at 80\u00b0, 81\u00b0 and 82\u00b0\u00a0South on the Barrier, along a line directly south to the Pole. Amundsen also planned to kill most of his dogs on the way and use them as a source for fresh meat. As he went he butchered some of the dogs and fed them to the remaining dogs, as well as eating some himself. A small group, including Hjalmar Johansen, Kristian Prestrud and J\u00f8rgen Stubberud, set out on 8 September, but had to abandon their trek due to extreme temperatures. The painful retreat caused a quarrel within the group, and Amundsen sent Johansen and the other two men to explore King Edward VII Land.\nA second attempt, with a team of five made up of Olav Bjaaland, Helmer Hanssen, Sverre Hassel, Oscar Wisting and Amundsen, departed base camp on 19 October. They took four sledges and 52\u00a0dogs. Using a route along the previously unknown Axel Heiberg Glacier, they arrived at the edge of the Polar Plateau on 21 November after a four-day climb. The team and 16\u00a0dogs arrived at the pole on 14 December, a month before Scott's group. Amundsen named their South Pole camp Polheim. Amundsen renamed the Antarctic Plateau as King Haakon VII's Plateau. They left a small tent and letter stating their accomplishment, in case they did not return safely to Framheim.\nThe team arrived at Framheim on 25 January 1912, with 11\u00a0surviving dogs. They made their way off the continent and to Hobart, Australia, where Amundsen publicly announced his success on 7 March 1912. He telegraphed news to backers.\nAmundsen's expedition benefited from his careful preparation, good equipment, appropriate clothing, a simple primary task, an understanding of dogs and their handling, and the effective use of skis. In contrast to the misfortunes of Scott's team, Amundsen's trek proved relatively smooth and uneventful.\nNorth Polar Expeditions and the Northeast Passage.\nThe Northeast Passage.\nIn 1918, an expedition Amundsen began with a new ship, , lasted until 1925. \"Maud\" was carefully navigated through the ice west to east through the Northeast Passage. With him on this expedition were Oscar Wisting and Helmer Hanssen, both of whom had been part of the team to reach the South Pole. In addition, Henrik Lindstr\u00f8m was included as a cook. He suffered a stroke and was so physically reduced that he could not participate.\nThe goal of the expedition was to explore the unknown areas of the Arctic Ocean, strongly inspired by Fridtjof Nansen's earlier expedition with \"Fram\". The plan was to sail along the coast of Siberia and go into the ice farther to the north and east than Nansen had. In contrast to Amundsen's earlier expeditions, this was expected to yield more material for academic research, and he carried the geophysicist Harald Sverdrup on board.\nThe voyage was to the northeasterly direction over the Kara Sea. Amundsen planned to freeze the \"Maud\" into the polar ice cap and drift towards the North Pole\u00a0\u2013 as Nansen had done with the \"Fram\"\u00a0\u2013 and he did so off Cape Chelyuskin. But, the ice became so thick that the ship was unable to break free, although it was designed for such a journey in heavy ice. In September 1919, the crew got the ship loose from the ice, but it froze again after eleven days somewhere between the New Siberian Islands and Wrangel Island.\nDuring this time, Amundsen suffered a broken arm and was attacked by a polar bear. As a result, he participated little in the work outdoors, such as sleigh rides and hunting. He, Hanssen, and Wisting, along with two other men, embarked on an expedition by dog sled to Nome, Alaska, more than away. But they found that the ice was not frozen solid in the Bering Strait, and it could not be crossed. They sent a telegram from Anadyr to signal their location.\nAfter two winters frozen in the ice, without having achieved the goal of drifting over the North Pole, Amundsen decided to go to Nome to repair the ship and buy provisions. Several of the crew ashore there, including Hanssen, did not return on time to the ship. Amundsen considered Hanssen to be in breach of contract, and dismissed him from the crew.\nDuring the third winter, \"Maud\" was frozen in the western Bering Strait. She finally became free and the expedition sailed south, reaching Seattle, in the American Pacific Northwest in 1921 for repairs. Amundsen returned to Norway, needing to put his finances in order. He took with him two young indigenous girls, a four-year-old he adopted, Kakonita, and her companion Camilla. When Amundsen went bankrupt two years later, however, he sent the girls to be cared for by Camilla's father, who lived in eastern Russia.\nIn June 1922, Amundsen returned to \"Maud\", which had been sailed to Nome. He decided to shift from the planned naval expedition to aerial ones, and arranged to charter a plane. He divided the expedition team in two: one part, led by him, was to winter over and prepare for an attempt to fly over the pole in 1923. The second team on \"Maud\", under the command of Wisting, was to resume the original plan to drift over the North Pole in the ice. The ship drifted in the ice for three years east of the New Siberian Islands, never reaching the North Pole. It was finally seized by Amundsen's creditors as collateral for his mounting debt.\nAlthough they were unable to reach the North Pole, the scientific results of the expedition, mainly the work of Sverdrup, have proven to be of considerable value. Much of the carefully collected scientific data was lost during the ill-fated journey of Peter Tessem and Paul Knutsen, two crew members sent on a mission by Amundsen. The scientific materials were later retrieved in 1922 by Russian scientist Nikolay Urvantsev from where they had been abandoned on the shores of the Kara Sea.\nAerial expeditions to the North Pole.\nThe 1923 attempt to fly over the Pole failed. Amundsen and Oskar Omdal, of the Royal Norwegian Navy, tried to fly from Wainwright, Alaska, to Spitsbergen across the North Pole. When their aircraft was damaged, they abandoned the journey. To raise additional funds, Amundsen travelled around the United States in 1924 on a lecture tour.\nIn 1925, accompanied by Lincoln Ellsworth, pilot Hjalmar Riiser-Larsen, flight mechanic Karl Feucht and two other team members (pilot Leif Dietrichson and mechanic Oskar Omdal), Amundsen took two Dornier Do J flying boats, the N-24 and N-25, to 87\u00b0\u00a044\u2032\u00a0north. It was the northernmost latitude reached by plane up to that time. The aircraft landed a few miles apart without radio contact, yet the crews managed to reunite. The N-24 was damaged. Amundsen and his crew worked for more than three weeks to clean up an airstrip to take off from ice. They shovelled 600 tons of ice while consuming only of daily food rations. In the end, the six crew members were packed into the N-25. In a remarkable feat, Riiser-Larsen took off, the flying boat barely becoming airborne over the cracking ice. They returned triumphant when everyone thought they had been lost forever.\nIn 1926, Amundsen and 15 other men (including Ellsworth, Riiser-Larsen, Oscar Wisting, and the Italian air crew led by aeronautical engineer Umberto Nobile) made the first crossing of the Arctic in the airship \"Norge,\" designed by Nobile. They left Spitsbergen on 11 May 1926, flew over the North Pole on 12 May, and landed in Alaska the following day.\nControversy over Polar Priority.\nThe three previous claims to have arrived at the North Pole, by the Americans Frederick Cook in 1908; Robert Peary in 1909; and Richard E. Byrd in 1926 (just a few days before the \"Norge\") are disputed by some, as being either of dubious accuracy or outright fraudulent. If these other claims are false, the crew of the \"Norge\" would be the first explorers verified to have reached the North Pole, when they floated over it in the \"Norge\" in 1926.\nDisappearance and death.\nAmundsen disappeared on 18 June 1928 while flying on a rescue mission in the Arctic. His team included Norwegian pilot Leif Dietrichson, French pilot Ren\u00e9 Guilbaud, and three more Frenchmen. They were seeking missing members of Nobile's crew, whose new airship had crashed while returning from the North Pole. Amundsen's French Latham 47 flying boat never returned.\nLater, a wing-float and bottom gasoline tank from the plane, which had been adapted as a replacement wing-float, were found near the Troms\u00f8 coast. It is assumed that the plane crashed in the Barents Sea, and that Amundsen and his crew were killed in the wreck, or died shortly afterward. The search for Amundsen and team was called off in September 1928 by the Norwegian government, and the bodies were never found.\nIn 2004 and in late August 2009, the Royal Norwegian Navy used the unmanned submarine \"Hugin 1000\" to search for the wreckage of Amundsen's plane. The searches focused on a area of the sea floor, and were documented by the German production company ContextTV. They found nothing from the Amundsen flight.\nPersonal life.\nAmundsen was a lifelong bachelor, but he had a long-time relationship with the Norwegian-born Kristine Elisabeth ('Kiss') Bennett, the wife of an Englishman, Charles Peto Bennett. He met her in London in 1907 and they remained close for many years; Amundsen kept the relationship a secret from everyone outside his intimate circle. Later, he became engaged to Bess Magids, an American divorc\u00e9e whom he had met in Alaska. Though there is little evidence, it was said that Amundsen had a brief affair with his landlady in Antwerp\u2014until he came home and found her dead after an apparent suicide. His biographer Tor Bomann-Larsen also suggests a romantic relationship between Amundsen and Sigrid Castberg, wife of the lawyer Leif Castberg from Gj\u00f8vik, in the years before the South Pole expedition, a relationship Amundsen broke off after that expedition in favour of Kiss Bennett.\nAuthor Julian Sancton noted that in his younger years, Amundsen was said to have ignored romantic relationships in pursuit of his goals. He \"found little use in activities that didn't help him fulfill his polar ambitions\".\nLegacy.\nOwing to Amundsen's numerous significant accomplishments in polar exploration, many places in both the Arctic and Antarctic are named after him. The Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station, operated by the United States Antarctic Program, was jointly named in honour of Amundsen and his British rival Robert Falcon Scott. The Amundsen crater on the Moon was named after him; the rim of the crater is being considered by NASA as a potential landing location for their Artemis III lunar lander.\nBuilt in 1929 and opened in 1930, Amundsen High School opened its doors in Chicago's Ravenswood neighborhood.\nJoachim Calmeyer portrayed Amundsen in the 1968 film \"Bare et liv \u2013 historien om Fridtjof Nansen\", which covers events from the life of Fridtjof Nansen.\nThe 1969 film \"The Red Tent\" tells the story of the Nobile expedition and Amundsen's disappearance. Sean Connery plays Amundsen.\nA book \"Scott and Amundsen\", by Roland Huntford, was adapted into the TV serial \"The Last Place on Earth\". It aired in 1985 and features Sverre Anker Ousdal as Amundsen.\nOn 15 February 2019, a biographic Norwegian film titled \"Amundsen\", directed by Espen Sandberg, was released.\nEuropean-Inuit descendant claims.\nAt least two Inuit in Gj\u00f8a Haven with European ancestry have claimed to be descendants of Amundsen, from the period of their extended winter stay on King William Island from 1903 to 1905. Accounts by members of the expedition told of their relations with Inuit women, and historians have speculated that Amundsen might also have taken a partner, although he wrote a warning against this.\nSpecifically, half-brothers Bob Konona and Paul Ikuallaq say that their father Luke Ikuallaq told them on his deathbed that he was the son of Amundsen. Konona said that their father Ikuallaq was left out on the ice to die after his birth, as his European ancestry made him illegitimate to the Inuit, threatening their community. His Inuit grandparents saved him.\nIn 2012, Y-DNA analysis, with the families' permission, showed that Ikuallaq was not a match to the direct male line of Amundsen. Not all descendants claiming European ancestry have been tested for a match to Amundsen, nor has there been a comparison of Ikuallaq's DNA to that of other European members of Amundsen's crew.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26200", "revid": "1319559637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26200", "title": "Richard Lovelace (poet)", "text": "English writer and poet (1617\u20131658)\nRichard Lovelace (, homophone of \"loveless\"; 9 December 1617 \u2013 1657) was an English poet in the seventeenth century. He was a cavalier poet who fought on behalf of Charles I during the English Civil War. His best known works are \"To Althea, from Prison\", and \"To Lucasta, Going to the Warres\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and family.\nRichard Lovelace was born on 9 December 1617. His exact birthplace is unknown, and may have been Woolwich, Kent, or Holland. He was the oldest son of Sir William Lovelace and Anne Barne Lovelace. He had four brothers and three sisters. His father was from a distinguished military and legal family; the Lovelace family owned a considerable amount of property in Kent.\nHis father, Sir William Lovelace, was a member of the Virginia Company and an incorporator in the second Virginia Company in 1609. He was a soldier and died during the war with Spain and the Dutch Republic in the Siege of Groenlo (1627) a few days before the town fell. Richard was nine years old when his father died.\nLovelace's father was the son of Sir William Lovelace and Elizabeth Aucher, who was the daughter of Mabel Wroths and Edward Aucher, who inherited, under his father's will, the manors of Bishopsbourne and Hautsborne. Elizabeth's nephew was Sir Anthony Aucher (1614 \u2013 31 May 1692) an English politician and Cavalier during the English Civil War. He was the son of her brother Sir Anthony Aucher and his wife Hester Collett.\nLovelace's mother, Anne Barne (1587\u20131633), was the daughter of Sir William Barne and the granddaughter of Sir George Barne III (1532\u20131593), the Lord Mayor of London and a prominent merchant and public official from London during the reign of Elizabeth I and Anne Gerrard, daughter of Sir William Garrard, who was Lord Mayor of London in 1555.\nLovelace's maternal grandmother was Anne Sandys. His great-grandmother was Cicely Wilford and his great-grandfather Most Reverend Dr Edwin Sandys, an Anglican church leader who successively held the posts of Bishop of Worcester (1559\u20131570), Bishop of London (1570\u20131576), and Archbishop of York (1576\u20131588) and was one of the translators of the Bishops' Bible.\nHis mother, Anne Barne Lovelace, married as her second husband, on 20 January 1630, at Greenwich, England, the Very Rev Dr Jonathan Browne. They were the parents of one child, Anne Browne, Richard's half-sister, who married Herbert Croft, later Bishop of Hereford, and was the mother of Sir Herbert Croft, the first of the Croft baronets.\nLovelace's brother, Francis Lovelace (1621\u20131675), was the second governor of the New York Colony appointed by the Duke of York, later King James II of England. They were also great nephews of both George Sandys (2 March 1577 \u2013 March 1644), an English traveller, colonist and poet; and of Sir Edwin Sandys (9 December 1561 \u2013 October 1629), an English statesman and one of the founders of the London Company.\nIn 1629, when Lovelace was eleven, he went to Sutton's Foundation at Charterhouse School, then in London. There is no clear record that Lovelace actually attended; it is believed that he studied as a \"boarder\" because he did not need financial assistance like the \"scholars\". He spent five years at Charterhouse, three of which were spent with Richard Crashaw, who also became a poet. On 5 May 1631, Lovelace was sworn in as a Gentleman Wayter Extraordinary to King Charles I, an honorary position for which one paid a fee. He went on to Gloucester Hall, Oxford, in 1634.\nCollegiate career.\nLovelace attended the University of Oxford and was praised by his contemporary Anthony Wood as \"the most amiable and beautiful person that ever eye beheld; a person also of innate modesty, virtue and courtly deportment, which made him then, but especially after, when he retired to the great city, much admired and adored by the female sex\".\nWhile at college, he tried to portray himself more as a social connoisseur than as a scholar, continuing his image of being a Cavalier. Being a Cavalier poet, Lovelace wrote to praise a friend or fellow poet, to give advice in grief or love, to define a relationship, to articulate the precise amount of attention a man owes a woman, to celebrate beauty, and to persuade to love. Lovelace wrote a comedy, \"The Scholars\", while at Oxford. He then left for the University of Cambridge for a few months, where he met Lord Goring, who led him into political trouble.\nAt the age of eighteen he was granted the degree of Master of Arts at Oxford University.\nPolitics and prison.\nLovelace's poetry was often influenced by his experiences with politics and association with important figures of his time. At the age of nineteen he contributed a verse to a volume of elegies commemorating Princess Katharine. In 1639 Lovelace joined the regiment of Lord Goring, serving first as a senior ensign and later as a captain in the Bishops' Wars. This experience inspired \"Sonnet. To Generall Goring\", the poem \"To Lucasta, Going to the Warres\" and the tragedy \"The Soldier\". On his return to his home in Kent in 1640, Lovelace served as a country gentleman and a justice of the peace, encountering civil turmoil over religion and politics.\nIn 1641, Lovelace led a group of men to seize and destroy a petition for the abolition of Episcopal rule, which had been signed by 15,000 people. The following year he presented the House of Commons with Dering's pro-Royalist petition which was supposed to have been burned. These actions resulted in Lovelace's first imprisonment. He was shortly released on bail, with the stipulation that he avoid communication with the House of Commons without permission. This prevented Lovelace, who had done everything to prove himself during the Bishops' Wars, from participating in the first phase of the English Civil War. This first experience of imprisonment brought him to write one of his best known lyrics, \"To Althea, from Prison\", in which he illustrates his noble and paradoxical nature. Lovelace did everything he could to remain in the king's favour despite his inability to participate in the war.\nDuring the political chaos of 1648 he was again imprisoned, this time for nearly a year. When he was released in April 1649, the king had been executed and Lovelace's cause seemed lost. As in his previous incarceration, this experience led to creative production\u2014this time in the cause of spiritual freedom, as reflected in the release of his first volume of poetry, \"Lucasta\". \"Lucasta\" was Lovelace's Muse, thought to be Lucy Sacheverell.\nLovelace died in 1657 and was buried in St Bride's Church in Fleet Street in the City of London.\nLiterature.\nFrom the time Richard Lovelace started writing while he was a student at Oxford he wrote almost 200 poems. His first work was a drama, \"The Scholars\", never published but performed at college and then in London. In 1640, he wrote a tragedy, \"The Soldier\" based on his military experience. When serving in the Bishops' Wars, he wrote the sonnet \"To Generall Goring\", a poem of Bacchanalian celebration rather than a glorification of military action. \"To Lucasta, Going to the Warres\", written in 1640, concerned his first political action. \"To Althea, From Prison\" was written during his first imprisonment in 1642. Later that year, during his travels to Holland with General Goring, he wrote \"The Rose\", followed by \"The Scrutiny\". On 14 May 1649, \"Lucasta\" was published. He also wrote poems on animal life: \"The Ant\", \"The Grasse-hopper\", \"The Snayl\", \"The Falcon\", \"The Toad and Spyder\". In 1660, after Lovelace died, \"Lucasta: Postume Poems\" was published; it contains \"A Mock-Song\", which has a darker tone than his previous works.\nWilliam Winstanley thought highly of Lovelace's work and compared him to an idol: \"I can compare no Man so like this Colonel Lovelace as Sir Philip Sidney\" of which it is in an Epitaph made of him;\nNor is it fit that more I should aquaint\n Lest Men adore in one\n A Scholar, Souldier, Lover, and a Saint\nHis most quoted excerpts are from the beginning of the last stanza of \"To Althea, From Prison\":\nStone walls do not a prison make,\nNor iron bars a cage;\nMinds innocent and quiet take\nThat for an hermitage\nand the end of \"To Lucasta. Going to the Warres\":\nI could not love thee, dear, so much,\nLov'd I not Honour more.\nDepictions.\nHis life was dramatised in the Australian radio play \"Lovelace\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26201", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26201", "title": "Reduced instruction set computer", "text": "Processor executing one instruction in minimal clock cycles\nIn electronics and computer science, a reduced instruction set computer (RISC, pronounced \"risk\") is a computer architecture designed to simplify the individual instructions given to the computer to accomplish tasks. Compared to the instructions given to a complex instruction set computer (CISC), a RISC computer might require more machine code in order to accomplish a task because the individual instructions perform simpler operations. The goal is to offset the need to process more instructions by increasing the speed of each instruction, in particular by implementing an instruction pipeline, which may be simpler to achieve given simpler instructions.\nThe key operational concept of the RISC computer is that each instruction performs only one function (e.g. copy a value from memory to a register). The RISC computer usually has many (16 or 32) high-speed, general-purpose registers with a load\u2013store architecture in which the instructions that perform arithmetic and tests operate only on the registers, and the instructions that access data in the main memory of the computer only load data from memory into registers or store data from registers into memory. The design of the CPU allows RISC computers few simple addressing modes and predictable instruction times that simplify design of the system as a whole.\nThe conceptual developments of the RISC computer architecture began with the IBM 801 project in the late 1970s, but these were not immediately put into use. Designers in California picked up the 801 concepts in two seminal projects, Stanford MIPS and Berkeley RISC. These were commercialized in the 1980s as the MIPS and SPARC systems. IBM eventually produced RISC designs based on further work on the 801 concept, the IBM POWER architecture, PowerPC, and Power ISA. As the projects matured, many similar designs, produced in the mid-to-late 1980s and early 1990s, such as ARM, PA-RISC, and Alpha, created central processing units that increased the commercial utility of the Unix workstation and of embedded processors in the laser printer, the router, and similar products.\nIn the minicomputer market, companies that included Celerity Computing, Pyramid Technology, and Ridge Computers began offering systems designed according to RISC or RISC-like principles in the early 1980s. Few of these designs began by using RISC microprocessors.\nThe varieties of RISC processor design include the ARC processor, the DEC Alpha, the AMD Am29000, the ARM architecture, the Atmel AVR, Blackfin, Intel i860, Intel i960, LoongArch, Motorola 88000, the MIPS architecture, PA-RISC, Power ISA, RISC-V, SuperH, and SPARC. RISC processors are used in supercomputers, such as the Fugaku.\nHistory and development.\nA number of systems, going back to the 1960s, have been credited as the first RISC architecture, partly based on their use of the load\u2013store approach. The term RISC was coined by David Patterson of the Berkeley RISC project, although somewhat similar concepts had appeared before.\nThe CDC 6600 designed by Seymour Cray in 1964 used a load\u2013store architecture with only two addressing modes (register+register, and register+immediate constant) and 74 operation codes, with the basic clock cycle being 10 times faster than the memory access time. Partly due to the optimized load\u2013store architecture of the CDC 6600, Jack Dongarra says that it can be considered a forerunner of modern RISC systems, although a number of other technical barriers needed to be overcome for the development of a modern RISC system.\nIBM 801.\nMichael J. Flynn views the first RISC system as the IBM 801 design, begun in 1975 by John Cocke and completed in 1980. The 801 developed out of an effort to build a 24-bit high-speed processor to use as the basis for a digital telephone switch. To reach their goal of switching 1 million calls per hour (300 per second) they calculated that the CPU required performance on the order of 12 million instructions per second (MIPS), compared to their fastest mainframe machine of the time, the 370/168, which performed at 3.5 MIPS.\nThe design was based on a study of IBM's extensive collection of statistics gathered from their customers. This demonstrated that code in high-performance settings made extensive use of processor registers, and that they often ran out of them. This suggested that additional registers would improve performance. Additionally, they noticed that compilers generally ignored the vast majority of the available instructions, especially orthogonal addressing modes. Instead, they selected the fastest version of any given instruction and then constructed small routines using it. This suggested that the majority of instructions could be removed without affecting the resulting code. These two conclusions worked in concert; removing instructions would allow the instruction opcodes to be shorter, freeing up bits in the instruction word which could then be used to select among a larger set of registers.\nThe telephone switch program was canceled in 1975, but by then the team had demonstrated that the same design would offer significant performance gains running just about any code. In simulations, they showed that a compiler tuned to use registers instead of operating directly on memory would run code about three times as fast as traditional designs. Somewhat surprisingly, the same code would run about 50% faster even on existing machines due to the improved register use. In practice, their experimental PL/8 compiler, a slightly cut-down version of PL/I, consistently produced code that ran much faster on their existing mainframes.\nA 32-bit version of the 801 was eventually produced in a single-chip form as the IBM ROMP in 1981, which stood for 'Research OPD [Office Products Division] Micro Processor'. This CPU was designed for \"mini\" tasks, and found use in peripheral interfaces and channel controllers on later IBM computers. It was also used as the CPU in the IBM RT PC in 1986, which turned out to be a commercial failure. Although the 801 did not see widespread use in its original form, it inspired many research projects, including ones at IBM that would eventually lead to the IBM POWER architecture.\nBerkeley RISC and Stanford MIPS.\nBy the late 1970s, the 801 had become well-known in the industry. This coincided with new fabrication techniques that were allowing more complex chips to come to market. The Zilog Z80 of 1976 had 8,000 transistors, whereas the 1979 Motorola 68000 (68k) had 68,000. These newer designs generally used their newfound complexity to expand the instruction set to make it more orthogonal. Most, like the 68k, used microcode to do this, reading instructions and re-implementing them as a sequence of simpler internal instructions. In the 68k, a full &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 of the transistors were used for this microcoding.\nIn 1979, David Patterson was sent on a sabbatical from the University of California, Berkeley to help DEC's west-coast team improve the VAX microcode. Patterson was struck by the complexity of the coding process and concluded it was untenable. He first wrote a paper on ways to improve microcoding, but later changed his mind and decided microcode itself was the problem. With funding from the DARPA VLSI Program, Patterson started the Berkeley RISC effort. The program, practically unknown today, led to a huge number of advances in chip design, fabrication, and even computer graphics. Considering a variety of programs from their BSD Unix variant, the Berkeley team found, as had IBM, that most programs made no use of the large variety of instructions in the 68k.\nPatterson's early work pointed out an important problem with the traditional \"more is better\" approach; even those instructions that were critical to overall performance were being delayed by their trip through the microcode. If the microcode was removed, the programs would run faster. And since the microcode ultimately took a complex instruction and broke it into steps, there was no reason the compiler could not do this instead. These studies suggested that, even with no other changes, one could make a chip with &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 fewer transistors that would run faster. In the original RISC-I paper they noted:\nSkipping this extra level of interpretation appears to enhance performance while reducing chip size.\nIt was also discovered that, on microcoded implementations of certain architectures, complex operations tended to be \"slower\" than a sequence of simpler operations doing the same thing. This was in part an effect of the fact that many designs were rushed, with little time to optimize or tune every instruction; only those used most often were optimized, and a sequence of those instructions could be faster than a less-tuned instruction performing an equivalent operation as that sequence. One infamous example was the VAX's codice_1 instruction.\nThe Berkeley work also turned up a number of additional points. Among these was the fact that programs spent a significant amount of time performing subroutine calls and returns, and it seemed there was the potential to improve overall performance by speeding up these calls. This led the Berkeley design to select a method known as register windows, which can significantly improve subroutine performance, although at the cost of some complexity. They also noticed that the majority of mathematical instructions were simple assignments; only &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 of them actually performed an operation like addition or subtraction. But when those operations did occur, they tended to be slow. This led to far more emphasis on the underlying arithmetic data unit, as opposed to previous designs where the majority of the chip was dedicated to control and microcode.\nThe resulting Berkeley RISC was based on gaining performance through the use of pipelining and aggressive use of register windowing. In a traditional CPU, one has a small number of registers, and a program can use any register at any time. In a CPU with register windows, there are a huge number of registers, e.g., 128, but programs can only use a small number of them, e.g., eight, at any one time. A program that limits itself to eight registers per procedure can make very fast procedure calls: The call simply moves the window \"down\" by eight, to the set of eight registers used by that procedure, and the return moves the window back. The Berkeley RISC project delivered the RISC-I processor in 1982. Consisting of only 44,420 transistors (compared with averages of about 100,000 in newer CISC designs of the era), RISC-I had only 32 instructions, and yet completely outperformed any other single-chip design, with estimated performance being higher than the VAX. They followed this up with the 40,760-transistor, 39-instruction RISC-II in 1983, which ran over three times as fast as RISC-I.\nAs the RISC project began to become known in Silicon Valley, a similar project began at Stanford University in 1981. This MIPS project grew out of a graduate course by John L. Hennessy, produced a functioning system in 1983, and could run simple programs by 1984. The MIPS approach emphasized an aggressive clock cycle and the use of the pipeline, making sure it could be run as \"full\" as possible. The MIPS system was followed by the MIPS-X, and in 1984 Hennessy and his colleagues formed MIPS Computer Systems to produce the design commercially. The venture resulted in a new architecture that was also called MIPS and the R2000 microprocessor in 1985.\nThe overall philosophy of the RISC concept was widely understood by the second half of the 1980s and led the designers of the MIPS-X to put it this way in 1987:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The goal of any instruction format should be: 1. simple decode, 2. simple decode, and 3. simple decode. Any attempts at improved code density at the expense of CPU performance should be ridiculed at every opportunity.\nCompetition between RISC and conventional CISC approaches was also the subject of theoretical analysis in the early 1980s, leading, for example, to the iron law of processor performance.\nSince 2010, a new open standard instruction set architecture (ISA), Berkeley RISC-V, has been under development at the University of California, Berkeley, for research purposes and as a free alternative to proprietary ISAs. As of 2014, version 2 of the user space ISA is fixed. The ISA is designed to be extensible from a barebones core sufficient for a small embedded processor to supercomputer and cloud computing use with standard and chip designer\u2013defined extensions and coprocessors. It has been tested in silicon design with the ROCKET SoC, which is also available as an open-source processor generator in the CHISEL language.\nCommercial breakout.\nIn the early 1980s, significant uncertainties surrounded the RISC concept. One concern involved the use of memory; a single instruction from a traditional processor like the Motorola 68k may be written out as perhaps a half dozen of the simpler RISC instructions. In theory, this could slow the system down as it spent more time fetching instructions from memory. But by the mid-1980s, the concepts had matured enough to be seen as commercially viable.\nCommercial RISC designs began to emerge in the mid-1980s. The IBM RT PC was introduced in January 1986, and the Acorn ARM1 was introduced as part of an evaluation system in July 1986, following on from initial fabrication in April 1985. The MIPS R2000 was introduced in May 1986, followed shortly thereafter by Hewlett-Packard's PA-RISC in some of their computers. In the meantime, the Berkeley effort had become so well known that it eventually became the name for the entire concept. In 1987, Sun Microsystems began shipping systems with the SPARC processor, directly based on the Berkeley RISC-II system. The US government Committee on Innovations in Computing and Communications credits the acceptance of the viability of the RISC concept to the success of the SPARC system.\nA benefit of RISC to the industry was much lower prices than the sole sourced Intel 80386; by 1989 many RISC CPUs were available, and competition lowered their price to $10 per MIPS in large quantities. The performance of IBM's RISC CPU\u2014only available in the RT PC\u2014was less competitive than others, but the success of SPARC renewed interest within IBM, which released new RISC systems by 1990 and by 1995 RISC processors were the foundation of a $15\u00a0billion server industry.\nPatterson was a consultant for Intel during the 1980s. Despite dominating the microprocessor market with the CISC 80386 and its successors, the consensus that RISC was the future of the industry influenced that company's engineers, who worked to improve the performance of their processors to match RISC. IBM chose a similar approach of improving CISC as much as possible with IBM mainframes, while introducing new RISC-based computers that competed directly with its existing CISC midrange systems. Sun's move to SPARC was based on its decision to, instead of relying on improvements to CISC, transition to RISC as fast as possible. The DEC engineers who designed DECstation with MIPS R2000 and not their company's own VAX did so because, they wrote, the former offered \"at least a two-to-one performance advantage\" for the cost. By the later 1980s, new RISC designs were easily outperforming all CISC designs by a wide margin.\nBy 1992 Sun, DEC, HP, and IBM were the leading commercial RISC companies. Other vendors began their own RISC efforts. Among the available architectures were the DEC Alpha, AMD Am29000, Intel i860 and i960, Motorola 88000, IBM POWER, and, slightly later, the IBM/Apple/Motorola PowerPC. Many of these have since disappeared due to them often offering no competitive advantage over others of the same era. Those that remain are often used only in niche markets or as parts of other systems; of the designs from these traditional vendors, only SPARC and the PowerPC-derived Power ISA have any significant remaining market.\nThe ARM architecture has been the most widely adopted RISC ISA, initially intended to deliver higher-performance desktop computing, at low cost, and in a restricted thermal package, such as in the Acorn Archimedes, while featuring in the Super Computer League tables, its initial, relatively, lower power and cooling implementation was soon adapted to embedded applications, such as laser printer raster image processing. Acorn, in partnership with Apple Inc, and VLSI, creating ARM Ltd, in 1990, to share R&amp;D costs and find new markets for the ISA, who in partnership with TI, GEC, Sharp, Nokia, Oracle and Digital would develop low-power and embedded RISC designs, and target those market segments, which at the time were niche. With the rise in mobile, automotive, streaming, smart device computing, ARM became the most widely used ISA, the company estimating almost half of all CPUs shipped in history have been ARM.\nCharacteristics and design philosophy.\nConfusion around the definition of RISC deriving from the formulation of the term, along with the tendency to opportunistically categorize processor architectures with relatively few instructions (or groups of instructions) as RISC architectures, led to attempts to define RISC as a design philosophy. One attempt to do so was expressed as the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A RISC processor has an instruction set that is designed for efficient execution by a pipelined processor and for code generation by an optimizing compiler.\nInstruction set philosophy.\nA common misunderstanding of the phrase \"reduced instruction set computer\" is that instructions are simply eliminated, resulting in a smaller set of instructions.\nIn fact, over the years, RISC instruction sets have grown in size, and today many of them have a larger set of instructions than many CISC CPUs. Some RISC processors such as the PowerPC have instruction sets as large as the CISC IBM System/370, for example; conversely, the DEC PDP-8\u2014clearly a CISC CPU because many of its instructions involve multiple memory accesses\u2014has only 8 basic instructions and a few extended instructions.\nThe term \"reduced\" in that phrase was intended to describe the fact that the amount of work any single instruction accomplishes is reduced\u2014at most a single data memory cycle\u2014compared to the \"complex instructions\" of CISC CPUs that may require dozens of data memory cycles in order to execute a single instruction.\nThe term \"load\u2013store architecture\" is sometimes preferred.\nAnother way of looking at the RISC/CISC debate is to consider what is exposed to the compiler. In a CISC processor, the hardware may internally use registers and flag bit in order to implement a single complex instruction such as , but hide those details from the compiler.\nThe internal operations of a RISC processor are \"exposed to the compiler\", leading to the backronym 'Relegate Interesting Stuff to the Compiler'.\nInstruction format.\nMost RISC architectures have fixed-length instructions and a simple encoding, which simplifies fetch, decode, and issue logic considerably. This is among the main goals of the RISC approach.\nSome of this is possible only due to the contemporary move to 32-bit formats. For instance, in a typical program, over 30% of all the numeric constants are either 0 or 1, 95% will fit in one byte, and 99% in a 16-bit value. When computers were based on 8- or 16-bit words, it would be difficult to have an immediate combined with the opcode in a single memory word, although certain instructions like increment and decrement did this implicitly by using a different opcode. In contrast, a 32-bit machine has ample room to encode an immediate value, and doing so avoids the need to do a second memory read to pick up the value. This is why many RISC processors allow a 12- or 13-bit constant to be encoded directly into the instruction word.\nAssuming a 13-bit constant area, as is the case in the MIPS and RISC designs, another 19 bits are available for the instruction encoding. This leaves ample room to indicate both the opcode and one or two registers. Register-to-register operations, mostly math and logic, require enough bits to encode the two or three registers being used. Most processors use the three-operand format , in which case three register numbers are needed. If the processor has 32 registers, each one requires a 5-bit number for 15 bits total. If one of these registers is replaced by an immediate, there is still room to encode the two remaining registers and the opcode. Common instructions found in multi-word systems, like and , which reduce the number of words that have to be read before performing the instruction, are unnecessary in RISC as they can be accomplished with a single register and the immediate value 1.\nThe original RISC-I format remains a canonical example of the concept. It uses 7 bits for the opcode and a 1-bit flag for conditional codes, the following 5 bits for the destination register, and the next five for the first operand. This leaves 14 bits, the first of which indicates whether the following 13 contain an immediate value or uses only five of them to indicate a register for the second operand. A more complex example is the MIPS encoding, which used only 6 bits for the opcode, followed by two 5-bit registers. The remaining 16 bits could be used in two ways, one as a 16-bit immediate value, or as a 5-bit shift value (used only in shift operations, otherwise zero) and the remaining 6 bits as an extension on the opcode. In the case of register-to-register arithmetic operations, the opcode was 0 and the last 6 bits contained the actual code; those that used an immediate value used the normal opcode field at the front.\nOne drawback of 32-bit instructions is reduced code density, which is more adverse a characteristic in embedded computing than it is in the workstation and server markets RISC architectures were originally designed to serve. To address this problem, several architectures, such as SuperH (1992), ARM thumb (1994), MIPS16e (2004), Power Variable Length Encoding ISA (2006), RISC-V, and the Adapteva Epiphany, have an optional short, feature-reduced compressed instruction set. Generally, these instructions expose a smaller number of registers and fewer bits for immediate values, and often use a two-operand format to eliminate one register number from instructions. A two-operand format in a system with 16 registers requires 8 bits for register numbers, leaving another 8 for an opcode or other uses. The SH5 also follows this pattern, albeit having evolved in the opposite direction, having added longer 32-bit instructions to an original 16-bit encoding.\nHardware utilization.\nThe most characteristic aspect of RISC is executing at least one instruction per cycle. Single-cycle operation is described as \"the rapid execution of simple functions that dominate a computer's instruction stream\", thus seeking to deliver an average throughput approaching one instruction per cycle for any single instruction stream.\nOther features of RISC architectures include:\nRISC designs are also more likely to feature a Harvard memory model, where the instruction stream and the data stream are conceptually separated; this means that modifying the memory where code is held might not have any effect on the instructions executed by the processor (because the CPU has a separate instruction and data cache), at least until a special synchronization instruction is issued; CISC processors that have separate instruction and data caches generally keep them synchronized automatically, for backwards compatibility with older processors.\nMany early RISC designs also shared the characteristic of having a branch delay slot, an instruction space immediately following a jump or branch. The instruction in this space is executed, whether or not the branch is taken (in other words the effect of the branch is delayed). This instruction keeps the ALU of the CPU busy for the extra time normally needed to perform a branch. Nowadays the branch delay slot is considered an unfortunate side effect of a particular strategy for implementing some RISC designs, and modern RISC designs generally do away with it (such as PowerPC and more recent versions of SPARC and MIPS).\nSome aspects attributed to the first RISC-\"labeled\" designs around 1975 include the observations that the memory-restricted compilers of the time were often unable to take advantage of features intended to facilitate \"manual\" assembly coding, and that complex addressing modes take many cycles to perform due to the required additional memory accesses. It was argued that such functions would be better performed by sequences of simpler instructions if this could yield implementations small enough to leave room for many registers, reducing the number of slow memory accesses. In these simple designs, most instructions are of uniform length and similar structure, arithmetic operations are restricted to CPU registers and only separate \"load\" and \"store\" instructions access memory. These properties enable a better balancing of pipeline stages than before, making RISC pipelines significantly more efficient and allowing higher clock frequencies.\nYet another impetus of both RISC and other designs came from practical measurements on real-world programs. Andrew Tanenbaum summed up many of these, demonstrating that processors often had oversized immediates. For instance, he showed that 98% of all the constants in a program would fit in 13 bits, yet many CPU designs dedicated 16 or 32 bits to store them. This suggests that, to reduce the number of memory accesses, a fixed length machine could store constants in unused bits of the instruction word itself, so that they would be immediately ready when the CPU needs them (much like immediate addressing in a conventional design). This required small opcodes in order to leave room for a reasonably sized constant in a 32-bit instruction word.\nSince many real-world programs spend most of their time executing simple operations, some researchers decided to focus on making those operations as fast as possible. The clock rate of a CPU is limited by the time it takes to execute the slowest \"sub-operation\" of any instruction; decreasing that cycle-time often accelerates the execution of other instructions. The focus on \"reduced instructions\" led to the resulting machine being called a \"reduced instruction set computer\" (RISC). The goal was to make instructions so simple that they could \"easily\" be pipelined, in order to achieve a \"single clock\" throughput at \"high frequencies\". This contrasted with CISC designs whose \"crucial arithmetic operations and register transfers\" were considered difficult to pipeline.\nLater, it was noted that one of the most significant characteristics of RISC processors was that external memory was only accessible by a \"load\" or \"store\" instruction. All other instructions were limited to internal registers. This simplified many aspects of processor design: allowing instructions to be fixed-length, simplifying pipelines, and isolating the logic for dealing with the delay in completing a memory access (cache miss, etc.) to only two instructions. This led to RISC designs being referred to as \"load\u2013store\" architectures.\nComparison to other architectures.\nSome CPUs have been specifically designed to have a very small set of instructions\u2014but these designs are very different from classic RISC designs, so they have been given other names such as minimal instruction set computer (MISC) or transport triggered architecture (TTA).\nRISC architectures have traditionally had few successes in the desktop PC and commodity server markets, where the x86-based platforms remain the dominant processor architecture. However, this may change, as ARM-based processors are being developed for higher performance systems. Manufacturers including Cavium, AMD, and Qualcomm have released server processors based on the ARM architecture. ARM further partnered with Cray in 2017 to produce an ARM-based supercomputer. On the desktop, Microsoft announced that it planned to support the PC version of Windows 10 on Qualcomm Snapdragon-based devices in 2017 as part of its partnership with Qualcomm. These devices will support Windows applications compiled for 32-bit x86 via an x86 processor emulator that translates 32-bit x86 code to ARM64 code. Apple announced they will transition their Mac desktop and laptop computers from Intel processors to internally developed ARM64-based SoCs called Apple silicon; the first such computers, using the Apple M1 processor, were released in November 2020. Macs with Apple silicon can run x86-64 binaries with Rosetta 2, an x86-64 to ARM64 translator.\nOutside of the desktop arena, however, the ARM RISC architecture is in widespread use in smartphones, tablets and many forms of embedded devices. While early RISC designs differed significantly from contemporary CISC designs, by 2000 the highest-performing CPUs in the RISC line were almost indistinguishable from the highest-performing CPUs in the CISC line.\nUse of RISC architectures.\nRISC architectures are now used across a range of platforms, from smartphones and tablet computers to some of the world's fastest supercomputers such as Fugaku, the fastest on the TOP500 list as of \u00a02020[ [update]], and Summit, Sierra, and Sunway TaihuLight, the next three on that list.\nLow-end and mobile systems.\nBy the beginning of the 21st century, the majority of low-end and mobile systems relied on RISC architectures. Examples include:\nOpen source, standard, or use.\nRISC architectures have become popular in open source processors and soft microprocessors since they are relatively simple to implement, which makes them suitable for FPGA implementations and prototyping, for instance. Examples include:\nAwards.\nIn 2022 Steve Furber, John L. Hennessy, David A. Patterson and Sophie M. Wilson were awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize by the United States National Academy of Engineering for their contributions to the invention, development, and implementation of reduced instruction set computer (RISC) chips.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26202", "revid": "50717566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26202", "title": "Ralph Waldo Emerson", "text": "American philosopher (1803\u20131882)\nRalph Waldo Emerson (May 25, 1803\u00a0\u2013 April 27, 1882), who went by his middle name Waldo, was an American essayist, lecturer, philosopher, minister, abolitionist, and poet who led the Transcendentalist movement of the mid-19th century. He was seen as a champion of individualism and critical thinking, as well as a prescient critic of the countervailing pressures of society and conformity. Friedrich Nietzsche thought he was \"the most gifted of the Americans,\" and Walt Whitman called Emerson his \"master\".\nEmerson gradually moved away from the religious and social beliefs of his contemporaries, formulating and expressing the philosophy of Transcendentalism in his 1836 essay, \"Nature\". His speech \"The American Scholar,\" given in 1837, was called America's \"intellectual Declaration of Independence\" by Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.\nEmerson wrote most of his important essays as lectures and then revised them for print. His first two collections of essays, ' (1841) and ' (1844), represent the core of his thinking. They include the well-known essays \"Self-Reliance\", \"The Over-Soul,\" \"Circles,\" \"The Poet,\" and \"Experience.\" Together with \"Nature,\" these essays made the mid-1830s to the mid-1840s Emerson's most fertile period. Emerson wrote on a number of subjects, never espousing fixed philosophical tenets. He instead developed ideas such as individuality, freedom, the ability for mankind to realize almost anything, and the relationship between the soul and the surrounding world. Emerson's \"nature\" was more philosophical than naturalistic: \"Philosophically considered, the universe is composed of Nature and the Soul.\" Emerson is one of several figures who \"took a more pantheist or pandeist approach, by rejecting views of God as separate from the world.\"\nHe remains among the linchpins of the American romantic movement, and his work has greatly influenced the thinkers, writers, and poets that followed him. \"In all my lectures,\" he wrote, \"I have taught one doctrine, namely, the infinitude of the private man.\" Emerson is also well-known as a mentor and friend of Henry David Thoreau, a fellow Transcendentalist.\nEarly life, family, and education.\nEmerson was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on May 25, 1803, to Ruth Haskins and the Rev. William Emerson, a Unitarian minister. He was named after his mother's brother Ralph and his father's great-grandmother Rebecca Waldo. Ralph Waldo was the second of five sons who survived into adulthood; the others were William, Edward, Robert Bulkeley, and Charles. Three other children\u2014Phoebe, John Clarke, and Mary Caroline\u2014died in childhood. Emerson was of English ancestry, and his family had been in New England since the early colonial period, with Emerson being a seventh-generation descendant of \"Mayflower\" voyagers John Howland and Elizabeth Tilley through their daughter Hope.\nEmerson's father died from stomach cancer on May 12, 1811, less than two weeks before Emerson's eighth birthday. Emerson was raised by his mother, with the help of the other women in the family; his aunt Mary Moody Emerson in particular had a profound effect on him. She lived with the family off and on and maintained a constant correspondence with Emerson until her death in 1863.\nEmerson's formal schooling began at the Boston Latin School in 1812, when he was nine. In October 1817, at age 14, Emerson went to Harvard College and was appointed freshman messenger for the president, requiring Emerson to fetch delinquent students and send messages to faculty. Midway through his junior year, Emerson began keeping a list of books he had read and started a journal in a series of notebooks that would be called \"Wide World.\" He took outside jobs to cover his school expenses, including as a waiter for the Junior Commons and as an occasional teacher working with his uncle Samuel and aunt Sarah Ripley in Waltham, Massachusetts. By his senior year, Emerson decided to go by his middle name, Waldo. Emerson served as Class Poet; as was custom, he presented an original poem on Harvard's Class Day, a month before his official graduation on August 29, 1821, when he was 18. He did not stand out as a student and graduated in the exact middle of his class of 59 people. In the early 1820s, Emerson was a teacher at the School for Young Ladies (which was run by his brother William). He next spent two years living in a cabin in the Canterbury section of Roxbury, Massachusetts, where he wrote and studied nature. In his honor, this area is now called Schoolmaster Hill in Boston's Franklin Park.\nIn 1826, faced with poor health, Emerson went to seek a warmer climate. He first went to Charleston, South Carolina, but found the weather was still too cold. He then went farther south to St. Augustine, Florida, where he took long walks on the beach and began writing poetry. While in St. Augustine he made the acquaintance of Achille Murat, the nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte. Murat was two years his senior; they became good friends and enjoyed each other's company. The two engaged in enlightening discussions of religion, society, philosophy, and government. Emerson considered Murat an important figure in his intellectual education.\nWhile in St. Augustine, Emerson had his first encounter with slavery. At one point, he attended a meeting of the Bible Society while a slave auction was taking place in the yard outside. He wrote, \"One ear therefore heard the glad tidings of great joy, whilst the other was regaled with 'Going, gentlemen, going!'\"\nEarly career.\nAfter Harvard, Emerson assisted his brother William in a school for young women established in their mother's house, after he had established his own school in Chelmsford, Massachusetts; when his brother William went to G\u00f6ttingen to study law in mid-1824, Ralph Waldo closed the school but continued to teach in Cambridge, Massachusetts, until early 1825. Emerson was accepted into the Harvard Divinity School in late 1824, and was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa in 1828. Emerson's brother Edward, two years younger than he, entered the office of the lawyer Daniel Webster, after graduating from Harvard first in his class. Edward's physical health began to deteriorate, and he soon suffered a mental collapse as well; he was taken to McLean Asylum in June 1828 at age 25. Although he recovered his mental equilibrium, he died in 1834, apparently from long-standing tuberculosis. Another of Emerson's bright and promising younger brothers, Charles, born in 1808, died in 1836, also of tuberculosis, making him the third young person in Emerson's innermost circle to die in a period of a few years.\nEmerson met his first wife, Ellen Louisa Tucker, in Concord, New Hampshire, on Christmas Day, 1827, and married her two years later when she was 18. The couple moved to Boston, with Emerson's mother, Ruth, moving with them to help take care of Ellen, who was already ill with tuberculosis. Less than two years after that, on February 8, 1831, Ellen died, at age 20, after uttering her last words, \"I have not forgotten the peace and joy.\" Emerson was strongly affected by her death and visited her grave in Roxbury daily. In a journal entry dated March 29, 1832, he wrote, \"I visited Ellen's tomb &amp; opened the coffin.\"\nBoston's Second Church invited Emerson to serve as its junior pastor, and he was ordained on January 11, 1829. His initial salary was $1,200 per year (), increasing to $1,400 in July, but with his church role he took on other responsibilities: he was the chaplain of the Massachusetts Legislature and a member of the Boston School Committee. His church activities kept him busy, though during this period, and facing the imminent death of his wife, he began to doubt his own beliefs.\nAfter his wife's death, he began to disagree with the church's methods, writing in his journal in June 1832, \"I have sometimes thought that, in order to be a good minister, it was necessary to leave the ministry. The profession is antiquated. In an altered age, we worship in the dead forms of our forefathers.\" His disagreements with church officials over the administration of the Communion service and misgivings about public prayer eventually led to his resignation in 1832. As he wrote, \"This mode of commemorating Christ is not suitable to me. That is reason enough why I should abandon it.\" As one Emerson scholar has pointed out, \"Doffing the decent black of the pastor, he was free to choose the gown of the lecturer and teacher, of the thinker not confined within the limits of an institution or a tradition.\"\nEmerson toured Europe in 1833 and later wrote of his travels in \"English Traits\" (1856). He left aboard the brig \"Jasper\" on Christmas Day, 1832, sailing first to Malta. During his European trip, he spent several months in Italy, visiting Rome, Florence and Venice, among other cities. When in Rome, he met with John Stuart Mill, who gave him a letter of recommendation to meet Thomas Carlyle. He went to Switzerland and had to be dragged by fellow passengers to visit Voltaire's home in Ferney, \"protesting all the way upon the unworthiness of his memory\". He then went on to Paris, a \"loud modern New York of a place\", where he visited the Jardin des Plantes. He was greatly moved by the organization of plants according to Jussieu's system of classification, and the way all such objects were related and connected. As Robert D. Richardson says, \"Emerson's moment of insight into the interconnectedness of things in the Jardin des Plantes was a moment of almost visionary intensity that pointed him away from theology and toward science.\"\nMoving north to England, Emerson met William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Thomas Carlyle. Carlyle in particular was a strong influence on him; Emerson would later serve as an unofficial literary agent in the United States for Carlyle, and in March 1835, he tried to persuade Carlyle to come to America to lecture. The two maintained a correspondence until Carlyle's death in 1881.\nEmerson returned to the United States on October 9, 1833, and lived with his mother in Newton, Massachusetts. In October 1834, he moved to Concord, Massachusetts, to live with his step-grandfather, Dr. Ezra Ripley, at what was later named The Old Manse. Given the budding Lyceum movement, which provided lectures on all sorts of topics, Emerson saw a possible career as a lecturer. On November 5, 1833, he made the first of what would eventually be some 1,500 lectures, \"The Uses of Natural History,\" in Boston. This was an expanded account of his experience in Paris. In this lecture, he set out some of his important beliefs and the ideas he would later develop in his first published essay, \"Nature\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nature is a language and every new fact one learns is a new word; but it is not a language taken to pieces and dead in the dictionary, but the language put together into a most significant and universal sense. I wish to learn this language, not that I may know a new grammar, but that I may read the great book that is written in that tongue.\nOn January 24, 1835, Emerson wrote a letter to Lydia Jackson proposing marriage. Her acceptance reached him by mail on the 28th. In July 1835, he bought a house on the Cambridge and Concord Turnpike in Concord, Massachusetts, which he named Bush; it is now open to the public as the Ralph Waldo Emerson House. Emerson quickly became one of the leading citizens in the town. He gave a lecture to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the town of Concord on September 12, 1835. Two days later, he married Jackson in her hometown of Plymouth, Massachusetts, and moved to the new home in Concord together with Emerson's mother on September 15.\nEmerson quickly changed his wife's name to Lidian, and would call her Queenie, and sometimes Asia, and she called him Mr. Emerson. Their children were Waldo, Ellen, Edith, and Edward Waldo Emerson. Edward Waldo Emerson was the father of Raymond Emerson. Ellen was named for his first wife, at Lidian's suggestion. He hired Sophia Foord to educate his children.\nEmerson was poor when he was at Harvard, but was later able to support his family for much of his life. He inherited a fair amount of money after his first wife's death, though he had to file a lawsuit against the Tucker family in 1836 to get it. He received $11,600 in May 1834 (), and a further $11,674.49 in July 1837 (). In 1834, he considered that he had an income of $1,200 a year from the initial payment of the estate, equivalent to what he had earned as a pastor.\nLiterary career and Transcendentalism.\nOn September 8, 1836, the day before the publication of \"Nature\", Emerson met with Frederic Henry Hedge, George Putnam, and George Ripley to plan periodic gatherings of other like-minded intellectuals. This was the beginning of the Transcendental Club, which served as a center for the movement. Its first official meeting was held on September 19, 1836. On September 1, 1837, women attended a meeting of the Transcendental Club for the first time. Emerson invited Margaret Fuller, Elizabeth Hoar, and Sarah Ripley for dinner at his home before the meeting to ensure that they would be present for the evening get-together. Fuller would prove to be an important figure in Transcendentalism.\nEmerson anonymously sent his first essay, \"Nature\", to James Munroe and Company to be published on September 9, 1836. A year later, on August 31, 1837, he delivered his now-famous Phi Beta Kappa address, \"The American Scholar,\" then entitled \"An Oration, Delivered before the Phi Beta Kappa Society at Cambridge\"; it was renamed for a collection of essays (which included the first general publication of \"Nature\") in 1849. Friends urged him to publish the talk, and he did so at his own expense, in an edition of 500 copies, which sold out in a month. In the speech, Emerson declared literary independence in the United States and urged Americans to create a writing style all their own, free from Europe. James Russell Lowell, who was a student at Harvard at the time, called it \"an event without former parallel on our literary annals\". Another member of the audience, Reverend John Pierce, called it \"an apparently incoherent and unintelligible address\".\nIn 1837, Emerson befriended Henry David Thoreau. Though they had likely met as early as 1835, in the fall of 1837, Emerson asked Thoreau, \"Do you keep a journal?\" The question went on to be a lifelong inspiration for Thoreau. Emerson's own journal was published in 16 large volumes, in the definitive Harvard University Press edition issued between 1960 and 1982. Some scholars consider the journal to be Emerson's key literary work.\nIn March 1837, Emerson gave a series of lectures on the philosophy of history at the Masonic Temple in Boston. This was the first time he managed a lecture series on his own, and it was the beginning of his career as a lecturer. The profits from this series of lectures were much larger than when he was paid by an organization to talk, and he continued to manage his own lectures often throughout his lifetime. He eventually gave as many as 80 lectures a year, traveling across the northern United States as far as St. Louis, Des Moines, Minneapolis, and California.\nOn July 15, 1838, Emerson was invited to Divinity Hall, Harvard Divinity School, to deliver the school's graduation address, which came to be known as the \"Divinity School Address\". Emerson discounted biblical miracles and proclaimed that, while Jesus was a great man, he was not God: historical Christianity, he said, had turned Jesus into a \"demigod, as the Orientals or the Greeks would describe Osiris or Apollo\". His comments outraged the establishment and the general Protestant community. He was denounced as an atheist and a poisoner of young men's minds. Despite the roar of critics, he made no reply, leaving others to put forward a defense. He was not invited back to speak at Harvard for another thirty years.\nThe Transcendental group began to publish its flagship journal, \"The Dial\", in July 1840. They planned the journal as early as October 1839, but did not begin work on it until the first week of 1840. Unitarian minister George Ripley was the managing editor. Margaret Fuller was the first editor, having been approached by Emerson after several others had declined the role. Fuller stayed on for about two years, when Emerson took over, using the journal to promote talented young writers including Ellery Channing and Thoreau.\nIn 1841, Emerson published \"Essays\", his second book, which included the famous essay \"Self-Reliance\". His aunt called it a \"strange medley of atheism and false independence\", but it gained favorable reviews in London and Paris. This book, and its popular reception, more than any of Emerson's contributions to date laid the groundwork for his international fame.\nIn January 1842, Emerson's first son, Waldo, died of scarlet fever. Emerson wrote of his grief in the poem \"Threnody\" (\"For this losing is true dying\"), and the essay \"Experience\". In the same month, William James was born, and Emerson agreed to be his godfather.\nBronson Alcott announced his plans in November 1842 to find \"a farm of a hundred acres in excellent condition with good buildings, a good orchard and grounds\". Charles Lane purchased a farm in Harvard, Massachusetts, in May 1843 for what would become Fruitlands, a community based on Utopian ideals inspired in part by Transcendentalism. The farm would run based on a communal effort, using no animals for labor; its participants would eat no meat and use no wool or leather. Emerson said he felt \"sad at heart\" for not engaging in the experiment himself. Even so, he did not think Fruitlands would be a success. \"Their whole doctrine is spiritual\", he wrote, \"but they always end with saying, Give us much land and money\". Even Alcott admitted he was not prepared for the difficulty in operating Fruitlands. \"None of us were prepared to actualize practically the ideal life of which we dreamed. So we fell apart\", he wrote. After its failure, Emerson helped buy a farm for Alcott's family in Concord which Alcott named \"Hillside\".\n\"The Dial\" ceased publication in April 1844; Horace Greeley reported it as an end to the \"most original and thoughtful periodical ever published in this country\".\nIn 1844, Emerson published his second collection of essays, \"Essays: Second Series\". This collection included \"The Poet\", \"Experience\", \"Gifts\", and an essay entitled \"Nature\", a different work from the 1836 essay of the same name.\nEmerson made a living as a popular lecturer in New England and much of the rest of the country. He had begun lecturing in 1833; by the 1850s he was giving as many as 80 lectures per year. He addressed the Boston Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge and the Gloucester Lyceum, among others. Emerson spoke on a wide variety of subjects, and many of his essays grew out of his lectures. He charged between $10 and $50 for each appearance, bringing him as much as $2,000 in a typical winter lecture season. This was more than his earnings from other sources. In some years, he earned as much as $900 for a series of six lectures, and in another, for a winter series of talks in Boston, he netted $1,600. He eventually gave some 1,500 lectures in his lifetime. His earnings allowed him to expand his property, buying of land by Walden Pond and a few more acres in a neighboring pine grove. He wrote that he was \"landlord and water lord of 14 acres, more or less\".\nEmerson was introduced to Indian philosophy through the works of the French philosopher Victor Cousin. In 1845, Emerson's journals show he was reading the \"Bhagavad Gita\" and Henry Thomas Colebrooke's \"Essays on the Vedas\". He was strongly influenced by Vedanta, and much of his writing has strong shades of nondualism. One of the clearest examples of this can be found in his essay \"The Over-soul\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We live in succession, in division, in parts, in particles. Meantime within man is the soul of the whole; the wise silence; the universal beauty, to which every part and particle is equally related, the eternal ONE. And this deep power in which we exist and whose beatitude is all accessible to us, is not only self-sufficing and perfect in every hour, but the act of seeing and the thing seen, the seer and the spectacle, the subject and the object, are one. We see the world piece by piece, as the sun, the moon, the animal, the tree; but the whole, of which these are shining parts, is the soul.\nThe central message Emerson drew from his Asian studies was that \"the purpose of life was spiritual transformation and direct experience of divine power, here and now on earth.\"\nIn 1847\u201348, he toured the British Isles. He also visited Paris between the French Revolution of 1848 and the bloody June Days. When he arrived, he saw the stumps of trees that had been cut down to form barricades in the February riots. On May 21, he stood on the Champ de Mars in the midst of mass celebrations for concord, peace and labor. He wrote in his journal, \"At the end of the year we shall take account, &amp; see if the Revolution was worth the trees.\" The trip left an important imprint on Emerson's later work. His 1856 book \"English Traits\" is based largely on observations recorded in his travel journals and notebooks. Emerson later came to see the American Civil War as a \"revolution\" that shared common ground with the European revolutions of 1848.\nIn a speech in Concord, Massachusetts, on May 3, 1851, Emerson denounced the Fugitive Slave Act:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The act of Congress is a law which every one of you will break on the earliest occasion\u2014a law which no man can obey, or abet the obeying, without loss of self-respect and forfeiture of the name of gentleman.\nThat summer, he wrote in his diary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This filthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century by people who could read and write. I will not obey it.\nIn February 1852, Emerson, James Freeman Clarke, and William Henry Channing edited an edition of the works and letters of Margaret Fuller, who had died in 1850. Within a week of her death, her New York editor, Horace Greeley, suggested to Emerson that a biography of Fuller, to be called \"Margaret and Her Friends\", be prepared quickly \"before the interest excited by her sad decease has passed away\". Published under the title \"The Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli\", Fuller's words were heavily censored or rewritten. The three editors were not concerned about accuracy; they believed public interest in Fuller was temporary and that she would not survive as a historical figure. Even so, it was the best-selling biography of the decade and went through thirteen editions before the end of the century.\nWalt Whitman published the innovative poetry collection \"Leaves of Grass\" in 1855 and sent a copy to Emerson for his opinion. Emerson responded positively, sending Whitman a flattering five-page letter in response. Emerson's approval helped the first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\" stir up significant interest and convinced Whitman to issue a second edition shortly thereafter. This edition quoted a phrase from Emerson's letter, printed in gold leaf on the cover: \"I Greet You at the Beginning of a Great Career\". Emerson took offense that this letter was made public and later was more critical of the work.\nPhilosophers Camp.\nIn summer 1858, Emerson camped at Follensbee Pond in the Adirondack Mountains in upstate New York with nine others: Louis Agassiz, James Russell Lowell, John Holmes, Horatio Woodman, Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar, Jeffries Wyman, Estes Howe, Amos Binney, and William James Stillman. Invited, but unable to make the trip, were Oliver Wendell Holmes, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and Charles Eliot Norton, all members of the Saturday Club (Boston, Massachusetts).\nThis social club was mostly a literary membership that met the last Saturday of the month at the Boston Parker House Hotel (Omni Parker House). William James Stillman was a painter and founding editor of an art journal called the Crayon. Stillman was born and grew up in Schenectady which was just south of the Adirondack mountains. He later traveled there to paint the wilderness landscape and to fish and hunt. He shared his experiences in this wilderness to the members of the Saturday Club, raising their interest in this unknown region.\nJames Russell Lowell and William Stillman led the effort to organize a trip to the Adirondacks. They began their journey on August 2, 1858, traveling by train, steamboat, stagecoach, and canoe guide boats. News that these cultured men were living like \"Sacs and Sioux\" in the wilderness appeared in newspapers across the nation. This became known as the \"Philosophers Camp\".\nThis event was a landmark in the nineteenth-century intellectual movement, linking nature with art and literature.\nAlthough much has been written over many years by scholars and biographers of Emerson's life, little has been written of what has become known as the \"Philosophers Camp\" at Follensbee Pond. Yet, his epic poem \"Adirondac\" reads like a journal of his day-to-day detailed description of adventures in the wilderness with his fellow members of the Saturday Club. This two-week camping excursion (1858 in the Adirondacks) brought him face to face with a true wilderness, something he spoke of in his essay \"Nature\", published in 1836. He said, \"in the wilderness I find something more dear and connate than in streets or villages\".\nCivil War years.\nEmerson was staunchly opposed to slavery, but he did not appreciate being in the public limelight and was hesitant about lecturing on the subject. In the years leading up to the Civil War, he did give a number of lectures, however, beginning as early as November 1837. A number of his friends and family members were more active abolitionists than he, at first, but from 1844 on he more actively opposed slavery. He gave a number of speeches and lectures, and welcomed John Brown to his home during Brown's visits to Concord. He voted for Abraham Lincoln in 1860, but was disappointed that Lincoln was more concerned about preserving the Union than eliminating slavery outright. Once the American Civil War broke out, Emerson made it clear that he believed in immediate emancipation of the slaves.\nAround this time, in 1860, Emerson published \"The Conduct of Life\", his seventh collection of essays. It \"grappled with some of the thorniest issues of the moment,\" and \"his experience in the abolition ranks is a telling influence in his conclusions.\" In these essays Emerson strongly embraced the idea of war as a means of national rebirth: \"Civil war, national bankruptcy, or revolution, [are] more rich in the central tones than languid years of prosperity.\"\nEmerson visited Washington, D.C., at the end of January 1862. He gave a public lecture at the Smithsonian on January 31, 1862, and declared, \"The South calls slavery an institution ... I call it destitution ... Emancipation is the demand of civilization\". The next day, February 1, his friend Charles Sumner took him to meet Lincoln at the White House. Lincoln was familiar with Emerson's work, having previously seen him lecture. Emerson's misgivings about Lincoln began to soften after this meeting. In 1865, he spoke at a memorial service held for Lincoln in Concord: \"Old as history is, and manifold as are its tragedies, I doubt if any death has caused so much pain as this has caused, or will have caused, on its announcement.\" Emerson also met a number of high-ranking government officials, including Salmon P. Chase, the secretary of the treasury; Edward Bates, the attorney general; Edwin M. Stanton, the secretary of war; Gideon Welles, the secretary of the navy; and William Seward, the secretary of state.\nOn May 6, 1862, Emerson's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Henry David Thoreau died of tuberculosis at the age of 44. Emerson delivered his eulogy. He often referred to Thoreau as his best friend, despite a falling-out that began in 1849 after Thoreau published \"A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers\". Another friend, Nathaniel Hawthorne, died two years after Thoreau, in 1864. Emerson served as a pallbearer when Hawthorne was buried in Concord, as Emerson wrote, \"in a pomp of sunshine and verdure\".\nHe was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1864. In 1867, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society.\nFinal years and death.\nStarting in 1867, Emerson's health began declining; he wrote much less in his journals. Beginning as early as the summer of 1871 or in the spring of 1872, he started experiencing memory problems and suffered from aphasia. By the end of the decade, he forgot his own name at times and, if asked how he felt, would respond \"Quite well; I have lost my mental faculties, but am perfectly well\".\nIn the spring of 1871, Emerson took a trip on the transcontinental railroad, barely two years after its completion. Along the way and in California he met a number of dignitaries, including Brigham Young during a stopover in Salt Lake City. Part of his California visit included a trip to Yosemite, and while there he met a young and unknown John Muir, a signature event in Muir's career.\nEmerson's Concord home caught fire on July 24, 1872. He called for help from neighbors and, giving up on putting out the flames, all tried to save as many objects as possible. The fire was put out by Ephraim Bull Jr., the one-armed son of Ephraim Wales Bull. Donations were collected by friends to help the Emersons rebuild, including $5,000 gathered by Francis Cabot Lowell, another $10,000 collected by LeBaron Russell Briggs, and a personal donation of $1,000 from George Bancroft. Support for shelter was offered as well; though the Emersons ended up staying with family at the Old Manse, invitations came from Anne Lynch Botta, James Elliot Cabot, James T. Fields and Annie Adams Fields. The fire marked an end to Emerson's serious lecturing career; from then on, he would lecture only on special occasions and only in front of familiar audiences.\nWhile the house was being rebuilt, Emerson took a trip to England, continental Europe, and Egypt. He left on October 23, 1872, along with his daughter Ellen, while his wife Lidian spent time at the Old Manse and with friends. Emerson and his daughter Ellen returned to the United States on the ship \"Olympus\" along with friend Charles Eliot Norton on April 15, 1873. Emerson's return to Concord was celebrated by the town, and school was canceled that day.\nIn late 1874, Emerson published an anthology of poetry entitled \"Parnassus\", which included poems by Anna Laetitia Barbauld, Julia Caroline Dorr, Jean Ingelow, Lucy Larcom, Jones Very, as well as Thoreau and several others. Originally, the anthology had been prepared as early as the fall of 1871, but it was delayed when the publishers asked for revisions.\nThe problems with his memory had become embarrassing to Emerson and he ceased his public appearances by 1879. In reply to an invitation to a retirement celebration for Octavius B. Frothingham, he wrote, \"I am not in condition to make visits, or take any part in conversation. Old age has rushed on me in the last year, and tied my tongue, and hid my memory, and thus made it a duty to stay at home.\" The \"New York Times\" quoted his reply and noted that his regrets were read aloud at the celebration. Holmes wrote of the problem saying, \"Emerson is afraid to trust himself in society much, on account of the failure of his memory and the great difficulty he finds in getting the words he wants. It is painful to witness his embarrassment at times\".\nOn April 21, 1882, Emerson was found to be suffering from pneumonia. He died six days later. Emerson is buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, Concord, Massachusetts. He was placed in his coffin wearing a white robe given by the American sculptor Daniel Chester French.\nLifestyle and beliefs.\nEmerson's religious views were often considered radical at the time. He believed that all things are connected to God and, therefore, all things are divine. Critics believed that Emerson was removing the central God figure; as Henry Ware Jr. said, Emerson was in danger of taking away \"the Father of the Universe\" and leaving \"but a company of children in an orphan asylum\". Emerson was partly influenced by German philosophy and Biblical criticism. His views, the basis of Transcendentalism, suggested that God does not have to reveal the truth, but that the truth could be intuitively experienced directly from nature. When asked his religious belief, Emerson stated, \"I am more of a Quaker than anything else. I believe in the 'still, small voice', and that voice is Christ within us.\"\nEmerson was a supporter of the spread of community libraries in the 19th century, having this to say of them: \"Consider what you have in the smallest chosen library. A company of the wisest and wittiest men that could be picked out of all civil countries, in a thousand years, have set in best order the results of their learning and wisdom.\"\nEmerson had romantic interest in various women throughout his life, including Anna Barker and Caroline Sturgis.\nRace and slavery.\nEmerson did not become an ardent abolitionist until 1844, though his journals show he was concerned with slavery beginning in his youth, even dreaming about helping to free slaves. In June 1856, shortly after Charles Sumner, a United States Senator, was beaten for his staunch abolitionist views, Emerson lamented that he himself was not as committed to the cause. He wrote, \"There are men who as soon as they are born take a bee-line to the axe of the inquisitor. ... Wonderful the way in which we are saved by this unfailing supply of the moral element\". After Sumner's attack, Emerson began to speak out about slavery. \"I think we must get rid of slavery, or we must get rid of freedom\", he said at a meeting at Concord that summer. Emerson used slavery as an example of a human injustice, especially in his role as a minister. In early 1838, provoked by the murder of an abolitionist publisher from Alton, Illinois, named Elijah Parish Lovejoy, Emerson gave his first public antislavery address. As he said, \"It is but the other day that the brave Lovejoy gave his breast to the bullets of a mob, for the rights of free speech and opinion, and died when it was better not to live\". John Quincy Adams said the mob-murder of Lovejoy \"sent a shock as of any earthquake throughout this continent\". However, Emerson maintained that reform would be achieved through moral agreement rather than by militant action. By August 1, 1844, at a lecture in Concord, he stated more clearly his support for the abolitionist movement: \"We are indebted mainly to this movement, and to the continuers of it, for the popular discussion of every point of practical ethics\".\nEmerson is often known as one of the most liberal democratic thinkers of his time who believed that through the democratic process, slavery should be abolished. While being an avid abolitionist who was known for his criticism of the legality of slavery, Emerson struggled with the implications of race. His usual liberal leanings did not clearly translate when it came to believing that all races had equal capability or function, which was a common conception for the period in which he lived. Many critics believe that it was his views on race that inhibited him from becoming an abolitionist earlier in his life and also inhibited him from being more active in the antislavery movement. Much of his early life, he was silent on the topic of race and slavery. Not until he was well into his 30s did Emerson begin to publish writings on race and slavery, and not until he was in his late 40s and 50s did he become known as an antislavery activist.\nDuring his early life, Emerson seemed to develop a hierarchy of races based on faculty to reason or rather, whether African slaves were distinguishably equal to white men based on their ability to reason. In a journal entry written in 1822, Emerson wrote about a personal observation: \"It can hardly be true that the difference lies in the attribute of reason. I saw ten, twenty, a hundred large lipped, lowbrowed black men in the streets who, except in the mere matter of language, did not exceed the sagacity of the elephant. Now is it true that these were created superior to this wise animal, and designed to control it? And in comparison with the highest orders of men, the Africans will stand so low as to make the difference which subsists between themselves &amp; the sagacious beasts inconsiderable.\"\nAs with many supporters of slavery, during his early years, Emerson seems to have thought that the faculties of African slaves were not equal to those of white slave-owners. But this belief in racial inferiority did not make Emerson a supporter of slavery. Emerson wrote later that year that \"No ingenious sophistry can ever reconcile the unperverted mind to the pardon of Slavery; nothing but tremendous familiarity, and the bias of private interest\". Emerson saw the removal of people from their homeland, the treatment of slaves, and the self-seeking benefactors of slaves as gross injustices. For Emerson, slavery was a moral issue, while superiority of the races was an issue he tried to analyze from a scientific perspective based on what he believed to be inherited traits.\nEmerson saw himself as a man of \"Saxon descent\". In a speech given in 1835 titled \"Permanent Traits of the English National Genius\", he said, \"The inhabitants of the United States, especially of the Northern portion, are descended from the people of England and have inherited the traits of their national character\". He saw direct ties between race based on national identity and the inherent nature of the human being. White Americans who were native-born in the United States and of English ancestry were categorized by him as a separate \"race\", which he thought had a position of being superior to other nations. His idea of race was based on a shared culture, environment, and history. He believed that native-born Americans of English descent were superior to European immigrants, including the Irish, French, and Germans, and also as being superior to English people from England, whom he considered a close second and the only really comparable group.\nLater in his life, Emerson's ideas on race changed when he became more involved in the abolitionist movement while at the same time, he began to more thoroughly analyze the philosophical implications of race and racial hierarchies. His beliefs shifted focus to the potential outcomes of racial conflicts. Emerson's racial views were closely related to his views on nationalism and national superiority, which was a common view in the United States at that time. Emerson used contemporary theories of race and natural science to support a theory of race development. He believed that the current political battle and the current enslavement of other races was an inevitable racial struggle, one that would result in the inevitable union of the United States. Such conflicts were necessary for the dialectic of change that would eventually allow the progress of the nation. In much of his later work, Emerson seems to allow the notion that different European races will eventually mix in America. This hybridization process would lead to a superior race that would be to the advantage of the superiority of the United States.\nLegacy.\nAs a lecturer and orator, Emerson\u2014nicknamed the Sage of Concord\u2014became the leading voice of intellectual culture in the United States. James Russell Lowell, editor of the \"Atlantic Monthly\" and the \"North American Review\", commented in his book \"My Study Windows\" (1871), that Emerson was not only the \"most steadily attractive lecturer in America,\" but also \"one of the pioneers of the lecturing system.\" Herman Melville, who had met Emerson in 1849, originally thought he had \"a defect in the region of the heart\" and a \"self-conceit so intensely intellectual that at first one hesitates to call it by its right name\", though he later admitted Emerson was \"a great man\". Theodore Parker, a minister and Transcendentalist, noted Emerson's ability to influence and inspire others: \"the brilliant genius of Emerson rose in the winter nights, and hung over Boston, drawing the eyes of ingenuous young people to look up to that great new star, a beauty and a mystery, which charmed for the moment, while it gave also perennial inspiration, as it led them forward along new paths, and towards new hopes\".\nEmerson's work not only influenced his contemporaries, such as Walt Whitman and Henry David Thoreau, but would continue to influence thinkers and writers in the United States and around the world down to the present. Notable thinkers who recognize Emerson's influence include Nietzsche and William James, Emerson's godson. There is little disagreement that Emerson was the most influential writer of 19th-century America, though these days he is largely the concern of scholars. Walt Whitman, Henry David Thoreau and William James were all positive Emersonians, while Herman Melville, Nathaniel Hawthorne and Henry James were Emersonians in denial\u2014while they set themselves in opposition to the sage, there was no escaping his influence. To T. S. Eliot, Emerson's essays were an \"encumbrance\". Waldo the Sage was eclipsed from 1914 until 1965, when he returned to shine, after surviving in the work of major American poets like Robert Frost, Wallace Stevens and Hart Crane.\nIn his book \"The American Religion\", Harold Bloom repeatedly refers to Emerson as \"The prophet of the American Religion\", which in the context of the book refers to indigenously American religions such as Mormonism and Christian Science, which arose largely in Emerson's lifetime, but also to mainline Protestant churches that Bloom says have become in the United States more gnostic than their European counterparts. In \"The Western Canon\", Bloom compares Emerson to Michel de Montaigne: \"The only equivalent reading experience that I know is to reread endlessly in the notebooks and journals of Ralph Waldo Emerson, the American version of Montaigne.\" Several of Emerson's poems were included in Bloom's \"The Best Poems of the English Language\", although he wrote that none of the poems are as outstanding as the best of Emerson's essays, which Bloom listed as \"Self-Reliance\", \"Circles\", \"Experience\", and \"nearly all of \"Conduct of Life\"\". In his belief that line lengths, rhythms, and phrases are determined by breath, Emerson's poetry foreshadowed the theories of Charles Olson.\nNamesakes.\nThe following were named after or in honor of Emerson:\nSelected works.\nCollections\nIndividual essays\nPoems\nLetters\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26204", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26204", "title": "Women in Judaism", "text": "Women in Judaism have affected the course of Judaism over millennia. Their role is reflected in the Hebrew Bible, the Oral Law (the corpus of rabbinic literature), by custom, and by cultural factors. Although the Hebrew Bible and rabbinic literature present various female role models, religious law treats women in specific ways. According to a 2017 study by the Pew Research Center, women account for 52% of the worldwide Jewish population.\nGender has a bearing on familial lines: in traditional Rabbinic Judaism, Jewish affiliation is passed down through the mother, although the father's name is used to describe sons and daughters in the Torah and in traditional Hebrew names, e. g., \"Dinah, daughter of Jacob\".\nA growing movement advocates for increased inclusion of women in positions such as rabbis, cantors, and communal leaders. This challenges historic practices. Perspectives on women's roles evolved over time due to discussion and reinterpretation of religious texts.\nLevi status (patrilineal descent from the tribe of Levi) is given only to a Jewish male descended patrilineally from Levi; likewise a Kohen descends from Aharon, the first Kohen. Bat-Kohens and Bat-Levis inherit that status from their Jewish father with the corresponding title HaKohen/HaLevi.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiblical times.\nCompared to men, relatively few women are mentioned in the Bible by name and role. Those mentioned include the Matriarchs Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah; Miriam the prophetess; Rahab who assisted Joshua; Achsah, daughter of Caleb; Deborah the Judge; Naomi; Ruth great-grandmother of King David Huldah the prophetess; Abigail (who married David); Rahab; and Persian Jewish queen Esther. Ruth and Esther are the only women with books that bear their name.\nWomen are portrayed subverting male-dominated power structures. Many Jewish women are considered foundational by feminists because they provide insights into life during those times. They are notable for breaking the male dominance of historical documentation. This is notable given the poor documentation of most women's lives at the time.\nAccording to Jewish tradition, a covenant was formed between the Israelites and the God of Abraham at Mount Sinai. The Torah relates that Israelite men and women were present at Sinai; however, the covenant bound men to act upon its requirements and to ensure that household members (wives, children, and slaves) also met these requirements. In this sense, the covenant bound women, though indirectly.\nMarriage and family law in biblical times gave men powers that it did not give to women. For example, a husband could choose to divorce a wife, but a wife could not divorce a husband without his consent. The practice of levirate marriage applied to widows of childless husbands, but not to widowers of childless wives; though, if either did not consent to the marriage, a ceremony called \"chalitza\" was done instead. The widow removes her brother-in-law's shoe, spits in front of him, and proclaims, \"This is what happens to someone who will not build his brother's house!\"\nLaws concerning the loss of female virginity have no male equivalent. Many of these laws, such as levirate marriage, are no longer practiced (\"chalitzah\" is practiced instead of levirate marriage). These and other gender differences found in the Torah suggest that biblical society viewed continuity, property, and family unity as paramount; however, they also suggest that women were to be subordinate to men. Men were required to perform specific duties for their wives, but these often reinforced gendered roles. These included the provision of clothing, food, and sexual service to their wives.\nWomen participated in ritual life. Women were required to make pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem once a year (men should on each of the three main festivals if possible) and offer the Passover sacrifice. They would also do so on special occasions in their lives such as giving a \"todah\" (\"thanksgiving\") offering after childbirth. Hence, they participated in many of the major public religious roles that non-Levitical men could, albeit less often and on a somewhat smaller and more discreet scale.\nAccording to Jewish tradition, Michal, the daughter of Saul and David's first wife, accepted the commandments of \"tefillin\" and \"tzitzit\". However, these requirements applied only to men. Many of the \"mitzvot\" applied to both men and women; however, women were usually exempt from requirements to perform a duty at a specific time, as opposed to doing so at a convenient time or requirements to abstain from an act). Two prominent theories attempt to explain this: pragmatism (because women's duties consume their time) and spirituality (because \"women have superior inherent spiritual wisdom\", known as bina, that makes them less dependent than men on religious practices to retain a strong spiritual connection to God).\nWomen depended on men economically. Women generally did not own property except in the rare case of inheriting land from a father who did not bear sons. Even in such cases, \"women would be required to remarry within the tribe so as not to reduce its land holdings\".\nTalmudic times.\nWomen were required by \"halacha\" to carry out all negative \"mitzvot\" (i. e., commandments that prohibit activities such as \"Thou shalt not commit adultery\"), but were excused from doing most time-bound, positive \"mitzvot\" (i. e., commandments that prescribe ritual action that must be done at certain times such as hearing a shofar on Rosh Hashanah). A woman was not, however, prohibited from doing a \"mitzvah\" from which she was excused. \"Halacha\" also provided women with some material and emotional protections related to marriage, and divorce that most non-Jewish women did not enjoy during the first millennium of the Common Era. Penal and civil law treated men and women equally.\nEvidence suggests that, at least among the elite, women were educated in the Bible and in \"halacha\". The daughter of a scholar was considered a good prospect for marriage in part because of her education. Stories in the Talmud present women whose husbands died or were exiled and yet were able to educate their children because of their own education.\nThe Talmud states:\nWhile few women are mentioned by name, and none are known to have authored a rabbinic work, those who are mentioned are portrayed as having a strong influence on their husbands. Occasionally they have a public persona. Examples are Bruriah, the wife of the Tanna Rabbi Meir; Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva; Yalta, the wife of Rabbi Nachman; and Ima Shalom, the wife of Eliezer ben Hurcanus. When Eleazar ben Azariah was asked to assume the role of \"Nasi\" (\"Prince\" or President of the Sanhedrin), he replied that he must first take counsel with his wife, which he did.\nMiddle Ages.\nSince Jews were seen as second-class citizens in Christian and Muslim societies (legally known in the Muslim world as dhimmi), it was harder for Jewish women to establish their own status. Grossman claimed that three factors affected how Jewish women were perceived by society: \"the biblical and Talmudic heritage; the situation in the non-Jewish society within which the Jews lived and functioned; and the economic status of the Jews, including the woman's role in supporting the family.\" Grossman used these factors to argue that women's status overall during this period rose.\nDuring the Middle Ages, a conflict emerged between Judaism's expectations of women and the reality in which they lived; this was similar to the lives of Christian women of the period. This prompted the kabbalistic work \"Sefer Hakanah\" to demand that women fulfill the \"mitzvot\" in a way equal to men. In some communities of Ashkenaz in the fifteenth century, the wife of the rabbi wore \"tzitzit\" like her husband.\nReligious life.\nProhibitions against teaching women Torah eased, and women started to form prayer groups. Women participated in Jewish practices publicly at the synagogue. Women probably learned how to read the liturgy in Hebrew.\nBowker stated that traditionally, \"men and women pray separately. This goes back to ancient times when women could go only as far as the second court of the Temple.\" In most synagogues, women were given an area named Ezrat Nashim, most likely a balcony; some synagogues had a separate building.\nSeparation from the men was created by the Rabbis in the \"Mishnah\" and the \"Talmud\". The reasoning was that a woman and her body would distract men and give them impure thoughts during prayer. Due to this rabbinical interpretation, scholars viewed the women's role in the synagogue as limited and sometimes non-existent. Later research reported that women had a significant role in the synagogue and the community at large. Women usually attended synagogue, for example, on the Shabbat and the holidays.\nDepending on the location, women either attended the same service as the men or conducted their own. In larger synagogues, a designated woman who was able to follow the cantor would repeat the prayers for the women. Women had always attended services on Shabbat and holidays, but beginning in the eleventh century, women became more involved in the synagogue and its rituals. Separate seating for women became a norm around the beginning of the thirteenth century. Women, however, did much more than pray. One of their main jobs was to beautify the building. Women sewed Torah ark curtains and Torah covers; some survive. The synagogue was a communal place for both men and women where worship, learning and community activities occurred.\nThe rise of Kabbalah, which emphasized the \"shechinah\" and female aspects of the divine presence and human-divine relationship, and which saw marriage as a holy covenant between partners rather than just a civil contract, had great influence. Kabbalists explained the phenomenon of menstruation as expressions of the demonic or sinful character of the menstruant. These changes were accompanied by increased pietistic strictures, including greater requirements for modest dress, and greater strictures while menstruating. Philosophical and \"midrashic\" interpretations depicted women in a negative light, emphasizing a duality between matter and spirit in which femininity was associated, with negative connotations, with earth and matter. Gentile society was seen as a negative influence on the Jewish community. For example, it seems that Jews would analyze the modesty of their Gentile neighbors before officially moving into a new community, because they knew that their children would be influenced by their surroundings.\nAfter the expulsion of Jews from Spain in 1492, women became virtually the only source of Jewish ritual and tradition in the Catholic world in a phenomenon known as crypto-Judaism. Crypto-Jewish women slaughtered their own animals, and followed as many of the Jewish dietary laws (\"Kashrut\" or \"kosher\") and life cycle rituals as possible without raising suspicion. Occasionally, these women were prosecuted by Inquisition officials for suspicious behavior such as lighting candles to honor the Sabbath or refusing to eat pork. The Inquisition targeted crypto-Jewish women at least as much as it targeted crypto-Jewish men, because women were accused of perpetuating Jewish tradition while men were merely permitting their wives and daughters to organize the household.\nDomestic life.\nMarriage, domestic violence and divorce were discussed by Jewish sages of the Medieval world. Marriage is an important institution in Judaism. The wife/mother is called \"akeret habayit\" in Hebrew, which in English means \"mainstay of the house\". In traditional and Orthodox Judaism the \"akeret habayit\" tends to the family and household duties.\nRabbeinu Gershom instituted a rabbinic decree (t\"akkanah\") prohibiting polygyny among Ashkenazic Jews. At the time, Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews did not accept this ban.\nThe rabbis instituted legal methods to enable women to petition a rabbinical court to compel a divorce. Maimonides ruled that a woman who found her husband \"repugnant\" could ask a court to compel a divorce by flogging the recalcitrant husband \"because she is not like a captive, to be subjected to intercourse with one who is hateful to her\". Furthermore, Maimonides ruled that a woman may \"consider herself as divorced and remarry\" if her husband remained absent for three years. This was to prevent women married to traveling merchants from becoming an \"agunah\" if the husband never returned.\nThe rabbis instituted and tightened prohibitions on domestic violence. Rabbi Peretz ben Elijah ruled, \"The cry of the daughters of our people has been heard concerning the sons of Israel who raise their hands to strike their wives. Yet who has given a husband the authority to beat his wife?\" Rabbi Meir of Rothenberg ruled that, \"For it is the way of the Gentiles to behave thus, but Heaven forbid that any Jew should do so. And one who beats his wife is to be excommunicated and banned and beaten.\" He also ruled that a battered wife could petition a rabbinical court to compel a husband to grant a divorce, with a monetary fine owed to her on top of the regular \"ketubah\" money. These rulings occurred in the midst of societies where wife-beating was legally sanctioned and routine.\nEducation.\nJewish women had a limited education. They were taught to read, write, run a household. They were given some education in religious law that was essential to their daily lives, such as keeping kosher. Both Christian and Jewish girls were educated in the home. Although Christian girls might have either a male or female tutor, most Jewish girls had a female tutor. Higher learning was uncommon for women. More sources of education were available for Jewish women in Muslim-controlled lands. Middle Eastern Jewry had an abundance of female literates.\nMany women had enough education to help their husbands in business or even run their own. Jewish women seem to have lent money to Christian women throughout Europe. Women also worked as copyists, midwives, spinners, and weavers.\nDebates in Jewish law.\nEducation of women.\nFrom certain contexts of the \"Mishnah\" and \"Talmud\", it can be derived that women should not study \"Mishnah\". Female Tannaitic Torah jurists included Rabbi Meir's wife, Rabbi Meir's daughter, and the daughter of Haninah ben Teradion. Haninah's daughter is mentioned as a sage in the non-Talmudic third-century text \"Tractate Semahot\" 12:13. Rabbi Meir's wife is credited with teaching him how to understand some verses from Isaiah. The \"Mishnah\" references certain women teaching men the Torah from behind a curtain so that no man would be offended.\nHowever, a \"yeshiva\", or school for Talmudic studies, is an \"exclusively masculine environment\".\nMaimonides tended to elevate the status of women above the then norm. For example, he permitted women to study \"Torah\" even though other legal opinions did not. Rabbi Chaim Joseph David Azulai wrote that women should study the \"Mishnah\" only if they wanted to. According to the \"Hida\", the prohibition of teaching women does not apply to a motivated woman or girl. Maimonides' response to detractors was the prohibition against teaching Mishnah to any student\u2014male or female\u2014unless they were properly prepared and motivated.\nOne of the most important Ashkenazi rabbanim of the past century, Yisrael Meir Kagan, known popularly as the \"Chofetz Chaim\", favored \"Torah\" education for girls to counteract the French \"finishing schools\" prevalent in his day for the daughters of the bourgeoisie. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It would appear that all [these sexist laws] were intended for earlier generations when everyone dwelt in the place of their familial ancestral home and ancestral tradition was very powerful among all to follow the path of their fathers... under such circumstances we could maintain that a woman not study Mishnayos and, for guidance, rely on her righteous parents, but presently, due to our myriad sins, ancestral tradition has become exceptionally weak and it is common that people do not dwell in proximity to the family home, and especially those women who devote themselves to mastering the vernacular, surely it is a now a great mitzvah to teach them Scripture and the ethical teachings of our sages such as Pirkei Avos, Menoras Ha-Ma'or and the like so that they will internalize our sacred faith because [if we do not do so] they are prone to abandon the path of God and violate all principles of [our] faith.\"\nRabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik taught that all religious Ashkenazi Jews, except hardline Hasidim, must teach their girls \"Gemarah\" like the boys: \"The halakha prohibiting Torah study for women is not indiscriminate or all-encompassing. ... 'If ever circumstances dictate that study of Torah sh-Ba'al Peh is necessary to provide a firm foundation for faith, such study becomes obligatory and obviously lies beyond the pale of any prohibition.' Undoubtedly, the Rav's prescription was more far-reaching than that of the Hafets Hayim and others. But the difference in magnitude should not obscure their fundamental agreement [on changing the attitudes Halachically].\"\nPresent day.\nOrthodox Judaism.\nOrthodox Judaism is complementarian. Opinions vary among Orthodox Jews concerning these principles. Most claim that men and women have different roles and bear different obligations. For example, women are not burdened with time-bound \"mitzvot\". Others believe that such differences have cultural, social, and historical causes. Women were historically exempted from religious study beyond understanding the practical aspects of \"Torah\" and the practices necessary for running a devout household\u2014both of which they were obligated to learn. Until the twentieth century, women were often discouraged from learning Talmud and other advanced Jewish texts. In the past 100 years, Orthodox Jewish education for women has expanded. This is most visible in the development of the Bais Yaakov system.\nOrthodox women have been working to expand women's learning and scholarship, promoting women's ritual inclusion in worship and promoting women's communal and religious leadership. Some rabbinic leaders oppose such changes, claiming that women are motivated by sociological reasons rather than religion. For example, Orthodox rabbis discourage women from wearing a \"kippah\", \"tallit\", or \"tefillin\".\nIn many Orthodox synagogues, women are not entitled to deliver \"divrei Torah\"\u2014brief discourses on the weekly Torah portion\u2014after or between services; \"shiurim\" are typically limited to men. Orthodox synagogues have physical barriers (\"mechitzot\") dividing the left and right sides of the synagogue, with the women on one side and the men on the other. Historically, many Orthodox synagogues restricted women to balcony seating while men sat on the main floor. Formally, a \"mechitzah\" of over four feet or so (ten handbreadths) suffices, even if the men can see the women, though such a small separation is not ideal. A typical \"mechitzah\" consists of wheeled wooden panels, often topped with one-way glass to allow women to view the Torah reading.\nContemporary Hasidic perspectives note the distinctive outreach structure developed by the Chabad-Lubavitch movement. Beginning in the late 1950s, the movement\u2019s leader, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, encouraged married couples to settle worldwide as equal partners in \"shlichut\" (religious emissary work), formally granting women the parallel title \"shlucha\". Today, more than 4,000 such emissary women gather annually in New York for the International Conference of Chabad-Lubavitch Women Emissaries, regarded as the largest regular assembly of Jewish women in the world. These \"shluchot\" direct educational programs, run community centres and teach Torah, often in locations lacking other Orthodox infrastructure. Scholars of modern Orthodoxy cite the model as a significant expansion of women\u2019s communal authority within a halakhic framework while maintaining traditional ritual roles.\nRules of modesty.\nAlthough Judaism prescribes modesty for both men and women, the importance of modesty in dress and conduct is particularly stressed among women and girls. Most Orthodox women wear skirts and avoid trousers, and most married Orthodox women cover their hair with a scarf (\"tichel\"), snood, hat, beret, or wig.\n\"Halakhic\" advisor.\nUnder Jewish Law, Orthodox Jewish women refrain from bodily contact with their husbands while they are menstruating and for 7 days afterwards, and after the birth of a child. The Israeli Rabbinate allows women to act as \"yoatzot\", \"halakhic\" advisers on matters considered sensitive and personal such as niddah.\nModern Orthodox.\nOrthodox leader Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik discouraged women from serving as presidents of synagogues or other official leadership positions, from performing other \"mitzvot\" traditionally performed by males exclusively, such as wearing a \"tallit\" or \"tefillin\". One reason is that tefillin are believed to help men avoid thoughts considered impure, while women are believed not to have such thoughts. Soloveitchik wrote that while women do not lack the capability to perform such acts, there is no \"mesorah\" (Jewish tradition) that permits it. In making his decision, he relied upon Jewish oral law, including a \"mishnah\" in Chulin 2a and a \"Beit Yoseph\" in the \"Tur Yoreh Deah\" stating that a woman can perform a specific official communal service for her own needs, but not those of others.\nWomen's issues garnered more interest with the advent of feminism. Many Modern Orthodox Jewish women and Modern Orthodox rabbis sought to provide more Jewish education for women. Modern Orthodox communities promote women's secular education. A few Modern Orthodox Synagogues have women serving as clergy, including Gilah Kletenik at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun.\nIn 2010, Sara Hurwitz became the first woman to be ordained as a \"Rabba\", the female equivalent of a rabbi, when she started serving as an Open Orthodox spiritual leader.\nIn 2013, Yeshivat Maharat, located in the United States, became the first Orthodox institution to consecrate female clergy. The graduates of Yeshivat Maharat typically receive the title \"maharat\" rather than rabbi. However, in 2015, Yaffa Epstein was ordained as a rabba by the institution. Also in 2015, Lila Kagedan was ordained as a rabbi at Yeshivat Maharat, the seminary's first graduate to take the title. She became the first female Modern Orthodox rabbi in the US in January 2016.\nIn 2013, Malka Schaps became the first female Haredi dean at an Israeli university when she was appointed dean of Bar Ilan University's Faculty of Exact Sciences. Also in 2013, the first class of female \"halachic\" advisers in the US graduated from the North American branch of Nishmat's \"yoetzet halacha\" program. SAR High School began allowing girls to wrap \"tefillin\" during \"Shacharit\" (morning prayer) in an all-female prayer group, the first Modern Orthodox high school in the US to do so.\nIn 2014, the first-ever book of \"halachic\" decisions was published by women ordained to serve as \"poskot\" (Idit Bartov and Anat Novoselsky) in Israel. They were ordained by Rabbi Shlomo Riskin after completing Midreshet Lindenbaum's women's course and passing examinations equivalent to the rabbinate's requirement for men.\nOn June 10, 2015, Meesh Hammer-Kossoy and Rahel Berkovits were the first women ordained as Modern Orthodox rabbas in Israel.\nIn the fall, the Agudath Israel of America denounced moves to ordain women, and declared Yeshivat Maharat, Yeshivat Chovevei Torah, and Open Orthodoxy, in general, as having rejected basic tenets of Judaism. The Rabbinical Council of America passed a resolution which stated, \"RCA members with positions in Orthodox institutions may not ordain women into the Orthodox rabbinate, regardless of the title used; or hire or ratify the hiring of a woman into a rabbinic position at an Orthodox institution; or allow a title implying rabbinic ordination to be used by a teacher of Limudei Kodesh in an Orthodox institution.\"\nJennie Rosenfeld became the first female Orthodox spiritual advisor in Israel.\nIn 2016 Ephraim Mirvis created the job of \"ma'ayan\" by which women would be advisers on Jewish law in the area of family purity and as adult educators in Orthodox synagogues. This required a part-time training course for 18 months, the first such course in the United Kingdom. On August 23, 2016, Karmit Feintuch became the first woman in Jerusalem to be hired as a Modern Orthodox \"rabbanit\" and serve as a spiritual leader.\nIn 2017, the Orthodox Union adopted a policy banning women from serving as clergy, from holding titles such as \"rabbi\", and from performing common clergy functions even without a title, in its US congregations.\nWomen's prayer groups.\nIn Germany, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, women's prayer groups were led by female cantors. Rabbi Eliezer of Worms, in his elegy for his wife Dulca, praised her for teaching the other women how to pray and embellishing the prayer with music. The gravestone of Urania of Worms, who died in 1275, contains the inscription \"who sang \"piyyutim\" for the women with musical voice\". In the Nurnberg Memorial Book, one Richenza was inscribed with the title \"prayer leader of the women\".\nOrthodox women more recently began holding organized women's \"tefila\" (prayer) groups beginning in the 1970s. While Orthodox legal authorities agree that women are prohibited from forming a \"minyan\" (prayer quorum) for the purpose of regular services, women in these groups have read the prayers and study Torah. A number of leaders from all segments of Orthodox Judaism have commented on this issue, but it has had a little, although growing, impact on Haredi and Sephardi Judaism. However, the emergence of this phenomenon has enmeshed Modern Orthodox Judaism in a debate which still continues today. There are three schools of thought on this issue:\nIn 2013, the Israeli Orthodox rabbinical organization Beit Hillel issued a halachic ruling which allows women, for the first time, to say the Kaddish prayer in memory of their deceased parents.\nWomen as witnesses.\nTraditionally, women are not generally permitted to serve as witnesses in an Orthodox Beit Din (rabbinical court), although they have recently been permitted to serve as \"toanot\" (advocates) in those courts. Women are also permitted to provide evidence under oath, and their statements are considered to be fully credible in ritual matters. The exclusion of women as witnesses has exceptions which have required exploration under rabbinic law, as the role of women in society and the obligations of religious groups under external civil law have been subject to increasing recent scrutiny.\nThe recent case of Rabbi Mordecai Tendler, the first rabbi to be expelled from the Rabbinical Council of America following allegations of sexual harassment, illustrated the importance of clarification of Orthodox halakha in this area. Rabbi Tendler claimed that the tradition of exclusion of women's testimony should compel the RCA to disregard the allegations. He argued that since the testimony of a woman could not be admitted in Rabbinical court, there were no valid witnesses against him, and hence, the case for his expulsion had to be thrown out for lack of evidence. In a ruling of importance for Orthodox women's capacity for legal self-protection under Jewish law, Haredi Rabbi Benzion Wosner, writing on behalf of the \"Shevet Levi\" Beit Din (Rabbinical court) of Monsey, New York, identified sexual harassment cases as coming under a class of exceptions to the traditional exclusion, under which \"even children or women\" have not only a right, but an obligation, to testify, and can be relied upon by a rabbinical court as valid witnesses:\nThe Ramah in Choshen Mishpat (Siman 35, 14) rules that in a case where only women congregate, or in a case where only women could possibly testify (in this case, the alleged harassment occurred behind closed doors), they can, and should, certainly testify. (Terumas Hadeshen Siman 353 and Agudah Perek 10, Yochasin)\nThis is also the ruling of the Maharik, Radvaz, and the Mahar\"i of Minz. Even those Poskim that would normally not rely on women witnesses, they would certainly agree that in our case ... where there is ample evidence that this Rabbi violated Torah precepts, then even children or women can certainly be kosher as witnesses, as the Chasam Sofer pointed out in his \"sefer\" (monograph) (Orach Chaim T'shuvah 11)\nThe Rabbinical Council of America, while initially relying on its own investigation, chose to rely on the Halakhic ruling of the Haredi Rabbinical body as authoritative in the situation.\nOrthodox approaches to change.\nLeaders of the Haredi community have opposed many changes to the role of women. Many have argued that religious and social constraints on women are timeless, and are not subject to change. Many have argued that giving traditionally male roles to women would detract from both women's and men's ability to lead fulfilling lives. Haredim have perceived arguments for liberalization as stemming from antagonism to Jewish law and beliefs.\nMore liberal variants of Modern Orthodox Judaism tend to view proposed changes in the role of women on a case-by-case basis, focusing on arguments regarding the religious and legal role of specific prayers, rituals and activities individually. Such arguments focus on cases where the Talmud and other traditional sources express multiple or more liberal viewpoints, particularly where the role of women in the past was arguably broader than in later times. Feminist advocates within Orthodoxy generally stay within the traditional legal process of argumentation, seeking a gradualist approach. Nevertheless, a growing Orthodox feminist movement seeks to address gender inequalities.\nmilitary service in Israel.\nIn modern Israel, the question of women's military service has been a central social and religious issue. While the Israel Defense Forces conscript women as part of mandatory service, religious authorities differ on the permissibility of such enlistment, with many encouraging alternative frameworks of national or community service. Organizations such as \"Aluma\" assist young religious women in navigating options for military or civilian service while maintaining their religious commitments.\nAgunot.\n\"Agunot\" (Hebrew: \"chained women\") are women whose husbands refuse to give them a divorce contract (a \"get\"). The word can also refer to a woman whose husband has disappeared. In Orthodox Judaism, only a man is able to serve a \"get\". In order to prevent a husband from such a refusal, many couples sign a prenuptial agreement that forces the husband to serve a get or else be reported to the Jewish court.\nConservative Judaism.\nAlthough the position of Conservative Judaism toward women originally differed little from the Orthodox position, it later minimized legal and ritual differences between men and women. The Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) of the Rabbinical Assembly issued decisions and responsa on this topic. These provide for women's active participation in areas such as:\nA rabbi may decide which particular rulings to adopt for the congregation; thus, some Conservative congregations became more or less egalitarian than others.\nAreas where legal differences remain between men and women include:\nA Conservative Jewish \"ketuba\" includes a clause that puts a husband and wife on more equal footing when it comes to marriage and divorce law within \"halacha\".\nCJLS reaffirmed in 2006 the obligation of Conservative women to observe \"niddah\" (sexual abstinence during and after menstruation) and \"mikvah\" (ritual immersion) following menstruation, although liberalizing certain details. Such practices, while requirements of Conservative Judaism, are not widely observed among Conservative laity.\nChanges.\nConservative Judaism traditionally held traditional views of women's role. However, in 1946, the new Silverman siddur changed the traditional words of thanking God for \"not making me a woman\", instead thanking God for \"making me a free person.\" In 1955, the CJLS of the Rabbinical Assembly allowed women to have an \"aliyah\" at \"Torah\"-readings services.\nIn 1973, the CJLS of the Rabbinical Assembly voted, without issuing an opinion, that women could count in a \"minyan\".\nA commission appointed by the Conservative movement to study the issue of ordaining women as rabbis, met between 1977 and 1978. It consisted of eleven men and three women: attorney Marian Siner Gordon, Assyriologist Rivkah Harris, and author Francine Klagsbrun. In 1983, the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA) faculty voted, also without accompanying opinion, to ordain women as rabbis and as cantors. Paula Hyman, among others, voted as a member of the JTSA faculty.\nIn 2002, the CJLS adapted a responsum by Rabbi David Fine, \"Women and the Minyan\", which provided a religious-law foundation for women counting in a \"minyan\" and explained the Conservative approach to the role of women in prayer. It holds that although Jewish women do not traditionally have the same obligations as men, Conservative women have voluntarily undertaken them. Because of this undertaking, Fine's responsum claimed that Conservative women are eligible to serve as agents and decision-makers for others. The responsum also held that traditionally-minded communities and individual women could opt out without sinning. By adopting this responsum, the CJLS allowed itself to provide a considered Jewish-law justification for its practices, without having to rely on \"ad hoc\" arguments, undermine the religious importance of community and clergy, ask individual women intrusive questions, repudiate the \"halakhic\" tradition, or label women as sinners who followed traditional practices.\nIn 2006, the CJLS adopted three responsa on the subject of \"niddah\", which reaffirmed the obligation of Conservative women to abstain from sexual relations during and following menstruation and to immerse in a \"mikvah\" prior to resumption, while liberalizing observance requirements including shortening the length of the \"niddah\", lifting restrictions on non-sexual contact during \"niddah\", and reducing the circumstances under which spotting and similar conditions would mandate abstinence.\nContinuing the Orthodox approach remained acceptable. Individual Conservative rabbis and synagogues were not required to change, and a small number did not.\nConservative approaches to change.\nBetween 1973 and 2002, the Conservative movement adopted changes through its official organizations, but without issuing explanatory opinions. Since 2002, the Conservative movement coalesced around a unified approach to the role of women.\nIn 1973, 1983, and 1993, individual rabbis and professors issued six major opinions that influenced the Conservative approach, the first and second Sigal, Blumenthal, Rabinowitz, and Roth responsa, and the Hauptman article. These opinions sought to launch a wholesale shift in women's public roles through a comprehensive legal justification. Most such opinions proposed that Jewish women always were, or had become, legally obligated to perform many of the same \"\" as men and, when performing , to do so in the same manner.\nThe first Sigal and the Blumenthal responsa were considered by CJLS as part of its decision on prayer roles in 1973. They argued that women had always had the same obligations as men. The first Sigal responsum used the \"Talmud\"'s general prayer obligation and examples of cases in which women were traditionally obligated to say specific prayers. They inferred from them a public prayer obligation identical to that of men. The Blumenthal responsum extrapolated from a minority authority that a \"minyan\" could be formed with nine men and one woman in an emergency. CJLS declined to adopt either responsum. Rabbi Sigal reported to the Rabbinical Assembly membership that many on the CJLS, while agreeing with the result, found the arguments unconvincing.\nThe Rabinowitz, Roth, and second Sigal responsa were considered by JTSA faculty as part of its decision to ordain women as rabbis in 1983. The Rabbinowitz responsum sidestepped the issue of obligation, arguing that a community representative was no longer needed in prayer and hence the question of whether a woman can perform \"halakhic\" was moot. CJLS stated that an argument potentially undermining the value of community and clergy was unconvincing: \"We should not be afraid to recognize that the function of clergy is to help our people connect with the holy.\" The Roth and second Sigal responsa accepted that time-bound \"mitzvot\" were traditionally optional for women, but argued that women in modern times could change their traditional roles. The Roth responsum argued that women could voluntarily assume the same obligations as men, and that women who do so (e. g., pray three times a day regularly) could count in a \"minyan\" and serve as agents. JTSA accordingly required female rabbinical students wishing to train as rabbis to personally obligate themselves. Synagogue rabbis, unwilling to inquire into individual religiosity, found this impractical. The second Sigal responsum called for a \"takkanah\", or rabbinical edict, \"that would serve as a \"halakhic\" ERA\", overruling all non-egalitarian provisions in law or, in the alternative, adopet an approach to \"halakhic\" interpretation independent of legal precedents. CJLS, unwilling to take either an intrusive approach or repudiate the traditional legal process, did not adopt either and let the JTS faculty vote stand unexplained.\nIn 1993, Professor Judith Hauptman of JTSA issued an influential paper arguing that women had historically always been obligated in prayer, using more detailed arguments than the Blumenthal and first Sigal responsa. The paper suggested that women who followed traditional practices were failing to meet their obligations. Rabbi Roth argued that Conservative Judaism should reconsider before adopting a stance that labeled its most traditional members as sinners. The issue was again dropped.\nIn 2002, the CJLS returned to the issue and adopted a single authoritative approach, the Fine responsum, as the definitive Conservative \"halakha\" on role-of-women issues. This responsum held that although Jewish women do not traditionally have the same obligations as men, Conservative women have collectively and voluntarily undertaken them. Because of this, the Fine responsum held that Conservative women were eligible to serve as agents and decision-makers for others. The Responsum also held that traditionally minded communities and individuals could continue traditional practice without sinning. By adopting this Responsum, CJLS was able to provide a considered Jewish-law justification for its egalitarian practices, without having to rely on potentially unconvincing arguments, undermine the religious importance of community and clergy, ask individual women intrusive questions, repudiate the \"halakhic\" tradition, or label women following traditional practices as sinners.\nReform Judaism.\nReform Judaism believes in the equality of men and women. It rejects the idea that \"halakha\" is the sole legitimate form of Jewish decisionmaking, and holds that Jews must consider their conscience and ethical principles inherent in the Jewish tradition when deciding upon a right course of action. Consensus is widespread among Reform Jews that traditional distinctions between the role of men and women violate the deeper ethical principles of Judaism. This has enabled Reform communities to allow women to perform many rituals traditionally reserved for men, such as:\nConcerns about intermarriage influenced the Reform Jewish position on gender. In 1983, the Central Conference of American Rabbis passed a resolution waiving the need for formal conversion for anyone with at least one Jewish parent who has made affirmative acts of Jewish identity. The 1983 resolution had a mixed reception in Reform Jewish communities outside of the United States. Most notably, the Israel Movement for Progressive Judaism rejected patrilineal descent and requires formal conversion for anyone whose mother is not Jewish. A joint\"Bet Din\" composed of Orthodox, Traditional, Conservative, and Reform rabbis, established in Denver, Colorado to promote uniform conversion standards, dissolved in 1983 due to that resolution.. In 2015, the majority of Britain's Assembly of Reform Rabbis voted in favor of a position paper proposing \"that individuals who live a Jewish life, and who are patrilineally Jewish, can be welcomed into the Jewish community and confirmed as Jewish through an individual process\". Britain's Assembly of Reform Rabbis stated that rabbis \"would be able to take local decisions \u2013 ratified by the Beit Din \u2013 confirming Jewish status\".\nReform prayerbooks tend to avoid male-specific words and pronouns, making all references to God in translations in gender-neutral language. For example, the UK Liberal movement's \"Siddur Lev Chadash\" (1995) does so, as does the UK Reform Movement's \"Forms of Prayer\" (2008). In Mishkan T'filah, the American Reform Jewish prayer book released in 2007, references to God as \"He\" have been removed, and whenever Jewish patriarchs are named (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob), so also are the matriarchs (Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah.) In 2015 the Reform Jewish High Holy Days prayer book \"Mishkan HaNefesh\" was released as a companion to \"Mishkan T'filah\". It includes a version of the High Holy Days prayer Avinu Malkeinu that refers to God as both \"Loving Father\" and \"Compassionate Mother\". Other notable changes replaced a line from the Reform movement's earlier prayerbook, \"Gates of Repentance\", that mentioned the joy of a bride and groom specifically, with the line \"rejoicing with couples under the \"chuppah\"\" (wedding canpopy), and adding a third, non-gendered option to the way worshippers are called to the \"Torah\", offering \"mibeit\" (from the house of), in addition to the traditional \"son of\" or \"daughter of\".\nIn 2008, Stacy Offner became the first female vice president of the Union for Reform Judaism. In 2015, Daryl Messinger became the first female Union chair.\nReform approaches to change.\nReform Judaism generally holds that the various differences between the roles of men and women in traditional Jewish law are not relevant to modern conditions and no longer applicable. Accordingly, legal arguments were not needed.\nReconstructionist Judaism.\nThe equality of women and men is a central tenet and hallmark of Reconstructionist Judaism. From the beginning, Reconstructionist Jewish ritual allowed men and women to pray together. It was on this basis that Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan called for the full equality of women and men, despite the obvious difficulties reconciling this stance with traditional Jewish practice. The Reconstructionist Movement always allowed women to be ordained. In 1968, women were accepted into the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, under Ira Eisenstein's leadership. The first ordained female Reconstructionist rabbi, Sandy Eisenberg Sasso, served as rabbi of the Manhattan Reconstructionist Congregation in 1976, and gained a pulpit in 1977 at Beth El Zedeck congregation in Indianapolis. Sandy Eisenberg Sasso was accepted without debate or subsequent controversy. In 2005, 24 of the movement's 106 synagogues in the US had women as senior or assistant rabbis. In 2013 Rabbi Deborah Waxman was elected as the President of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College. She was the first woman and first lesbian to officially to lead a Jewish congregational union, and the first female rabbi and first lesbian to lead a Jewish seminary; the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College is both a congregational union and a seminary.\nThe Reconstructionist Community began including women in the \"minyan\" and allowing them to come up to the Torah for \"aliyot\". They also continued the practice of \"bat mitzvah\". Reconstructionist Judaism allowed women to perform other traditionally male tasks, such as serving as witnesses, leading services, public \"Torah\" reading, and wearing ritual prayer garments like \"kippot\" and \"tallitot\". Female Reconstructionist rabbis were instrumental in the creation of rituals, stories, and music that give women a voice in Judaism. Most of the focus has been on rituals for life-cycle events. New ceremonies have been created for births, weddings, divorces, conversions, weaning, and the onset of menarche and menopause. The Reconstructionist movement committed to creating liturgy that supports gender equality and the celebration of women's lives. Another major step: The Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations developed educational programs that teach the full acceptance of lesbians, as well as rituals that affirm lesbian relationships. Reconstructionist rabbis officiate at same-sex weddings. Reconstructionist Judaism allows openly LGBT people to be ordained as rabbis and cantors.\nProminent members of the Reconstructionist community focused on issues such as domestic violence. Others devoted energy to helping women gain the right of divorce in traditional Jewish communities. Many have spoken out for the right of Jewish women to pray aloud and read from the \"Torah\" at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, particularly members of the Women of the Wall group.\nWhen the roles of women in religion change, men's roles may also change. With their acceptance of patrilineal descent in 1979, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association supported the principle that a man can pass Judaism on to the next generation as well as a woman.\nJewish Renewal.\nJewish Renewal describes itself as \"a worldwide, transdenominational movement grounded in Judaism's prophetic and mystical traditions\". The Jewish Renewal movement ordains women and men as rabbis and cantors. Lynn Gottlieb became the first female rabbi in Jewish Renewal in 1981, and Avitall Gerstetter became the first female cantor in Jewish Renewal (and the first female cantor in Germany) in 2002. In 2009 and 2012 respectively, OHALAH (Association of Rabbis for Jewish Renewal) issued a board statement and a resolution supporting Women of the Wall. OHALAH's Statement of Principles states, \"Our local communities will embody egalitarian and inclusive values, manifested in a variety of leadership and decision-making structures, ensuring that women and men are full and equal partners in every aspect of our communal Jewish life.\" In 2014 OHALAH issued a board resolution stating, \"Therefore, be it resolved that: OHALAH supports the observance of Women's History Month, International Women's Day, and Women's Equality Day; OHALAH condemns all types of sexism; OHALAH is committed to gender equality, now and in all generations to come; and OHALAH supports equal rights regardless of gender.\" Also in 2014, ALEPH: Alliance for Jewish Renewal issued a statement stating, \"ALEPH: Alliance for Jewish Renewal supports the observance of Women's History Month, International Women's Day, and Women's Equality Day, condemns all types of sexism, is committed to gender equality, now and in all generations to come, and supports equal rights regardless of gender, in recognition and allegiance to the view that we are all equally created in the Divine Image.\"\nHumanistic Judaism.\nHumanistic Judaism ordains both men and women as rabbis; its first rabbi was a woman, Tamara Kolton, who was ordained in 1999. Its first cantor was also a woman, Deborah Davis, ordained in 2001; Humanistic Judaism later stopped ordaining cantors. The Society for Humanistic Judaism issued a statement in 1996 stating, \"We affirm that a woman has the moral right and should have the continuing legal right to decide whether or not to terminate a pregnancy in accordance with her own ethical standards. Because a decision to terminate a pregnancy carries serious, irreversible consequences, it is one to be made with great care and with keen awareness of the complex psychological, emotional, and ethical implications.\" In 2012, they opposed conscience clauses that allowed religious-affiliated institutions to be exempt from requirements mandating the provision of reproductive healthcare services. In 2013 stated, \"Therefore, be it resolved that: The Society for Humanistic Judaism wholeheartedly supports the observance of Women's Equality Day on August 26 to commemorate the anniversary of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution allowing women to vote; The Society condemns gender discrimination in all its forms, including restriction of rights, limited access to education, violence, and subjugation; and The Society commits itself to maintain vigilance and speak out in the fight to bring gender equality to our generation and to the generations that follow.\"\nSofrot (scribe).\nSofrot is the feminine plural of Sofer. A Sopher, Sopher, Sofer STaM, or Sofer ST\"M (Heb: \"scribe\", \u05e1\u05d5\u05e4\u05e8 \u05e1\u05ea\u05f4\u05dd) is a Jewish scribe who is able and entitled to transcribe \"Torah\" scrolls, \"tefillin\" and \"mezuzot\", and other religious writings. (ST\"M, \u05e1\u05ea\u05f4\u05dd, is an abbreviation for Sefer Torahs, Tefillin, and Mezuzot. The masculine plural of sofer is \"sofrim\" \u05e1\u05d5\u05e4\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd).\nForming the basis for the discussion of women becoming sofrot, Talmud Gittin 45b states: \"Sifrei Torah, tefillin, and mezuzot written by a heretic, a star-worshipper, a slave, a woman, a minor, a Cuthean, or an apostate Jew, are unfit for ritual use.\". As Arba'ah Turim does not include women in its list of those ineligible to write Sifrei Torah, some see this as proof that women are permitted to write a \"Torah\" scroll. However, virtually all Orthodox (both Modern and Ultra) authorities reject the idea that a woman is permitted to write a Sefer Torah. Yet women are permitted to inscribe Ketubot (marriage contracts), STaM not intended for ritual use, and other writings of Sofrut beyond simple STaM. In 2003, Canadian Aviel Barclay became the world's first public, traditionally-trained, female sofer. In 2007 Jen Taylor Friedman, a British woman, became the first female sofer to scribe a Sefer Torah. In 2010 the first Sefer Torah scribed by a group of women (six female sofers, from Brazil, Canada, Israel, and the United States) was completed; this was known as the Women's Torah Project.\nFrom October 2010 until spring 2011, Julie Seltzer, one of the female sofers from the Women's Torah Project, scribed a Sefer Torah as part of an exhibition at the Contemporary Jewish Museum in San Francisco. This makes her the first American female sofer to scribe a Sefer Torah. Seltzer is non-denominationally Jewish. From spring 2011 until August 2012 she scribed another Sefer Torah, this time for the Reform congregation Beth Israel in San Diego. On September 22, 2013, Congregation Beth Elohim of New York dedicated a new Torah, which members of Beth Elohim said was the first Torah in New York City to be completed by a woman. The \"Torah\" was scribed by Linda Coppleson. As of 2014, there were an estimated 50 female sofers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral\nPublications\nParticular issues"}
{"id": "26207", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26207", "title": "Robert Herrick", "text": "Robert Herrick may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "26208", "revid": "38020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26208", "title": "Raelites", "text": ""}
{"id": "26209", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26209", "title": "Ramadhan", "text": ""}
{"id": "26211", "revid": "32562831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26211", "title": "Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act", "text": "US federal law\nThe Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act is a United States federal law that provides for extended criminal penalties and a civil cause of action for acts performed as part of an ongoing criminal organization.\nRICO was enacted by Title IX of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 (Pub. L.\u00a0, 84\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, enacted ), and is codified at as \u00a0https://\u2013https://.\nThis article primarily covers the federal criminal statute, but since 1972, 33 U.S. states and territories have adopted state RICO laws, which although similar, cover additional state crimes and may differ from the federal law and each other in several respects.\nHistory.\nG. Robert Blakey, an adviser to the United States Senate Government Operations Committee, drafted the law under the close supervision of Senator John L. McClellan, the Chairman of the Criminal Law and Procedures Subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee. \nIt was signed into law by U.S. President Richard Nixon. Prosecutors in the 1970s used it to prosecute the Mafia as well as others who were actively engaged in organized crime. In later years, prosecutors have applied the law more broadly.\nSummary.\nUnder RICO, a person who has committed \"at least two acts of racketeering activity\" drawn from a list of 35 crimes (27 federal crimes and eight state crimes) within a 10-year period can be charged with racketeering if such acts are related in one of four specified ways to an enterprise.\nThose found guilty of racketeering can be fined up to $25,000 and sentenced to 20 years in prison per racketeering count.\nIn addition, the racketeer must forfeit all ill-gotten gains and interest in any business gained through a pattern of racketeering activity.\nA US Attorney who indicts someone under RICO has the option of seeking a pre-trial restraining order or an injunction to temporarily seize a defendant's assets and prevent the transfer of potentially forfeitable property as well as to require the defendant to put up a performance bond. An injunction or performance bond ensures that there is something to seize in the event of a guilty verdict.\nThis provision prevented the owners of Mafia-related shell corporations from absconding with assets. In many cases, the threat of a RICO indictment can force defendants to plead guilty to lesser charges, in part because the seizure of assets would make it difficult to pay a defense attorney.\nDespite its harsh provisions, a RICO-related charge is considered easy to prove in court because it focuses on patterns of behavior as opposed to criminal acts.\nEnterprise defined.\nThere must be one of four specified relationships between the defendants and the enterprise. Either the defendants:\nThe US Supreme Court noted that a commentator had used the terms \"prize\", \"instrument\", \"victim\", or \"perpetrator\" for these four relationships.\nCivil provisions.\nU.S.C. \u00a7 1964 provides for civil remedies in cases of violations outlined in U.S.C. \u00a7 1962. The following are established:\nThe civil provisions of the RICO Act provide versatility in how the government may work to dissolve criminal entities. Due to the lessened burden of proof in civil court (i.e., preponderance of evidence), the United States may circumvent restrictions set forth in criminal proceedings. Discovery tools, permitted use of illegally obtained evidence, and adverse inferences broaden government intervention in combatting U.S.C. \u00a7 1962 violations.\nCivil suits.\nRICO also permits a private individual \"damaged in his business or property\" by a racketeer to file a civil suit. The plaintiff must prove the existence of an enterprise. The defendants are not the enterprise; in other words, the defendants and the enterprise are not one and the same.\nA civil RICO action can be filed in state or federal court.\nBoth the criminal and the civil components allow the recovery of treble damages (triple the amount of actual/compensatory damages). If the United States government is the plaintiff in civil court, treble damages may be replaced with a request for and preliminary injunctive reliefs.\nOrganized crime.\nAlthough its primary intent was to deal with organized crime, Blakey said that Congress never intended it merely to apply to the Mob. He once told \"Time\", \"We don't want one set of rules for people whose collars are blue or whose names end in vowels, and another set for those whose collars are white and have Ivy League diplomas.\" In the years following its passage, RICO had been criticized for its extensive use against entities other than organized crime. One critic pointed towards the number of civil suits that were brought against businesses, labor unions, and other private parties, which made up for 90% of all civil RICO cases, according to the American Bar Association.\nOn December 1, 1977, the federal grand jury in the Eastern District of Louisiana indicted thirteen defendants, Robert J. L'Hoste &amp; Company, Inc. for conspiracy and racketeering activity. After the defendants moved to dismiss the indictment for overbreadth and vagueness, the grand jury returned a superseding indictment on February 27, 1978, charging the same offenses and naming eleven defendants, including the appellants. The district court denied a motion to dismiss the superseding indictment, and the first RICO trial commenced on March 13, 1978. The jury convicted the four appellants and another corporation on both the conspiracy and racketeering counts.\nIn May 1979, prosecutor Mark L. Webb, Northern District of California, conducted RICO trial, \"United States v. Sam Bailey Gang\". The successful prosecution used the RICO statute to allege that a gang of postal burglars and a Nevada fence collaborated criminally in an organized crime fashion. The case did not involve a Mafia crime family.\nSubsequently, the US Attorney's office for the Eastern District of Arkansas used the RICO Act on October 2, 1978, to indict officers of Local 1292 of the Laborers International Union of North America. Special Assistant United States Attorney, Samuel A. Perroni, prosecuted the first labor union official trial that began on June 5, 1979. Perroni's successful prosecution used RICO to convict the defendants of conspiracy, murder for hire, perjury and embezzlement of union property in \"United States v. Allison, et al.\"\nThe US Attorney's Office in the Southern District of New York employed the RICO Act on September 18, 1979, in \"United States v. Scotto\". Scotto, who was convicted on charges of racketeering, accepting unlawful labor payments, and income tax evasion, headed the International Longshoremen's Association.\nDuring the 1980s and the 1990s, federal prosecutors used the law to bring charges against several Mafia figures. In 1985, United States Attorney Rudy Giuliani (who would be indicted under Georgia RICO laws in August 2023) indicted 11 organized crime figures in \"United States v. Anthony Salerno, et al\", also known as Mafia Commission Trial. Using the RICO Act, Giuliani charged the heads of New York's so-called \"Five Families\" with extortion, labor racketeering, and murder for hire.\nThree Assistant United States Attorneys assisted in the trial: Michael Chertoff, the eventual second United States Secretary of Homeland Security and co-author of the Patriot Act; John Savarese, later a partner at Wachtell Lipton Rosen &amp; Katz; and Gil Childers, a later deputy chief of the criminal division for the Southern District of New York and later managing director in the legal department at Goldman Sachs.\n\"Time\" magazine called the \"Case of Cases\" possibly \"the most significant assault on the infrastructure of organized crime since the high command of the Chicago Mafia was swept away in 1943\" and quoted Giuliani's stated intention: \"Our approach is to wipe out the five families.\"\nThree heads of the Five Families were sentenced to 100 years in prison on January 13, 1987. The Genovese and Colombo leaders, Tony Salerno and Carmine Persico received additional sentences in separate trials, with 70-year and 39-year sentences to run consecutively. The Gambino crime family boss Paul Castellano and his underboss, Thomas Bilotti, were murdered on the streets of Midtown Manhattan on December 16, 1985.\nState laws.\nAs of 2014, 33 states as well as Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands had adopted state RICO laws to cover state offenses under a similar scheme.\nRICO predicate offenses.\nUnder the law, the meaning of racketeering activity is set out at \u00a0https://. As currently amended it includes:\nPattern of racketeering activity requires at least two acts of racketeering activity, one of which occurred after the effective date of this chapter and the last of which occurred within ten years (excluding any period of imprisonment) after the commission of a prior act of racketeering activity. The US Supreme Court has instructed federal courts to follow the continuity-plus-relationship test in order to determine whether the facts of a specific case give rise to an established pattern. The illegal acts forming a pattern are called \"predicate\" offenses. Predicate acts are related if they \"have the same or similar purposes, results, participants, victims, or methods of commission, or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics and are not isolated events.\" Continuity is both a closed and open ended concept, referring to either a closed period of conduct, or to past conduct that by its nature projects into the future with a threat of repetition.\nFamous cases.\nThe Lucchese crime family was one of the \"Five Families\" that dominated organized crime activities in New York City. Prosecuting attorneys Gregory O'Connell and Charles Rose used RICO charges to break up the family over an 18-month period.\nSeveral members of the Latin Kings have been convicted of RICO offenses.\n1978, The Cowboy Mafia.\nRICO was instrumental in indicting members of The Cowboy Mafia from Texas, Tennessee and Florida. During 1977 and 1978, this group imported over 106 tons of marijuana. Using the shrimp boats \"Agnes Pauline\", \"Monkey\", \"Jubilee\", and \"Bayou Blues\", the group made six trips from Colombia to Texas. The group was arrested in 1978 after the federal government seized the \"Agnes Pauline\" when they were unloading their cargo in Port Arthur, Texas. In 1979, twenty-six members of the smuggling ring were convicted. Charles \"Muscles\" Foster, a ranch foreman and the head of the operation, pleaded innocent by reason of insanity and was acquitted in 1980. In August 1981, Rex Cauble was indicted by a grand jury, as the government believed he was the financial backer of the smugglers. Foster was the foreman for his ranches, and the drugs were transported to Cauble's ranches throughout Texas. Cauble was a multi-millionaire, the former chairman of the Texas Aeronautics Commission, and an honorary Texas Ranger. He was also the owner of Cutter Bill, a famous cutting horse. Cauble was convicted in January 1982 on ten counts: two counts of violating the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act statute (RICO), conspiracy to violate RICO, three violations of the Interstate Commerce Travel Act, and four counts of misapplication of bank funds. He was sentenced to ten concurrent terms of five years. He completed his prison term, was released in September 1987, and died in 2003.\nThree books about the group were published: \"The Cowboy Mafia\" (2003) by Cauble's personal jet pilot Roy Graham; \"Catching the Katy\" (2017) by Barker Milford; and \"A Conspiracy Revealed\" by DEA agent Daniel Wedeman Sr.\nAs a result of the RICO conviction, Cauble forfeited his 31% interest in Cauble Enterprises, including two Cutter Bill Western World stores, three Texas banks (Western State Bank in Denton, Dallas International Bank and South Main Bank of Houston), six ranches, a welding supply company, and oil and gas holdings. The company's worth was estimated at $80 million. However, the government sold their interest back to the other partners (Cauble's wife and son) for an estimated $12 million.\n1979, Hells Angels Motorcycle Club.\nIn 1979, the United States Federal Government went after Sonny Barger and several members and associates of the Oakland chapter of the Hells Angels using RICO. In \"United States vs. Barger\", the prosecution team attempted to demonstrate a pattern of behavior to convict Barger and other members of the club of RICO offenses related to guns and illegal drugs. The jury acquitted Barger on the RICO charges with a hung jury on the predicate acts: \"There was no proof it was part of club policy, and as much as they tried, the government could not come up with any incriminating minutes from any of our meetings mentioning drugs and guns.\"\n1980, Gil Dozier.\nIn 1980, Louisiana Commissioner of Agriculture and Forestry Gil Dozier was charged with violating both Hobbs and RICO laws. The Baton Rouge-based United States District Court for the Middle District of Louisiana accused Dozier of compelling companies doing business with his department to make campaign contributions on his behalf. On September 23, 1980, a jury convicted Dozier of five counts of extortion and racketeering.\nThe judge sentenced Dozier to 10 years imprisonment which was later upgraded to 18 years when other offenses were determined. A $25,000 fine was suspended pending appeal, and Dozier remained free on bail. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in New Orleans upheld Dozier's conviction. He eventually served nearly four years until a presidential commutation freed him in 1986.\n1984, Key West Police Department.\nAround June 1984, the Key West Police Department located in Monroe County, Florida, was declared a criminal enterprise under the federal RICO statutes after a lengthy United States Department of Justice investigation. Several high-ranking officers of the department, including Deputy Police Chief Raymond Cassamayor, were arrested on federal charges of running a protection racket for illegal cocaine smugglers. At trial, a witness testified he routinely delivered bags of cocaine to the Deputy Chief's office at City Hall.\n1984, The Order.\nThe Order was an American far-right terrorist group active from September 1983 to December 1984. Their intention was to precipitate the collapse of the federal Government or Zionist Occupation Government (ZOG) which they perceived as illegitimate. Their intention was to do so via a campaign of bombings and assassinations. However, in order to fund their actions they turned to armoured car robbery and a counterfeiting and laundering operation. The FBI began to investigate the group using RICO following the assassination of Jewish radio host Alan Berg on June 18, 1984, and the arrest of member Tom Martinez, for using counterfeit bills to buy liquor. Martinez informed on The Order and RICO was used by the FBI to bring 10 members of The Order to trial and achieved conviction of racketeering and conspiracy charges. Over the course of The Order's activities they had distributed millions of dollars to the wider far-right movement and Operation Clean Sweep used RICO to bring 14 leading members of the far-right to trial on charges of seditious conspiracy at Fort Smith, alleging their receipt of The Order's funds as connection to their attempt to overthrow the federal government.\n1986, Iran-Contra.\nIn 1986, the Christic Institute filed a civil RICO case naming 30 defendants who were also implicated in the Iran-Contra scandal that they were also part of a conspiracy behind the La Penca bombing. The suit, titled Avirgan v Hull named several Central Intelligence Agency figures and accused them of participating in illegal political assassinations, as well as arms and drug trafficking. The suit was eventually dismissed in 1989, and lead attorney Daniel Sheehan alleged members of the Iran-Contra enterprise were behind the assassination of judge Robert Vance who was expected to reverse the dismissal. G. Robert Blakey stated it was the best-charged RICO case he had seen, and the litigation spawned a national fundraising effort. In 1990, Bruce Springsteen and Bonnie Raitt held a benefit concert to support the litigation. A 500-page affidavit filed in December 1986 was also published as \"The Shadow Government.\"\n1989, Michael Milken.\nOn March 29, 1989, American financier Michael Milken was indicted on 98 counts of racketeering and fraud relating to an investigation into an allegation of insider trading and other offenses. Milken was accused of using a wide-ranging network of contacts to manipulate stock and bond prices. It was one of the first occasions that a RICO indictment was brought against an individual with no ties to organized crime. Milken pleaded guilty to six lesser felonies of securities fraud and tax evasion, rather than risk spending the rest of his life in prison and ended up serving 22 months in prison. Milken was also ordered banned for life from the securities industry.\nOn September 7, 1988, Milken's employer, Drexel Burnham Lambert, was threatened with RICO charges under \"respondeat superior\", the legal doctrine that corporations are responsible for their employees' crimes. Drexel avoided RICO charges by entering an Alford plea to lesser felonies of stock parking and stock manipulation. In a carefully worded plea, Drexel said it was \"not in a position to dispute the allegations\" made by the Government. If Drexel had been indicted under RICO statutes, it would have had to post a performance bond of up to $1 billion to avoid having its assets frozen. That would have taken precedence over all of the firm's other obligations, including the loans that provided 96 percent of its capital base. If the bond ever had to be paid, its shareholders would have been practically wiped out. Since banks will not extend credit to a firm indicted under RICO, an indictment would have likely put Drexel out of business. By at least one estimate, a RICO indictment would have destroyed the firm within a month. Years later, Drexel President and CEO Fred Joseph said that Drexel had no choice but to plead guilty because \"a financial institution cannot survive a RICO indictment.\"\n1992, Gambino crime family.\nJohn Gotti and Frank Locascio were convicted on April 2, 1992, under the RICO Act and later sentenced to life in prison.\n1998, Embassy Bombings and Al Qaeda.\nAfter the 1998 simultaneous bombings of the US Embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, the US Department of Justice sued Osama bin Laden \"in absentia\" under the RICO statute. A 2004 documentary by BBC filmmaker Adam Curtis called The Power of Nightmares argued controversially that in order to prosecute bin Laden in absentia, U.S. prosecutors had to prove that he is the head of a criminal organization responsible for the bombings. They found a former associate of bin Laden, Jamal al-Fadl, and paid him to testify that bin Laden was the head of a massive terrorist organization called \"al-Qaeda,\" which satisfied the requirements of the RICO statute, but that in actuality, a formal terrorist organization named \"Al Qaeda\" did not exist.\n2000, Los Angeles Police Department.\nIn 1999 the Rampart scandal broke in the Los Angeles Police Department exposing widespread criminal activity within the department's anti-gang unit called CRASH. 70 officers were initially implicated in planting evidence, dealing drugs, bank robbery, and unlawful killings and beatings. In 2000, Federal District judge William Rea ruled the RICO statute could be used to name the entire LAPD as a criminal enterprise for individuals suing it over police brutality and misconduct. Over 140 civil RICO lawsuits were filed against the department. In July 2001, US District Judge Gary A. Feess said that the plaintiffs did not have standing to sue the LAPD under RICO, because they were alleging personal injuries rather than economic or property damage.\n2002, Major League Baseball.\nIn 2001, Major League Baseball team owners voted to eliminate two teams, presumably the Minnesota Twins and Montreal Expos. In 2002, the former minority owners of the Expos filed charges under the RICO Act against MLB commissioner Bud Selig and former Expos owner Jeffrey Loria, claiming that Selig and Loria deliberately conspired to devalue the team for personal benefit in preparation for a move. If found liable, Major League Baseball could have been responsible for up to $300 million in punitive damages. The case lasted two years, successfully stalling the Expos' move to Washington or contraction during that time. It was eventually sent to arbitration, where the arbiters ruled in favor of Major League Baseball, permitting the move to Washington to take place.\n2004, Bonanno crime family.\nBonanno crime family boss Joseph Massino's trial began on May 24, 2004, with judge Nicholas Garaufis presiding and Greg\u00a0D.\u00a0Andres and Robert Henoch heading the prosecution. Massino faced 11 RICO counts for seven murders (due to the prospect of prosecutors seeking the death penalty for the murder of Bonanno caporegime Gerlando Sciascia, that case severed to be tried separately), arson, extortion, loansharking, illegal gambling, and money laundering. After deliberating for five days, the jury found Massino guilty of all 11 counts on July 30, 2004. His sentencing was initially scheduled for October 12, and he was expected to receive a sentence of life imprisonment with no possibility of parole. The jury also approved the prosecutors' recommended $10 million forfeiture of the proceeds of his reign as Bonanno boss on the day of the verdict.\nImmediately after his July 30 conviction, as court was adjourned, Massino requested a meeting with Judge Garaufis, where he made his first offer to cooperate. He did so in hopes of sparing his life; he was facing the death penalty if found guilty of Sciascia's murder. Indeed, one of John Ashcroft's final acts as Attorney General was to order federal prosecutors to seek the death penalty for Massino. Massino thus stood to be the first Mafia boss to be executed for his crimes, and the first mob boss to face the death penalty since Lepke Buchalter was executed in 1944. Massino was the first sitting boss of a New York crime family to turn state's evidence, and the second in the history of the American Mafia to do so (Philadelphia crime family boss Ralph Natale had flipped in 1999 when facing drug charges).\n2005, Chicago Outfit.\nIn 2005, the US Department of Justice's Operation Family Secrets indicted 14 Chicago Outfit (also known as the Outfit, the Chicago Mafia, the Chicago Mob, or the Organization) members and associates under RICO predicates. Five defendants were convicted of RICO violations and other crimes. Six pleaded guilty, two died before trial, and one was too sick to be tried.\n2005, Connecticut Senator Len Fasano.\nIn 2005, a federal jury ordered Fasano to pay $500,000 under RICO for illegally helping a client hide their assets in a bankruptcy case.\n2005, Mohawk Industries.\nThe Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in \"Williams v. Mohawk Industries, Inc.\" No. https://, 547 U.S. https:// (2006) that a corporation could be held liable for \"unlawfully conducting the affairs of an association-in-fact enterprise comprisedof the corporation and its agents.\" Mohawk Industries had allegedly hired illegal aliens, in violation of RICO. On appeal, the Supreme Court was asked to decide whether Mohawk Industries, along with recruiting agencies, constituted an \"enterprise\" that could be prosecuted under RICO. The Court vacated the Eleventh Circuit decision that had permitted RICO liability.\n2006, Gambino crime family.\nIn Tampa, on October 16, 2006, four members of the Gambino crime family (Capo Ronald Trucchio, Terry Scaglione, Steven Catallono, and Anthony Mucciarone and associate Kevin McMahon) were tried under RICO statutes, found guilty, and sentenced to life in prison.\n2009, Scott W. Rothstein.\nScott W. Rothstein is a disbarred lawyer and the former managing shareholder, chairman, and chief executive officer of the now-defunct Rothstein Rosenfeldt Adler law firm. He was accused of funding his philanthropy, political contributions, law firm salaries, and an extravagant lifestyle with a massive 1.2 billion dollar Ponzi scheme. On December 1, 2009, Rothstein turned himself in to federal authorities and was subsequently arrested on charges related to RICO. Although his arraignment plea was not guilty, Rothstein cooperated with the government and reversed his plea to guilty of five federal crimes on January 27, 2010. Bond was denied by US Magistrate Judge Robin Rosenbaum, who ruled that due to his ability to forge documents, he was considered a flight risk. On June 9, 2010, Rothstein received a 50-year prison sentence after a hearing in federal court in Fort Lauderdale.\n2011, Michael Conahan and Mark Ciavarella.\nA federal grand jury in the Middle District of Pennsylvania handed down a 48-count indictment against former Luzerne County Court of Common Pleas Judges Michael Conahan and Mark Ciavarella. The judges were charged with RICO after allegedly committing acts of mail and wire fraud, tax evasion, money laundering, and honest services fraud. The judges were accused of taking kickbacks for housing juveniles, that the judges convicted of mostly petty crimes, at a private detention center. The incident was dubbed by many local and national newspapers as the \"kids for cash scandal\". On February 18, 2011, a federal jury found Mark Ciavarella guilty of racketeering because of his involvement in accepting illegal payments from Robert Mericle, the developer of PA Child Care, and Attorney Robert Powell, a co-owner of the facility. Ciavarella is facing 38 other counts in federal court.\n2012, AccessHealthSource.\nEleven defendants were indicted on RICO charges for allegedly assisting AccessHealthSource, a local health care provider, in obtaining and maintaining lucrative contracts with local and state government entities in the city of El Paso, Texas, \"through bribery of and kickbacks to elected officials or himself and others, extortion under color of authority, fraudulent schemes and artifices, false pretenses, promises and representations and deprivation of the right of citizens to the honest services of their elected local officials\" (see indictment).\n2013, Trump University.\n\"Art Cohen vs. Donald J. Trump\" was a civil RICO class action suit filed October 18, 2013, accusing Donald Trump of misrepresenting Trump University \"to make tens of millions of dollars\" but delivering \"neither Donald Trump nor a university\". The case was being heard in U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California in San Diego, No. 3:2013cv02519, by Judge Gonzalo P. Curiel. It was scheduled for argument beginning November 28, 2016. However, on November 18 and shortly after Trump won the presidential election, this case and two others were settled for a total of $25 million to be paid to the plaintiffs, but without any admission of wrongdoing by Trump.\n2015, Drummond Company.\nIn 2015, the Drummond Company sued attorneys Terrence P. Collingsworth and William R. Scherer, the advocacy group International Rights Advocates (IRAdvocates), and Dutch businessman Albert van Bilderbeek, one of the owners of Llanos Oil, accusing them of violating RICO by alleging that Drummond had worked alongside Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia to murder labor union leaders within proximity of their Colombian coal mines, which Drummond denies.\n2015, FIFA.\nFourteen defendants affiliated with FIFA were indicted under the RICO act on 47 counts for \"racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering conspiracies, among other offenses, in connection with the defendants' participation in a 24-year scheme to enrich themselves through the corruption of international soccer\". The defendants include many current and former high-ranking officers of FIFA and its affiliate CONCACAF. The defendants had allegedly used the enterprise as a front to collect millions of dollars in bribes, which may have influenced Russia and Qatar's winning bids to host the FIFA World Cup in 2018 and 2022, respectively.\n2022, YSL Records.\nIn May 2022, rapper Young Thug was arrested in a RICO indictment filed against him and his YSL Records label. The indictment, filed by Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis, consisted of 56 counts against 28 affiliates of the label, with Thug himself facing 8 charges. The indictment alleged that YSL was not only a record label, but a street gang that was partaking in violent activity in Georgia. The case, originally presided over by Judge Ural D. Glanville, has been mired in controversy; including allegations from Thug's lawyer Brian Steel that Glanville had participated in a secret \"ex-parte\" meeting with the prosecution. The allegations of this meeting resulted in Steel being held in contempt of court and taken into custody, as he refused to disclose the source of his information; he was sentenced to 10 weekends in jail, but this was overturned on appeal. Shortly thereafter, Glanville was recused from the case. The case is currently being presided over by Judge Paige Reese Whitaker.\nThis case is notable as it included the longest jury selection process in Georgia's history (10 months), and it has been the longest trial in Georgia's history.\n2023, Donald Trump.\nIn August 2023, the District Attorney of Fulton County, Georgia, Fani Willis, filed charges under the Georgia state RICO act against Donald Trump and 18 co-defendants, including Rudy Giuliani. The Georgia law contains a list of 40 state crimes or acts that together can be classified as \"racketeering schemes\". It is broader than the federal law in that attempting, soliciting, coercing, and intimidating another person to commit any of the offenses can also be considered organized crime.\nApplication of RICO laws.\nAlthough some of the RICO predicate acts are extortion and blackmail, one of the most successful applications of the RICO laws has been the ability to indict and or sanction individuals for their behavior and actions committed against witnesses and victims in alleged retaliation or retribution for cooperating with federal law enforcement or intelligence agencies.\nViolations of the RICO laws can be alleged in civil lawsuit cases or for criminal charges. In these instances, charges can be brought against individuals or corporations in retaliation for said individuals or corporations working with law enforcement. Further, charges can also be brought against individuals or corporations who have sued or filed criminal charges against a defendant.\nAnti-SLAPP (strategic lawsuit against public participation) laws can be applied in an attempt to curb alleged abuses of the legal system by individuals or corporations who use the courts as a weapon to retaliate against whistle blowers or victims or to silence another's speech. RICO could be alleged if it can be shown that lawyers or their clients conspired and collaborated to concoct fictitious legal complaints solely in retribution and retaliation for themselves having been brought before the courts.\nAlthough the RICO laws may cover drug trafficking crimes in addition to other more traditional RICO predicate acts such as extortion, blackmail, and racketeering, large-scale and organized drug networks are now commonly prosecuted under the Continuing Criminal Enterprise Statute, also known as the \"Kingpin Statute\". The CCE laws target only traffickers who are responsible for long-term and elaborate conspiracies, whereas the RICO law covers a variety of organized criminal behaviors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBagchi, Aysha. Bloomberg Tax. \"Participants in IRS-Targeted Land Deals Sue Alleged Promoters\". March 27, 2020."}
{"id": "26213", "revid": "31125104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26213", "title": "Rhombicuboctahedron", "text": "Archimedean solid with 26 faces\nIn geometry, the rhombicuboctahedron is an Archimedean solid with 26 faces, consisting of 8 equilateral triangles and 18 squares. It was named by Johannes Kepler in his 1618 Harmonices Mundi, being short for \"truncated cuboctahedral rhombus\", with cuboctahedral rhombus being his name for a rhombic dodecahedron.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron is an Archimedean solid, and its dual is a Catalan solid, the deltoidal icositetrahedron. The elongated square gyrobicupola is a polyhedron that is similar to a rhombicuboctahedron, but it is not an Archimedean solid because it is not vertex-transitive. The rhombicuboctahedron is found in diverse cultures in architecture, toys, the arts, and elsewhere.\nConstruction.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron may be constructed from a cube by drawing a smaller one in the middle of each face, parallel to the cube's edges. After removing the edges of a cube, the squares may be joined by adding more squares adjacent between them, and the corners may be filled by the equilateral triangles. Another way to construct the rhombicuboctahedron is by attaching two regular square cupolas into the bases of a regular octagonal prism.\nA rhombicuboctahedron may also be known as an \"expanded octahedron\" or \"expanded cube\". This is because the rhombicuboctahedron may also be constructed by separating and pushing away the faces of a cube or a regular octahedron from their centroid (in blue or red, respectively, in the animation), and filling between them with the squares and equilateral triangles. This construction process is known as expansion. By using all of these methods above, the rhombicuboctahedron has 8 equilateral triangles and 18 squares as its faces. Relatedly, the rhombicuboctahedron may also be constructed by cutting all edges and vertices of either cube or a regular octahedron, a process known as cantellation.\nCartesian coordinates of a rhombicuboctahedron with an edge length 2 are the permutations of formula_1.\nProperties.\nMeasurement and metric properties.\nThe surface area of a rhombicuboctahedron formula_2 can be determined by adding the area of all faces: 8 equilateral triangles and 18 squares. The volume of a rhombicuboctahedron formula_3 can be determined by slicing it into two square cupolas and one octagonal prism. Given that the edge length formula_4, its surface area and volume is:\nformula_5\nThe optimal packing fraction of rhombicuboctahedra is given by\nformula_6\nIt was noticed that this optimal value is obtained in a Bravais lattice by . Since the rhombicuboctahedron is contained in a rhombic dodecahedron whose inscribed sphere is identical to its inscribed sphere, the value of the optimal packing fraction is a corollary of the Kepler conjecture: it can be achieved by putting a rhombicuboctahedron in each cell of the rhombic dodecahedral honeycomb, and it cannot be surpassed, since otherwise the optimal packing density of spheres could be surpassed by putting a sphere in each rhombicuboctahedron of the hypothetical packing which surpasses it.\nThe dihedral angle of a rhombicuboctahedron can be determined by adding the dihedral angle of a square cupola and an octagonal prism:\nA rhombicuboctahedron has the Rupert property, meaning there is a polyhedron with the same or larger size that can pass through its hole.\nSymmetry and its classification family.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron has the same symmetry as a cube and regular octahedron, the octahedral symmetry formula_7. However, the rhombicuboctahedron also has a second set of distortions with six rectangular and sixteen trapezoidal faces, which do not have octahedral symmetry but rather pyritohedral symmetry formula_8, so they are invariant under the same rotations as the tetrahedron but different reflections. It is centrosymmetric, meaning its symmetric is interchangeable by the appearance of inversion center. It is also non-chiral; that is, it is congruent to its own mirror image.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron is an Archimedean solid, meaning it is a highly symmetric and semi-regular polyhedron, and two or more different regular polygonal faces meet in a vertex. The polygonal faces that meet for every vertex are one equilateral triangle and three squares, and the vertex figure is denoted as formula_9. Its dual is deltoidal icositetrahedron, a Catalan solid, shares the same symmetry as the rhombicuboctahedron.\nThe elongated square gyrobicupola is the only polyhedron resembling the rhombicuboctahedron. The difference is that the elongated square gyrobicupola is constructed by twisting one of its cupolae. It was once considered as the 14th Archimedean solid, until it was discovered that it is not vertex-transitive, categorizing it as the Johnson solid instead.\nGraph.\nThe skeleton of a rhombicuboctahedron can be described as a polyhedral graph, meaning a graph that is planar and 3-vertex-connected. In other words, the edges of a graph are not crossed while being drawn, and removing any two of its vertices leaves a connected subgraph.\nThe rhombicuboctahedral graph has 24 vertices and 48 edges. It is quartic, meaning each of its vertices is connected to four others. This graph is classified as Archimedean graph, because it resembles the graph of Archimedean solid.\nAppearances.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron sometimes appears in architecture, with an example being the building of the National Library located at Minsk. The Wilson House by Bruce Goff is another example of a rhombicuboctahedral building, although its module was depicted as a truncated cube in which the edges are all cut off. It was built during the Second World War and Operation Breakthrough in the 1960s.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron may also be found in toys. For example, if the lines along which a Rubik's Cube can be turned are projected onto a sphere, they are topologically identical to a rhombicuboctahedron's edges. Variants using the Rubik's Cube mechanism have been produced, which closely resemble the rhombicuboctahedron. During the Rubik's Cube craze of the 1980s, at least two twisty puzzles sold had the form of a rhombicuboctahedron (the mechanism was similar to that of a Rubik's Cube) Another example may be found in dice from Corfe Castle, each of whose square faces have marks of pairs of letters and pips.\nThe rhombicuboctahedron may also appear in art. An example is the 1495 \"Portrait of Luca Pacioli\", traditionally attributed to Jacopo de' Barbari, which includes a glass rhombicuboctahedron half-filled with water, which may have been painted by Leonardo da Vinci.\nThe first printed version of the rhombicuboctahedron was by Leonardo da Vinci and appeared in Pacioli's \"Divina proportione\" (1509).\nA kleetope of a rhombicuboctahedron, that is a figure adding a pyramid to each face, is a 26-pointed Moravian star.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26214", "revid": "25588047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26214", "title": "Reverse transcriptase", "text": "Enzyme which generates DNA\nA reverse transcriptase (RT) is an enzyme used to convert RNA to DNA, a process termed reverse transcription. Reverse transcriptases are used by viruses such as HIV and hepatitis B to replicate their genomes, by retrotransposon mobile genetic elements to proliferate within the host genome, and by eukaryotic cells to extend the telomeres at the ends of their linear chromosomes. The process does not violate the flows of genetic information as described by the classical central dogma, but rather expands it to include transfers of information from RNA to DNA.\nRetroviral RT has three sequential biochemical activities: RNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity, ribonuclease H (RNase H), and DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity. Collectively, these activities enable the enzyme to convert single-stranded RNA into double-stranded cDNA. In retroviruses and retrotransposons, this cDNA can then integrate into the host genome, from which new RNA copies can be made via host-cell transcription. The same sequence of reactions is widely used in the laboratory to convert RNA to DNA for use in molecular cloning, RNA sequencing, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or genome analysis.\nHistory.\nReverse transcriptases were discovered by Howard Temin at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison in \"Rous sarcoma\" virions and independently isolated by David Baltimore in 1970 at MIT from two RNA tumour viruses: murine leukemia virus and again Rous sarcoma virus. For their achievements, they shared the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (with Renato Dulbecco).\nWell-studied reverse transcriptases include:\nFunction in viruses.\nThe enzymes are encoded and used by viruses that use reverse transcription as a step in the process of replication. Reverse-transcribing RNA viruses, such as retroviruses, use the enzyme to reverse-transcribe their RNA genomes into DNA, which is then integrated into the host genome and replicated along with it. Reverse-transcribing DNA viruses, such as the hepadnaviruses, can allow RNA to serve as a template in assembling and making DNA strands. HIV infects humans with the use of this enzyme. Without reverse transcriptase, the viral genome would not be able to incorporate into the host cell, resulting in failure to replicate.\nProcess of reverse transcription or retrotranscription.\nReverse transcriptase creates double-stranded DNA from an RNA template.\nIn virus species with reverse transcriptase lacking DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity, creation of double-stranded DNA can possibly be done by host-encoded DNA polymerase \u03b4, mistaking the viral DNA-RNA for a primer and synthesizing a double-stranded DNA by a similar mechanism as in primer removal, where the newly synthesized DNA displaces the original RNA template.\nThe process of reverse transcription, also called retrotranscription, is extremely error-prone, and it is during this step that mutations may occur. Such mutations may cause drug resistance.\nRetroviral reverse transcription.\nRetroviruses, also referred to as class VI ssRNA-RT viruses, are RNA reverse-transcribing viruses with a DNA intermediate. Their genomes consist of two molecules of positive-sense single-stranded RNA with a 5' cap and 3' polyadenylated tail. Examples of retroviruses include the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV). Creation of double-stranded DNA occurs in the cytosol as a series of these steps:\nCreation of double-stranded DNA also involves \"strand transfer\", in which there is a translocation of short DNA product from initial RNA-dependent DNA synthesis to acceptor template regions at the other end of the genome, which are later reached and processed by the reverse transcriptase for its DNA-dependent DNA activity.\nRetroviral RNA is arranged in 5' terminus to 3' terminus. The site where the primer is annealed to viral RNA is called the primer-binding site (PBS). The RNA 5'end to the PBS site is called U5, and the RNA 3' end to the PBS is called the leader. The tRNA primer is unwound between 14 and 22 nucleotides and forms a base-paired duplex with the viral RNA at PBS. The fact that the PBS is located near the 5' terminus of viral RNA is unusual because reverse transcriptase synthesize DNA from 3' end of the primer in the 5' to 3' direction (with respect to the newly synthesized DNA strand). Therefore, the primer and reverse transcriptase must be relocated to 3' end of viral RNA. In order to accomplish this reposition, multiple steps and various enzymes including DNA polymerase, ribonuclease H(RNase H) and polynucleotide unwinding are needed.\nThe HIV reverse transcriptase also has ribonuclease activity that degrades the viral RNA during the synthesis of cDNA, as well as DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity that copies the sense cDNA strand into an \"antisense\" DNA to form a double-stranded viral DNA intermediate (vDNA). The HIV viral RNA structural elements regulate the progression of reverse transcription.\nIn cellular life.\nSelf-replicating stretches of eukaryotic genomes known as retrotransposons utilize reverse transcriptase to move from one position in the genome to another via an RNA intermediate. They are found abundantly in the genomes of plants and animals. Telomerase is another reverse transcriptase found in many eukaryotes, including humans, which carries its own RNA template; this RNA is used as a template for DNA replication.\nInitial reports of reverse transcriptase in prokaryotes came as far back as 1971 in France (Beljanski et al., 1971a, 1972) and a few years later in the USSR (Romashchenko 1977). These have since been broadly described as part of bacterial Retrons, distinct sequences that code for reverse transcriptase, and are used in the synthesis of msDNA. In order to initiate synthesis of DNA, a primer is needed. In bacteria, the primer is synthesized during replication.\nValerian Dolja of Oregon State argues that viruses, due to their diversity, have played an evolutionary role in the development of cellular life, with reverse transcriptase playing a central role.\nStructure.\nThe reverse transcriptase employs a \"right hand\" structure similar to that found in other viral nucleic acid polymerases. In addition to the transcription function, retroviral reverse transcriptases have a domain belonging to the RNase H family, which is vital to their replication. By degrading the RNA template, it allows the other strand of DNA to be synthesized. Some fragments from the digestion also serve as the primer for the DNA polymerase (either the same enzyme or a host protein), responsible for making the other (plus) strand.\nReplication fidelity.\nThere are three different replication systems during the life cycle of a retrovirus. The first process is the reverse transcriptase synthesis of viral DNA from viral RNA, which then forms newly made complementary DNA strands. The second replication process occurs when host cellular DNA polymerase replicates the integrated viral DNA. Lastly, RNA polymerase II transcribes the proviral DNA into RNA, which will be packed into virions. Mutation can occur during one or all of these replication steps.\nReverse transcriptase has a high error rate when transcribing RNA into DNA since, unlike most other DNA polymerases, it has no proofreading ability. This high error rate allows mutations to accumulate at an accelerated rate relative to proofread forms of replication. The commercially available reverse transcriptases produced by Promega are quoted by their manuals as having error rates in the range of 1 in 17,000 bases for AMV and 1 in 30,000 bases for M-MLV.\nOther than creating single-nucleotide polymorphisms, reverse transcriptases have also been shown to be involved in processes such as transcript fusions, exon shuffling and creating artificial antisense transcripts. It has been speculated that this \"template switching\" activity of reverse transcriptase, which can be demonstrated completely \"in vivo\", may have been one of the causes for finding several thousand unannotated transcripts in the genomes of model organisms.\nTemplate switching.\nTwo RNA genomes are packaged into each retrovirus particle, but, after an infection, each virus generates only one provirus. After infection, reverse transcription is accompanied by template switching between the two genome copies (copy choice recombination). There are two models that suggest why RNA transcriptase switches templates. The first, the forced copy-choice model, proposes that reverse transcriptase changes the RNA template when it encounters a nick, implying that recombination is obligatory to maintaining virus genome integrity. The second, the dynamic choice model, suggests that reverse transcriptase changes templates when the RNAse function and the polymerase function are not in sync rate-wise, implying that recombination occurs at random and is not in response to genomic damage. A study by Rawson et al. supported both models of recombination. From 5 to 14 recombination events per genome occur at each replication cycle. Template switching (recombination) appears to be necessary for maintaining genome integrity and as a repair mechanism for salvaging damaged genomes.\nApplications.\nAntiviral drugs.\nAs HIV uses reverse transcriptase to copy its genetic material and generate new viruses (part of a retrovirus proliferation circle), specific drugs have been designed to disrupt the process and thereby suppress its growth. Collectively, these drugs are known as reverse-transcriptase inhibitors and include the nucleoside and nucleotide analogues zidovudine (trade name Retrovir), lamivudine (Epivir) and tenofovir (Viread), as well as non-nucleoside inhibitors, such as nevirapine (Viramune).\nMolecular biology.\nReverse transcriptase is commonly used in research to apply the polymerase chain reaction technique to RNA in a technique called reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The classical PCR technique can be applied only to DNA strands, but, with the help of reverse transcriptase, RNA can be transcribed into DNA, thus making PCR analysis of RNA molecules possible. Reverse transcriptase is used also to create cDNA libraries from mRNA. The commercial availability of reverse transcriptase greatly improved knowledge in the area of molecular biology, as, along with other enzymes, it allowed scientists to clone, sequence, and characterise RNA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26215", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26215", "title": "Riemann mapping theorem", "text": "Mathematical theorem\nIn complex analysis, the Riemann mapping theorem states that if formula_1 is a non-empty simply connected open subset of the complex number plane formula_2 which is not all of formula_2, then there exists a biholomorphic mapping formula_4 (i.e. a bijective holomorphic mapping whose inverse is also holomorphic) from formula_1 onto the open unit disk \nformula_6\nThis mapping is sometimes called the Riemann mapping from formula_1 to the unit disk.\nIntuitively, the condition that formula_1 be simply connected means that formula_1 does not contain any \u201choles\u201d. The fact that formula_4 is biholomorphic implies that it is a conformal map and therefore angle-preserving. Such a map may be interpreted as preserving the shape of any sufficiently small figure, while possibly rotating and scaling (but not reflecting) it.\nHenri Poincar\u00e9 proved that the map formula_4 is unique up to rotation and recentering: if formula_12 is an element of formula_1 and formula_14 is an arbitrary angle, then there exists precisely one \"f\" as above such that formula_15 and such that the argument of the derivative of formula_4 at the point formula_12 is equal to formula_14. This is an easy consequence of the Schwarz lemma.\nAs a corollary of the theorem, any two simply connected open subsets of the Riemann sphere which both lack at least two points of the sphere can be conformally mapped into each other.\nHistory.\nThe theorem was stated (under the assumption that the boundary of formula_1 is piecewise smooth) by Bernhard Riemann in 1851 in his PhD thesis. Lars Ahlfors wrote once, concerning the original formulation of the theorem, that it was \u201cultimately formulated in terms which would defy any attempt of proof, even with modern methods\u201d. Riemann's flawed proof depended on the Dirichlet principle (which was named by Riemann himself), which was considered sound at the time. However, Karl Weierstrass found that this principle was not universally valid. Later, David Hilbert was able to prove that, to a large extent, the Dirichlet principle is valid under the hypothesis that Riemann was working with. However, in order to be valid, the Dirichlet principle needs certain hypotheses concerning the boundary of formula_1 (namely, that it is a Jordan curve) which are not valid for simply connected domains in general.\nThe first rigorous proof of the theorem was given by William Fogg Osgood in 1900. He proved the existence of Green's function on arbitrary simply connected domains other than formula_2 itself; this established the Riemann mapping theorem.\nConstantin Carath\u00e9odory gave another proof of the theorem in 1912, which was the first to rely purely on the methods of function theory rather than potential theory. His proof used Montel's concept of normal families, which became the standard method of proof in textbooks. Carath\u00e9odory continued in 1913 by resolving the additional question of whether the Riemann mapping between the domains can be extended to a homeomorphism of the boundaries (see Carath\u00e9odory's theorem).\nCarath\u00e9odory's proof used Riemann surfaces and it was simplified by Paul Koebe two years later in a way that did not require them. Another proof, due to Lip\u00f3t Fej\u00e9r and to Frigyes Riesz, was published in 1922 and it was rather shorter than the previous ones. In this proof, like in Riemann's proof, the desired mapping was obtained as the solution of an extremal problem. The Fej\u00e9r\u2013Riesz proof was further simplified by Alexander Ostrowski and by Carath\u00e9odory.\nImportance.\nThe following points detail the uniqueness and power of the Riemann mapping theorem:\nProof via normal families.\nSimple connectivity.\nTheorem. For an open domain formula_28 the following conditions are equivalent:\n(1) \u21d2 (2) because any continuous closed curve, with base point formula_43, can be continuously deformed to the constant curve formula_44. So the line integral of formula_45 over the curve is formula_40.\n(2) \u21d2 (3) because the integral over any piecewise smooth path formula_47 from formula_44 to formula_49 can be used to define a primitive.\n(3) \u21d2 (4) by integrating formula_50 along formula_47 from formula_44 to formula_53 to give a branch of the logarithm.\n(4) \u21d2 (5) by taking the square root as formula_54 where formula_4 is a holomorphic choice of logarithm.\n(5) \u21d2 (6) because if formula_47 is a piecewise closed curve and formula_57 are successive square roots of formula_58 for formula_38 outside formula_29, then the winding number of formula_47 about formula_38 is formula_63 times the winding number of formula_64 about formula_40. Hence the winding number of formula_47 about formula_38 must be divisible by formula_63 for all formula_69, so it must equal formula_40.\n(6) \u21d2 (7) for otherwise the extended plane formula_71 can be written as the disjoint union of two open and closed sets formula_72 and formula_73 with formula_74 and formula_72 bounded. Let formula_76 be the shortest Euclidean distance between formula_72 and formula_73 and build a square grid on formula_2 with length formula_80 with a point formula_44 of formula_72 at the centre of a square. Let formula_83 be the compact set of the union of all squares with distance formula_84 from formula_72. Then formula_86 and formula_87 does not meet formula_72 or formula_73: it consists of finitely many horizontal and vertical segments in formula_29 forming a finite number of closed rectangular paths formula_91. Taking formula_92 to be all the squares covering formula_72, then formula_94 equals the sum of the winding numbers of formula_92 \nover formula_44, thus giving formula_97. On the other hand the sum of the winding numbers of formula_98 about formula_44 equals formula_97. Hence the winding number of at least one of the formula_98 about formula_44 is non-zero.\n(7) \u21d2 (1) This is a purely topological argument. Let formula_47 be a piecewise smooth closed curve based at formula_104. By approximation \u03b3 is in the same homotopy class as a rectangular path on the square grid of length formula_76 based at formula_12; such a rectangular path is determined by a succession of formula_107 consecutive directed vertical and horizontal sides. By induction on formula_107, such a path can be deformed to a constant path at a corner of the grid. If the path intersects at a point formula_109, then it breaks up into two rectangular paths of length formula_110, and thus can be deformed to the constant path at formula_109 by the induction hypothesis and elementary properties of the fundamental group. The reasoning follows a \"northeast argument\": in the non self-intersecting path there will be a corner formula_12 with largest real part (easterly) and then amongst those one with largest imaginary part (northerly). Reversing direction if need be, the path go from formula_113 to formula_12 and then to formula_115 for formula_116 and then goes leftwards to formula_117. Let formula_118 be the open rectangle with these vertices. The winding number of the path is formula_40 for points to the right of the vertical segment from formula_12 to formula_121 and formula_122 for points to the right; and hence inside formula_118. Since the winding number is formula_40 off formula_29, formula_118 lies in formula_29. If formula_49 is a point of the path, it must lie in formula_29; if formula_49 is on formula_131 but not on the path, by continuity the winding number of the path about formula_49 is formula_122, so formula_49 must also lie in formula_29. Hence formula_136. But in this case the path can be deformed by replacing the three sides of the rectangle by the fourth, resulting in two less sides (with self-intersections permitted).\nThis is an immediate consequence of Morera's theorem for the first statement. Cauchy's integral formula gives a formula for the derivatives which can be used to check that the derivatives also converge uniformly on compacta.\nIf the limit function is non-zero, then its zeros have to be isolated. Zeros with multiplicities can be counted by the winding number formula_137 for a holomorphic function formula_35. Hence winding numbers are continuous under uniform limits, so that if each function in the sequence has no zeros nor can the limit. For the second statement suppose that formula_139 and set formula_140. These are nowhere-vanishing on a disk but formula_141 vanishes at formula_142, so formula_35 must vanish identically.\nRiemann mapping theorem.\nDefinitions. A family formula_144 of holomorphic functions on an open domain is said to be \"normal\" if any sequence of functions in formula_144 has a subsequence that converges to a holomorphic function uniformly on compacta. \nA family formula_144 is \"compact\" if whenever a sequence formula_57 lies in formula_144 and converges uniformly to formula_4 on compacta, then formula_4 also lies in formula_144. A family formula_144 is said to be \"locally bounded\" if their functions are uniformly bounded on each compact disk. Differentiating the Cauchy integral formula, it follows that the derivatives of a locally bounded family are also locally bounded.\nLet formula_57 be a totally bounded sequence and chose a countable dense subset formula_155 of formula_29. By locally boundedness and a \"diagonal argument\", a subsequence can be chosen so that formula_157 is convergent at each point formula_155. It must be verified that this sequence of holomorphic functions converges on formula_29 uniformly on each compactum formula_160. Take formula_161 open with formula_162 such that the closure of formula_161 is compact and contains formula_29. Since the sequence formula_165 is locally bounded, formula_166 on formula_161. By compactness, if formula_76 is taken small enough, finitely many open disks formula_169 of radius formula_76 are required to cover formula_160 while remaining in formula_161. Since \nformula_173,\nwe have that formula_174. Now for each formula_175 choose some formula_176 in formula_169 where formula_178 converges, take formula_69 and formula_180 so large to be within formula_181 of its limit. Then for formula_182,\nformula_183\nHence the sequence formula_184 forms a Cauchy sequence in the uniform norm on formula_160 as required.\nUniqueness follows because if formula_4 and formula_35 satisfied the same conditions, formula_195 would be a univalent holomorphic map of the unit disk with formula_196 and formula_197. But by the Schwarz lemma, the univalent holomorphic maps of the unit disk onto itself are given by the M\u00f6bius transformations\nformula_198\nwith formula_199. So formula_200 must be the identity map and formula_201.\nTo prove existence, take formula_144 to be the family of holomorphic univalent mappings formula_4 of formula_29 into the open unit disk formula_190 with formula_191 and formula_192. It is a normal family by Montel's theorem. By the characterization of simple-connectivity, for formula_208 there is a holomorphic branch of the square root formula_209 in formula_29. It is univalent and formula_211 for formula_212. By the open mapping theorem, formula_213 contains a closed disk formula_214; say with centre formula_215 and radius formula_216. Thus no points of formula_217 can lie in formula_213. Let formula_219 be the unique M\u00f6bius transformation taking formula_220 onto formula_190 with the normalization formula_222 and formula_223. By construction formula_224 is in formula_144, so that formula_144 is \"non-empty\". The method of Koebe is to use an \"extremal function\" to produce a conformal mapping solving the problem: in this situation it is often called the \"Ahlfors function\" of \"G\", after Ahlfors. Let formula_227 be the supremum of formula_228 for formula_229. Pick formula_230 with formula_231 tending to formula_232. By Montel's theorem, passing to a subsequence if necessary, formula_57 tends to a holomorphic function formula_4 uniformly on compacta. By Hurwitz's theorem, formula_4 is either univalent or constant. But formula_4 has formula_191 and formula_192. So formula_232 is finite, equal to formula_192 and formula_241. It remains to check that the conformal mapping formula_4 takes formula_29 \"onto\" formula_190. If not, take formula_245 in formula_246 and let formula_247 be a holomorphic square root of formula_248 on formula_29. The function formula_247 is univalent and maps formula_29 into formula_190. Let\nformula_253\nwhere formula_254. Then formula_255 and a routine computation shows that\nformula_256\nThis contradicts the maximality of formula_232, so that formula_4 must take all values in formula_190.\nRemark. As a consequence of the Riemann mapping theorem, every simply connected domain in the plane is homeomorphic to the unit disk. If points are omitted, this follows from the theorem. For the whole plane, the homeomorphism formula_260 gives a homeomorphism of formula_2 onto formula_190.\nParallel slit mappings.\nKoebe's uniformization theorem for normal families also generalizes to yield uniformizers formula_4 for multiply-connected domains to finite parallel slit domains, where the slits have angle formula_264 to the \"x\"-axis. Thus if formula_29 is a domain in formula_42 containing formula_267 and bounded by finitely many Jordan contours, there is a unique univalent function formula_4 on formula_29 with\nformula_270\nnear formula_267, maximizing formula_272 and having image formula_273 a parallel slit domain with angle formula_264 to the \"x\"-axis.\nThe first proof that parallel slit domains were canonical domains for in the multiply connected case was given by David Hilbert in 1909. , on his book on univalent functions and conformal mappings, gave a treatment based on the work of Herbert Gr\u00f6tzsch and Ren\u00e9 de Possel from the early 1930s; it was the precursor of quasiconformal mappings and quadratic differentials, later developed as the technique of extremal metric due to Oswald Teichm\u00fcller. Menahem Schiffer gave a treatment based on very general variational principles, summarised in addresses he gave to the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1950 and 1958. In a theorem on \"boundary variation\" (to distinguish it from \"interior variation\"), he derived a differential equation and inequality, that relied on a measure-theoretic characterisation of straight-line segments due to Ughtred Shuttleworth Haslam-Jones from 1936. Haslam-Jones' proof was regarded as difficult and was only given a satisfactory proof in the mid-1970s by Schober and Campbell\u2013Lamoureux.\n gave a proof of uniformization for parallel slit domains which was similar to the Riemann mapping theorem. To simplify notation, horizontal slits will be taken. Firstly, by Bieberbach's inequality, any univalent function\nformula_275\nwith formula_49 in the open unit disk must satisfy formula_277. As a consequence, if\nformula_278\nis univalent in formula_279, then formula_280. To see this, take formula_281 and set\nformula_282\nfor formula_49 in the unit disk, choosing formula_142 so the denominator is nowhere-vanishing, and apply the Schwarz lemma. Next the function formula_285 is characterized by an \"extremal condition\" as the unique univalent function in formula_286 of the form formula_287 that maximises formula_288: this is an immediate consequence of Gr\u00f6nwall's area theorem, applied to the family of univalent functions formula_289 in formula_290.\nTo prove now that the multiply connected domain formula_291 can be uniformized by a horizontal parallel slit conformal mapping\nformula_292,\ntake formula_118 large enough that formula_294 lies in the open disk formula_295. For formula_281, univalency and the estimate formula_297 imply that, if formula_49 lies in formula_29 with formula_300, then formula_301. Since the family of univalent formula_4 are locally bounded in formula_303, by Montel's theorem they form a normal family. Furthermore if formula_57 is in the family and tends to formula_4 uniformly on compacta, then formula_4 is also in the family and each coefficient of the Laurent expansion at formula_267 of the formula_57 tends to the corresponding coefficient of formula_4. This applies in particular to the coefficient: so by compactness there is a univalent formula_4 which maximizes formula_288. To check that\nformula_312\nis the required parallel slit transformation, suppose \"reductio ad absurdum\" that formula_313 has a compact and connected component formula_160 of its boundary which is not a horizontal slit. Then the complement formula_315 of formula_160 in formula_42 is simply connected with formula_318. By the Riemann mapping theorem there is a conformal mapping\nformula_319\nsuch that formula_320 is formula_2 with a horizontal slit removed. So we have that\nformula_322\nand thus formula_323 by the extremality of formula_4. Therefore, formula_325. On the other hand by the Riemann mapping theorem there is a conformal mapping\nformula_326\nmapping from formula_327 onto formula_315. Then\nformula_329\nBy the strict maximality for the slit mapping in the previous paragraph, we can see that formula_330, so that formula_331. The two inequalities for formula_332 are contradictory.\nThe proof of the uniqueness of the conformal parallel slit transformation is given in and . Applying the inverse of the Joukowsky transform formula_200 to the horizontal slit domain, it can be assumed that formula_29 is a domain bounded by the unit circle formula_335 and contains analytic arcs formula_92 and isolated points (the images of other the inverse of the Joukowsky transform under the other parallel horizontal slits). Thus, taking a fixed formula_43, there is a univalent mapping\nformula_338\nwith its image a horizontal slit domain. Suppose that formula_339 is another uniformizer with\nformula_340\nThe images under formula_341 or formula_342 of each formula_92 have a fixed \"y\"-coordinate so are horizontal segments. On the other hand, formula_344 is holomorphic in formula_29. If it is constant, then it must be identically zero since formula_346. Suppose formula_347 is non-constant, then by assumption formula_348 are all horizontal lines. If formula_349 is not in one of these lines, Cauchy's argument principle shows that the number of solutions of formula_350 in formula_29 is zero (any formula_349 will eventually be encircled by contours in formula_29 close to the formula_92's). This contradicts the fact that the non-constant holomorphic function formula_347 is an open mapping.\nSketch proof via Dirichlet problem.\nGiven formula_1 and a point formula_357, we want to construct a function formula_4 which maps formula_1 to the unit disk and formula_12 to formula_40. For this sketch, we will assume that \"U\" is bounded and its boundary is smooth, much like Riemann did. Write\nformula_362\nwhere formula_363 is some (to be determined) holomorphic function with real part formula_364 and imaginary part formula_365. It is then clear that formula_12 is the only zero of formula_4. We require formula_368 for formula_369, so we need \nformula_370\non the boundary. Since formula_364 is the real part of a holomorphic function, we know that formula_364 is necessarily a harmonic function; i.e., it satisfies Laplace's equation.\nThe question then becomes: does a real-valued harmonic function formula_364 exist that is defined on all of formula_1 and has the given boundary condition? The positive answer is provided by the Dirichlet principle. Once the existence of formula_364 has been established, the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations for the holomorphic function formula_35 allow us to find formula_365 (this argument depends on the assumption that formula_1 be simply connected). Once formula_364 and formula_365 have been constructed, one has to check that the resulting function formula_4 does indeed have all the required properties.\nUniformization theorem.\nThe Riemann mapping theorem can be generalized to the context of Riemann surfaces: If formula_1 is a non-empty simply-connected open subset of a Riemann surface, then formula_1 is biholomorphic to one of the following: the Riemann sphere, the complex plane formula_2, or the unit disk formula_190. This is known as the uniformization theorem.\nSmooth Riemann mapping theorem.\nIn the case of a simply connected bounded domain with smooth boundary, the Riemann mapping function and all its derivatives extend by continuity to the closure of the domain. This can be proved using regularity properties of solutions of the Dirichlet boundary value problem, which follow either from the theory of Sobolev spaces for planar domains or from classical potential theory. Other methods for proving the smooth Riemann mapping theorem include the theory of kernel functions or the Beltrami equation.\nAlgorithms.\nComputational conformal mapping is prominently featured in problems of applied analysis and mathematical physics, as well as in engineering disciplines, such as image processing.\nIn the early 1980s an elementary algorithm for computing conformal maps was discovered. Given points formula_386 in the plane, the algorithm computes an explicit conformal map of the unit disk onto a region bounded by a Jordan curve formula_47 with formula_388 This algorithm converges for Jordan regions in the sense of uniformly close boundaries. There are corresponding uniform estimates on the closed region and the closed disc for the mapping functions and their inverses. Improved estimates are obtained if the data points lie on a formula_389 curve or a \"K\"-quasicircle. The algorithm was discovered as an approximate method for conformal welding; however, it can also be viewed as a discretization of the Loewner differential equation.\nThe following is known about numerically approximating the conformal mapping between two planar domains.\nPositive results:\nNegative results:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26216", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26216", "title": "Reiters Syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "26219", "revid": "38554947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26219", "title": "Rhodesia", "text": "Unrecognised state in Southern Africa\nRhodesia ( , ; ), officially the Republic of Rhodesia from 1970, was an unrecognised country in Southern Africa that existed from 1965 to 1979. Rhodesia served as the \"de facto\" successor state to the British colony of Southern Rhodesia following a unilateral declaration of independence issued by the ruling white-minority government. Throughout this fourteen-year period, Rhodesia faced internal conflict and political unrest. Following the Lancaster House Agreement in 1979, the territory returned to British political control and then subsequently gained internationally recognised independence as Zimbabwe in 1980.\nThe rapid decolonisation of Africa in the late 1950s and early 1960s alarmed a significant proportion of Southern Rhodesia's white population. In an effort to delay the transition to black majority rule, the predominantly white Southern Rhodesian government issued its own Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) from the United Kingdom on 11 November 1965. The new nation, identified simply as Rhodesia, initially sought recognition as an autonomous realm within the Commonwealth of Nations, but reconstituted itself as a republic in 1970. Following the declaration of independence in 1965, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution that called upon all states not to grant recognition to Rhodesia. Two African nationalist parties, the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) and Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), launched an armed insurgency against the government upon UDI, sparking the Rhodesian Bush War. Growing war weariness, diplomatic pressure, and an extensive trade embargo imposed by the United Nations prompted Rhodesian prime minister Ian Smith to concede to majority rule in 1978. However, elections and a multiracial provisional government, with Smith succeeded by moderate Abel Muzorewa, failed to appease international critics or halt the war. By December 1979, Muzorewa had secured an agreement with ZAPU and ZANU, allowing Rhodesia to briefly revert to colonial status pending new elections under British supervision. ZANU secured an electoral victory in 1980, and the country achieved internationally recognised independence in April 1980, as Zimbabwe.\nA landlocked nation, Rhodesia was bordered by Botswana (Bechuanaland: British protectorate until 1966) to the southwest, Mozambique (Portuguese province until 1975) to the east, South Africa to the south, and Zambia (Northern Rhodesia until 1964) to the northwest. From 1965 to 1979, Rhodesia was one of two independent states on the African continent governed by a white minority of European descent and culture, the other being South Africa. Rhodesia's largest cities were Salisbury (its capital city, now known as Harare) and Bulawayo. Prior to 1970, the unicameral Legislative Assembly was predominantly white, with a small number of seats reserved for black representatives. Following the declaration of a republic in 1970, this was replaced by a bicameral Parliament, with a House of Assembly and a Senate. The bicameral system was retained in Zimbabwe after 1980. Aside from its racial franchise, Rhodesia observed a Westminster system inherited from the United Kingdom, with a president acting as ceremonial head of state, while a prime minister headed the Cabinet as head of government.\nEtymology.\nThe official name of the country, according to the constitution adopted concurrently with the UDI in November 1965, was Rhodesia, which derives from Cecil Rhodes. This was not the case under British law, however, which considered the territory's legal name to be Southern Rhodesia, the name given to the country in 1898 during the British South Africa Company's administration of the Rhodesias, and retained by the self-governing colony of Southern Rhodesia after the end of company rule in 1923.\nThis naming dispute dated back to October 1964, when Northern Rhodesia became independent from the UK and concurrently changed its name to Zambia. The Southern Rhodesian colonial government in Salisbury felt that in the absence of a \"Northern\" Rhodesia, the continued use of \"Southern\" was superfluous. It passed legislation to become simply Rhodesia, but the British government refused to approve this on the grounds that the country's name was defined by British legislation, so could not be altered by the colonial government. Salisbury went on using the shortened name in an official manner nevertheless, while the British government continued referring to the country as Southern Rhodesia. This situation continued throughout the UDI period. The shortened name was used by many people including the British government in the House of Commons.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nUntil after the Second World War the landlocked British possession of Southern Rhodesia was not developed as an indigenous African territory, but rather as a unique state that reflected its multiracial character. This situation certainly made it very different from other lands that existed under colonial rule, as many Europeans had arrived to make permanent homes, populating the towns as traders or settling to farm the most productive soils. In 1922, faced with the decision to join the Union of South Africa as a fifth province or accept nearly full internal autonomy, the electorate cast its vote against South African integration.\nIn view of the outcome of the referendum, the territory was annexed by the United Kingdom on 12 September 1923. Shortly after annexation, on 1 October 1923, the first constitution for the new Colony of Southern Rhodesia came into force. Under this constitution, Southern Rhodesia was given the right to elect its own thirty-member legislature, premier, and cabinet\u2014although the British government retained a formal veto over measures affecting natives and dominated foreign policy.\nOver the course of the next three decades, Southern Rhodesia experienced a degree of economic expansion and industrialisation almost unrivaled in sub-Saharan Africa. Its natural abundance of mineral wealth\u2014including large deposits of chromium and manganese\u2014contributed to the high rate of conventional economic growth. However, most colonies in Africa, even those rich in natural resources, experienced difficulty in achieving similar rates of development due to a shortage of technical and managerial skills. Small, rotating cadres of colonial civil servants who possessed little incentive to invest their skills in the local economy were insufficient to compensate for this disadvantage. Southern Rhodesia had negated the issue by importing a skilled workforce directly from abroad in the form of its disproportionately large European immigrant and expatriate population. For example, in 1951 over 90% of white Southern Rhodesians were engaged in what the British government classified as \"skilled occupations\", or professional and technical trades. This made it possible to establish a diversified economy with a strong manufacturing sector and iron and steel industries, and circumvent the normal British protectionist policy of supporting domestic industry in the metropole while discouraging industry in the colonies abroad. As the white population increased, so did capital imports, especially in the wake of the Second World War. This trend, too, stood in sharp contrast to most other colonial territories, which suffered a major capital deficit due to revenues simply being repatriated to the metropole, leaving little capital to be invested locally. The considerable investment made by white Rhodesians in the economy financed the development of Southern Rhodesia's export industries as well as the infrastructure necessary to integrate it further with international markets.\nIn August 1953, Southern Rhodesia merged with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, the two other British Central African territories, to form the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland \u2013 a loose association that placed defence and economic direction under a central government but left many domestic affairs under the control of its constituent territories. As it began to appear that decolonisation was inevitable and indigenous black populations were pressing heavily for change, the federation was dissolved at the end of December 1963.\nUnilateral Declaration of Independence (1965).\nAlthough prepared to grant formal independence to Southern Rhodesia (now Rhodesia), the British government had adopted a policy of \"no independence before majority rule\" (NIBMR), dictating that colonies with a significant, politically active population of European settlers would not receive independence except under conditions of majority rule. White Rhodesians balked at the premise of NIBMR; many felt they had a right to absolute political control, at least for the time being, despite their relatively small numbers. They were also disturbed by the chaos of the post-colonial political transitions occurring in other African nations at the time, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A vocal segment of the white populace was open to the concept of gradually incorporating black Rhodesians into civil society and a more integrated political structure in theory, although not without qualification and equivocation. A greater degree of social and political equality, they argued, was acceptable once more black citizens had obtained higher educational and vocational standards. The second faction in the white community was wholly unwilling to concede the principle, much less the practice, of equality to the black population. Both groups remained opposed to majority rule in the near future. However, once Rhodesia had been introduced as a topic for discussion in international bodies, extension of the status quo became a matter of concern to the British government, which perceived the scrutiny as a serious embarrassment to the United Kingdom.\nAfter the federation was dissolved in December 1963, British Prime Minister Sir Alec Douglas-Home insisted that preconditions on independence talks hinge on what he termed the \"five principles\" \u2013 unimpeded progress to majority rule, assurance against any future legislation decidedly detrimental to black interests, \"improvement in the political status\" of local Africans, an end to official racial discrimination, and a political settlement that could be \"acceptable to the whole population\". Harold Wilson and his incoming Labour government took an even harder line on demanding that these points be legitimately addressed before a timetable for independence could be set.\nIn 1964, growing white dissatisfaction with the ongoing negotiations played a major role in the ousting of Winston Field as Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia. Field was succeeded by Ian Smith, chairman of the conservative Rhodesian Front Party and an outspoken critic of any immediate transition to majority rule. Smith, the colony's first Rhodesian-born leader, soon came to personify resistance to liberals in British government and those agitating for change at home. In September 1964, Smith visited Lisbon, where Portuguese prime minister Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar promised him \"maximum support\" if he should declare independence. Aside from a common interest in maintaining security ties in southern Africa, Salazar expressed a great deal of anger at Britain's refusal to support Portugal during the Indian annexation of Goa in 1961, admonishing Smith not to trust the British government. A Rhodesian Trade Office was opened in Lisbon in order to co-ordinate breaking the anticipated sanctions in the event of a unilateral declaration of independence later that year, which encouraged Smith not to compromise. In its turn, the Rhodesian Trade Office in Lisbon functioned as a \"de facto\" embassy and caused tension with London, which objected to Rhodesia conducting its own foreign policy. As land-locked Rhodesia bordered the Portuguese colony of Mozambique, Salazar's promise of \"maximum support\" from Portugal in breaking the anticipated sanctions gave Smith more grounds for self-confidence in his talks with London. Smith ruled out acceptance for all five of the British principles as they stood, implying instead that Rhodesia was already legally entitled to independence\u2014a claim that was overwhelmingly endorsed by the predominantly white electorate in a referendum.\nEmboldened by the results of this referendum and the subsequent general election, the Rhodesian government threatened to declare independence without British consent. Harold Wilson countered by warning that such an irregular procedure would be considered treasonous, although he specifically rejected using armed force to quell a rebellion by English \"kith and kin\", or white Rhodesians of predominantly British descent and origin, many of whom still possessed sympathies and family ties to the United Kingdom. Wilson's refusal to consider a military option further encouraged Smith to proceed with his plans. Talks quickly broke down, and final efforts in October to achieve a settlement floundered; the Smith government remained unwilling to accept the five principles of independence, and the British government argued it would settle for nothing less.\nOn 11 November 1965 the Cabinet of Rhodesia issued a unilateral declaration of independence (UDI). The UDI was immediately denounced as an \"act of rebellion against the Crown\" in the United Kingdom, and Wilson promised that the illegal action would be short-lived. However, given its self-governing status Rhodesia had no longer been within the United Kingdom's direct sphere of influence for some time, and the fa\u00e7ade of continued British rule was rendered a constitutional fiction by UDI. In light of these circumstances, Wilson quickly realised his ability to assert direct leverage over the incumbent Rhodesian government was limited.\nOn 12 October 1965, the United Nations General Assembly had noted the repeated threats of the Rhodesian authorities \"to declare unilaterally the independence of Southern Rhodesia, in order to perpetuate minority rule\", and called upon Wilson to use all means at his disposal (including military force) to prevent the Rhodesian Front from asserting independence. After UDI was proclaimed, UN officials branded the Rhodesian government as an \"illegal racist minority regime\" and called on member states to voluntarily sever economic ties with Rhodesia, recommending sanctions on petroleum products and military hardware. In December 1966, the UN further iterated that these sanctions were mandatory, and member states were explicitly barred from purchasing Rhodesian export goods, namely tobacco, chromium, copper, asbestos, sugar, and beef.\nThe British government, having already adopted extensive sanctions of its own, dispatched a Royal Navy squadron to monitor oil deliveries in the port of Beira in Mozambique, from which a strategic pipeline ran to Umtali in Rhodesia. The warships were to deter \"by force, if necessary, vessels reasonably believed to be carrying oil destined for (Southern) Rhodesia\".\nSome Western nations, such as Switzerland and West Germany, which were not UN member states, continued to conduct business openly with Rhodesia \u2013 the latter remained the Smith government's largest trading partner in Western Europe until 1973, when it was admitted to the UN. Japan remained the chief recipient of Rhodesian exports outside the African continent, and Iran also supplied oil to Rhodesia in violation of the embargo. Portugal served as a conduit for Rhodesian goods, which it exported through Mozambique with false certificates of origin. South Africa, too, refused to observe the UN sanctions. In 1971, the Byrd Amendment was passed in the United States, permitting American firms to go on importing Rhodesian chromium and nickel products as normal.\nDespite the poor showing of sanctions, Rhodesia found it nearly impossible to obtain diplomatic recognition abroad. In 1970, the United States declared it would not recognise UDI \"under [any] circumstances\". South Africa and Portugal, Rhodesia's largest trading partners, also refused to extend diplomatic recognition, and did not open embassies in the Rhodesian capital, Salisbury, preferring to conduct diplomatic activities through \"accredited representatives\". This allowed the South African and Portuguese governments to maintain they were continuing to respect British sovereignty while also accepting the practical authority of the Smith administration.\nInitially, the Rhodesian state retained its pledged loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II, recognising her as Queen of Rhodesia. When Smith and Deputy Prime Minister Clifford Dupont visited Sir Humphrey Gibbs, the Governor of Southern Rhodesia, to formally notify him of the UDI, Gibbs condemned it as an act of treason. After Smith formally announced the UDI on the radio, Governor Gibbs used his reserve power to dismiss Smith and his entire cabinet from office, on orders from the Colonial Office in Whitehall. However, Gibbs was unable to take any concrete actions to bring about a return to lawful colonial government. Rhodesian ministers simply ignored his notices, contending that UDI had made his office obsolete. Even so, Gibbs continued to occupy his official residence, Government House, in Salisbury until 1970, when he finally left Rhodesia, following the declaration of a republic. He had effectively been superseded before then; the Smith government stated that if the Queen did not appoint a Governor-General, it would name Dupont as \"Officer Administering the Government\". Smith had intended to have Dupont named Governor-General, but Queen Elizabeth II would not even consider this advice. With few exceptions, the international community backed Whitehall's assertion that Gibbs was the Queen's only legitimate representative, and hence the only lawful authority in Rhodesia.\nIn September 1968, the Appellate Division of the High Court of Rhodesia ruled that Ian Smith's administration had become the \"de jure\" government of the country, not merely the \"de facto\" one. To support his decision, Chief Justice Sir Hugh Beadle used several statements made by Hugo Grotius, who maintained that there was no way that a nation could rightly claim to be governing a particular territory \u2013 if it was waging a war against that territory. Beadle argued that due to Britain's economic war against Rhodesia, she could not (at the same point) be described as \"governing\" Rhodesia. The ruling set the precedent that despite the UDI, the incumbent Smith government \"could lawfully do anything its predecessors could lawfully have done\".\nA Salisbury commission chaired by prominent lawyer W.R. Waley was appointed to study constitutional options open to the Rhodesian authorities as of April 1968, including on the topic of majority rule, but reopening negotiations with the British on a settlement was ruled out early on. The Waley Commission found that in practical as well as legal terms, \"Europeans must surrender any belief in permanent European domination\", pointing out that minority rule was not permanently sustainable. However, Waley also testified that majority rule was not desirable immediately.\nTalks aimed at easing the differences between Rhodesia and the United Kingdom were carried out aboard Royal Navy vessels once in December 1966 and again in October 1968. Both efforts failed to achieve agreement, although Harold Wilson added a sixth principle to the five he had previously enunciated: \"it would be necessary to ensure that, regardless of race, there was no oppression of the majority by the minority or of [any] minority by the majority.\" Rhodesian resolve stiffened following a failure to reach a new settlement, with more radical elements of the Rhodesian Front calling for a republican constitution.\nDuring a two-proposition referendum held in 1969, the proposal for severing all remaining ties to the British Crown passed by a majority of 61,130 votes to 14,327. Rhodesia declared itself a republic on 2 March 1970. Under the new constitution, a president served as ceremonial head of state, with the prime minister nominally reporting to him. Some in the Rhodesian government had hoped in vain that the declaration of a republic would finally prompt other nations to grant recognition.\nImpact of UDI.\nThe years following Rhodesia's UDI saw an unfolding series of economic, military, and political pressures placed on the country that eventually brought about majority rule, a totality of these factors rather than any one the reason for introducing change. In 2005, a conference at the London School of Economics that discussed Rhodesia's independence concluded that UDI was sparked by an existing racial conflict complicated by Cold War intrigues.\nCritics of UDI maintained that Ian Smith intended to safeguard the privileges of an entrenched colonial ruling class at the expense of the impoverished black population. Smith defended his actions by claiming that the black Rhodesian majority was too inexperienced at the time to participate in the complex administrative process of what was, by contemporary African standards, a reasonably industrialised state.\nAt large, UDI further hardened the white population's attitudes towards majority rule and relations with the UK. A significant majority of white Rhodesian residents were either British immigrants or of British ancestry, and many held a special affection for the British Empire. However, the UK's refusal to grant them independence on their terms further confirmed their opposition to a political settlement on British terms, and fed their negative attitudes towards British interference in Rhodesian politics at large. In the years prior to UDI, white Rhodesians increasingly saw themselves as beleaguered and threatened, perpetually insecure and undermined by the metropole, unable to rely on anybody but themselves. The policy of \"No independence before majority rule\" transformed the white community's relationship with the UK and increased its suspicions of the British government's untrustworthiness and duplicity in colonial affairs, especially since the latter had adopted NIBMR as a formal policy - the very circumstance UDI was carried out to avoid, and which white Rhodesians had struggled to resist since the onset of decolonisation.\nBlack nationalist parties reacted with outrage at UDI, with one ZANU official stating, \"for all those who cherish freedom and a meaningful life, UDI has set a collision course that cannot be altered. 11 November 1965 [has] marked the turning point of the struggle for freedom in that land from a constitutional and political one to primarily a military struggle.\" It would, however, be several years before the nationalists adopted armed struggle as their primary strategy for obtaining political power. Violent tactics at this time were intended to create opportunities for external intervention, either by the international community or the British government, rather than seriously undermine the Rhodesian security forces.\nBecause Rhodesian exports were generally competitive and had previously been entitled to preferential treatment on the British market, the former colony did not recognise the need for escalating the pace of diversification before independence. Following the UDI, however, Rhodesia began to demonstrate that it had the potential to develop a greater degree of economic self-sufficiency. After the Rhodesian Front began introducing incentives accorded to domestic production, industrial output expanded dramatically. A rigid system of countermeasures enacted to combat sanctions succeeded in blunting their impact for at least a decade. Over the next nine years, Rhodesian companies, spiting the freezing of their assets and blocking of overseas accounts, also perfected cunning techniques of sanctions evasion through both local and foreign subsidiaries, which operated on a clandestine trade network.\nFrom 1968 until 1970, there was virtually no further dialogue between Rhodesia and the UK. In a referendum in 1969, white voters approved a new constitution and the establishment of a republic, thereby severing Rhodesia's last links with the British Crown, duly declared in March 1970. This changed immediately after the election of Edward Heath, who reopened negotiations. Smith remained optimistic that Heath would do his utmost to remedy Anglo-Rhodesian relations, although disappointed that he continued to adhere publicly to the original \"five principles\" proposed by Alec Douglas-Home, now foreign secretary. In November 1971, Douglas-Home renewed contacts with Salisbury and announced a proposed agreement that would be satisfactory to both sides \u2013 it recognised Rhodesia's 1969 constitution as the legal frame of government, while agreeing that gradual legislative representation was an acceptable formula for unhindered advance to majority rule. Nevertheless, the new settlement, if approved, would also implement an immediate improvement in black political status, offer a means to terminate racial discrimination, and provide a solid guarantee against retrogressive constitutional amendments.\nImplementation of the proposed settlement hinged on popular acceptance, but the Rhodesian government consistently refused to submit it to a universal referendum. A twenty four-member commission headed by an eminent jurist, Lord Pearce, was therefore tasked with ascertaining public opinion on the subject. In 1972, the commission began interviewing interest groups and sampling opinions \u2013 although concern was expressed over the widespread apathy encountered. According to the commission, whites were in favour of the settlement, and Rhodesians of Coloured or Asian ancestry generally pleased, while the black response to the settlement's terms was resoundingly negative. As many as thirty black Rhodesian chiefs and politicians voiced their opposition, prompting Britain to withdraw from the proposals on the grounds of the commission's report.\nBush War.\nEarly militant activity.\nAs early as 1960, minority rule in Southern Rhodesia was already being challenged by a rising tide of political violence led by black African nationalists such as Joshua Nkomo and Ndabaningi Sithole. A sustained period of civil unrest between 1960 and 1965 further polarised relations between the government and the increasingly militant black nationalists. After their public campaigns were initially suppressed, many black nationalists believed that negotiation was completely incapable of meeting their aspirations. Petrol bombings by politicised radicals became increasingly common, with the \"Zimbabwe Review\" observing in 1961, \"for the first time home-made petrol bombs were used by freedom fighters in Salisbury against settler establishments.\" Between January and September 1962, nationalists detonated 33 bombs and were implicated in 28 acts of arson, and 27 acts of sabotage against communications infrastructure. The nationalists also murdered a number of black Rhodesians who were accused of collaboration with the security forces. Nkomo's party, the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) announced that year that it had formed a military wing, the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) and \"the decision to start bringing in arms and ammunition and to send young men away for sabotage training\" had already been implemented. \nAs early as 1960, ZAPU's predecessor, the National Democratic Party (NDP), had established informal contacts with the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, and discussed the possibility of obtaining military training in Eastern Europe for its members. In July 1962, Nkomo visited Moscow and discussed plans for a ZAPU-led armed uprising in Rhodesia. He made formal requests for Soviet funding and arms for ZIPRA, explaining that \"for these purposes ZAPU needs arms, explosives, revolvers...the party also needs money to bribe persons who guard important installations, to carry out sabotage\". The Soviets agreed to supply ZAPU with limited funds beginning in 1963, and increased its level of financial support after UDI. In 1963, ZIPRA also made its first formal request to the Soviet Union for military training. The Soviets began training ZIPRA militants in guerrilla warfare in early 1964.\nNkomo's public endorsement of a violent strategy confirmed white politicians' opposition to ZAPU and fed their negative attitudes towards black nationalists at large. In response to the formation of ZIPRA, the Rhodesian government banned ZAPU, driving that party's supporters underground. It also passed draconian security legislation restricting the right to assembly and granting the security forces broad powers to crack down on suspected political subversives. For the first time, the death sentence was also introduced for any act of politically inspired terrorism which involved arson or the use of explosives.\nThe emergence of guerrilla warfare and acts of urban insurrection by the black nationalist parties in Rhodesia allowed racial politics to be elevated into an issue of law and order in white Rhodesian public discourse. To Smith and his government, black nationalists were stateless dissidents whose primary motives were not political, but crime and perpetuating lawlessness; for example, Smith preferred to describe the insurgents as \"gangsters\" in his commentary. The use of weapons and explosives sourced from communist states by the black nationalists also disguised the racial dynamics of the conflict, allowing white Rhodesians to claim that they were targets of Soviet-directed communist agitators rather than a domestic political movement. Smith and his supporters perceived themselves as collective defenders of the traditional values of the British Empire against the twin threats of international communism, manifested through the Soviet Union's support for black nationalist militants, and the social and political decadence of the West. Often repeated appeals to the Christian heritage of their pioneer ancestors in \"defending the free world\" and sustaining \"Western civilisation\" reflected these beliefs. This was hardly an unusual opinion among white minorities in Southern Africa at the time; a dossier compiled by United States intelligence officials on the topic found that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nZAPU's attempts to implement its armed struggle were hamstrung by a factional split within the party between 1962 and 1963. A number of ZAPU dissidents rejected Nkomo's authority and formed their own organisation, the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), with Ndabaningi Sithole as its president and Robert Mugabe as its general secretary. By August 1964, ZANU was banned by the Rhodesian government as well, which cited widespread acts of violent intimidation attributed to its members. ZANU's agenda was left-wing and pan-Africanist; it demanded a one-party state with majority rule and the abolition of private property. Ethnic tensions also exacerbated the split: ZANU recruited almost solely from the Shona-speaking peoples of Rhodesia. Its chief support base was the rural peasantry in the Mashonaland countryside. ZAPU did retain Shona members, even among its senior leadership following the split. However, thereafter it recruited predominantly from the Ndebele ethnic group. Due to ZAPU's close relationship with the Soviet Union, ZANU found itself ostracised by the Soviet bloc but soon found a new ally in the People's Republic of China. Its political ideology was somewhat more influenced by the principles of Maoism than ZAPU, and a sympathetic Chinese government soon agreed to furnish weapons and training for ZANU's own war effort.\nAfter UDI, ZANU formed its own military wing, the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA). While ZANLA and ZIPRA both planned for an armed struggle against the Rhodesian government, their respective leadership disagreed on the means of conducting the insurgency. ZIPRA favoured Soviet thinking, placing an emphasis on acquiring sophisticated weaponry in the hopes of winning a conventional battle like the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu. ZANLA placed greater emphasis on the politicisation of the local populace in the areas it operated, and favoured a more irregular style of warfare.\nIn early April 1966, two groups of ZANLA insurgents recently trained at a Chinese military facility in Nanjing crossed into Rhodesia from Zambia, having been issued vague instructions to sabotage important installations and kill white farmers. Five were arrested by the Rhodesian security forces almost immediately. Another seven initially evaded capture and planned to destroy an electric pylon near Sinoia. Their explosive charges failed to detonate and were discovered by the Rhodesian Security Forces, who tracked the insurgents to a nearby ranch on 28 April. All seven were cornered and killed after a brief firefight; this event is considered to be the first engagement of the Rhodesian Bush War. The action at Sinoia has been commemorated by supporters of the guerrillas since as \"Chimurenga Day\", and occupies a place of pride in ZANU hagiography.\nIn August 1967, a large and better-equipped column of almost seventy ZIPRA insurgents infiltrated Rhodesia from Zambia, bolstered by recruits from an allied South African militant organisation, uMkhonto we Sizwe (MK). The insurgents failed to cultivate prior contacts with the local populace, which immediately informed on their presence to Rhodesian officials. Within the month, the Rhodesian police and army had launched a counteroffensive codenamed Operation Nickel, killing forty-seven insurgents, capturing another twenty, and driving the survivors across the border into Botswana. An even larger ZIPRA column of over a hundred insurgents was intercepted in early 1968 and annihilated by the security forces. A third ZIPRA incursion attempt in July 1969 met with similarly catastrophic results. Thereafter, ZIPRA abandoned the notion of attempting to infiltrate the country with large groups of insurgents equipped only with small arms; it limited itself to more irregular forms of warfare until it could stockpile enough heavy weaponry to mount a major conventional invasion. For its part, the ZANLA leadership criticised ZIPRA's continued fixation with winning a major conventional engagement, arguing that the failed incursions demonstrated the futility of engaging the Rhodesian military in the type of pitched battles in which it held an indisputable advantage. ZIPRA's failure to obtain support from the locals was also noted, and ZANLA began implementing a long-term covert politicisation programme to cultivate civilian support throughout its future area of operations.\nMilitary and political escalation (1972\u20131976).\nBy December 1972, ZANLA had cached arms and established a vast underground network of informants and supporters in northeastern Rhodesia. As a result of the erosion of Portuguese authority in Mozambique's border provinces due to the Mozambican War of Independence, ZANLA was also able to establish external sanctuaries there. It was also in the process of cultivating a military alliance with the leading black nationalist movement in Mozambique, the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO). On 21 December, a group of ZANLA insurgents under Rex Nhongo crossed into Rhodesia from Mozambique and raided an isolated commercial farm. In the successive months, this attack was followed by a succession of raids on white farmers throughout the northeastern districts of the country and resulted in several casualties among the security forces. The propaganda value of these raids, coupled with the success of ZANLA's politicisation campaign, denied intelligence to the security forces and furnished more recruits for the insurgents. In response, the Rhodesian security forces began coordinating operations in Mozambique with the Portuguese Army to intercept ZANLA insurgents before they could cross the border.\nThe practical alliances between ZIPRA and MK, and later ZANLA and FRELIMO, prompted Rhodesia to look increasingly towards South Africa and Portugal for active assistance. Rhodesian politicians frequently reminded officials in the other two nations of common security interests based on the similarity of their restive internal situations. They saw strong parallels between their nation's position of being threatened by black nationalist insurgencies and the Portuguese predicament with FRELIMO in Mozambique, as well as to a lesser extent the insurgencies in South Africa and South West Africa. Under the auspices of the Alcora Exercise, the three countries' bureaucracies began routinely sharing information and seeking common diplomatic positions. Lieutenant General Alan Fraser, a senior strategist in the South African Defence Force wrote in 1970, \"there can be no doubt in any of our minds that we have a common enemy: we, i.e. Portugal, the RSA and Rhodesia. Unless we are to lay ourselves open to the possibility of defeat in detail, we must fight this enemy jointly\u2014if not simultaneously.\" Nevertheless, aside from intelligence-sharing and some limited coordination on the operational level in Mozambique, the Portuguese could offer Rhodesia little decisive assistance. Portuguese military resources in Mozambique were preoccupied with FRELIMO and somewhat depleted by a decade of war, and little could be spared to assist a foreign ally. Rhodesia expected far more from South Africa, which possessed far greater military resources and infinitely more diplomatic influence abroad.\nAfter the Carnation Revolution and the end of Portuguese rule in Mozambique in 1975, it was no longer viable for the Smith regime to sustain white minority rule indefinitely. By this time, even South Africa's John Vorster had come to this view. While Vorster was unwilling to make concessions to his own country's black people, he concluded that white minority rule was not sustainable in a country where black people outnumbered white people 22:1. In 1976, there were 270,000 Rhodesians of European descent and six million Africans.\nInternational business groups involved in the country (e.g. Lonrho) transferred their support from the Rhodesian government to black nationalist parties. Business leaders and politicians feted Nkomo on his visits to Europe. ZANU also attracted business supporters who saw the course that future events were likely to take. Funding and arms support provided by supporters, particularly from the Soviet Union and its allies in the latter 1970s, allowed both ZIPRA and the ZANLA to acquire more sophisticated weaponry, thereby increasing the military pressure that the guerrillas were able to place on Rhodesia.\nUntil 1972, containing the guerrillas was little more than a police action. Even as late as August 1975 when Rhodesian government and black nationalist leaders met at Victoria Falls for negotiations brokered by South Africa and Zambia, the talks never got beyond the procedural phase. Rhodesian representatives made it clear they were prepared to fight an all out war to prevent majority rule. However, the situation changed dramatically after the end of Portuguese colonial rule in Mozambique in 1975. Rhodesia now found itself almost entirely surrounded by hostile states and even South Africa, its only real ally, pressed for a settlement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Having let slip one chance after another of reaching an accommodation with more moderate black leaders, Rhodesia's whites seem to have made the tragic choice of facing black nationalism over the barrel of a gun rather than the conference table. The downhill road toward a race war in Rhodesia is becoming increasingly slippery with blood.\u2014\u200a\nAt this point, ZANU's alliance with FRELIMO and the porous border between Mozambique and eastern Rhodesia enabled large-scale training and infiltration of ZANU/ZANLA fighters. The governments of Zambia and Botswana were also emboldened sufficiently to allow resistance movement bases to be set up in their territories. Guerrillas began to launch operations deep inside Rhodesia, attacking roads, railways, economic targets and isolated security force positions, in 1976.\nThe government adopted a strategic hamlets policy of the kind used in Malaya and Vietnam to restrict the influence of insurgents over the population of rural areas. Local people were forced to relocate to protected villages (PVs) which were strictly controlled and guarded by the government against rebel atrocities. The protected villages were compared by the guerrillas to concentration camps. Some contemporary accounts claim that this interference in the lives of local residents induced many of them who had previously been neutral to support the guerrillas.\nThe war degenerated into rounds of increasing brutality from all three parties involved (ZANU and ZAPU, and the Rhodesian Army). Mike Subritzky, a former New Zealand Army ceasefire monitor in Rhodesia, in 1980 described the war as \"both bloody and brutal and brought out the very worst in the opposing combatants on all three sides.\"\nA major problem for the Rhodesian state in fighting the Bush War was always a shortage of manpower. Of the 3,000 white men liable for conscription in 1973, only about 1,000 reported when called-up. In February 1978, the Rhodesian Army stated it needed a minimum of 1,041 men to continue combat operations, and of those called up, only 570 reported for duty while the rest chose to move to South Africa. White emigration increased as the state called up more and more men to fight in the war, creating a vicious circle, which gradually limited the capacity of the Rhodesian state to continue the war. In order to stop white emigration, the Smith government brought in a law in 1975 forbidding Rhodesian citizens from holding foreign currency, but the law was widely flouted. In order to encourage white emigration, the guerrillas of ZANU and ZAPU followed a strategy of attacking anything and everything that was of economic value across the country in order to force the state to call up more men, and of killing white civilians. Killing Rhodesian white citizens tended to have an \"echo effect\" as the ZANU and ZAPU had each estimated that for one white citizen killed, it caused about 20 to leave Rhodesia.\nEnd of the Bush War.\nRhodesia began to lose vital economic and military support from South Africa, which, while sympathetic to the white minority government, never accorded it diplomatic recognition. The South African government placed limits on the fuel and munitions they supplied to the Rhodesian military. They also withdrew the personnel and equipment that they had previously provided to aid the war effort, though covert military support continued.\nIn 1976, the South African government and United States governments worked together to place pressure on Smith to agree to a form of majority rule. In response to the initiative of United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, in 1976 Ian Smith accepted the principle of black majority rule within two years. The Rhodesians now offered more concessions, but those concessions, focused on reaching an \"internal settlement\" with moderate black leaders, were insufficient to end the war.\nAt the time, some Rhodesians said the still embittered history between the British-dominated Rhodesia and the Afrikaner-dominated South Africa partly led the South African government to withdraw its aid to Rhodesia. Ian Smith said in his memoirs that even though many white South Africans supported Rhodesia, South African Prime Minister John Vorster's policy of d\u00e9tente with the black African states ended up with Rhodesia being offered as the \"sacrificial lamb\" to buy more time for South Africa. Other observers perceived South Africa's distancing itself from Rhodesia as being an early move in the process that led to majority rule in South Africa itself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In 1976 South Africa saw settlement of the Rhodesian question as vital on several fronts: to cauterise the wound of the psychological blow \u2026 caused by her defeat in the Angolan conflict; to pre-empt possible Cuban intervention in Rhodesia and the possibility of South Africa being sucked into another Cold War regional conflict without the support and endorsement of the western powers\u2014\u200a\nIn the latter 1970s, the militants had successfully put the economy of Rhodesia under significant pressure while the numbers of guerrillas in the country were steadily increasing. The government abandoned its early strategy of trying to defend the borders in favour of trying to defend key economic areas and lines of communication with South Africa, while the rest of the countryside became a patchwork of \"no-go areas\".\nLate 1970s.\nBy the late 1970s, Rhodesia's front-line forces contained about 25,000 regular troops and police \u2013 backed up by relatively strong army and police reserves. Its mechanised contingent consisted of light armoured cars and improvised mine-protected armoured personnel carriers, complemented by eight tanks (Polish built T-55LD tanks), delivered in the last year of the war. The Rhodesian Air Force operated an assortment of both Canberra light bombers, Hawker Hunter fighter bombers, older de Havilland Vampire jets as well as a somewhat antiquated, but still potent, helicopter arm. These forces, including highly trained special operations units, were capable of launching devastating raids on resistance movement camps outside the country, as in Operation Dingo in 1977 and other similar operations.\nNevertheless, guerrilla pressure inside the country itself was steadily increasing in the latter 1970s. By 1978\u20131979, the war had become a contest between the guerrilla warfare placing ever increasing pressure on the Rhodesian regime and civil population, and the Rhodesian government's strategy of trying to hold off the militants until external recognition for a compromise political settlement with moderate black leaders could be secured.\nBy this time, the need to cut a deal was apparent to most Rhodesians, but not to all. Ian Smith had dismissed his intransigent Defence Minister, P. K. van der Byl, as early as 1976. Van der Byl was a hard-line opponent of any form of compromise with domestic opposition or the international community since before UDI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...it is better to fight to the last man and the last cartridge and die with some honour. Because, what is being presented to us here is a degree of humiliation...\u2014\u200a\nVan der Byl eventually retired to his country estate outside Cape Town, but there were elements in Rhodesia, mainly embittered former security force personnel, who forcibly opposed majority rule up to and well beyond the establishment of majority rule. New white immigrants continued to arrive in Rhodesia right up to the eve of majority rule.\nIntensification of the Bush War.\nThe work of journalists such as Lord Richard Cecil, son of Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 6th Marquess of Salisbury, stiffened the morale of Rhodesians and their overseas supporters. Lord Richard produced news reports for ITN which typically contrasted the \"incompetent\" insurgents with the \"superbly professional\" government troops. A group of ZANLA fighters killed Lord Richard on 20 April 1978 when he was accompanying a Rhodesian airborne unit employed in Fire Force Operations.\nThe shooting down on 3 September 1978 of the civilian Air Rhodesia airliner, a Vickers Viscount named the \"Hunyani\", in the Kariba area by ZIPRA fighters using a surface-to-air missile, with the subsequent massacre of 10 of its 18 survivors, is widely considered to be the event that finally destroyed the Rhodesians' will to continue the war. Although militarily insignificant, the loss of this aircraft (and a second Viscount, named the \"Umniati\", in 1979) demonstrated the reach of resistance movements extended to Rhodesian civil society.\nThe Rhodesians' means to continue the war were also eroding fast. In December 1978, a ZANLA unit penetrated the outskirts of Salisbury and fired a volley of rockets and incendiary device rounds into the main oil storage depot \u2013 the most heavily defended economic asset in the country. The storage tanks burned for five days, giving off a column of smoke that could be seen away. of petroleum product (comprising Rhodesia's strategic oil reserve) were lost.\nThe government's defence spending increased from R$30 million, 8.5% of the national budget in 1971 to 1972, to R$400 m in 1978 to 1979, 47% of the national budget. In 1980, the post-independence government of Zimbabwe inherited a US$500 million national debt.\nEnd of UDI (1979).\nThe Rhodesian army continued its \"mobile counter-offensive\" strategy of holding key positions (\"vital asset ground\") while carrying out raids into the no-go areas and into neighbouring countries. While often extraordinarily successful in inflicting heavy guerrilla casualties, such raids also on occasion failed to achieve their objectives. In April 1979 special forces carried out a raid on Joshua Nkomo's residence in Lusaka, Zambia, with the stated intention of assassinating him. Nkomo and his family left hastily a few hours before the raid \u2013 having clearly been warned that the raid was coming.\nIn 1979, some special forces units were accused of using counterinsurgent operations as cover for ivory poaching and smuggling. Colonel Reid-Daly (commander of the Selous Scouts) discovered that his phone was bugged and after challenging a superior officer on this issue was court martialled for insubordination. He received the lightest sentence possible, a caution, but he continued to fight his conviction and eventually resigned his commission and left the Army.\nBy 1978\u20131979, up to 70% of the regular army was composed of black soldiers (though both the army and police reserves remained overwhelmingly white). By 1979 there were also 30 black commissioned officers in the regular army. While there was never any suggestion of disloyalty among the soldiers from predominantly black units (in particular within the Selous Scouts or the Rhodesian African Rifles \u2013 RAR), some argue that, by the time of the 1980 election, many of the RAR soldiers voted for Robert Mugabe.\nAs the result of an Internal Settlement signed on 3 March 1978 between the Rhodesian government and the moderate African nationalist parties, which were not in exile and not involved in the war, elections were held in April 1979. The United African National Council (UANC) party won a majority in this election, and its leader, Abel Muzorewa (a United Methodist Church bishop), became the country's first black prime minister on 1 June 1979. The country's name was changed to Zimbabwe Rhodesia. The internal settlement left control of the country's police, security forces, civil service and judiciary in white hands, for the moment. It assured whites of about one-third of the seats in parliament. It was essentially a power-sharing arrangement between white people and black people which, in the eyes of many, particularly the insurgents, did not amount to majority rule. However, the United States Senate voted to end economic sanctions against Zimbabwe Rhodesia on 12 June.\nWhile the 1979 election was described by the Rhodesian government as non-racial and democratic, it did not include the main nationalist parties ZANU and ZAPU. In spite of offers from Ian Smith, the latter parties declined to participate in an election in which their political position would be insecure and under a proposed constitution which they had played no part in drafting and which was perceived as retaining strong white minority privilege.\nBishop Muzorewa's government did not receive international recognition. The Bush War continued unabated and sanctions were not lifted. The international community refused to accept the validity of any agreement which did not incorporate the main nationalist parties. The British government (then led by the recently elected Margaret Thatcher) issued invitations to all parties to attend a peace conference at Lancaster House. These negotiations took place in London in late 1979. The three-month-long conference almost failed to reach conclusion, due to disagreements on land reform, but resulted in the Lancaster House Agreement. UDI ended, and Rhodesia temporarily reverted to the status of a British colony (the 'Colony of Southern Rhodesia'). As per the agreement, Lord Soames became governor with full legislative and executive powers.\nThe Lancaster House Agreement further provided for a ceasefire which was followed by an internationally supervised general election, held in February 1980. ZANU led by Robert Mugabe won this election, some alleged, by terrorising its political opposition, including supporters of ZAPU, through former insurgents that had not confined themselves to the designated guerrilla assembly points, as stipulated by the Lancaster House Agreement. The observers and Soames were accused of looking the other way, and Mugabe's victory was certified. Nevertheless, few could doubt that Mugabe's support within his majority Shona tribal group was extremely strong. The Rhodesian military seriously considered mounting a coup against a perceived stolen election (\"Operation Quartz\") to prevent ZANU from taking over the country. The alleged coup was to include the assassination of Mugabe and coordinated assaults on guerrilla assembly points throughout the country. The plan was eventually scuttled, as it was obvious that Mugabe enjoyed widespread support from the black majority despite voter intimidation, as well as the fact that the coup would gain no external support, and a conflagration which would engulf the country was seen as inevitable.\nRepublic of Zimbabwe (1980).\nOn 18 April 1980, the country became independent within the Commonwealth of Nations as the Republic of Zimbabwe, and its capital, Salisbury, was renamed Harare two years later.\nGeography.\nRhodesia is equivalent in territory to modern Zimbabwe. It was a landlocked country in southern Africa, lying between latitudes 15\u00b0 and 23\u00b0S, and longitudes 25\u00b0 and 34\u00b0E. It was bordered by South Africa to the south, the Bechuanaland Protectorate (later Botswana) to the west and southwest, Zambia to the northwest, and Mozambique to the east and northeast. Its northwest corner was roughly from South West Africa (present-day Namibia), South Africa, nearly forming a four-nation quadripoint. Most of the country was elevated, consisting of a central plateau (high veld) stretching from the southwest northwards with altitudes between . The country's extreme east was mountainous, this area being known as the Eastern Highlands, with Mount Inyangani as the highest point at .\nClimate.\nRhodesia had a tropical climate with many local variations. The southern areas were known for their heat and aridity, parts of the central plateau received frost in winter, the Zambezi valley was also known for its extreme heat and the Eastern Highlands usually experienced cool temperatures and the highest rainfall in the country. The country's rainy season was from late October to March and the hot climate was moderated by increasing altitude. The country was faced with recurring droughts, and severe storms were rare.\nBiodiversity.\nThe country was mostly savannah, although the moist and mountainous eastern highlands supported areas of tropical evergreen and hardwood forests. Trees found in these Eastern Highlands included teak, mahogany, enormous specimens of strangling fig, forest newtonia, big leaf, white stinkwood, chirinda stinkwood, knobthorn and many others.\nIn the low-lying parts of the country, fever trees, mopane, combretum and baobabs abound. Much of the country was covered by miombo woodland, dominated by brachystegia species and others. Among the numerous flowers and shrubs were hibiscus, flame lily, snake lily, spider lily, leonotus, cassia, tree wisteria and dombeya. There were around 350 species of mammals that can be found in Rhodesia. There were also many snakes and lizards, over 500 bird species, and 131 fish species.\nGovernment and politics.\nAlthough Southern Rhodesia never gained full Dominion status within the Commonwealth of Nations, Southern Rhodesians ruled themselves from the attainment of 'Responsible Government' in 1923. Its electoral register had property and education qualifications. Over the years various electoral arrangements made at a national and municipal level upheld these standards. For example, the franchise for the first Southern Rhodesian Legislative Council election in 1899 contained the following requirement:\nvoters to be British subjects, male, 21 years of age and older, able to write their address and occupation, and then to fulfil the following financial requirements: (a) ownership of a registered mining claim in Southern Rhodesia, or (b) occupying immovable property worth \u00a375, or (c) receiving wages or salary of \u00a350 per annum in Southern Rhodesia. Six months' continuous residence was also required for qualifications (b) and (c).\nFollowing Cecil Rhodes's dictum of \"equal rights for all civilised men\", there was an implicit, albeit not an overt, racial component to the franchise, which effectively excluded a majority of native black people from the electorate via such means as property qualifications.\nUp until the 1950s, Southern Rhodesia had a vibrant political life with right and left wing parties competing for power. The Rhodesian Labour Party held seats in the Assembly and in municipal councils throughout the 1920s and 1930s. From 1953 to 1958, the prime minister was Garfield Todd, a liberal who did much to promote the development of the black community through investment in education, housing and healthcare. However, the government forced Todd from office because his proposed reforms were seen by many whites as too radical.\nFrom 1958 onwards, white settler politics consolidated and ossified around resistance to majority rule, setting the stage for UDI. The 1961 Constitution governed Southern Rhodesia and independent Rhodesia up until 1969, using the Westminster Parliamentary System modified by a system of separate voter rolls with differing property and education qualifications, without regard to race. Whites ended up with the majority of Assembly seats with Whites attaining 50 out of 66 seats. Blacks would only attain 16 out of the 66 seats in the Rhodesian Parliament.\nThe 1969 republican constitution established a bicameral Parliament consisting of an indirectly elected Senate and a directly elected House of Assembly, effectively reserving the majority of seats for whites. The office of president had only ceremonial significance with the prime minister holding executive power.\nThe Constitution of the short-lived Zimbabwe Rhodesia, which saw a black-led government elected for the first time, reserved 28 of the 100 parliamentary seats for whites. The independence constitution agreed at Lancaster House watered those provisions down and reserved 20 out of 100 seats for whites in the House of Assembly and 8 out of 40 seats in the Senate. The constitution prohibited Zimbabwe authorities from altering the Constitution for seven years without unanimous consent and required a three-quarters vote in Parliament for a further three years. The government amended the Constitution in 1987 to abolish the seats reserved for whites, and replace the office of prime minister with an executive president. In 1990, the government abolished the Senate.\nAdministrative divisions.\nRhodesia had a centralised government and was divided into seven provinces and two cities with provincial status, for administrative purposes. Each province had a provincial capital from where government administration was usually carried out.\nMilitary.\nSouthern Rhodesia had long been distinctive among British dependencies in that it had financed and developed its own security forces and command structure. After UDI, this posed a particular dilemma for the British government, which considered and rejected various proposals aimed at ending Rhodesia's state of rebellion by force. Harold Wilson once remarked that bringing an end to Rhodesian independence \"would not be a case of arresting a subversive individual. It would mean a bloody war, and probably a bloody war turning into a bloody civil war.\" The formidable nature of the Rhodesian security forces, as well as British fears of a direct South African intervention on behalf of the rogue colony, preempted the further consideration of military options.\nFor much of its existence, Rhodesia maintained a small professional standing army of 3,400 troops, about a third of whom were black volunteers. In the tradition of many colonial armies, it was primarily organised into light infantry battalions trained and equipped for counter-insurgency warfare or internal security actions, and possessed little artillery or armour. The Royal Rhodesian Air Force (RRAF) had 1,000 personnel and six squadrons of aircraft, including forty to fifty Hawker Hunter and de Havilland Vampire strike aircraft and English Electric Canberra light bombers. It also possessed a helicopter squadron, a transport squadron, and a light reconnaissance squadron. The Rhodesian military was backed by the British South Africa Police (BSAP), a well-equipped police force whose title was derived from the law enforcement division of the British South Africa Company. The BSAP had armoured vehicles of its own and a potent paramilitary capability. Domestic and external intelligence gathering were vested in the Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO).\nAs a result of the escalating rural insurgency, the Rhodesian Security Forces began to depend more heavily on white conscripts and reservists of the Territorial Force and Territorial reserves. Regular units remained small throughout the Rhodesian Bush War but became increasingly specialised and were often able to have an effect utterly disproportionate to their size. The security forces included a disproportionate number of personnel who had seen action during the First Malayan Emergency as well as the Aden Emergency, and their experience gave Rhodesia's defence establishment a solid grounding in counter-insurgency warfare and small unit tactics in particular. Nevertheless, the vastness of the operational area and Rhodesia's limited manpower pool left the army, air force, and BSAP constantly overstretched. Budgetary and resource restraints, coupled with manpower shortages, meant the security forces could not expand quickly enough to match the guerrilla movements, and were almost always outnumbered. Rhodesian units compensated for their disadvantage in this regard by pursuing an aggressive preemptive and counterstrike strategy, raiding neighbouring states to destroy guerrilla forces in their external sanctuaries.\nAll white, male residents aged eighteen to twenty-three were obligated to fulfill four and a half months (later extended to nine months) of full-time national service. This was followed by a three-year reservist obligation. By 1974, the national service intakes had been doubled, and white men over twenty-three were also conscripted. In 1978, the Rhodesian Army had about 14,000 white national servicemen, but continued manpower shortages forced it to recruit black volunteers in larger numbers and extend compulsory military service to all white males up to sixty years of age. By the end of the Rhodesian Bush War virtually all male white residents were either serving in the military or police in a full-time or part-time capacity. The size of the Rhodesian Army had swelled to about 20,000 personnel, and the BSAP to over 40,000, including reservists.\nBiological and chemical warfare.\nFrom 1975 to 1980, the Rhodesian government made several attempts to weaponise chemical and biological agents. Members of the security forces contaminated supplies before replacing them in guerrilla caches or planted them in rural stores to be stolen by the guerrillas during raids. They also poisoned water sources along known infiltration routes along the Rhodesian border, forcing their opponents to travel through more arid regions or carry more water during their treks.\nThe chemical agents most used in the Rhodesian chemical and biological warfare (CBW) programme were parathion (an organophosphate insecticide) and thallium (a heavy metal commonly found in rodenticide). The weapons the Rhodesians selected for use also included \"Vibrio cholerae\" (causative agent of cholera) and possibly \"Bacillus anthracis\" (causative agent of anthrax). They also looked at using \"Rickettsia prowazekii\" (causative agent of epidemic typhus), and \"Salmonella typhi\" (causative agent of typhoid fever), and toxins such as ricin and botulinum toxin.\nBiological agents, namely \"Vibrio cholerae\", had some impact on the fighting capability of ZANLA. Some former officers of the Rhodesian Security Forces alleged that anthrax was used covertly during the late 1970s, but this has been disputed. Use of \"anthracis\", ricin, or botulinum toxin was favoured during assassination attempts of prominent guerrilla commanders.\nEconomy.\nEconomically, Southern Rhodesia developed an economy that was narrowly based on the production of a few primary products, notably, chromium and tobacco. It was therefore vulnerable to the economic cycle. The deep recession of the 1930s gave way to a post-war boom. This boom prompted the immigration of about 200,000 whites between 1945 and 1970, taking the white population up to 307,000. A large number of these immigrants were of British working-class origin, with others coming from the Belgian Congo, Kenya, Tanzania, and later Angola and Mozambique. They established a relatively balanced economy, transforming what was once a primary producer dependent on backwoods farming into an modest industrial power which spawned a strong manufacturing sector, iron and steel industries, and modern mining ventures. These economic successes owed little to foreign aid apart from the immigration of skilled labour and backing from South Africa.\nThe economy of the state of Rhodesia sustained international sanctions for a decade following the declaration of its independence, a resistance which waned as more southern African states declared independence and majority rule as well as the destruction caused by the Rhodesian Bush War.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nA central feature of the white community in Rhodesia was its transience, as white settlers were just as likely to leave Rhodesia after a few years as permanently settle; for example, of the 700 Britons who were the first white settlers, arriving in 1890, only 15 were still living in Rhodesia in 1924. As the white population of Rhodesia had a low birth rate (18 per 1,000 compared to the African rate of 48 per 1,000), maintaining white population growth was largely dependent upon taking in new white immigrants with immigration accounting for 60% of the growth of the white Rhodesian population between 1955 and 1972.\nIn the ten years after the nation's declaration of independence from Britain, around 70,000 from the white population of Rhodesia emigrated from the nation. 45% of the emigration was to South Africa, as it was geographically adjacent and shared similarities in climate, topography, economic standards, and social customs. The remaining 55% chiefly headed to other mainly white, English-speaking nations at the time: the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand.\nHowever, the American historian Josiah Brownell noted that the turnover rate for white residents in Rhodesia was very high, as Rhodesia took in a total of 255,692 white immigrants between 1955 and 1979 while the same period a total of 246,583 whites emigrated. Even during the boom years of the late 1950s, when Rhodesia took in an average of 13,666 white immigrants per year, mostly from the United Kingdom and South Africa, an average of about 7,666 whites emigrated annually. Between 1961 and 1965, Rhodesia took in an average of 8,225 white immigrants per year while also having an average white emigration of 12,912 per year. Many prospective white immigrants in Rhodesia arrived seeking economic opportunities and departed with fluctuations in the security situation as the Bush War intensified. A substantial number were uninterested in settling there permanently and did not apply for Rhodesian citizenship, despite a much-publicised 1967 campaign urging them to do so.\nBrownell asserted that patriotism in the white community was \"shallow\" due to its essentially expatriate character. He also claimed that the majority of white immigrants in the late 1960s and early 1970s were unskilled laborers who competed with the country's black African workforce and did not contribute badly needed technical or professional skills to the country, arguing that this was due to government policy aimed at making white immigration as \"unselective as possible\" and guaranteeing every white immigrant a job. The population of Rhodesia boomed during the late 1960s due to immigration and an exceptional rate of natural increase among its black citizens, the highest in sub-Saharan Africa at the time.\nLanguage.\nWhite Rhodesians mostly spoke English, with a minority that spoke Afrikaans. Approximately 70% of black Rhodesians spoke Shona, and around 20% spoke Ndebele. A majority of Rhodesia's Indian community spoke Gujarati and a minority spoke Hindi.\nReligion.\nRhodesia predominantly adhered to Christianity, with Protestantism being the largest denomination. However, many native Africans still adhered to traditional African religions.\nForeign relations.\nThroughout the period of its Unilateral Declaration of Independence (1965 to 1979), Rhodesia pursued a foreign policy of attempting to secure recognition as an independent country, and insisting that its political system would include 'gradual steps to majority rule.' Ardently anti-communist, Rhodesia tried to present itself to the West as a front-line state against communist expansion in Africa, to little avail.\nRhodesia received little international recognition during its existence; recognition only occurred after elections in 1980 and a transition to majority rule.\nRhodesia wished to retain its economic prosperity and also feared communist elements in the rebel forces, and thus felt their policy of a gradual progression to black majority rule was justified. However, the international community refused to accept this rationale, believing that their policies were perpetuating racism. This attitude was part of the larger decolonisation context, during which Western powers such as the United Kingdom, France, and Belgium hastened to grant independence to their colonies in Africa.\nUnited Kingdom.\nRhodesia was originally a British colony. Although decolonisation in Africa had begun after World War II, it began accelerating in the early 1960s, causing Britain to negotiate independence rapidly with several of its colonies. During this period, it adopted a foreign policy called NIBMAR, or No Independence Before Majority African Rule, mandating democratic reforms that placed governance in the hands of the majority black Africans. The governing white minority of Rhodesia, led by Ian Smith, opposed the policy and its implications. On 11 November 1965, Rhodesia's minority white government made a unilateral declaration of independence (UDI) from the United Kingdom, as it became apparent that negotiations would not lead to independence under the white regime.\nThe United Kingdom government immediately brought in legislation (Southern Rhodesia Act 1965) which formally abolished all Rhodesian government institutions. This move made life difficult for Rhodesian citizens who wished to travel internationally as passports issued by Rhodesia's UDI administration were not recognised as valid; in January 1966, the British issued a statement accepting as valid any passport issued before the declaration of independence and allowing six-month United Kingdom passports to be granted when they expired \u2013 provided that the bearer declared they did not intend to aid the UDI Rhodesian government.\nDevelopments in Britain helped to alienate the white Rhodesian population from the former mother country, namely Queen Elizabeth II's 1966 speech to the Parliament of Jamaica where she endorsed majority rule and her attempt in 1968 to block the hanging of what Rhodesians perceived as Zimbabwean nationalist terrorists.\nUntil late 1969, Rhodesia still recognised Queen Elizabeth II as head of state, even though it opposed the British government itself for hindering its goals of independence. However she refused to accept the title \"Queen of Rhodesia\" and eventually the Smith government abandoned their attempts to remain loyal to the British Crown. In a 1969 referendum, a majority of the electorate voted to declare Rhodesia an independent republic. The hope being that this move would facilitate recognition as an independent state by the international community, but the issue of white minority rule remained and continued to hinder this effort, and like the UDI before it, the proclamation of a republic lacked international recognition.\nThe British public overall viewed the issue of Rhodesia and UDI as a distant and anachronistic one that they cared relatively little about and saw any expedient response to it by their government as satisfactory. Most Britons saw the end of Rhodesia's white supremacist timocracy as inevitable and justified. Although the majority Britons opposed military intervention against the renegade Rhodesian state, this opinion was not uniformly held.\nSanctions.\nAfter the declaration of independence, and indeed for the entire duration of its existence, Rhodesia did not receive official recognition from any state, although it did maintain diplomatic relations with South Africa, which was then under apartheid. South Africa did not recognise Rhodesia to preserve its fragile positions with other nations, but frequently assisted the Rhodesian state. Portugal maintained informal relations until the Carnation Revolution of 1974. The day following the declaration of independence, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution (S/RES/216) calling upon all states not to accord Rhodesia recognition, and to refrain from any assistance. The Security Council also imposed selective mandatory economic sanctions, which were later made comprehensive.\nThe US, despite voting in favour of the sanctions at the UNSC, violated them to buy chromium ore from Rhodesia. Kenneth Kaunda, president of Zambia, also accused western oil companies of violating the sanctions and selling oil to Rhodesia.\nInternational perspective.\nRhodesia's Unilateral Declaration of Independence from the United Kingdom on 11 November 1965 was promptly condemned by the international community. The United Nations Security Council Resolution 216 of 12 November 1965 called \"upon all States not to recognise this illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia.\"\nRhodesia campaigned for international acceptance and invoked the doctrine of non-intervention in internal affairs as justification for rebuking external criticism of its internal policies. However, the emerging doctrine of self-determination in colonial situations meant that most nations regarded Rhodesia's self-declared independence as illegitimate.\nZambia, formerly Northern Rhodesia, took a pragmatic approach towards Rhodesia. Kenneth Kaunda, heavily dependent on access through Rhodesia for his nation's copper ore exports, fuel, and power imports unofficially worked with the Rhodesian government. Rhodesia still allowed Zambia to export and import its goods through its territory to Mozambique ports, despite the Zambian government's official policy of hostility and non-recognition of the post-UDI Smith Administration.\nThe United States, like all other Western nations, refused to recognise Rhodesia, but unlike others allowed its Consulate-General to function as a communications conduit between the US government in Washington, DC and the Rhodesian government in Salisbury. When Rhodesia set up the Rhodesian Information Office in Washington, DC, OAS nations loudly protested. The US government responded by saying the Rhodesian mission and its staff had no official diplomatic status and violated no US laws.\nPortugal pursued a middle path with Rhodesia. While not officially recognising Rhodesia under Ian Smith, the government of Ant\u00f3nio Salazar did permit Rhodesia to establish a representative mission in Lisbon, and permitted Rhodesian exports and imports through their colony of Mozambique. The Portuguese government in power at that time, authoritarian and ardently anti-communist, gave active behind-the-scenes support in Rhodesia's fight against the guerrilla groups.\nSouth Africa, itself under international pressure as a white minority government, pursued a policy of d\u00e9tente with the black African states at the time. These states wanted South Africa to pressure Ian Smith to accept a faster transition to majority rule in Rhodesia, in return for pledges of non-interference in South Africa's internal affairs. Prime Minister John Vorster, believing majority rule in Rhodesia would lead to international acceptance for South Africa, used a number of tactics to pressure Smith. The South African government held up shipments of fuel and ammunition and pulled out friendly South African forces from Rhodesia. The combined loss of Mozambique and the loss of support from South Africa dealt critical blows to the Rhodesian government.\nDiplomatic relations.\nAfter the UDI, Rhodesia maintained several overseas missions, including Pretoria, and until 1975, Lisbon in Portugal and Louren\u00e7o Marques (now Maputo) in Mozambique.\nSince 1961, Rhodesia had an \"Accredited Diplomatic Representative\" with South Africa, heading a \"Rhodesian Diplomatic Mission\" or \"de facto\" embassy. Before South Africa left the Commonwealth that year, the then Southern Rhodesia had exchanged High Commissioners with the then Union of South Africa, but following the change in status, the Republic now had a \"South African Diplomatic Mission\" in Salisbury.\nDuring 1965, the government of Rhodesia made moves to establish a mission in Lisbon separate from the British Embassy, with its own accredited representative, having previously been able to establish its own consulate in Louren\u00e7o Marques, capital of Portuguese Mozambique. This prompted protests from the British government, which was determined that the representative, Harry Reedman, should be a nominal member of the British Ambassador's staff. For their part, the Portuguese authorities sought a compromise whereby they would accept Reedman as an independent representative but deny him diplomatic status.\nThe Rhodesian Information Office in Washington remained open following UDI, but its director, Ken Towsey, and his staff were deprived of their diplomatic status. Previously, there had been a \"Minister for Rhodesian Affairs\" operating under the aegis of the British Embassy in Washington, as well representatives in Tokyo and Bonn. Following the country's independence as Zimbabwe, Towsey became charg\u00e9 d'affaires at the new embassy.\nThe High Commission in London, known as Rhodesia House, continued to function until it was closed in 1969 following the decision by white Rhodesians in a referendum to make the country a republic, along with the \"British Residual Mission\" in Salisbury. Prior to its closure, the mission flew the newly adopted Flag of Rhodesia, considered illegal by the Foreign Office, prompting calls by Labour MP Willie Hamilton for its removal.\nIn Australia, the federal government sought to close the Rhodesia Information Centre in Sydney, but it remained open, operating under the jurisdiction of the state of New South Wales. In 1973, the Labor government of Gough Whitlam cut post and telephone links to the centre, but this was ruled illegal by the High Court. An office was also established in Paris, but this was closed down by the French government in 1977.\nSimilarly, the United States recalled its consul-general from Salisbury, and reduced consular staff, but did not move to close its consulate until the declaration of a republic in 1970. South Africa, however, retained its \"Accredited Diplomatic Representative\" after UDI, which allowed it to continue to recognise British sovereignty as well as to deal with the \"de facto\" authority of the government of Ian Smith.\nThe South African Diplomatic Mission in Salisbury became the only such mission remaining in the country after 1975, when Portugal downgraded its mission to consul level, having recalled its consul-general in Salisbury in May 1970. After Zimbabwe's independence, the new government closed its missions in Pretoria and Cape Town, only maintaining a trade mission in Johannesburg, while the South African Diplomatic Mission in Salisbury was also closed.\nResults.\nThe growing intensity of the civil war and a lack of international support eventually led the Rhodesian government to submit to an agreement with the UK in 1979. This led to internationally supervised elections, won by Zimbabwe African National Union \u2013 Patriotic Front and Robert Mugabe, establishing the internationally recognised Zimbabwe.\nCulture.\nMedia.\nThe most influential newspapers in the country were the \"Rhodesia Herald\" in Salisbury and \"The Chronicle\" in Bulawayo. Following UDI, in 1976, the state-run Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation (RBC) took over the privately owned Rhodesia Television (RTV) service, in which it had previously acquired a 51 percent stake.\nAmong the news magazines published in Rhodesia under UDI were the \"Illustrated Life Rhodesia\", while \"The Valiant Years\" by Beryl Salt told the history of Rhodesia from 1890 to 1978 entirely through the medium of facsimile reproduction of articles and headlines from Rhodesian newspapers.\nSports.\nAs Rhodesia was a former colony of the United Kingdom, all of the sports that were born in the United Kingdom enjoyed considerable popularity in Rhodesia; especially cricket, rugby, water polo, football, netball, golf, tennis (including the Rhodesian Open Tennis Championships), lawn bowls, field hockey, etc. Just like neighbouring South Africa, Rhodesia was barred from both competing against and participating with Commonwealth member countries. \nOne of the biggest triumphs in Rhodesia sports history was when the team defeated the New Zealand national rugby team 10-8 while the All Blacks were touring South Africa. They are 1 of 8 nations to ever defeat the All Blacks and the only non-test nation to have ever beaten them. As this was the only game the two nations ever played they also have the unique honour of having a 100% win record against the All Blacks.\nLegacy.\nIn the ten years after transforming into Zimbabwe, around 60% of the white population emigrated, most to South Africa and to other mainly white, English-speaking countries where they formed immigrant communities. Politically within Zimbabwe, the consolidation of power by Robert Mugabe continued through the 1980s. Following amendments to the country's constitution in 1987, parliamentary seats reserved for whites were abolished, and an executive presidency was created, held by Mugabe. Many immigrants and some of the whites who stayed in Zimbabwe became deeply nostalgic for Rhodesia. These individuals are known as \"Rhodies\". Native whites who are more accepting of the new order are known as \"Zimbos\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
