{"id": "24897", "revid": "42076370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24897", "title": "Persuasion", "text": "Umbrella term of influence and mode of communication\nPersuasion or persuasion arts is an umbrella term for influence. Persuasion can influence a person's beliefs, attitudes, intentions, motivations, or behaviours.\nPersuasion is studied in many disciplines. Rhetoric studies modes of persuasion in speech and writing and is often taught as a classical subject. Psychology looks at persuasion through the lens of individual behaviour and neuroscience studies the brain activity associated with this behaviour. History and political science are interested in the role of propaganda in shaping historical events. In business, persuasion is aimed at influencing a person's (or group's) attitude or behaviour towards some event, idea, object, or another person (s) by using written, spoken, or visual methods to convey information, feelings, or reasoning, or a combination thereof. Persuasion is also often used to pursue personal gain, such as election campaigning, giving a sales pitch, or in trial advocacy. Persuasion can also be interpreted as using personal or positional resources to change people.\nForms.\nPropaganda is a form of persuasion used to indoctrinate a population towards an individual or a particular agenda.\nCoercion is a form of persuasion that uses aggressive threats and the provocation of fear and/or shame to influence a person's behavior.\nSystematic persuasion is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to logic and reason.\nHeuristic persuasion, on the other hand, is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to habit or emotion.\nHistory and philosophy.\nThe academic study of persuasion began with the Greeks, who emphasized rhetoric and elocution as the highest standard for a successful politician. All trials were held in front of the Assembly, and the likelihood of success of the prosecution versus the defense rested on the persuasiveness of the speaker. Rhetoric is the art of effective persuasive speaking, often through the use of figures of speech, metaphors, and other techniques.\nThe Greek philosopher Aristotle listed four reasons why one should learn the art of persuasion:\nHe described three fundamental ways to communicate persuasively:\nEthics of persuasion.\nMany philosophers have commented on the morality of persuasion. Socrates argued that rhetoric was based on appearances rather than the essence of a matter. Thomas Hobbes was critical of use rhetoric to create controversy, particularly the use of metaphor. Immanuel Kant was critical of rhetoric, arguing that it could cause people to reach conclusions that are at odds with those that they would have reached if they had applied their full judgment. He draws parallels between the function of rhetoric and the deterministic function of the mind like a machine.\nAristotle was critical of persuasion, though argued that judges would often allow themselves to be persuaded by choosing to apply emotions rather than reason. However, he argued that persuasion could be used to induce an individual to apply reason and judgment.\nWriters such as William Keith and Christian O. Lundberg argue that uses of force and threats in trying to influence others does not lead to persuasion, but rather talking to people does, going further to add \"While Rhetoric certainly has its dark side that deals in tricks and perceptions... the systematic study of rhetoric generally ignores these techniques, in part because they are \"not\" very systematic or reliable.\" There is also in legal disputes, the matter of the burden of proof when bringing up an argument, where it often falls on the hands of the one presenting a case to prove its validity to another person and where presumptions may be made where of the burden of proof has not been met, an argument may be dropped such as in a more famous example of \"Innocent until proven guilty\", although this line of presumption or burden of proof may not always be followed. While Keith and Lundberg do go into detail about the different intricacies of persuasion, they do explain that lapses in logic and or reasoning could lead to persuasive arguments with faults. These faults can come as enthymemes, where more likely than not only certain audiences with specific pieces of knowledge may understand the reasoning being presented with missing logic, or the more egregious example of fallacies where conclusions may be drawn (almost always incorrectly) through invalid argument. In contrast to the reasoning behind enthymemes, the use of examples can help prove a person's rhetorical claims through inductive reasoning, which assumes that \"if something is true in specific cases, it is true in general\".\nExamples can be split into two categories real and hypothetical. Real examples come from personal experience or academic/scientific research which can support the argument you're making. Hypothetical examples are made-up. When arguing something, speakers can put forward a hypothetical situation that illustrates the point they are making to connect better with the audience. These examples must be plausible to properly illustrate a persuasive argument.\nTheories.\nThere are many psychological theories for what influences an individual's behaviour in different situations. These theories will have implications about how persuasion works.\nAttribution theory.\nHumans attempt to explain the actions of others through either dispositional attribution or situational attribution.\nDispositional attribution, also referred to as internal attribution, attempts to point to a person's traits, abilities, motives, or dispositions as a cause or explanation for their actions. A citizen criticizing a president by saying the nation is lacking economic progress and health because the president is either lazy or lacking in economic intuition is utilizing a dispositional attribution.\nSituational attribution, also referred to as external attribution, attempts to point to the context around the person and factors of his surroundings, particularly things that are completely out of his control. A citizen claiming that a lack of economic progress is not a fault of the president but rather the fact that he inherited a poor economy from the previous president is situational attribution.\nA fundamental attribution error occurs when people wrongly attribute either a shortcoming or accomplishment to internal factors while disregarding all external factors. In general, people use dispositional attribution more often than situational attribution when trying to explain or understand the behavior of others. This happens because we focus more on the individual when we lack information about that individual's situation and context. When trying to persuade others to like us or another person, we tend to explain positive behaviors and accomplishments with dispositional attribution and negative behaviors and shortcomings with situational attributions.\nBehaviour change theories.\nThe Theory of Planned Behavior is the foremost theory of behaviour change. It has support from meta-analyses which reveals it can predict around 30% of behaviour. Theories, by nature however, prioritize internal validity, over external validity. They are coherent and therefore make for an easily reappropriated story. On the other hand, they will correspond more poorly with the evidence, and mechanics of reality, than a straightforward itemization of the behaviour change interventions (techniques) by their individual efficacy. \nThese behaviour change interventions have been categorized by behavioral scientists. A mutually exclusive, comprehensively exhaustive (MECE) translation of this taxonomy, in decreasing order of effectiveness are:\nA typical instantiations of these techniques in therapy isexposure / response prevention for OCD.\nConditioning theories.\nConditioning plays a huge part in the concept of persuasion. It is more often about leading someone into taking certain actions of their own, rather than giving direct commands. In advertisements for example, this is done by attempting to connect a positive emotion to a brand/product logo. This is often done by creating commercials that make people laugh, using a sexual undertone, inserting uplifting images and/or music etc. and then ending the commercial with a brand/product logo. Great examples of this are professional athletes. They are paid to connect themselves to things that can be directly related to their roles; sport shoes, tennis rackets, golf balls, or completely irrelevant things like soft drinks, popcorn poppers and panty hose. The important thing for the advertiser is to establish a connection to the consumer.\nThis conditioning is thought to affect how people view certain products, knowing that most purchases are made on the basis of emotion. Just like you sometimes recall a memory from a certain smell or sound, the objective of some ads is solely to bring back certain emotions when you see their logo in your local store. The hope is that repeating the message several times makes consumers more likely to purchase the product because they already connect it with a good emotion and positive experience.\nStefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow did a comprehensive study on the effects of persuasion in different domains. They discovered that persuasion has little or no effect on advertisement; however, there was a substantial effect of persuasion on voting if there was face-to-face contact.\nCognitive dissonance theory.\nLeon Festinger originally proposed the theory of cognitive dissonance in 1957. He theorized that human beings constantly strive for mental consistency. Our cognition (thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes) can be in agreement, unrelated, or in disagreement with each other. Our cognition can also be in agreement or disagreement with our behaviors. When we detect conflicting cognition, or dissonance, it gives us a sense of incompleteness and discomfort. For example, a person who is addicted to smoking cigarettes but also suspects it could be detrimental to their health suffers from cognitive dissonance.\nFestinger suggests that we are motivated to reduce this dissonance until our cognition is in harmony with itself. We strive for mental consistency. There are four main ways we go about reducing or eliminating our dissonance:\nRevisiting the example of the smoker, they can either quit smoking, reduce the importance of their health, convince themself they are not at risk, or decide that the reward of smoking is worth the cost of their health.\nCognitive dissonance is powerful when it relates to competition and self-concept. The most famous example of how cognitive dissonance can be used for persuasion comes from Festinger and Carlsmith's 1959 experiment in which participants were asked to complete a very dull task for an hour. Some were paid $20, while others were paid $1, and afterwards they were instructed to tell the next waiting participants that the experiment was fun and exciting. Those who were paid $1 were much more likely to convince the next participants that the experiment really was enjoyable than those who received $20. This is because $20 is enough reason to participate in a dull task for an hour, so there is no dissonance. Those who received $1 experienced great dissonance, so they had to truly convince themselves that the task actually was enjoyable to avoid feeling taken advantage of, and therefore reduce their dissonance.\nElaboration likelihood model.\nPersuasion has traditionally been associated with two routes:\nThe Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) forms a new facet of the route theory. It holds that the probability of effective persuasion depends on how successful the communication is at bringing to mind a relevant mental representation, which is the elaboration likelihood. Thus if the target of the communication is personally relevant, this increases the elaboration likelihood of the intended outcome and would be more persuasive if it were through the central route. Communication which does not require careful thought would be better suited to the peripheral route.\nFunctional theories.\nFunctional theorists attempt to understand the divergent attitudes individuals have towards people, objects or issues in different situations. There are four main functional attitudes:\nWhen communication targets an underlying function, its degree of persuasiveness influences whether individuals change their attitude after determining that another attitude would more effectively fulfill that function.\nInoculation theory.\nA vaccine introduces a weak form of a virus that can easily be defeated to prepare the immune system should it need to fight off a stronger form of the same virus. In much the same way, the theory of inoculation suggests that a certain party can introduce a weak form of an argument that is easily thwarted in order to make the audience inclined to disregard a stronger, full-fledged form of that argument from an opposing party.\nThis often occurs in negative advertisements and comparative advertisements\u2014both for products and political causes. An example would be a manufacturer of a product displaying an ad that refutes one particular claim made about a rival's product, so that when the audience sees an ad for said rival product, they refute the product claims automatically.\nNarrative transportation theory.\nNarrative transportation theory proposes that when people lose themselves in a story, their attitudes and intentions change to reflect that story. The mental state of narrative transportation can explain the persuasive effect of stories on people, who may experience narrative transportation when certain contextual and personal preconditions are met, as Green and Brock postulate for the transportation-imagery model. Narrative transportation occurs whenever the story receiver experiences a feeling of entering a world evoked by the narrative because of empathy for the story characters and imagination of the story plot.\nSocial judgment theory.\nSocial judgment theory suggests that when people are presented with an idea or any kind of persuasive proposal, their natural reaction is to immediately seek a way to sort the information subconsciously and react to it. We evaluate the information and compare it with the attitude we already have, which is called the initial attitude or anchor point.\nWhen trying to sort incoming persuasive information, an audience evaluates whether it lands in their latitude of acceptance, latitude of non-commitment or indifference, or the latitude of rejection. The size of these latitudes varies from topic to topic. Our \"ego-involvement\" generally plays one of the largest roles in determining the size of these latitudes. When a topic is closely connected to how we define and perceive ourselves, or deals with anything we care passionately about, our latitudes of acceptance and non-commitment are likely to be much smaller and our attitude of rejection much larger. A person's anchor point is considered to be the center of their latitude of acceptance, the position that is most acceptable to them.\nAn audience is likely to distort incoming information to fit into their unique latitudes. If something falls within the latitude of acceptance, the subject tends to assimilate the information and consider it closer to his anchor point than it really is. Inversely, if something falls within the latitude of rejection, the subject tends to contrast the information and convince themself the information is farther away from their anchor point than it really is.\nWhen trying to persuade an individual target or an entire audience, it is vital to first learn the average latitudes of acceptance, non-commitment, and rejection of your audience. It is ideal to use persuasive information that lands near the boundary of the latitude of acceptance if the goal is to change the audience's anchor point. Repeatedly suggesting ideas on the fringe of the acceptance latitude makes people gradually adjust their anchor points, while suggesting ideas in the rejection latitude or even the non-commitment latitude does not change the audience's anchor point.\nMethods.\nPersuasion methods are also sometimes referred to as \"persuasion tactics\" or \"persuasion strategies\".\nUse of force.\nThere is the use of force in persuasion, which does not have any scientific theories, except for its use to make demands. The use of force is then a precedent to the failure of less direct means of persuasion. Application of this strategy can be interpreted as a threat since the persuader does not give options to their request.\nCialdini's influence cues.\nRobert Cialdini, in \"\", his 2001 publication on persuasion, identified six \"influence cues or weapons of influence\":\nThe principle of reciprocity states that when a person provides us with something, we attempt to repay them in kind. Reciprocation produces a sense of obligation, which can be a powerful tool in persuasion. The reciprocity rule is effective because it can be overpowering and instill in us a sense of obligation. Generally, we have a dislike for individuals who neglect to return a favor or provide payment when offered a free service or gift. As a result, reciprocation is a widely held principle. This societal standard makes reciprocity extremely powerful persuasive technique, as it can result in unequal exchanges and can even apply to an uninvited first favor. Reciprocity applies to the marketing field because of its use as a powerful persuasive technique. The marketing tactic of \"free samples\" demonstrates the reciprocity rule because of the sense of obligation that the rule produces. This sense of obligation comes from the desire to repay the marketer for the gift of a \"free sample\".\nConsistency is an important aspect of persuasion because it:\nConsistency allows us to more effectively make decisions and process information. The concept of consistency states that someone who commits to something, orally or in writing, is more likely to honor that commitment. This is especially true for written commitments, as they appear psychologically more concrete and can create hard proof. Someone who commits to a stance tends to behave according to that commitment. Commitment is an effective persuasive technique, because once you get someone to commit, they are more likely to engage in self-persuasion, providing themselves and others with reasons and justifications to support their commitment in order to avoid dissonance. Cialdini notes Chinese brainwashing of American prisoners of war in Korean War to rewrite their self-image and gain automatic unenforced compliance. Another example is children being made to repeat the Pledge of Allegiance each morning and why marketers make you close popups by saying \"I'll sign up later\" or \"No thanks, I prefer not making money\".\nSocial learning, also known as social proof, is a core principle among almost all forms of persuasion.\u00a0It is based on the idea of peer influence, and is considered essential for audience-centered approaches to persuasive messages. The principle of social proof suggests what people believe or do is typically learned by observing the norms of those around us.\u00a0People naturally conform their actions and beliefs to fit what society expects, as the rewards for doing so are usually greater than standing out.\n\"The power of the crowd\" is thought to be highly involved in the decisions we make. Social proof is often utilized by people in a situation that requires a decision be made. In uncertain or ambiguous situations, when multiple possibilities create choices we must make, people are likely to conform to what others do. We take cues from those around us as to what the appropriate behavior is in that moment. People often feel they will make fewer mistakes \"by acting in accord with social evidence than by behaving contrary to it.\"\nThis principle is simple and concise. People say \"yes\" to people that they like. Two major factors contribute to overall likeness. The first is physical attractiveness. People who are physically attractive seem more persuasive. They get what they want and they can easily change others' attitudes. This attractiveness is proven to send favorable messages/impressions of other traits that a person may have, such as talent, kindness, and intelligence. The second factor is similarity. People are more easily persuaded by others they deem as similar to themselves.\nPeople are more prone to believing those with authority. They have the tendency to believe that if an expert says something, it must be true. People are more likely to adhere to opinions of individuals who are knowledgeable and trustworthy. Although a message often stands or falls on the weight of its ideas and arguments, a person's attributes or implied authority can have a large effect on the success of their message.\nIn The True Believer, Eric Hoffer noted, \"People whose lives are barren and insecure seem to show a greater willingness to obey than people who are self-sufficient and self-confident. To the frustrated, freedom from responsibility is more attractive than freedom from restraint. . . . They willingly abdicate the directing of their lives to those who want to plan, command and shoulder all responsibility.\"\nIn the Milgram study, a series of experiments begun in 1961, a \"teacher\" and a \"learner\" were placed in two different rooms. The \"learner\" was attached to an electric harness that could administer shock. The \"teacher\" was told by a supervisor, dressed in a white scientist's coat, to ask the learner questions and punish him when he got a question wrong. The teacher was instructed by the study supervisor to deliver an electric shock from a panel under the teacher's control. After delivery, the teacher had to up the voltage to the next notch. The voltage went up to 450 volts. The catch to this experiment was that the teacher did not know that the learner was an actor faking the pain sounds he heard and was not actually being harmed. The experiment was being done to see how obedient we are to authority. \"When an authority tells ordinary people it is their job to deliver harm, how much suffering will each subject be willing to inflict on an entirely innocent other person if the instructions come 'from above'?.\" In this study, the results showed that the teachers were willing to give as much pain as was available to them. The conclusion was that people are willing to bring pain upon others when they are directed to do so by some authority figure.\nScarcity can play an important role in the process of persuasion. When something has limited availability, people assign it more value. As one of the six basic principles behind the science of persuasion, then, \"scarcity\" can be leveraged to convince people to buy into some suggestions, heed the advice or accept the business proposals. According to Robert Cialdini, Regents' Professor of Psychology and Marketing at Arizona State University and Distinguished Professor of Marketing in the W. P. Carey School, whatever is rare, uncommon or dwindling in availability \u2014 this idea of scarcity \u2014 confers value on objects, or even relationships.\nThere are two major reasons why the scarcity principle works:\nWhen this happens, people usually assign the scarce item or service more value simply because it is harder to acquire. This principle is that everyone wants things that are out of their reach. Something easily available is not that desirable as something very rare.\nLater, Cialdini added a seventh principle or cue, \"unity\", referring to a shared identity which embraces both the influencer and influencee.\nList of methods.\nBy appeal to reason:\nBy appeal to emotion:\nAids to persuasion:\nOther techniques:\nCoercive techniques, some of which are highly controversial or not scientifically proven effective:\nIn culture.\nIt is through a basic cultural personal definition of persuasion that everyday people understand how others are attempting to influence them and then how they influence others. The dialogue surrounding persuasion is constantly evolving because of the necessity to use persuasion in everyday life. Persuasion tactics traded in society have influences from researchers, which may sometimes be misinterpreted.\nTo keep evolutionary advantage, in the sense of wealth and survival, you must persuade and not be persuaded. To understand cultural persuasion, researchers gather knowledge from domains such as \"buying, selling, advertising, and shopping, as well as parenting and courting.\"\nMethods of persuasion vary by culture, both in prevalence and effectiveness. For example, advertisements tend to appeal to different values according to whether they are used in collectivistic or individualistic cultures.\nPersuasion Knowledge Model (PKM).\nThe Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM) was created by Friestad and Wright in 1994. This framework allows the researchers to analyze the process of gaining and using everyday persuasion knowledge. The researchers suggest the necessity of including \"the relationship and interplay between everyday folk knowledge and scientific knowledge on persuasion, advertising, selling, and marketing in general.\"\nTo educate the general population about research findings and new knowledge about persuasion, a teacher must draw on their pre-existing beliefs from folk persuasion to make the research relevant and informative to lay people, which creates \"mingling of their scientific insights and commonsense beliefs.\"\nAs a result of this constant mingling, the issue of persuasion expertise becomes messy. Expertise status can be interpreted from a variety of sources like job titles, celebrity, or published scholarship.\nIt is through this multimodal process that we create concepts like, \"Stay away from car salesmen, they will try to trick you.\" The kind of persuasion techniques blatantly employed by car salesmen creates an innate distrust of them in popular culture. According to Psychology Today, they employ tactics ranging from making personal life ties with the customer to altering reality by handing the customer the new car keys before the purchase.\nCampbell proposed and empirically demonstrated that some persuasive advertising approaches lead consumers to infer manipulative intent on the marketer's part. Once consumers infer manipulative intent, they are less persuaded by the marketer, as indicated by attenuated advertising attitudes, brand attitudes and purchase intentions. Campbell and Kirmani developed an explicit model of the conditions under which consumers use persuasion knowledge in evaluating influence agents such as salespersons.\nNeurobiology.\nAn article showed that EEG measures of anterior prefrontal asymmetry might be a predictor of persuasion. Research participants were presented with arguments that favored and arguments that opposed the attitudes they already held. Those whose brain was more active in left prefrontal areas said that they paid the most attention to statements with which they agreed while those with a more active right prefrontal area said that they paid attention to statements that disagreed. This is an example of defensive repression, the avoidance or forgetting of unpleasant information. Research has shown that the trait of defensive repression is related to relative left prefrontal activation. In addition, when pleasant or unpleasant words, probably analogous to agreement or disagreement, were seen incidental to the main task, an fMRI scan showed preferential left prefrontal activation to the pleasant words.\nOne way therefore to increase persuasion would seem to be to selectively activate the right prefrontal cortex. This is easily done by monaural stimulation to the contralateral ear. The effect apparently depends on selective attention rather than merely the source of stimulation. This manipulation had the expected outcome: more persuasion for messages coming from the left.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "24898", "revid": "16312513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24898", "title": "Prime Minister of Israel", "text": "Head of government of Israel\nThe prime minister of Israel (, Hebrew abbreviation: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e8\u05d4\u05f4\u05de\u200e; ) is the head of government and chief executive of the State of Israel.\nIsrael is a parliamentary republic with a president as the head of state. The president's powers are largely ceremonial, while the prime minister holds the executive power. The official residence of the prime minister, \"Beit Aghion,\" is in Jerusalem. The current prime minister is Benjamin Netanyahu of Likud, the ninth person to hold the position (excluding caretakers).\nFollowing an election, the president nominates a member of the Knesset to become prime minister after asking party leaders whom they support for the position. The first candidate the president nominates has 28 days to form a viable government that can command a majority in the Knesset. He then presents a government platform and must receive a vote of confidence from the Knesset to take office. In practice, the prime minister is usually the leader of the largest party in the governing coalition. Since it is all but impossible for one party to win a majority in the Knesset, all Israeli governments have been coalitions between two or more parties. Between 1996 and 2001, the prime minister was directly elected, separately from the Knesset.\nThe prime minister's position is greatly enhanced compared to his counterparts in other parliamentary republics because he is both \"de jure\" and \"de facto\" chief executive. This is because Basic Law: The Government explicitly vests executive power in the Government, of which the prime minister is the leader. In most other parliamentary republics, the president is at least nominal chief executive, while usually required by convention to act on the advice of the cabinet.\nHistory.\nThe office of Prime Minister came into existence on 14 May 1948, the date of the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel, when the provisional government was created. David Ben-Gurion, leader of Mapai and head of the Jewish Agency, became Israel's first prime minister. The position became permanent on 8 March 1949, when the first government was formed. Ben-Gurion retained his role until late 1953, when he resigned to settle in the Kibbutz of Sde Boker. He was replaced by Moshe Sharett. However, Ben-Gurion returned in a little under two years to reclaim his position. He resigned for a second time in 1963, breaking away from Mapai to form Rafi. Levi Eshkol took over as head of Mapai and prime minister. He became the first prime minister to head the country under the banner of two parties when Mapai formed the Alignment with Ahdut HaAvoda in 1965. In 1968 he also became the only party leader to command an absolute majority in the Knesset, after Mapam and Rafi merged into the Alignment, giving it 63 seats in the 120-seat Knesset.\nOn 26 February 1969, Eshkol became the first prime minister to die in office. He was temporarily replaced by Yigal Allon, whose stint lasted less than a month, as the party persuaded Golda Meir to return to political life and become prime minister in March 1969. Meir was Israel's first woman prime minister, and the third in the world (after Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Indira Gandhi).\nMeir resigned in 1974 after the Agranat Commission published its findings on the Yom Kippur War, even though it had absolved her of blame. Yitzhak Rabin took over, though he also resigned towards the end of the eighth Knesset's term following a series of scandals. Those included the suicide of Housing Minister Avraham Ofer after police began investigating allegations that he had used party funds illegally, and the affair involving Asher Yadlin (the governor-designate of the Bank of Israel), who was sentenced to five years in prison for having accepted bribes. Rabin's wife, Leah, was also found to have had an overseas bank account, which was illegal in Israel at the time.\nMenachem Begin became the first right-wing prime minister when his Likud won the 1977 elections, and retained the post in the 1981 elections. He resigned in 1983 for health reasons, passing the reins of power to Yitzhak Shamir.\nAfter the 1984 elections had proved inconclusive with neither the Alignment nor Likud able to form a government, a national unity government was formed with a rotating prime ministership \u2013 Shimon Peres took the first two years, and was replaced by Shamir midway through the Knesset term. Although the 1988 elections produced another national unity government, Shamir was able to take the role alone. Peres made an abortive bid to form a left-wing government in 1990, but failed, leaving Shamir in power until 1992. Rabin became prime minister for the second time when he led Labour to victory in the 1992 elections. After his assassination on 4 November 1995, Peres took over as prime minister.\nDirect election.\nDuring the thirteenth Knesset (1992\u20131996) it was decided to hold a separate ballot for prime minister modeled after American presidential elections. This system was instituted in part because the Israeli electoral system makes it all but impossible for one party to win a majority. While only two parties\u2014Mapai/Labour and Likud\u2014had ever led governments, the large number of parties or factions in a typical Knesset usually prevents one party from winning the 61 seats needed for a majority.\nIn 1996, when the first such election took place, the outcome was a surprise win for Benjamin Netanyahu after election polls predicted that Peres was the winner. However, in the Knesset election held at the same time, Labour won more votes than any other party (27%). Thus Netanyahu, despite his theoretical position of power, needed the support of the religious parties to form a viable government.\nUltimately Netanyahu failed to hold the government together, and early elections for both prime minister and the Knesset were called in 1999. Although five candidates intended to run, the three representing minor parties (Benny Begin of Herut \u2013 The National Movement, Azmi Bishara of Balad, and Yitzhak Mordechai of the Centre Party) dropped out before election day, and Ehud Barak beat Netanyahu in the election. However, the new system again appeared to have failed; although Barak's One Israel alliance (an alliance of Labour, Gesher, and Meimad) won more votes than any other party in the Knesset election, they garnered only 26 seats, the lowest ever by a winning party or alliance. Barak needed to form a coalition with six smaller parties to form a government.\nIn early 2001, Barak resigned following the outbreak of the al-Aqsa Intifada. However, the government was not brought down, and only elections for prime minister were necessary. In the election itself, Ariel Sharon of Likud comfortably beat Barak, taking 62.4% of the vote. However, because Likud only had 21 seats in the Knesset, Sharon had to form a national unity government. Following Sharon's victory, it was decided to do away with separate elections for prime minister and return to the previous system.\n2003 onwards.\nThe 2003 elections were carried out in the same manner as prior to 1996. Likud won 38 seats, the highest by a party for over a decade, and as party leader Sharon was duly appointed Prime Minister. However, towards the end of his term and largely as a result of the deep divisions within Likud over Israel's unilateral disengagement plan, Sharon broke away from his party to form Kadima, managing to maintain his position as prime minister and also becoming the first prime minister not to be a member of either Labour or Likud (or their predecessors). However, he suffered a stroke in January 2006, in the midst of election season, leading Ehud Olmert to become acting prime minister in the weeks leading to the elections. He was voted by the cabinet to be interim prime minister just after the 2006 elections, when Sharon had reached 100 days of incapacitation. He thus became Israel's third interim prime minister, only days before forming his own new government as the official Prime Minister of Israel.\nIn 2008, amid accusations of corruption and challenges from his own party, Olmert resigned. However, his successor Tzipi Livni was unable to form a coalition government. In the election in the following year, while Kadima won the most seats, it was the Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu who was given the task of forming a government. He was able to do so, thus beginning his second term as Prime Minister of Israel.\nIn the 2013 election, the Likud Yisrael Beiteinu alliance emerged as the largest faction. After forming a coalition, Netanyahu secured his third prime ministership. In 2015, Netanyahu managed to stay in power. Multiple disagreements with his coalition members led to the 2019\u20132022 Israeli political crisis.\nIn 2021, Naftali Bennett became prime minister. He was succeeded in July 2022 by his coalition partner, Yair Lapid. In December 2022, Benjamin Netanyahu returned to the prime ministership, as a result of the previous month's election.\nOrder of succession.\nIf the prime minister dies in office, the cabinet chooses an interim prime minister to run the government until a new government is placed in power. Yigal Allon served as interim prime minister following Levi Eshkol's death, as did Shimon Peres following the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin.\nAccording to Israeli law, if a prime minister is temporarily incapacitated rather than dies (as was the case following Ariel Sharon's stroke in early 2006), power is transferred to the acting prime minister, until the prime minister recovers (Ehud Olmert took over from Sharon), for up to 100 days. If the prime minister is declared permanently incapacitated, or that period expires, the president of Israel oversees the process of assembling a new governing coalition, and in the meantime the acting prime minister or other incumbent minister is appointed by the cabinet to serve as interim prime minister.\nIn the case of Sharon, elections were already due to occur within 100 days of the beginning of his coma; thus, the post-election coalition-building process pre-empted the emergency provisions for the selection of a new prime minister. Nevertheless, Olmert was appointed interim prime minister on 16 April 2006, after the elections, just days before he formed a government on 4 May 2006, becoming the official prime minister.\nActing, vice and deputy prime minister.\nAside from the position of Acting Prime Minister, there are also vice prime ministers and deputy prime ministers.\nInterim prime minister.\nThe interim prime minister (, \"Rosh HaMemshala Ba-foal\" lit. \"prime minister de facto\") is appointed by the government if the incumbent is dead or permanently incapacitated, or if his tenure was ended due to a criminal conviction.\nIsraeli law distinguishes the terms \"acting prime minister\" (\u05de\u05dc\u05d0 \u05de\u05e7\u05d5\u05dd \u05e8\u05d0\u05e9 \u05d4\u05de\u05de\u05e9\u05dc\u05d4), filling in for the incumbent prime minister, temporarily, and acting in the incumbent's office, while the incumbent is in office, and an \"interim prime minister\" in office. Only if the incumbent prime minister becomes \"temporarily incapacitated\" will the acting prime minister act in the incumbent's office and will be standing in for him for up to 100 consecutive days, while the incumbent is in office. Legally, the \"100 consecutive days\" limit, in the language of the law, only stipulates that the incumbent then is deemed to be \"permanently incapacitated\" and that the limited time for an acting prime minister to act in the incumbent's office is over.\nIn 2006, Ehud Olmert, after standing in for Prime Minister Sharon for 100 consecutive days, as acting prime minister, did not automatically assume office as an interim prime minister. The government voted to appoint him, and in addition, he was also a member of prime minister's party, which enabled them to appoint him to the role.\nShimon Peres was the foreign minister when Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated, and was voted unanimously to assume office as an interim prime minister until a new Government would be placed in power (that he later formed by himself). Yigal Allon was also voted to be the interim prime minister after Prime Minister Levi Eshkol suddenly died and served until Golda Meir formed her government.\nBoth the interim and acting prime ministers' authorities are identical to those of a prime minister, with the exception of not having the authority to dissolve the Knesset.\nInterim government.\nAn 'interim government' (, \"Memshelet Ma'avar\" lit. \"transitional government\") is the same government, having been changed in their legal status, after the death, resignation, permanent incapacitation, or criminal conviction of the prime minister, as well as after the prime minister's request to dissolve the Knesset (Israeli parliament) was published through the president's decree, or after it was defeated by a motion of no confidence (these actions are regarded by the law as \"the Government shall be deemed to have resigned\"), or after election and before the forming of a new government.\nPrime Minister's residence.\nSince 1974, the official residence of the prime minister is \"Beit Aghion\", at the corner of Balfour and Smolenskin streets in Rehavia, Jerusalem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24899", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24899", "title": "President of France", "text": "Head of state of France\nThe president of France, officially the president of the French Republic (, ) or president of the Republic (), is the executive head of state of France, and the commander-in-chief of the French Armed Forces. As the presidency is the supreme magistracy of the country, the position is the highest office in France. The powers, functions and duties of prior presidential offices, in addition to their relation with the prime minister and government of France, have over time differed with the various constitutional documents since the Second Republic.\nThe president of France is the co-prince of Andorra, grand master of the Legion of Honour and of the National Order of Merit, and protector of the Institut de France in Paris. The officeholder is also honorary proto-canon of the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome, although some have rejected the title in the past.\nThe current president is Emmanuel Macron, who succeeded Fran\u00e7ois Hollande on 14 May 2017 following the 2017 presidential election, and was inaugurated for a second term on 7 May 2022 following the 2022 presidential election.\nHistory.\nThe presidency of France was first publicly proposed during the July Revolution of 1830, when it was offered to the Marquis de Lafayette. He demurred in favour of Prince Louis Phillipe, who became King of the French.\nEighteen years later, during the opening phases of the Second Republic, the title was created for a popularly elected head of state, the first of whom was Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, nephew of Emperor Napoleon. Bonaparte served as president until he staged a self-coup against the republic, proclaiming himself Napoleon III, Emperor of the French.\nUnder the Third Republic the president was at first quite powerful, mainly because the royalist party was strong when the constitutional laws of 1875 were established, and it was hoped that a member of one of the two branches of the royal family would be able to serve as president and turn France into a constitutional monarchy. However, the next legislature was dominated by Republicans, and after President Patrice de MacMahon had unsuccessfully tried to obtain a new royalist majority by dissolving the , his successor Jules Gr\u00e9vy promised in 1879 that he would not use his presidential power of dissolution, and therefore lost his control over the legislature, effectively creating a parliamentary system that would be maintained for 80 years until the accession of Charles de Gaulle as president in 1959.\nIndeed, when the Fourth Republic was created, after the Second World War, it was a parliamentary system, in which the office of President of the Republic was a largely ceremonial one.\nThe Constitution of the Fifth Republic, adopted in 1958, greatly increased the president's powers. A 1962 referendum changed the constitution, so that the president would be directly elected by universal suffrage and not by the electoral college established in 1958. In 2000, a referendum shortened the presidential term from seven years () to five years (). A maximum of two consecutive terms was imposed after a 2008 constitutional reform.\nElection.\nTerm limits.\nSince the 1962 presidential referendum, the president has been directly elected by universal suffrage; previously, an electoral college decided the head of state. The length of the presidential term was reduced from seven years to five years following a 2000 referendum; the first election for a shorter term was held in 2002. Then-president Jacques Chirac was first elected in 1995 and again in 2002, and would have been able to run in 2007 had he chosen to, given the lack of term limits.\nFollowing a further change, the constitutional law of 2008 on the modernization of the institutions of the Fifth Republic, a president cannot serve more than two consecutive terms. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac were previously the only presidents to date who have served a full two terms (14 years for the former, 12 years for the latter). Incumbent Emmanuel Macron is the fourth president (after de Gaulle, Mitterrand, and Chirac) to win re-election, having done so in 2022.\nElectoral process.\nFrench presidential elections are conducted using run-off voting, which ensures that the elected president always obtains a majority: if no candidate receives a majority of votes in the first round of voting, the two highest-scoring candidates arrive at a run-off. After a new president is elected, they go through a solemn investiture ceremony called a (\"handing over of powers\").\nIn order to be admitted as an official candidate, potential candidates must receive signed nominations (known as , for \"sponsors\") from more than 500 elected local officials, mostly mayors. These officials must be from at least 30 or overseas collectivities, and no more than 10% of them should be from the same or collectivity. Furthermore, each official may nominate only one candidate.\nThere are exactly 45,543 elected officials, including 33,872 mayors. Spending and financing of campaigns and political parties are highly regulated. There is a cap on spending (at approximately \u20ac20\u00a0million) and government public financing of 50% of spending if the candidate scores more than 5%. If the candidate receives less than 5% of the vote, the government funds \u20ac8,000,000 to the party (\u20ac4,000,000 paid in advance). Advertising on TV is forbidden, but official time is given to candidates on public TV. An independent agency regulates election and party financing.\nPowers.\nThe French Fifth Republic is a semi-presidential system. Unlike most other European heads of state, the French president is quite powerful. Although the Prime Minister of France, through their government as well as Parliament, oversees much of the nation's actual day-to-day domestic affairs, the French president wields significant influence and authority, especially in the fields of national security and foreign policy. The president's greatest power is the ability to choose the prime minister. However, since it is the French National Assembly that has the sole power to dismiss the prime minister's government, the president is forced to name a prime minister who can command the support of a majority in the assembly. Since 2002, the legislative elections are held a few weeks after the presidential; a majority supporting the president's party or at the very least not opposing the president's choice is therefore very likely to be obtained. The president also has the duty of arbitrating the functioning of governmental authorities for efficient service, as the head of state of France.\nSince 2002, the mandate of the president and the Assembly are both five years, and the two elections are close to each other. Therefore, the likelihood of a is lower. Among the powers of the president:\nAll decisions of the president must be countersigned by the prime minister, except dissolving the National Assembly, choice of prime minister, and other dispositions referred to in Article 19.\nDetailed constitutional powers.\nThe constitutional attributions of the president are defined in Title II of the Constitution of France.\nArticle 5: The president of the republic shall see that the Constitution is observed. He shall ensure, by his arbitration, the proper functioning of the public authorities and the continuity of the State. He shall be the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity and observance of treaties.\nArticle 8: The president of the republic shall appoint the prime minister. He shall terminate the appointment of the prime minister when the latter tenders the resignation of the Government. On the proposal of the prime minister, he shall appoint the other members of the Government and terminate their appointments.\nArticle 9: The president of the republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers.\nArticle 10: The president of the republic shall promulgate acts of parliament within fifteen days following the final adoption of an act and its transmission to the Government. He may, before the expiry of this time limit, ask Parliament to reconsider the act or sections of the Act. Reconsideration shall not be refused. \"While the President has to sign all acts adopted by parliament into law, he cannot refuse to do so and exercise a kind of right of veto; his only power in that matter is to ask for a single reconsideration of the law by parliament and this power is subject to countersigning by the Prime minister.\"\nArticle 11: The president could submit laws to the people in a referendum with advice and consent of the cabinet.\nArticle 12: The president of the republic may, after consulting the prime minister and the presidents of the assemblies, declare the National Assembly dissolved. A general election shall take place not less than twenty days and not more than forty days after the dissolution. The National Assembly shall convene as of right on the second Thursday following its election. Should it so convene outside the period prescribed for the ordinary session, a session shall be called by right for a fifteen-day period. No further dissolution shall take place within a year following this election.\nArticle 13: The president of the republic shall sign the ordinances and decrees deliberated upon in the Council of Ministers. He shall make appointments to the civil and military posts of the State. [...]\nArticle 14: The president of the republic shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and envoys extraordinary shall be accredited to him.\nArticle 15: The president of the republic shall be commander-in-chief of the armed forces. He shall preside over the higher national defence councils and committees.\nArticle 16: Where the institutions of the republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory or the fulfilment of its international commitments are under serious and immediate threat, and where the proper functioning of the constitutional public authorities is interrupted, the president of the republic shall take the measures required by these circumstances, after formally consulting the prime minister, the presidents of the assemblies and the Constitutional Council. He shall inform the nation of these measures in a message. The measures must stem from the desire to provide the constitutional public authorities, in the shortest possible time, with the means to carry out their duties. The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures. Parliament shall convene as of right. The National Assembly shall not be dissolved during the exercise of the emergency powers.\n\"Article 16, allowing the president a limited form of rule by decree for a limited period of time in exceptional circumstance, has been used only once, by Charles de Gaulle during the Algerian War, from 23 April to 29 September 1961.\"\nArticle 17: The president of the republic has the right to grant pardon.\nArticle 18: The president of the republic shall communicate with the two assemblies of Parliament by means of messages, which he shall cause to be read and which shall not be the occasion for any debate. He can also give an address in front of the Congress of France in Versailles. Outside sessions, Parliament shall be convened especially for this purpose.\nArticle 19: Acts of the president of the republic, other than those provided for under articles 8 (first paragraph), 11, 12, 16, 18, 54, 56 and 61, shall be countersigned by the prime minister and, where required, by the appropriate ministers.\nPresidential amnesties.\nBefore the 2008 constitutional reform forbidding them, there was a tradition of so-called \"presidential amnesties\", which are something of a misnomer: after the election of a president, and of a National Assembly of the same party, parliament would traditionally vote a law granting amnesty for some petty crimes (it was also a way of reducing jail overpopulation). This practice had been increasingly criticized, particularly because it was believed to inspire people to commit traffic offences in the months preceding the election. Such an amnesty law would also authorize the president to designate individuals who have committed certain categories of crimes to be offered amnesty, if certain conditions are met. Such individual measures have been criticized for the political patronage that they allow. The difference between an amnesty and a presidential pardon is that the former clears all subsequent effects of the sentencing, as though the crime had not been committed, while pardon simply relieves the sentenced individual from part or all of the remainder of the sentence.\nCriminal responsibility and impeachment.\nArticles 67 and 68 organize the regime of criminal responsibility of the president. They were reformed by a 2007 constitutional act in order to clarify a situation that previously resulted in legal controversies. The president of the Republic enjoys immunity during their term: they cannot be requested to testify before any jurisdiction, they cannot be prosecuted, etc. However, the statute of limitations is suspended during their term, and enquiries and prosecutions can be restarted, at the latest one month after they leave office. The president is not deemed personally responsible for their actions in their official capacity, except where their actions are indicted before the International Criminal Court (France is a member of the ICC and the president is a French citizen as another following the Court's rules) or where impeachment is moved against them. Impeachment can be pronounced by the Republican High Court, a special court convened from both houses of Parliament on the proposal of either House, should the president have failed to discharge their duties in a way that evidently precludes the continuation of their term.\nSuccession and incapacity.\nUpon the death in office, removal, or resignation of the president, the Senate's president takes over as acting president. Alain Poher is the only person to have served in this temporary position, and has done so twice: the first time in 1969 after Charles de Gaulle's resignation and a second time in 1974 after Georges Pompidou's death while in office. In this situation, the president of the Senate does not have to resign from their position while acting as president.\nThe first round of a new presidential election must be organized no sooner than twenty days and no later than thirty-five days following the vacancy of the presidency. Fifteen days can separate the first and second rounds of a presidential election; this means that the president of the Senate can only act as President of the Republic for a maximum period of fifty days.\nDuring this interim period, acting presidents are not allowed to dismiss the national assembly, nor are they allowed to call for a referendum or initiate any constitutional changes. If there is no president of the Senate, the powers of the president of the republic are exercised by the , meaning the Cabinet. This has been interpreted by some constitutional academics as meaning first the prime minister and, if they are themselves not able to act, the members of the cabinet in the order of the list of the decree that nominated them. This is in fact unlikely to happen, because if the president of the Senate is not able to act, the Senate will normally name a new president of the Senate, who will act as President of the Republic.\nDuring the Third French Republic the president of the Council of Ministers acted as president whenever the office was vacant. According to article 7 of the Constitution, if the presidency becomes vacant for any reason, or if the president becomes incapacitated, upon the request of the , the Constitutional Council may rule, by a majority vote, that the presidency is to be temporarily assumed by the president of the Senate. If the Council rules that the incapacity is permanent, the same procedure as for the resignation is applied, as described above. If the president cannot attend meetings, including meetings of the Council of Ministers, they can ask the prime minister to attend in their stead (Constitution, article 21). This clause has been applied by presidents travelling abroad, ill, or undergoing surgery. During the Second French Republic, there was a vice president. The only person to ever hold the position was Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe.\nDeath in office.\nFour French presidents have died in office:\nPay and official residences.\nThe president of the Republic is paid a salary according to a pay grade defined in comparison to the pay grades of the most senior members of the French Civil Service (\"out of scale\", , those whose pay grades are known as letters and not as numeric indices). In addition they are paid a residence stipend of 3%, and a function stipend of 25% on top of the salary and residence indemnity. This gross salary and these indemnities are the same as those of the prime minister, and are 50% higher than the highest paid to other members of the government, which is itself defined as twice the average of the highest (pay grade G) and the lowest (pay grade A1) salaries in the \"out of scale\" pay grades. Using the 2008 \"out of scale\" pay grades,[ [update]] it amounts to a monthly pay of 20,963 euros, which fits the 19,000 euros quoted to the press in early 2008. Using the pay grades starting from 1 July 2009, this amounts to a gross monthly pay of \u20ac21,131. The salary and the residence stipend are taxable for income tax. The official residence and office of the president is the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace in Paris. Other presidential residences include:\nPension and benefits.\nAccording to French law, former presidents of the Republic have guaranteed lifetime pension defined according to the pay grade of the Councillors of State, a courtesy diplomatic passport, and, according to the French Constitution (Article 56), membership of the Constitutional Council. They also get personnel, an apartment or office, and other amenities though the legal basis for these is disputed. The current system for providing personnel and other amenities to the former French presidents was devised in 1981 by Michel Charasse, then advisor to President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, in order to care for former president Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing and the widow of former President Georges Pompidou. In 2008, according to an answer by the services of the prime minister to a question from Ren\u00e9 Dosi\u00e8re, a member of the National Assembly, the facilities comprised: a security detail, a car with a chauffeur, first class train tickets and an office or housing space, as well as two people who service the space. In addition, funds are available for seven permanent assistants. President Hollande announced a reform of the system in 2016. Former presidents of France will no longer receive a car with chauffeur and the personnel in their living space was cut as well. Additionally, the number of assistants available for their use has been reduced, but a state flat or house remains available for former officeholders. Train tickets are also available if the trip is justified by the office of the former officeholder as part of official business. The security personnel around former presidents of France remained unchanged.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24900", "revid": "50595967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24900", "title": "Plastic explosive", "text": "Type of explosive material\nPlastic explosive is a soft and hand-moldable solid form of explosive material. Within the field of explosives engineering, plastic explosives are also known as putty explosives.\nPlastic explosives are especially suited for explosive demolition. Common plastic explosives include Semtex and C-4. The first manufactured plastic explosive was gelignite in 1875, invented by Alfred Nobel.\nUsage.\nPlastic explosives are especially suited for explosive demolition of obstacles and fortifications by combat engineers as they can be easily formed into ideal shapes for cutting structural members and have a high enough velocity of detonation and density for metal cutting work.\nAn early use of plastic explosives was in the warhead of the Petard demolition mortar of the British Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers (AVRE) which was used to destroy concrete fortifications encountered during Operation Overlord (D-Day). The original use of Nobel 808 supplied by the SOE was for sabotage of German installations and railways in Occupied Europe. \nThey are generally not used for ordinary blasting as they tend to be significantly more expensive than other materials that perform just as well. A common commercial use of plastic explosives is for shock hardening high manganese percentage steel, a material typically used for train rail components and earth digging implements.\nReactive armor in tanks uses plastic explosives sandwiched between two plates of steel. Incoming high explosive shaped charge anti-tank rounds pierce the outer steel plate, then detonate the plastic explosive. This disrupts the energy from the incoming round and shields the tank.\nHistory.\nThe first plastic explosive was gelignite, invented by Alfred Nobel in 1875. Prior to World War I, the British explosives chemist Oswald Silberrad obtained British and U.S. patents for a series of plastic explosives called \"Nitrols\", composed of nitrated aromatics, collodion, and oxidising inorganic salts. The language of the patents indicate that at this time, Silberrad saw no need to explain to \"those versed in the art\" either what he meant by plasticity or why it may be advantageous, as he only explains why his plastic explosive is superior to others of that type.\nOne of the simplest plastic explosives was Nobel's Explosive No. 808, of the gelignite type, also known as \"Nobel 808\" (often just called \"Explosive 808\" in the British Armed Forces during the Second World War), developed by the British company Nobel Chemicals Ltd well before World War II. It had the appearance of green plasticine with a distinctive smell of almonds. During World War II it was extensively used by the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) at Aston House for sabotage missions. It is also the explosive used in HESH anti-tank shells and was an essential factor in the devising of the Gammon grenade. Captured SOE-supplied Nobel 808 was the explosive used in the failed 20 July plot assassination attempt on Adolf Hitler in 1944.\nDuring and after World War II a number of new RDX-based explosives were developed, including Compositions C, C2, and eventually C3. Together with RDX, these incorporate various plasticizers to decrease sensitivity and make the composition plastic. The origin of the obsolete term \"plastique\" dates back to the Nobel 808 explosive introduced to the U.S. by the British in 1940. The samples of explosive brought to the U.S. by the Tizard Mission had already been packaged by the SOE ready for dropping via parachute container to the French Resistance and were therefore labeled in French, as \"Explosif Plastique\". It is still referred to by this name in France and also by some Americans.\nTypes.\nComposition C.\nThe British used a plastic explosive during World War II as a demolition charge. The specific explosive, Composition C, was 88.3% RDX and 11.7% non-oily, non-explosive plasticizer. The material was plastic between , but was brittle at colder temperatures and gummy at higher temperatures. Composition C was superseded by Composition C2, which used a mixture of 80% RDX and 20% plasticizer. Composition C2 had a wider temperature range at which it remained plastic, from . Composition C2 was replaced by Composition C3, which was a mixture of 77% RDX and 23% explosive plasticizer. C3 was effective but proved to be too brittle in cold weather and was replaced with C4. There are three classes of C4, with varying amounts of RDX and polyisobutylene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24902", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24902", "title": "Post-structuralism", "text": "Philosophical school and tradition\nPost-structuralism is a philosophical movement that questions the objectivity or stability of the various interpretive structures that are posited by structuralism and considers them to be constituted by broader systems of power. Although different post-structuralists present different critiques of structuralism, common themes include the rejection of the self-sufficiency of structuralism, as well as an interrogation of the binary oppositions that constitute its structures. Accordingly, post-structuralism discards the idea of interpreting media (or the world) within pre-established, socially constructed structures.\n\"Structuralism\" proposes that human culture can be understood by means of a structure that is modeled on language. As a result, there is concrete reality on the one hand, abstract ideas about reality on the other hand, and a \"third order\" that mediates between the two. \nA post-structuralist response, then, might suggest that in order to build meaning out of such an interpretation, one must (falsely) assume that the definitions of these signs are both valid and fixed, and that the author employing structuralist theory is somehow above and apart from these structures they are describing so as to be able to wholly appreciate them. The rigidity and tendency to categorize intimations of universal truths found in structuralist thinking is a common target of post-structuralist thought, while also building upon structuralist conceptions of reality mediated by the interrelationship between signs.\nWriters whose works are often characterised as post-structuralist include Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, and Jean Baudrillard, although many theorists who have been called \"post-structuralist\" have rejected the label.\nHistory.\nPost-structuralism emerged in France during the 1960s as a movement critiquing structuralism. According to J.\u00a0G. Merquior, a love\u2013hate relationship with structuralism developed among many leading French thinkers in the 1960s. The period was marked by the rebellion of students and workers against the state in May 1968.\nIn a 1966 lecture titled \"Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences\", Jacques Derrida presented a thesis on an apparent rupture in intellectual life. Derrida interpreted this event as a \"decentering\" of the former intellectual cosmos. Instead of progress or divergence from an identified centre, Derrida described this \"event\" as a kind of \"play.\"\nA year later, in 1967, Roland Barthes published \"The Death of the Author\", in which he announced a metaphorical event: the \"death\" of the author as an authentic source of meaning for a given text. Barthes argued that any literary text has multiple meanings and that the author was not the prime source of the work's semantic content. The \"Death of the Author,\" Barthes maintained, was the \"Birth of the Reader,\" as the source of the proliferation of meanings of the text.\nBarthes and the need for metalanguage.\nIn \"Elements of Semiology\" (1967), Barthes advances the concept of the \"metalanguage\", a systematized way of talking about concepts like meaning and grammar beyond the constraints of a traditional (first-order) language; in a metalanguage, symbols replace words and phrases. Insofar as one metalanguage is required for one explanation of the first-order language, another may be required, so metalanguages may actually replace first-order languages. Barthes exposes how this structuralist system is regressive; orders of language rely upon a metalanguage by which it is explained, and therefore deconstruction itself is in danger of becoming a metalanguage, thus exposing all languages and discourse to scrutiny. Barthes' other works contributed deconstructive theories about texts.\nDerrida's lecture at Johns Hopkins.\nThe occasional designation of post-structuralism as a movement can be tied to the fact that mounting criticism of Structuralism became evident at approximately the same time that Structuralism became a topic of interest in universities in the United States. This interest led to a colloquium at Johns Hopkins University in 1966 titled \"The Languages of Criticism and the Sciences of Man\", to which such French philosophers as Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, and Jacques Lacan were invited to speak.\nDerrida's lecture at that conference, \"Structure, Sign, and Play in the Human Sciences\", was one of the earliest to propose some theoretical limitations to Structuralism, and to attempt to theorize on terms that were clearly no longer structuralist.\nThe element of \"play\" in the title of Derrida's essay is often erroneously interpreted in a linguistic sense, based on a general tendency towards puns and humour, while social constructionism as developed in the later work of Michel Foucault is said to create play in the sense of strategic agency by laying bare the levers of historical change.\nPost-structuralism and structuralism.\nStructuralism, as an intellectual movement in France in the 1950s and 1960s, studied underlying structures in cultural products (such as texts) and used analytical concepts from linguistics, psychology, anthropology, and other fields to interpret those structures. Structuralism posits the concept of binary opposition, in which frequently-used pairs of opposite-but-related words (concepts) are often arranged in a hierarchy; for example: Enlightenment/Romantic, male/female, speech/writing, rational/emotional, signified/signifier, symbolic/imaginary, and east/west.\nPost-structuralism rejects the structuralist notion that the dominant word in a pair is dependent on its subservient counterpart, and instead argues that founding knowledge on either pure experience (phenomenology) or on systematic structures (structuralism) is impossible, because history and culture actually condition the study of underlying structures, and these are subject to biases and misinterpretations. Gilles Deleuze and others saw this impossibility not as a failure or loss, but rather as a cause for \"celebration and liberation.\" A post-structuralist approach argues that to understand an object (a text, for example), one must study both the object itself and the systems of knowledge that produced the object. The uncertain boundaries between structuralism and post-structuralism become further blurred by the fact that scholars rarely label themselves as post-structuralists. Some scholars associated with structuralism, such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault, also became noteworthy in post-structuralism.\nAuthors.\nThe following are often said to be post-structuralists, or to have had a post-structuralist period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCriticism.\nSome observers from outside of the post-structuralist camp have questioned the rigour and legitimacy of the field. American philosopher John Searle\nsuggested in 1990: \"The spread of 'poststructuralist' literary theory is perhaps the best-known example of a silly but non-catastrophic phenomenon.\" Similarly, physicist Alan Sokal in 1997 criticized \"the postmodernist/poststructuralist gibberish that is now hegemonic in some sectors of the American academy.\"\nLiterature scholar Norman Holland in 1992 saw post-structuralism as flawed due to reliance on Saussure's linguistic model, which was seriously challenged by the 1950s and was soon abandoned by linguists:Saussure's views are not held, so far as I know, by modern linguists, only by literary critics and the occasional philosopher. [Strict adherence to Saussure] has elicited wrong film and literary theory on a grand scale. One can find dozens of books of literary theory bogged down in signifiers and signifieds, but only a handful that refers to Chomsky.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24903", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24903", "title": "Peace process", "text": "Diplomatic end to war\nA peace process is the set of sociopolitical negotiations, agreements and actions that aim to solve a specific armed conflict.\nDefinitions.\nPrior to an armed conflict occurring, peace processes can include the prevention of an intrastate or inter-state dispute from escalating into military conflict. The United Nations Department of Peace Operations (UNDPO) terms the prevention of disputes from escalating into armed conflicts as \"conflict prevention\". In 2007, the United Nations Secretary-General's Policy Committee classed both initial prevention of an armed conflict and prevention of the repeat of a solved conflict as peacebuilding.\nFor peace processes to resolve an armed conflict, Izumi Wakugawa, advisor to the Japan-based International Peace Cooperation Program, suggests a definition of a peace process as \"a mixture of politics, diplomacy, changing relationships, negotiation, mediation, and dialogue in both official and unofficial arenas\", which he attributes to Harold H. Saunders of the United States Institute of Peace (USIP). Wakugawa categorises these processes into two stages: the ceasing of armed conflict and the processes of sociological reorganisation.\nCeasing of armed conflict.\nNon-military processes for stopping an armed conflict stage are generally classed as peacemaking. Military methods by globally organised military forces of stopping a local armed conflict are typically classed as peace enforcement.\nReorganisation.\nThe prevention of the repeat of a solved conflict (as well as the preventing of an armed conflict from occurring at all) is usually classed as peacebuilding. UNDPO defines peacebuilding to include \"measures [that] address core issues that effect the functioning of society and the State\". The use of neutral military forces to sustain ceasefires during this phase, typically by United Nations peacekeeping forces, can be referred to as peacekeeping.\nOverlapping definitions.\nThe terms \"peacemaking\", \"peacekeeping\" and \"peacebuilding\" tend to be used broadly, with their meanings defined in terms of the phases of various peace process mechanisms blurring and overlapping in practice.\nInstitutions.\nThe construction of international institutions, especially during the twentieth century, has to a large degree been motivated by the desire to provide a broad global context of peacebuilding. That includes the League of Nations and the United Nations and regional institutions such as the European Union. Institutions involved in encouraging or overseeing some of the steps in specific peace processes include the United Nations Department of Peace Operations.\nElements: terminology.\nThe Peace Accords Matrix of the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the University of Notre Dame, United States, uses the term \"provisions\" to describe specific elements of peace processes in intrastate conflicts. This includes a list of 51 different elements, including amnesties; ceasefires; arms embargoes; releases of political prisoners; truth and reconciliation commissions; and reforms of the constitution, or of military, police, judicial or educational institutions or of the media.\nOther specific elements of peace processes include exchanges, confidence-building measures, humanitarian corridors, peace treaties and transitional justice.\nCriticism.\nEdward Luttwak argues that conventional wars should not be interrupted before they could burn themselves out and the preconditions for a long-lasting peace are established. Stable peace settlement is possible only with the exhaustion of belligerents or the decisive victory of one side. \"Hopes for military success must fade for accommodation to become more attractive than further combat,\" but premature ceasefires prevent belligerents from exhaustion and let them rearm their forces. That in turn prolongs war and leads to further killings and destruction.\nWomen's participation.\nAccording to Neville Melvin Gertze of Namibia, speaking at an October 2019 meeting of the United Nations Security Council, peace agreements that are the result of negotiations including women are 35 percent more likely to last at least 15 years than those which are the result of men-only negotiations. At the same meeting, United Nations Secretary-General Ant\u00f3nio Guterres stated that women were excluded from peace processes, attacks against women human rights defenders had increased, and only a \"tiny percentage\" of funding for peacebuilding was given to women's organisations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24905", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24905", "title": "Peyton Randolph", "text": "Founding Father of the United States (1721\u20131775)\nPeyton Randolph (September 10, 1721 \u2013 October 22, 1775) was an American politician and planter who was a Founding Father of the United States. Born into Virginia's wealthiest and most powerful family, Randolph served as speaker of Virginia's House of Burgesses, president of the first two Virginia Conventions, and president of the First Continental Congress. He also served briefly as the first president of the Second Continental Congress.\nIn 1774, Randolph signed the Continental Association, a trade boycott adopted by the First Continental Congress in response to the British Parliament's Intolerable Acts. Randolph was a first cousin once removed of Thomas Jefferson and was also related to John Marshall, the fourth Chief Justice of the United States, and Robert E. Lee, commander of the Confederate States Army in the American Civil War.\nEarly life and education.\nRandolph was born on September 10, 1721, in Tazewell Hall, his family's estate in Williamsburg, Virginia. His father was Sir John Randolph, and his brother was John Randolph. Peyton Randolph was 15 when his father died. He attended the College of William &amp; Mary and later studied law at Middle Temple at the Inns of Court in London, becoming a member of the bar in 1743.\nA lifelong resident of Williamsburg, the colony's capital, Randolph was to follow in the footsteps of his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, all of whom served as speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses.\nCareer.\nIn 1748, Randolph was appointed attorney general of the Colony of Virginia and the same year was elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, where he would serve for the remainder of his life. It was Randolph's dual roles as attorney general and as burgess that would lead to an extraordinary conflict of interest in 1751. Governor Robert Dinwiddie had imposed a fee for the certification of land patents, which the House of Burgesses strongly objected to. The House selected Randolph to represent their cause to Crown authorities in London. \nIn his role as attorney general, though, he was responsible for defending actions taken by the governor. Randolph left for London, over the objections of Governor Dinwiddie, and was replaced for a short time as attorney general by George Wythe. Randolph resumed his post on his return at the behest of Wythe as well as officials in London, who also recommended the governor drop the new fee.\nAmerican Revolution.\nIn 1765, Randolph found himself at odds with a freshman burgess, Patrick Henry, over the colony's response to the Stamp Act. The House appointed Randolph to draft objections to the act, but his more conservative plan was trumped when five of Henry's seven Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions passed. Henry's proposals were approved at a meeting of the House in which most of the members were absent and while Randolph was presiding in the absence of the speaker.\nRandolph resigned as king's attorney (attorney general) in 1766, as fellow Burgesses elected him as their speaker upon the death of his relative, the powerful Speaker John Robinson. Sitting as the General Court, they also appointed Randolph one of the executors (along with Wythe and Edmund Pendleton) of the former speaker's estate, which was a major financial scandal. As friction between Britain and the colonies progressed, Randolph grew to favor independence. In 1769 the House of Burgesses was dissolved by Governor Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt, in response to its actions against the Townshend Acts. In 1773, Randolph chaired the Virginia committee of correspondence. The next governor, John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, also dissolved the House of Burgesses in 1774 when it showed solidarity with Boston, Massachusetts, following the Boston Port Act.\nRandolph chaired meetings of the first of five Virginia Conventions of former House members, principally at a Williamsburg tavern, which worked toward responses to the unwelcome tax measures imposed by the British government. On March 21, 1775, he was president of the Second Virginia Convention in Richmond that debated independence (the setting of Patrick Henry's famous \"Give me liberty or give me death!\" speech). In April, Randolph negotiated with Lord Dunmore for the removal of gunpowder from the Williamsburg arsenal during the Gunpowder Incident, which was a confrontation between the governor's forces and Virginia militia, led by Henry.\nThe House of Burgesses was called back by Lord Dunmore one last time in June 1775 to address British Prime Minister Lord North's Conciliatory Resolution. Randolph, who was a delegate to the Continental Congress, returned to Williamsburg to take his place as Speaker. Randolph indicated that the resolution had not been sent to the Congress (it had instead been sent to each colony individually in an attempt to divide them and bypass the Continental Congress). The House of Burgesses rejected the proposal, which was also later rejected by the Continental Congress.\nRandolph was the last speaker of the House of Burgesses (their role was replaced by the Virginia Conventions and later the House of Delegates in 1776). Randolph also served as the president of the Third Virginia Convention in July 1775, which as a legislative body elected a committee of safety to act as the colony's executive since Lord Dunmore had abandoned the capital and took refuge on a British warship. Pendleton succeeded Randolph as president of the later conventions.\nFirst and Second Continental Congress.\nVirginia selected Randolph as one of its delegates to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia in 1774 and 1775. Fellow delegates elected him their president (speaker) of both the First Continental Congress, which requested that King George III repeal the Intolerable Acts and passed the Continental Association, and president of the Second Continental Congress, which extended the Olive Branch Petition as a final attempt at reconciliation. However, Randolph fell ill during each term. Henry Middleton of South Carolina succeeded him as president from his resignation on October 22, 1774, two days after presiding over the passage and signing of the Continental Association, until his return on May 10, 1775. He was again elected president of Congress, but Randolph left for Virginia four days later and was succeeded as president by John Hancock.\nDeath.\nRandolph returned as a Virginia delegate but suffered a five-hour-long stroke and died while dining with Thomas Jefferson in Philadelphia on October 22, 1775. His remains were returned to Williamsburg, where they were interred at the chapel of the College of William &amp; Mary. Since renamed the Wren Building, Randolph remains buried in the chapel following its restoration. \nLegacy.\nSince the Continental Congress assumed governmental duties for the colonies as a whole, such as appointing ambassadors, some consider Randolph to be the first U.S. president, even though he died in 1775, several years before the nation's founding.\nThe Continental Congress honored Randolph by naming one of the first naval frigates as the USS \"Randolph\", as well by naming a fort at the junction of the Ohio River and the Kanawha River, as Fort Randolph.\nRandolph County, North Carolina; Randolph, Massachusetts; and Randolph County, Indiana, were named to honor the colonial statesman. \nDuring World War II, the early \"Essex\"-class aircraft carrier USS \"Randolph\" (CV-15) was named for him. The Peyton Randolph House in Colonial Williamsburg was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1970.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24907", "revid": "38984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24907", "title": "Pro-feminist", "text": ""}
{"id": "24910", "revid": "1279781867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24910", "title": "Product topology", "text": "Topology on Cartesian products of topological spaces\nIn topology and related areas of mathematics, a product space is the Cartesian product of a family of topological spaces equipped with a natural topology called the product topology. This topology differs from another, perhaps more natural-seeming, topology called the box topology, which can also be given to a product space and which agrees with the product topology when the product is over only finitely many spaces. However, the product topology is \"correct\" in that it makes the product space a categorical product of its factors, whereas the box topology is too fine; in that sense the product topology is the natural topology on the Cartesian product.\nDefinition.\nThroughout, formula_1 will be some non-empty index set and for every index formula_2 let formula_3 be a topological space.\nDenote the Cartesian product of the sets formula_3 by\nformula_5\nand for every index formula_2 denote the formula_7-th canonical projection by\nformula_8\nThe , sometimes called the , on formula_9 is defined to be the coarsest topology (that is, the topology with the fewest open sets) for which all the projections formula_10 are continuous. It is the initial topology on formula_9 with respect to the family of projections formula_12. The Cartesian product formula_13 endowed with the product topology is called the .\nThe open sets in the product topology are arbitrary unions (finite or infinite) of sets of the form formula_14 where each formula_15 is open in formula_3 and formula_17 for only finitely many formula_18 In particular, for a finite product (in particular, for the product of two topological spaces), the set of all Cartesian products between one basis element from each formula_3 gives a basis for the product topology of formula_20 That is, for a finite product, the set of all formula_14 where formula_15 is an element of the (chosen) basis of formula_23 is a basis for the product topology of formula_20\nThe product topology on formula_9 is the topology generated by sets of the form formula_26 where formula_27 and formula_15 is an open subset of formula_29 In other words, the sets\nformula_30\nform a subbase for the topology on formula_31 A subset of formula_32 is open if and only if it is a (possibly infinite) union of intersections of finitely many sets of the form formula_33 The formula_34 are sometimes called open cylinders, and their intersections are cylinder sets.\nThe product topology is also called the topology of pointwise convergence because a sequence (or more generally, a net) in formula_9 converges if and only if all its projections to the spaces formula_3 converge.\nExplicitly, a sequence formula_37 (respectively, a net formula_38) converges to a given point formula_39 if and only if formula_40 in formula_3 for every index formula_2 where formula_43 denotes formula_44 (respectively, denotes formula_45).\nIn particular, if formula_46 is used for all formula_7 then the Cartesian product is the space formula_48 of all real-valued functions on formula_49 and convergence in the product topology is the same as pointwise convergence of functions.\nExamples.\nIf the real line formula_50 is endowed with its standard topology then the product topology on the product of formula_51 copies of formula_50 is equal to the ordinary Euclidean topology on formula_53 (Because formula_51 is finite, this is also equivalent to the box topology on formula_53)\nThe Cantor set is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the discrete space formula_56 and the space of irrational numbers is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the natural numbers, where again each copy carries the discrete topology.\nSeveral additional examples are given in the article on the initial topology.\nProperties.\nThe set of Cartesian products between the open sets of the topologies of each formula_3 forms a basis for what is called the box topology on formula_31 In general, the box topology is finer than the product topology, but for finite products they coincide.\nThe product space formula_59 together with the canonical projections, can be characterized by the following universal property: if formula_60 is a topological space, and for every formula_2 formula_62 is a continuous map, then there exists precisely one continuous map formula_63 such that for each formula_27 the following diagram commutes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis shows that the product space is a product in the category of topological spaces. It follows from the above universal property that a map formula_63 is continuous if and only if formula_66 is continuous for all formula_67 In many cases it is easier to check that the component functions formula_68 are continuous. Checking whether a map formula_69 is continuous is usually more difficult; one tries to use the fact that the formula_70 are continuous in some way.\nIn addition to being continuous, the canonical projections formula_71 are open maps. This means that any open subset of the product space remains open when projected down to the formula_29 The converse is not true: if formula_73 is a subspace of the product space whose projections down to all the formula_3 are open, then formula_73 need not be open in formula_32 (consider for instance formula_77) The canonical projections are not generally closed maps (consider for example the closed set formula_78 whose projections onto both axes are formula_79).\nSuppose formula_80 is a product of arbitrary subsets, where formula_81 for every formula_67 If all formula_83 are non-empty then formula_80 is a closed subset of the product space formula_32 if and only if every formula_83 is a closed subset of formula_29 More generally, the closure of the product formula_80 of arbitrary subsets in the product space formula_32 is equal to the product of the closures:\nformula_90\nAny product of Hausdorff spaces is again a Hausdorff space.\nTychonoff's theorem, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice, states that any product of compact spaces is a compact space. A specialization of Tychonoff's theorem that requires only the ultrafilter lemma (and not the full strength of the axiom of choice) states that any product of compact Hausdorff spaces is a compact space.\nIf formula_91 is fixed then the set\nformula_92\nis a dense subset of the product space formula_32.\nRelation to other topological notions.\nSeparation\nCompactness\nConnectedness\nMetric spaces\nAxiom of choice.\nOne of many ways to express the axiom of choice is to say that it is equivalent to the statement that the Cartesian product of a collection of non-empty sets is non-empty. The proof that this is equivalent to the statement of the axiom in terms of choice functions is immediate: one needs only to pick an element from each set to find a representative in the product. Conversely, a representative of the product is a set which contains exactly one element from each component.\nThe axiom of choice occurs again in the study of (topological) product spaces; for example, Tychonoff's theorem on compact sets is a more complex and subtle example of a statement that requires the axiom of choice and is equivalent to it in its most general formulation, and shows why the product topology may be considered the more useful topology to put on a Cartesian product.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24911", "revid": "868083741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24911", "title": "Polygamous", "text": ""}
{"id": "24912", "revid": "219529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24912", "title": "Plasma Physics", "text": ""}
{"id": "24913", "revid": "1234326569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24913", "title": "Playdia", "text": "Fifth-generation home video game console\nThe (developed under the codename \"BA-X\") is a fifth-generation home video game console released exclusively in Japan in 1994 at the initial price of \u00a524,800. It was intended for a young audience and, like many consoles of the era (such as the LaserActive and the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer), was marketed more as a multimedia home entertainment system than as a dedicated gaming console, with anime quiz software and edutainment making up most of the game library. The Playdia uses a single infrared joypad with simple controls. Bandai, the Playdia's manufacturer, was the only software publisher to support this console (except for VAP who published \"Ie Naki Ko - Suzu no Sentaku\" instead of Bandai).\nOverview.\nThe Playdia has a CD-ROM drive, and the software is on CD-ROM. The controller has two AAA batteries with infrared wireless that can be stored in the main unit. The target age group was set mainly for elementary school students as both the hardware and software were inexpensive for home games at the time.\nThe Playdia can create anime-style full motion video (FMV) using CD-based games. Most are interactive learning experiences, but Bandai created a few video games with an interactive component based on its franchise series, including \"Gundam\", ', \"Ultra Man\", and '. They lack true game action. As a simple interactive cartoon, the player just directs the on-screen figure by choosing from the menu options that are presented to them on the Playdia control pad. Playdia is the only fifth-generation game machine, because the products of the competitors at that time have 32-bit s and 64-bit s across the board. The system had to rely on Bandai's IPs which started to be redundant. \u00a0\nOn the main body and software package, there is a logo of \"QIS\" and the notation \"This software is dedicated to the QIS standard\". QIS is an abbreviation of \"Quick Interactive System\" and indicates a high-speed access function to CD-ROM. There is no BIOS or menu when the user starts the console without a disc, all that shows is a blue screen.\nThe Playdia had poor sales, therefore for Bandai, the console was a failure. Bandai discontinued the console in 1996 and the unsold consoles were converted by Banpresto, a Bandai subsidiary, into coin-operated Micha King machines that played anime clips in Japanese arcades and shops. Its successor was Apple Pippin that Bandai co-developed, which was also unsuccessful.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24915", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24915", "title": "Pidgin", "text": "Simplified language\nA pidgin , or pidgin language, is a grammatically simplified form of contact language that develops between two or more groups of people that do not have a language in common: typically, its vocabulary and grammar are limited and often drawn from several languages. It is most commonly employed in situations such as trade, or where both groups speak languages different from the language of the country in which they reside (but where there is no common language between the groups). \nFundamentally, a pidgin is a simplified means of linguistic communication, as it is constructed impromptu, or by convention, between individuals or groups of people. A pidgin is not the native language of any speech community, but is instead learned as a second language.\nA pidgin may be built from words, sounds, or body language from a multitude of languages as well as onomatopoeia. As the lexicon of any pidgin will be limited to core vocabulary, words with only a specific meaning in the lexifier language may acquire a completely new (or additional) meaning in the pidgin.\nPidgins have historically been considered a form of \"patois\", unsophisticated simplified versions of their lexifiers, and as such usually have low prestige with respect to other languages. However, not all simplified or \"unsophisticated\" forms of a language are pidgins. Each pidgin has its own norms of usage which must be learned for proficiency in the pidgin.\nA pidgin differs from a creole, which is the first language of a speech community of native speakers that at one point arose from a pidgin. Unlike pidgins, creoles have fully developed vocabulary and patterned grammar. Most linguists believe that a creole develops through a process of nativization of a pidgin when children of speakers of an acquired pidgin learn it and use it as their native language.\nEtymology.\n\"Pidgin\" derives from a Chinese pronunciation of the English word \"business\", and all attestations from the first half of the nineteenth century given in the third edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" mean \"business; an action, occupation, or affair\" (the earliest being from 1807). The term \"pidgin English\" ('business English'), first attested in 1855, shows the term in transition to referring to language, and by the 1860s the term \"pidgin\" alone could refer to Pidgin English. The term came to be used in a more general linguistic sense to refer to any simplified language by the late 19th century.\nA popular false etymology for \"pidgin\" is English \"pigeon\", a bird sometimes used for carrying brief written messages, especially in times prior to modern telecommunications.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"pidgin\", formerly also spelled \"pigion\", was first applied to Chinese Pidgin English, but was later generalized to refer to any pidgin. \"Pidgin\" may also be used as the specific name for local pidgins or creoles, in places where they are spoken. For example, the name of the creole language Tok Pisin derives from the English words \"talk pidgin\". Its speakers usually refer to it simply as \"pidgin\" when speaking English. Likewise, Hawaiian Creole English is commonly referred to by its speakers as \"Pidgin\".\nThe term \"jargon\" has also been used to refer to pidgins, and is found in the names of some pidgins, such as Chinook Jargon. In this context, linguists today use \"jargon\" to denote a particularly rudimentary type of pidgin; however, this usage is rather rare, and the term \"jargon\" most often means the specialized vocabulary of some profession.\nPidgins may start out as or become trade languages, such as Tok Pisin. Trade languages can eventually evolve into fully developed languages in their own right, such as Swahili, distinct from the languages they were originally influenced by. Trade languages and pidgins can also influence an established language's vernacular, especially amongst people who are directly involved in a trade where that pidgin is commonly used, which can alternatively result in a regional dialect being developed.\nCommon traits.\nPidgins are usually less morphologically complex but more syntactically rigid than other languages, and usually have fewer morphosyntactic irregularities than other languages.\nCharacteristics shared by most pidgins:\nDevelopment.\nThe initial development of a pidgin usually requires:\nKeith Whinnom (in ) suggests that pidgins need three languages to form, with one (the superstrate) being clearly dominant over the others.\nLinguists sometimes posit that pidgins can become creole languages when a generation of children learn a pidgin as their first language,\na process that regularizes speaker-dependent variation in grammar. Creoles can then replace the existing mix of languages to become the native language of a community (such as the Chavacano language in the Philippines, Krio in Sierra Leone, and Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea). However, not all pidgins become creole languages; a pidgin may die out before this phase would occur (e.g. the Mediterranean Lingua Franca).\nOther scholars, such as Salikoko Mufwene, argue that pidgins and creoles arise independently under different circumstances, and that a pidgin need not always precede a creole nor a creole evolve from a pidgin. Pidgins, according to Mufwene, emerged among trade colonies among \"users who preserved their native vernaculars for their day-to-day interactions\". Creoles, meanwhile, developed in settlement colonies in which speakers of a European language, often indentured servants whose language would be far from the standard in the first place, interacted extensively with non-European slaves, absorbing certain words and features from the slaves' non-European native languages, resulting in a heavily basilectalized version of the original language. These servants and slaves would come to use the creole as an everyday vernacular, rather than merely in situations in which contact with a speaker of the superstrate was necessary.\nList of notable pidgins.\nMany of these languages are commonly referred to by their speakers as \"Pidgin\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24916", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24916", "title": "Polish", "text": "Polish may refer to:\nPolish may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24918", "revid": "50470099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24918", "title": "People's Liberation Army Navy", "text": "Maritime service branch of the Chinese People's Liberation Army\nMilitary unit\nThe People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN), also known as the PLA Navy, People's Navy or simply Chinese Navy, is the naval warfare branch of the People's Liberation Army, the national military of the People's Republic of China. It is composed of five sub-branches: the Surface Force, the Submarine Force, the Coastal Defense Force, the Marine Corps and the Naval Air Force, with a total strength of 384,000 personnel, including 55,000 marines and 50,000 naval aviation personnel. The PLAN's combat units are deployed among three theater command fleets, namely the North Sea, East Sea and South Sea Fleet, which serve the Northern, Eastern and Southern Theater Command, respectively.\nThe PLAN was formally established on 23 April 1949 and traces its lineage to maritime fighting units during the Chinese Civil War, including many elements of the Republic of China Navy which had defected. Until the late 1980s, the PLAN was largely a riverine and littoral force (brown-water navy) mostly in charge of coastal defense and patrol against potential Nationalist amphibious invasions and territorial waters disputes in the East and South China Sea (roles that are now largely relegated to the paramilitary China Coast Guard), and had been traditionally a maritime support subordinate to the PLA Ground Force. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Chinese leadership were freed from overland border concerns with the northern neighbor and shifted towards more forward-oriented foreign and national security policies in the 1990s, and the PLAN leaders were able to advocate for renewed attention toward limited command of the seas as a green-water navy operating in the marginal seas within the range of coastal air parity.\nInto the 21st century, Chinese military officials have outlined plans to operate with blue water capability between the first and second island chains, with Chinese strategists talking about the modernization of the PLAN into \"a regional blue-water defensive and offensive navy.\" Transitioning into a blue-water navy, regular naval exercises and patrols have increased in the Taiwan Strait, the Senkaku Islands/Diaoyutai in the East China Sea, and within the nine-dash line in the South China Sea, and all of which China claims as its territory despite the Republic of China (ROC, i.e. Taiwan), Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines each also claiming a significant part of the South China Sea. Some exercises and patrols of the PLAN in recent years went as close to and within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of Japan, Taiwan, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand, although undisputed territorial waters have been not been crossed except in cases of innocent passage.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the PLAN is the second-largest navy in the world by total displacement tonnage \u2014 at 2 million tons in 2024, behind only the United States Navy (USN) \u2014 and the largest navy globally by number of active sea-going ships (excluding coastal missile boats, gunboats and minesweepers) with over 370 surface ships and submarines in service, compared to approximately 292 ships and submarines in the USN. However, the Chinese fleets are much newer and smaller in tonnage, as about 70% of their warships were launched after 2010 and consist mostly of newly designed destroyers, frigates and corvettes with only a few amphibious warfare ships and the three commissioned aircraft carriers, while only about 25% of the American ships were launched after 2010 and majority of their tonnage are from its eleven 100,000-ton supercarriers, 21 large amphibious assault ships and experimental capital ships such as the Zumwalt-class destroyers. The dominance of Chinese shipbuilding capacity (over 230 times greater tonnage than the United States, according to the Alliance for American Manufacturing) have led the Office of Naval Intelligence to project that China will have 475 battle force ships by 2035 while the USN will have 305 to 317, which would put the United States in a numerical and operational disadvantage especially in the West Pacific according to a chair naval strategy professor at the Naval War College.\nHistory.\nThe PLAN traces its lineage to units of the Republic of China Navy (ROCN) who defected to the People's Liberation Army towards the end of the Chinese Civil War. A number of Japanese and Manchukuo Imperial Navy gunboats used to patrol the river border with the Soviet Union were also handed over to the PLA following the surrender of Japan. In 1949, Mao Zedong asserted that \"to oppose imperialist aggression, we must build a powerful navy\". During the Landing Operation on Hainan Island, the communists used wooden junks fitted with mountain guns as both transport and warships against the ROCN. The navy was established on 23 April 1949 by consolidating regional naval forces under Joint staff Department command in Jiangyan (now in Taizhou, Jiangsu).\nThe Naval Academy was set up at Dalian on 22 November 1949, mostly with Soviet instructors. It then consisted of a motley collection of ships and boats acquired from the Kuomintang forces. The Naval Air Force was added two years later. By 1954, an estimated 2,500 Soviet naval advisers were in China\u2014possibly one adviser to every thirty Chinese naval personnel\u2014and the Soviet Union began providing modern ships.\nWith Soviet assistance, the navy reorganized in 1954 and 1955 into the North Sea Fleet, East Sea Fleet, and South Sea Fleet, and a corps of admirals and other naval officers was established from the ranks of the ground forces. In shipbuilding the Soviets first assisted the Chinese, then the Chinese copied Soviet designs without assistance, and finally the Chinese produced vessels of their own design. Eventually Soviet assistance progressed to the point that a joint Sino-Soviet Pacific Ocean fleet was under discussion.\n1950s and 1960s.\nThrough the upheavals of the late 1950s and 1960s the Navy remained relatively undisturbed. Under the leadership of Minister of National Defense Lin Biao, large investments were made in naval construction during the frugal years immediately after the Great Leap Forward. During the Cultural Revolution, a number of top naval commissars and commanders were purged.\nNaval forces were used to suppress a revolt in Wuhan in July 1967, but the service largely avoided the turmoil affecting the country. Although it paid lip service to Mao and assigned political commissars aboard ships, the Navy continued to train, build, and maintain the fleets as well the coastal defense and aviation arms, as well as in the performance of its mission.\n1970s and 1980s.\nIn the 1970s, when approximately 20 percent of the defense budget was allocated to naval forces, the Navy grew dramatically. The conventional submarine force increased from 35 to 100 boats, the number of missile-carrying ships grew from 20 to 200, and the production of larger surface ships, including support ships for oceangoing operations, increased. The Navy also began development of nuclear attack submarines (SSN) and nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBN).\nIn the 1980s, under the leadership of Chief Naval Commander Liu Huaqing, the navy developed into a regional naval power, though naval construction continued at a level somewhat below the 1970s rate. Liu Huaqing was an Army officer who spent most of his career in administrative positions involving science and technology. It was not until 1988 that the People's Liberation Army Navy was led by a naval officer. Liu was also very close to Deng Xiaoping as his modernization efforts were very much in keeping with Deng's national policies.\nWhile under his leadership Naval construction yards produced fewer ships than the 1970s, greater emphasis was placed on technology and qualitative improvement. Modernization efforts also encompassed higher educational and technical standards for personnel; reformulation of the traditional coastal defense doctrine and force structure in favor of more green-water operations; and training in naval combined-arms operations involving submarine, surface, naval aviation, and coastal defense forces.\nExamples of the expansion of China's capabilities were the 1980 recovery of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) in the Western Pacific by a twenty-ship fleet, extended naval operations in the South China Sea in 1984 and 1985, and the visit of two naval ships to three South Asian nations in 1985. In 1982 the navy conducted a successful test of an underwater-launched ballistic missile. The navy also had some success in developing a variety of surface-to-surface and air-to-surface missiles, improving basic capabilities.\nIn 1986, the Navy's order of battle included two \"Xia\"-class SSBNs armed with twelve CSS-N-3 missiles and three Han-class SSNs armed with six SY-2 cruise missiles. In the late 1980s, major deficiencies reportedly remained in anti-submarine warfare, mine warfare, naval electronics (including electronic countermeasures equipment), and naval aviation capabilities.\nThe PLA Navy was ranked in 1987 as the third largest navy in the world, although naval personnel had comprised only 12 percent of PLA strength. In 1987 the Navy consisted (as it does now) of the naval headquarters in Beijing; three fleet commands \u2013 the North Sea Fleet, based at Qingdao, Shandong; the East Sea Fleet, based at Ningbo; and the South Sea Fleet, based at Zhanjiang, Guangdong \u2013 and about 1,000 ships of which only approximately 350 are ocean going. The rest are small patrol or support craft.\nThe 350,000-person Navy included Naval Air Force units of 34,000 men, the Coastal Defense Forces of 38,000, and the Marine Corps of 56,500. Navy Headquarters, which controlled the three fleet commands, was subordinate to the PLA General Staff Department. In 1987, China's 1,500\u00a0km coastline was protected by approximately 70 diesel-powered Romeo- and Whiskey-class submarines, which could remain at sea only a limited time.\nInside this protective ring and within range of shore-based aircraft were destroyers and frigates mounting Styx anti-ship missiles, depth-charge projectors, and guns up to 130\u00a0mm. Any invader penetrating the destroyer and frigate protection would have been swarmed by almost 900 fast-attack craft. Stormy weather limited the range of these small boats, however, and curtailed air support. Behind the inner ring were Coastal Defense Force personnel operating naval shore batteries of Styx missiles and guns, backed by ground force units deployed in depth.\n1990s and 2000s.\nAs the 21st century approached, the PLAN began to transition to an off-shore defensive strategy that entailed more out-of-area operations away from its traditional territorial waters. From 1990 to 2002, Jiang Zemin's military reforms placed particular emphasis on the Navy.261\nBetween 1989 and 1993, the training ship \"Zhenghe\" paid ports visits to Hawaii, Thailand, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and India. PLAN vessels visited Vladivostok in 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996. PLAN task groups also paid visits to Indonesia in 1995; North Korea in 1997; New Zealand, Australia, and the Philippines in 1998; Malaysia, Tanzania, South Africa, the United States, and Canada in 2000; and India, Pakistan, France, Italy, Germany, Britain, Hong Kong, Australia, and New Zealand in 2001.\nIn March 1997, the \"Luhu\"-class guided missile destroyer \"Harbin\", the \"Luda\"-class guided missile destroyer \"Zhuhai\", and the replenishment oiler \"Nancang\" began the PLA Navy's first circumnavigation of the Pacific Ocean, a 98-day voyage with port visits to Mexico, Peru, Chile, and the United States, including Pearl Harbor and San Diego. The flotilla was under the command of Vice Admiral Wang Yongguo, the commander-in-chief of the South Sea Fleet.\nThe \"Luhu\"-class guided missile destroyer \"Qingdao\" and the replenishment oiler \"Taicang\" completed the PLA Navy's first circumnavigation of the world \"(pictured)\", a 123-day voyage covering between 15 May \u2013 23 September 2002. Port visits included Changi, Singapore; Alexandria, Egypt; Aksis, Turkey; Sevastopol, Ukraine; Piraeus, Greece; Lisbon, Portugal; Fortaleza, Brazil; Guayaquil, Ecuador; Callao, Peru; and Papeete in French Polynesia. The PLA naval vessels participated in naval exercises with the French frigates and , as well as exercises with the Peruvian Navy. The flotilla was under the command of Vice Admiral Ding Yiping, the commander-in-chief of the North Sea Fleet, and Captain Li Yujie was the commanding officer of the \"Qingdao\".\nOverall, between 1985 and 2006, PLAN naval vessels visited 18 Asian-Pacific nations, 4 South American nations, 8 European nations, 3 African nations, and 3 North American nations. In 2003, the PLAN conducted its first joint naval exercises during separate visits to Pakistan and India. Bi-lateral naval exercises were also carried out with exercises with the French, British, Australian, Canadian, Philippine, and United States navies.\nOn 26 December 2008, the PLAN dispatched a task group consisting of the guided missile destroyer \"Haikou\" (flagship), the guided missile destroyer \"Wuhan\", and the supply ship \"Weishanhu\" to the Gulf of Aden to participate in anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia. A team of 16 Chinese Special Forces members from its Marine Corps armed with attack helicopters were on board. Since then, China has maintained a three-ship flotilla of two warships and one supply ship in the Gulf of Aden by assigning ships to the Gulf of Aden on a three monthly basis. Other recent PLAN incidents include the 2001 Hainan Island incident, a major submarine accident in 2003, and naval incidents involving the U.S. MSC-operated ocean surveillance ships and during 2009. At the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the PLAN, 52 to 56 vessels were shown in manoeuvres off Qingdao in April 2009 including previously unseen nuclear submarines.\nThe demonstration was seen as a sign of the growing status of China, while the CMC chairman, Hu Jintao, indicated that China is neither seeking regional hegemony nor entering an arms race.\nPredictions by Western analysts that the PLAN would outnumber the USN submarine force as early as 2011 have failed to come true because the PRC curtailed both imports and domestic production of submarines.\n2010s and 2020s.\nBeginning in 2009, China ordered 4 Zubr-class LCAC from Ukraine and bought 4 more from the Hellenic Navy (Greece). These hovercraft/LCACs are built to send troops and armored vehicles (tanks, etc.) onto beaches in a fast manner, acting as a landing craft, and were viewed to be a direct threat to Taiwan's pro-independence movement as well as the conflict over Senkaku Islands. China is continually shifting the power balance in Asia by building up the Navy's Submarines, Amphibious warfare, and surface warfare capabilities.\nBetween 5\u201312 July 2013, a seven-ship task force from the North Sea Fleet joined warships from the Russian Pacific Fleet to participate in Joint Sea 2013, bilateral naval maneuvers held in the Peter the Great Bay of the Sea of Japan. To date, Joint Sea 2013 was the largest naval drill yet undertaken by the People's Liberation Army Navy with a foreign navy.\nOn 2 April 2015, during the violent aftermath of a coup d'\u00e9tat in Yemen and amid an international bombing campaign, the PLAN helped ten countries get their citizens out of Yemen safely, evacuating them aboard a missile frigate from the besieged port city of Aden. The operation was described by Reuters as \"the first time that China's military has helped other countries evacuate their people during an international crisis\".\nChina's participation in international maritime exercises is also increasing. In RIMPAC 2014, China was invited to send ships from their People's Liberation Army Navy; marking not only the first time China participated in a RIMPAC exercise but also the first time China participated in a large-scale United States-led naval drill. On 9 June 2014, China confirmed it would be sending four ships to the exercise, a destroyer, frigate, supply ship, &amp; hospital ship. In April 2016, the People's Republic of China was also invited to RIMPAC 2016 despite the tension in South China Sea.\nPRC military expert Yin Zhuo said that due to present weaknesses in the PLAN's ability to replenish their ships at sea, their future aircraft carriers will be forced to operate in pairs.\nIn a TV interview, Zhang Zhaozhong suggest otherwise, saying China is \"unlikely to put all her eggs in one basket\" and that the navy will likely rotate between carriers rather than deploy them all at once.\nIn 2017, PLAN hospital ship \"Peace Ark\" traveled to Djibouti (treating 7,841 Djiboutians), Sierra Leone, Gabon, Republic of Congo (treating 7,508 Congolese), Angola, Mozambique (treating 9,881 Mozambiquans), and Tanzania (treating 6,421 Tanzanians).\"284\"\nThe PLAN continued its expansion into the 2020s, increasing its operational capacity, commissioning new ships, and constructing naval facilities. Observers note that the PLAN's ongoing modernization is intended to build up the Chinese surface fleet and fix existing issues that limit the capability of the PLAN. Observers have noted that the PLAN's expansion will allow it to project Chinese power in the South China Sea and allow for the navy to counter the USN's operations in Asia. Chinese naval capability increased substantially in the 2010s and 2020s. In two decades, the PLA Navy fielded 4,300 vertical launching system (VLS) cells on its surface combatants. According to the US-based think tank RAND Corporation, PLAN enjoyed major advantages in terms of naval technologies, missiles, and tonnage against regional rivals such as Taiwan, Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, and India.\nIn 2024 the PLAN carried out unprecedented training exercises. These included two aircraft carrier strike groups, \"Liaoning\" and \"Shandong\", operating together in the South China Sea for the first time. In 2025 the two carrier strike groups operated for the first time in the western Pacific beyond the first island chain, and one of them crossed the second island chain for the first time.\nOrganizational structure.\nAdministrative structure.\nThe PLAN central HQ is directly subordinate to the CMC. The PLAN HQ functional offices have the administrative command, control, coordination, and force construction duties over all naval forces. The PLAN is divided into five major \"arms\" or service branches (\u5175\u79cd): the Surface Force, the Submarine Force, the Coastal Defense Force, the Marine Corps, and the Naval Air Force.\nFunctional offices.\nAfter the 2016 reforms, the main offices of the PLAN HQ are:\nOperational units.\nOperationally, the PLAN's naval forces are subordinate to the CMC Joint Operations Command Center through the Theater Command's own Joint Operations Command Center (T-JOCC). The three fleets (one per Theater) has in turn a Each fleet has their own headquarters, headed like all PLA units by a dual team of a commander and a political commissar, and each has set up a \u201cmaritime operations sub-center\u201d (MOSC) (\u6d77\u4e0a\u4f5c\u6218\u5206\u4e2d\u5fc3) to coordinate operations. The fleets are in turn organized into formations (\u7f16\u961f) consisting on various numbers of vessels, each under the operational control of a \"formation command post\" (\u7f16\u961f\u6307\u6325\u6240). Fleet units are ordinarily organized into \"zhidui\" (\u652f\u961f, usually translated as \"flotilla\") of divisional or brigade grade, and \"dadui\" (\u5927\u961f, usually translated as \"squadron\") of regimental or battalion grade. Temporary smaller detachments (\u4e2d\u961f), and larger task forces (\u6218\u6597\u7fa4) or \"clusters\" (\u96c6\u7fa4) can be organized according to circumstances.\nThe Coastal Defense Force, Marine Corps, and Naval Air Force are organized in brigades.\nWhile the CMC Joint Operations Command Center has superior command, the Theater Command's T-JOCC has immediate operational control of all services in its jurisdiction. A peculiar case is the East Sea Joint Command Center established in 2013, which has operational control over all forces above, on, and under that sea, including PLAN, PLAAF, China Coast Guard, and Maritime Militia.\nFleets.\nThe People's Liberation Army Navy is divided into three fleets:\nTerritorially, each fleet has two or three Bases (\u57fa\u5730), each with a number of subordinate Maritime Garrison Areas (\u6c34\u8b66\u533a), each with a given spatial jurisdiction, usually only over territorial waters. Deep blue sea operations are controlled at Theater and Fleet levels.\nBranches.\nPLAN Surface Force.\nThe People's Liberation Army Surface Force consists of all surface warships in service with the PLAN. They are organised into flotillas spread across the three main fleets.\nPLAN Submarine Force.\nThe People's Liberation Army Navy Submarine Force consists of all nuclear and diesel-electric submarines in service with the PLAN.\nThe PRC is the last of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council which has not conducted an operational ballistic missile submarine patrol, because of institutional problems. It operates a fleet of 68 submarines.\nPLAN Coastal Defense Force.\nThe PLAN Coastal Defence Force is a land-based branch of the PLAN in charge of coastal defence with a strength of around 25,000 personnel. Also known as the coastal defense troops, they serve to defend China's coastal and littoral areas from invasion via amphibious landings or air attacks.\nBetween the 1950s and 1960s, the Coastal Defense Force was primarily assigned to repel any Kuomintang attempts to infiltrate, invade and harass the Chinese coastline. After the Sino-Soviet split and the abandonment of KMT's plans to recapture the Mainland, the Coastal Defense Force was focused on defending China's coast from a possible Soviet seaborne invasion throughout the 1960s to 1980s.\nWith the fall of the Soviet Union, the threat of an amphibious invasion of China has diminished and therefore the branch is often considered to no longer be a vital component of the PLAN, especially as the surface warships of the PLAN continue to improve in terms of anti-ship and air-defence capabilities and the PLAN's power projection begins to extend beyond the first island chain.\nToday the primary weapons of the coastal defense troops are the YJ-62, YJ-18, YJ-12, and C-602 anti-ship missiles, plus SAM and SHORAD batteries.\nPLAN Marine Corps.\nThe PLAN Marine Corps was originally established in the 1950s and then re-established in 1979 under PLAN organisation. It consists of around 30,000-40,000 marines, with roughly two brigades in each theater. The Marine Corps are considered elite troops, and are rapid deployment forces trained primarily in amphibious warfare and sometimes in air assaults to establish a beachhead or act as a spearhead during assault operations against enemy targets.\nThe marines are equipped with the standard Type 95 assault rifles as well as other small arms and personnel equipment, and until 2022 they had distinct blue/littoral camouflage uniform as standard (now being replaced by more subdued coloring based on the xingkong pattern). The marines are also equipped with amphibious armoured fighting vehicles (including amphibious assault vehicles such as the ZTD-05 and IFVs such as ZBD-05), helicopters, naval artillery, anti-aircraft weapon systems, and short range surface-to-air missiles.\nWith the PLAN's accelerating efforts to expand its capabilities beyond territorial waters, it would be likely for the Marine Corps to play a greater role in terms of being an offshore expeditionary force similar to the USMC and Royal Marines.\nPLAN Air Force.\nThe People's Liberation Army Navy Air Force (PLANAF) is the naval aviation branch of the PLAN and has a strength of around 25,000 personnel and 690 aircraft. It operates similar hardware as the People's Liberation Army Air Force, including fighter aircraft, bombers, attack aircraft, tankers, reconnaissance/early warning aircraft, electronic warfare aircraft, maritime patrol aircraft, transport aircraft and helicopters of various roles.\nThe PLA Naval Air Force traditionally operated from coastal air bases, and received older aircraft than the PLAAF with less ambitious steps towards mass modernization. Advancements in new technologies, weaponry and aircraft acquisition were made after 2000. With the introduction of China's first aircraft carrier, \"Liaoning\", in 2012, the Naval Air Force began conducting carrier-based operations for the first time with the goal of building carrier battle group-focused blue water capabilities. In 2023, the PLANAF transferred the majority of its land-based combat planes to the PLAAF, in exchange for more investment on ship-based aircraft (both carrier based like the Shenyang J-35, or ship-borne like helicopters).\nThe PLANAF naval air bases include:\nRelationship with other maritime organizations of China.\nThe PLAN is complemented by paramilitary maritime services such as the China Coast Guard. The Chinese Coast Guard was previously not under an independent command, considered part of the People's Armed Police, under the local (provincial) border defense command, prior to its reorganization and consolidation as an unified service. It was formed from the integration of several formerly separate services such as China Marine Surveillance (CMS), General Administration of Customs, Armed Police, China Fishery Law Enforcement and local maritime militia.\nThe CMS performed mostly coastal and ocean search and rescue or patrols, and received quite a few large patrol ships that significantly enhanced their operations; while Customs, militia, Armed Police and Fishery Law Enforcement operated hundreds of small patrol craft. For maritime patrol services, these craft are usually quite well armed with machine guns and 37mm anti-aircraft guns. In addition, these services operated their own small aviation fleets to assist their maritime patrol capabilities, with Customs and CMS operating a handful of Harbin Z-9 helicopters, and a maritime patrol aircraft based on the Harbin Y-12 STOL transport.\nEvery coastal province has 1 to 3 Coast Guard squadrons:\nRanks.\nThe ranks in the People's Liberation Army Navy are similar to those of the People's Liberation Army Ground Force, Air Force and the Rocket Force. The current system of officer ranks and insignia dates from 1988 and is a revision of the ranks and insignia used from 1955 to 1965. The rank of Hai Jun Yi Ji Shang Jiang (First Class Admiral) was never held and was abolished in 1994. With the official introduction of the Type 07 uniforms all officer insignia are on either shoulders or sleeves depending on the type of uniform used. The current system of enlisted ranks and insignia dates from 1998.\nCommissioned officer ranks.\nThe rank insignia of commissioned officers.\nOther ranks.\nThe rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.\nContemporary topics.\nStrategy, plans, priorities.\nThe People's Liberation Army Navy has become more prominent in recent years owing to a change in Chinese strategic priorities. The new strategic threats include possible conflict with the United States and/or a resurgent Japan in areas such as the Taiwan Strait or the South China Sea. As part of its overall program of naval modernization, the PLAN has a long-term plan of developing a blue water navy. Robert D. Kaplan has said that it was the collapse of the Soviet Union that allowed China to transfer resources from its army to its navy and other force projection assets.\nChina is constructing a major underground nuclear submarine base near Sanya, Hainan. In December 2007 the first Type 094 submarine was moved to Sanya.\nThe Daily Telegraph on 1 May 2008 reported that tunnels were being built into hillsides which could be capable of hiding up to 20 nuclear submarines from spy satellites. According to the Western news media the base is reportedly to help China project seapower well into the Pacific Ocean area, including challenging United States naval power.\nDuring a 2008 interview with the BBC, Major General Qian Lihua, a senior Chinese defense official, stated that the PLAN aspired to possess a small number of aircraft carriers to allow it to expand China's air defense perimeter. According to Qian the important issue was not whether China had an aircraft carrier, but what it did with it. On 13 January 2009, Adm. Robert F. Willard, head of the U.S. Pacific Command, called the PLAN's modernization \"aggressive,\" and that it raised concerns in the region. On 15 July 2009, Senator Jim Webb of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee declared that only the \"United States has both the stature and the national power to confront the obvious imbalance of power that China brings\" to situations such as the claims to the Spratly and Paracel islands.\nRonald O'Rourke of the Congressional Research Service wrote in 2009 that the PLAN \"continues to exhibit limitations or weaknesses in several areas, including capabilities for sustained operations by larger formations in distant waters, joint operations with other parts of China\u2019s military, C4ISR systems, anti-air warfare (AAW), antisubmarine warfare (ASW), MCM, and a dependence on foreign suppliers for certain key ship components.\"\nIn 1998 China purchased the discarded Ukrainian ship \"Varyag\" and began retrofitting it for naval deployment. On 25 September 2012, the People's Liberation Army Navy took delivery of China's first aircraft carrier, \"Liaoning\". The 60,000-ton ship can accommodate 33 fixed wing aircraft. It is widely speculated that these aircraft will be the J15 fighter (the Chinese version of Russia's SU-33).\nIn September 2015, satellite images showed that China may have started constructing its first indigenous Type 002 aircraft carrier. At the time, the layout suggested to be displacement of 50,000 tons and a hull to have a length of about 240\u00a0m and a beam of about 35\u00a0m. On 28 April 2017 the carrier was launched as \"Shandong\".\nJapan has raised concerns about the PLAN's growing capability and the lack of transparency as its naval strength keeps on expanding. China has entered into service the world's first anti-ship ballistic missile called DF-21D. The potential threat from the DF-21D against U.S. aircraft carriers has reportedly caused major changes in U.S. strategy.\nOn 28 June 2017 China launched the first of a new type of large destroyer, the Type 055 destroyer. The destroyer \u2013 the \"Nanchang\" \u2013 is, with its length of 180 m and at over 12,000 tons fully loaded, the second largest destroyer class in the world after the American Zumwalt-class destroyer. Eight destroyers to this design, rated by the United States Navy as \"cruisers\", have been built or are under construction.\nComparison to US Navy.\nThe strength of PLAN is often compared to that of the US Navy.The PLAN is the second largest navy in the world in terms of tonnage which stands at 2 million tons as of 2022, only behind the United States Navy.\nA 2019 review found the USN fleet was able to deploy more \"battle force missiles\" (BFMs), defined as those missiles that contribute to battle missions, than the PLAN: USN fleet could deploy 11,000 BFMs, compared to 5250 BFMs for PLAN and 3326 BFMs for the Russian Navy.\nTerritorial disputes.\nSpratly Islands dispute.\nThe Spratly Islands dispute is a territorial dispute over the ownership of the Spratly Islands, a group of islands located in the South China Sea. States staking claims to various islands are Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and People's Republic of China. All except Brunei occupy some of the islands in dispute.\nOn 14 March 1988, Chinese and Vietnamese naval forces clashed over Johnson South Reef in the Spratly Islands, which involved three PLAN frigates.\nIn February 2011, the Chinese frigate \"Dongguan\" fired three shots at Philippine fishing boats in the vicinity of Jackson Atoll. The shots were fired after the frigate instructed the fishing boats to leave, and one of those boats experienced trouble removing its anchor.\nSenkaku Islands dispute.\nThe Senkaku Islands dispute concerns a territorial dispute over a group of uninhabited islands known as the Diaoyu Islands in China, the Senkaku Islands in Japan, and Tiaoyutai Islands in Taiwan. Aside from a 1945 to 1972 period of administration by the United States, the archipelago has been controlled by Japan since 1895. The People's Republic of China disputed the proposed U.S. handover of authority to Japan in 1971 and has asserted its claims to the islands since that time. Taiwan also has claimed these islands. The disputed territory is close to key shipping lanes and rich fishing grounds, and it may have major oil reserves in the area.\nOn some occasions, ships and planes from various mainland Chinese and Taiwanese government and military agencies have entered the disputed area. In addition to the cases where they escorted fishing and activist vessels, there have been other incursions. In an eight-month period in 2012, over forty maritime incursions and 160 aerial incursions occurred. For example, in July 2012, three Chinese patrol vessels entered the disputed waters around the islands.\nMilitary escalation continued in 2013. In February, Japanese Defense Minister Itsunori Onodera claimed that a Chinese frigate had locked weapons-targeting radar onto a Japanese destroyer and helicopter on two occasions in January. A Chinese Jiangwei II class frigate and a Japanese destroyer were three kilometers apart, and the crew of the latter vessel went to battle stations. The Chinese state media responded that their frigates had been engaged in routine training at the time.\nOther incidents.\nOn 22 July 2011, following its Vietnam port-call, the Indian amphibious assault vessel was reportedly contacted 45 nautical miles from the Vietnamese coast in the disputed South China Sea by a party identifying itself as the Chinese Navy and stating that the Indian warship was entering Chinese waters. According to a spokesperson for the Indian Navy, since there were no Chinese ships or aircraft were visible, the INS \"Airavat\" proceeded on her onward journey as scheduled. The Indian Navy further clarified that \"[t]here was no confrontation involving the INS \"Airavat\". India supports freedom of navigation in international waters, including in the South China Sea, and the right of passage in accordance with accepted principles of international law. These principles should be respected by all.\"\nOn 11 July 2012, the Chinese frigate \"Dongguan\" ran aground on Hasa Hasa Shoal (\"pictured\") located 60 nmi west of Rizal, which was within the Philippines' 200 nmi-EEZ. By 15 July, the frigate had been refloated and was returning to port with no injuries and only minor damage. During this incident, the 2012 ASEAN summit took place in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, amid the rising regional tensions.\nAnti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden.\nOn 18 December 2008, Chinese authorities deployed People's Liberation Army Navy vessels to escort Chinese shipping in the Gulf of Aden.\n2011 Libyan Civil War.\nIn the lead-up to the 2011 Libyan Civil War, the \"Xuzhou\" (530) was deployed from anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden to help evacuate Chinese nationals from Libya.\nYemen conflict.\nDuring the Yemen conflict, in 2015, the Chinese Navy diverted frigates carrying out anti-piracy operations in Somalia to evacuate at least 600 Chinese and 225 foreign citizens working in Yemen. Among the non-Chinese evacuees were 176 Pakistani citizens, with smaller numbers from other countries, such as Ethiopia, Singapore, the UK, Italy, and Germany. Despite the evacuations, the Chinese embassy in Yemen continued to operate.\nReam Naval Base.\nIn July 2019, US officials stated that they had seen a secret agreement that would allow the People's Liberation Army Navy exclusive access to about one-third of the Ream naval base for up to 30 years. This would give Beijing a new base near the South China Sea.\nThe existence of the agreement was denied by Cambodian authorities who called it \"fake news\". They said that the base is Cambodian, not Chinese, and that foreign military presence there is rotational and not permanent, in compliance with the country's constitution. In 2021 the Cambodian defence minister stated that China was helping build infrastructure at Ream and there were no strings attached.\nEquipment.\nChina's navy is the second-largest in the world in terms of tonnage.263\nShips and submarines.\nAs of 2024, the navy has an overall battle force of more than 350 ships and submarines.263\u2013264\nAircraft.\nThe Chinese Navy operates both airfield- and carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft, as well as helicopters for battlefield logistics, reconnaissance, patrol and medical evacuation.\nNaval weaponry.\nThe QBS-06 is an underwater assault rifle with 5.8\u00d742 DBS-06. It is based on the Soviet APS.\nIn early February 2018, pictures of what is claimed to be a Chinese railgun were published online. In pictures the gun is shown mounted on the bow of a Type 072III-class landing ship \"Haiyangshan\". In March 2018, it was reported that China had claimed to have begun testing its electromagnetic rail gun at sea.\nFuture of the People's Liberation Army Navy.\nThe PLAN's ambitions include operating out to the first and second island chains, as far as the South Pacific near Australia, and spanning to the Aleutian islands, and operations extending to the Straits of Malacca near the Indian Ocean.\nBetween 2001 and 2006 there was a rapid building and acquisition program, a trend which continued. There were more than a dozen new classes of ships built in those five years, totaling some 60 brand new ships (including landing ships and auxiliaries). Simultaneously, dozens of other ships have been either phased out of service or refitted with new equipment.\nRonald O'Rourke of the Congressional Research Service reported that the long-term goals of PLAN planning include:\nFollowing the construction of its two smaller aircraft carriers, China began building the Type 003 carrier. In the near term, the PLAN intends to put together four aircraft carrier strike groups and four expeditionary strike groups.\nThe PLAN may also operate from Gwadar or Seychelles for anti-piracy missions and to protect vital trade routes which may endanger China's energy security in the case of a conflict. In 2016, China established her first overseas naval base in Djibouti.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24919", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24919", "title": "Peoples Liberation Army", "text": ""}
{"id": "24921", "revid": "50563890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24921", "title": "Patrick Macnee", "text": "British-American actor (1922\u20132015)\nDaniel Patrick Macnee (6 February 1922 \u2013 25 June 2015) was a British-American actor best known for his breakthrough role as secret agent John Steed in the television series \"The Avengers\" (1961\u20131969). Starting out as the assistant to David Keel (Ian Hendry), he became the lead when Hendry left after the first series, and was subsequently partnered with a succession of female assistants. He later reprised the role in \"The New Avengers\" (1976\u20131977).\nBorn in London as the eldest son of socialite Dorothea Macnee, Macnee served in the Royal Navy during the Second World War before starting his career as an actor in British television. He appeared in numerous television series up until 2001, including the \"Twilight Zone\" episode \"Judgement Night\" (1959); \"Columbo\"; \"Magnum, P.I.\"; \"Hart to Hart\"; \"Murder, She Wrote\"; \"The Love Boat\"; and \"Frasier\". In 1984, he was the subject of the British television series \"This Is Your Life\".\nMacnee also appeared in Oasis's music video for \"Don't Look Back in Anger\" (1996). He and \"Avengers\" co-star Honor Blackman had a UK Top 10 hit in 1990 when their 1964 song \"Kinky Boots\" received renewed interest from being played on BBC Radio One.\nMacnee's notable film roles include young Jacob Marley in \"Scrooge\" (1951), Sir Denis Eton-Hogg in \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984), and Sir Godfrey Tibbett in \"A View to a Kill\" (1985). He is one of the few actors to have played both Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson in different productions.\nEarly life and career.\nThe elder of two sons, Daniel Patrick Macnee was born in Paddington, London, England, on 6 February 1922; to Daniel Macnee (1878\u20131952) and British socialite Dorothea Mabel Macnee (n\u00e9e Henry) (1896\u20131984). His father, who was a grandson of the Scottish artist Sir Daniel Macnee, trained race horses in Lambourn, and was known for his dress sense; he had served as an officer in the Yorkshire Dragoons in the First World War. His maternal grandmother was Frances Alice Hastings (1870\u20131945), who was the daughter of Vice-Admiral George Fowler Hastings and granddaughter of The 12th Earl of Huntingdon. His younger brother James, known as Jimmy, was born five years later. Macnee saw himself as a Scot.\nMacnee's parents separated after his mother came out as a lesbian. His father later moved to India, and his mother began to live with her wealthy partner, Evelyn Spottiswoode, whose money came from the Dewar's whisky business. Macnee referred to her in his autobiography as \"Uncle Evelyn\", and she helped pay for his schooling. He was educated at Summer Fields School and Eton College, where he was a member of the Officer Training Corps and was one of the guard of honour for King George V at St George's Chapel in 1936. He was later expelled from Eton for selling pornography to and being a bookmaker for his fellow students.\nMacnee studied acting at the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art, but shortly before he was to perform in his first West End leading role, which would have had him acting alongside Vivien Leigh, he was called up for the Royal Navy. He joined as an ordinary seaman in October 1942 and was commissioned a sub-lieutenant in June 1943, becoming a navigator on Motor Torpedo Boats in the English Channel and North Sea. Reassigned as first lieutenant on a second MTB, Macnee caught bronchitis just before D-Day; while he was recuperating in hospital, his boat and crew were lost in action. Two of the crew received the Distinguished Service Medal. He left the Royal Navy in 1946 as a lieutenant.\nMacnee nurtured his acting career in Canada early on, but he also appeared as an uncredited extra in the British films \"Pygmalion\" (1938), \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\" (1943) and Laurence Olivier's \"Hamlet\" (1948), as well as some live TV dramas for the BBC, before graduating to credited roles in such films as \"Scrooge\" (US: \"A Christmas Carol\", 1951), as young Jacob Marley; the Gene Kelly vehicle \"Les Girls\" (1957), as an Old Bailey barrister; and the war film \"The Battle of the River Plate\" (1956). Between these occasional movie roles, Macnee spent the better part of the 1950s working in dozens of small roles in American and Canadian television and theatre. In 1954, he appeared on stage in \"Richard of Bordeaux\" and \"Haste to the Wedding\" at the Crest Theatre in Toronto., On television, he appeared in an episode of \"\" (\"Night of April 14th\") and \"The Twilight Zone\" (\"Judgment Night\") in 1959. Disappointed in his limited career development, by the late 1950s Macnee was smoking 80 cigarettes and drinking a bottle of whisky on a daily basis.\nIn the early 1960s, before his career-making role in \"The Avengers\", Macnee took a break from acting and served as one of the London-based producers for the classic documentary series \"The Valiant Years\", based on the Second World War memoirs of Winston Churchill.\n\"The Avengers\".\nWhile working in London on the Churchill series, Macnee was offered the role in \"The Avengers\" (1961\u201369), (originally intended to be known as \"Jonathan Steed\"), for which he became best known. The series was conceived as a vehicle for Ian Hendry, who played the lead role of Dr. David Keel in a sequel to an earlier series, \"Police Surgeon\" (1960), while John Steed was his assistant. Macnee, though, became the lead after Hendry's departure at the end of the first series. Macnee played opposite a succession of glamorous female partners: Honor Blackman, Diana Rigg and Linda Thorson. Of the 161 completed episodes, Macnee appeared in all but two, both from the first series.\nAlthough Macnee evolved in the role as the series progressed, the key elements of Steed's persona and appearance were present from the beginning: the slightly mysterious demeanour and, increasingly, the light, suave, flirting tone with ladies (and always with his female partners). Finally, from the episodes with Blackman onwards, the trademark bowler hat and umbrella completed the image. Although it was traditionally associated with London \"city gents\", the ensemble of suit, umbrella and bowler had developed in the post-war years as mufti for ex-servicemen attending Armistice Day ceremonies. Steed's sartorial style may also have been drawn from Macnee's father. Macnee, alongside designer Pierre Cardin, adapted the look into a style all his own, and he went on to design several outfits himself for Steed based on the same basic theme. Steed was also the central character of \"The New Avengers\" (1976\u201377), in which he was teamed with agents named Purdey (Joanna Lumley) and Mike Gambit (Gareth Hunt).\nMacnee insisted on, and was proud of, almost never carrying a gun in the original series; when asked why, he explained, \"I'd just come out of a World War in which I'd seen most of my friends blown to bits.\" Lumley later said she did most of the gun-slinging in \"The New Avengers\" for the same reason.\nWhen asked in June 1982 which \"Avengers\" female lead was his favourite, Macnee declined to give a specific answer. \"Well, I'd rather not say. To do so would invite trouble,\" he told \"TV Week\" magazine. Macnee did provide his evaluation of the female leads. Of Honor Blackman he said, \"She was wonderful, presenting the concept of a strong-willed, independent and liberated woman just as that sort of woman was beginning to emerge in society.\" Diana Rigg was \"One of the world's great actresses. A superb comedienne. I'm convinced that one day she'll be Dame Diana\" (his prediction came true in 1994). Linda Thorson was \"one of the sexiest women alive\" while Joanna Lumley was \"superb in the role of Purdey. An actress who is only now realising her immense potential.\"\nMacnee co-wrote two original novels based upon \"The Avengers\" during the 1960s, titled \"Dead Duck\" and \"Deadline\". He hosted the documentary \"The Avengers: The Journey Back\" (1998), directed by Clyde Lucas.\nFor the critically lambasted film version of \"The Avengers\" (1998), he lent his voice in a cameo as Invisible Jones. The character John Steed was taken over by Ralph Fiennes.\nLater roles.\nMacnee's other significant roles included playing Sir Godfrey Tibbett opposite Roger Moore in the James Bond film \"A View to a Kill\" (1985); as Major Crossley in \"The Sea Wolves\" (again with Moore); guest roles in \"Encounter\"; \"Alias Smith and Jones\" (for Glen A. Larson); \"Magnum, P.I.\"; \"Hart to Hart\"; \"Murder, She Wrote\" and \"The Love Boat\". Although his best known role was heroic, many of his television appearances were as villains; among them were his roles of both the demonic Count Iblis and his provision of the character voice of the Cylons' Imperious Leader in \"Battlestar Galactica\", also for Glen A. Larson, for which he also supplied the show's introductory voiceover. He also presented the American paranormal series \"Mysteries, Magic and Miracles\". Macnee appeared on Broadway as the star of Anthony Shaffer's mystery \"Sleuth\" in 1972\u201373.\nMacnee reunited with Diana Rigg in her short-lived sitcom \"Diana\" (1973) in a single episode. Other television appearances include a guest appearance on \"Columbo\" in the episode \"Troubled Waters\" (1975); and playing Major Vickers in \"For the Term of his Natural Life\" (1983). He had recurring roles in the crime series \"Gavilan\" with Robert Urich and in the short-lived satire on big business, \"Empire\" (1984), as Dr. Calvin Cromwell. Macnee was known for narrating various James Bond Documentaries on Special Edition DVD. He also narrated the documentary \"Ian Fleming: 007's Creator\" (2000).\nMacnee featured prominently in two editions of the long-running British television series \"This Is Your Life\": in 1978, when he and host Eamonn Andrews, both dressed as Steed, surprised Ian Hendry, and in 1984 when he was the edition's unsuspecting subject. Therefore, he also voiced the narrator in the Audrey Wood VHS adaptation of \"The Little Mouse, the Red Ripe Strawberry, and the Big Hungry Bear\".\nMacnee also appeared in several cult films: in \"The Howling\" (1981), as Dr. George Waggner (named whimsically after the director of \"The Wolf Man\", 1941) and as Sir Denis Eton-Hogg in the rockumentary comedy \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984). He played Dr. Stark in \"The Creature Wasn't Nice\" (1981), also called \"Spaceship\" and \"Naked Space\". Macnee played the role of actor David Mathews in the television movie \"Rehearsal for Murder\" (1982), which starred Robert Preston and Lynn Redgrave. The movie was from a script written by \"Columbo\" co-creators Richard Levinson and William Link. He replaced Leo G. Carroll's character as the head of U.N.C.L.E. as Sir John Raleigh in \"Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" (1983), produced by Michael Sloan. He was featured in the science fiction television movie \"Super Force\" (1990) as E. B. Hungerford (the subsequent series featured Macnee's voiceover as part of a computer simulation of his character), as a supporting character in the parody film \"Lobster Man from Mars\" (1989) as Professor Plocostomos and in the television film \"The Return of Sam McCloud\" (1989) as Tom Jamison. He made an appearance in \"Frasier\" (2001), and several episodes of the American sci-fi series \"Nightman\" as Dr. Walton, a psychiatrist who advised the main character. Macnee appeared in two episodes of the series \"\" (1993\u201394) and was a retired agent in a handful of instalments of \"Spy Game\" (1997\u201398).\nMacnee made numerous TV commercials including one around 1990 for Swiss Chalet, the Canadian restaurant chain, and a year or so before, a commercial for the Sterling Motor Car Company. Over the James Bond theme, the car duels with a motorcycle assailant at high speed through mountainous territory, ultimately eludes the foe, and reaches its destination. Macnee steps out of the car and greets viewers with a smile, saying \"I suppose you were expecting someone else\". Macnee was the narrator for several \"behind-the-scenes\" featurettes for the James Bond series of DVDs and recorded numerous audio books, including the releases of many novels by Jack Higgins. He also recorded the children's books \"The Musical Life of Gustav Mole\" and its sequel, \"The Lost Music (Gustav Mole's War on Noise),\" both written by Michael Twinn.\nMacnee featured in two pop videos: as Steed in original \"Avengers\" footage in The Pretenders' video for their song \"Don't Get Me Wrong\" (1986) and in the promotion for Oasis' video \"Don't Look Back in Anger\" (1996), as the band's driver, a role similar to that which he played in the James Bond film \"A View to a Kill\" (1985). In 1990, his recording with his \"Avengers\" co-star Honor Blackman, called \"Kinky Boots\" (1964), reached the UK Singles Chart after being played on Simon Mayo's BBC Radio One breakfast show.\nSherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson.\nMacnee appeared in \"Magnum, P.I.\" (1984) as a retired British agent who suffered from the delusion that he was Sherlock Holmes, in a season four episode titled \"Holmes Is Where the Heart Is\". He played both Holmes and Dr. Watson on several occasions. He played Watson three times: once alongside Roger Moore's Sherlock Holmes in the television film \"Sherlock Holmes in New York\" (1976), and twice with Christopher Lee, first in \"Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady\" (1991), and then in \"Incident at Victoria Falls\" (1992). He played Holmes in another television film \"The Hound of London\" (1993), along with the Canadian television film \"Sherlock Holmes: The Case of the Temporal Nexus\" (1996). He is thus one of only a small number of actors to have portrayed both Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson on screen.\nPersonal life.\nMacnee married his first wife Barbara Douglas (1921\u20132012) in 1942. They had two children, Rupert and Jenny, and a grandson, Christopher (\"Kit\"). After they were divorced in 1956, his second marriage (1965\u20131969) was to actress Katherine Woodville. From 1973 to 1991, Macnee owned a home in the Deep Well neighborhood of Palm Springs, California. His third marriage was to Baba Majos de Nagyzsenye, daughter of opera singer Ella N\u00e9methy. It lasted from 1988 until her death in 2007. Macnee became a United States citizen in 1959. He dictated his autobiography, which he titled \"Blind in One Ear: The Avenger Returns\" (1988), to Marie Cameron. Later in life, Macnee was an enthusiastic naturist.\nDeath.\nOn 25 June 2015, Macnee died at Rancho Mirage, California, his home for the previous four decades, at the age of 93. Tributes were paid by co-stars Roger Moore and Nicola Bryant, and by fellow \"Avengers\" leads Diana Rigg and Linda Thorson.\nFilmography.\nDocumentaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24922", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24922", "title": "List of Polish proverbs", "text": ""}
{"id": "24925", "revid": "23105605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24925", "title": "Parsemage", "text": ""}
{"id": "24927", "revid": "1318634187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24927", "title": "Pembroke College, Cambridge", "text": "Constituent college of the University of Cambridge\nPembroke College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge, England. The college is the third-oldest college of the university and has over 700 students and fellows. It is one of the university's larger colleges, with buildings from almost every century since its founding, as well as extensive gardens. Its members are termed \"Valencians\". The college's Master is the art historian Rosalind Polly Blakesley.\nPembroke has a level of academic performance among the highest of all the Cambridge colleges; in 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2018 Pembroke was placed second in the Tompkins Table. Pembroke contains the first chapel designed by Sir Christopher Wren and is one of only six Cambridge colleges to have educated a British prime minister, in Pembroke's case William Pitt the Younger. The college library, with a Victorian neo-gothic clock tower, has an original copy of the first encyclopaedia to contain printed diagrams.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nMarie de St Pol, Countess of Pembroke (1303\u20131377), a member of the de Ch\u00e2tillon family of France, founded Pembroke College, Cambridge. On Christmas Eve 1347, Edward III granted Marie de St Pol, widow of the Earl of Pembroke, the licence for the foundation of a new educational establishment in the young university at Cambridge. The \"Hall of Valence Mary\" (\"Custos &amp; Scolares Aule Valence Marie in Cantebrigg'\"), as it was originally known, was thus founded to house a body of students and fellows. The statutes were notable in that they both gave preference to students born in France who had already studied elsewhere in England, and that they required students to report fellow students if they indulged in excessive drinking or visited disreputable houses.\nThe college was later renamed Pembroke Hall, and finally became Pembroke College in 1856.\nMarie was closely involved with College affairs in the 30 years until her death and burial at Denny Abbey, to the north of Cambridge, in 1377. She seems to have been something of a disciplinarian: the original Foundation documents had strict penalties for drunkenness and lechery, required that all students' debts were settled within two weeks of the end of term, and gave strict limits on numbers at graduation parties.\nLegacies.\nRichard Buckenham (Archdeacon of Lewes) himself a book collector ensured in 1599 before William Smarte's death, that over 100 manuscripts in Smarte's possession were donated to Pembroke College library.\nSir Robert Hitcham, a lawyer and MP who was an alumnus of[Pembroke College left Framlingham castle in Suffolk and its associated lands to the College in 1636, a year after he bought it. Hitcham's Cloister in Pembroke College built in 1666 was named after him. The College still owns much of the estate.\nIn 2015, the college received a bequest of \u00a334 million from the estate of American inventor and Pembroke alumnus Ray Dolby, thought to be the largest single donation to a college in the history of Cambridge University.\nBuildings.\nOld Court.\nThe first buildings comprised a single court (now called Old Court) containing all the component parts of a college \u2013 chapel, hall, kitchen and buttery, master's lodgings, students' rooms \u2013 and the statutes provided for a manciple, a cook, a barber and a laundress. Both the founding of the college and the building of the city's first college Chapel (1355) required the grant of a papal bull.\nThe original court was the university's smallest at only by , but was enlarged to its current size in the nineteenth century by demolishing the south range.\nThe college's gatehouse is the oldest in Cambridge.\nChapel.\nThe original Chapel now forms the Old Library and has a striking seventeenth-century plaster ceiling, designed by Henry Doogood, showing birds flying overhead. Around the Civil War, one of Pembroke's fellows and Chaplain to Charles I before he was king, Matthew Wren, was imprisoned by Oliver Cromwell. On his release after eighteen years, he fulfilled a promise by hiring his nephew Christopher Wren to build a great Chapel in his former college. The resulting Chapel was consecrated on St Matthew's Day, 1665, and the eastern end was extended by George Gilbert Scott in 1880, when it was consecrated on the Feast of the Annunciation.\nExpansion.\nAn increase in membership over the last 150 years saw a corresponding increase in building activity. The Hall was rebuilt in 1875\u20131876 to designs by Alfred Waterhouse after he had declared the medieval Hall unsafe. As well as the Hall, Waterhouse designed a new range of rooms, Red Buildings (1871\u20131872), in French Renaissance style, designed a new Master's Lodge on the site of Paschal Yard (1873, later to become N staircase), pulled down the old Lodge and the south range of Old Court to open a vista to the chapel, and finally designed a new Library (1877\u20131878) in the continental Gothic style. The construction of the new library was undertaken by Rattee and Kett.\nWaterhouse was dismissed as architect in 1878 and succeeded by George Gilbert Scott, who, after extending the chapel, provided additional accommodation with the construction of New Court in 1881, with letters on a series of shields along the string course above the first floor spelling out the text from Psalm 127:1, (\"Except the Lord build the house, their labour is but vain that build it\").\nBuilding work continued into the 20th century with W. D. Car\u00f6e as architect. He added Pitt Building (M staircase) between Ivy Court and Waterhouse's Lodge, and extended New Court with the construction of O staircase on the other side of the Lodge. He linked his two buildings with an arched stone screen, Car\u00f6e Bridge, along Pembroke Street in a late Baroque style, the principal function of which was to act as a bridge by which undergraduates might cross the Master's forecourt at first-floor level from Pitt Building to New Court without leaving the college or trespassing in what was then the Fellows' Garden.\nIn 1926, as the Fellows had become increasingly disenchanted with Waterhouse's Hall, Maurice Webb was brought in to remove the open roof, put in a flat ceiling and add two storeys of sets above. The wall between the Hall and the Fellows' Parlour was taken down, and the latter made into a High Table dais. A new Senior Parlour was then created on the ground floor of Hitcham Building. The remodelling work was completed in 1949 when Murray Easton replaced the Gothic tracery of the windows with a simpler design in the style of the medieval Hall.\nIn 1933 Maurice Webb built a new Master's Lodge in the south-east corner of the College gardens, on land acquired from Peterhouse in 1861. Following the war, further accommodation was created with the construction in 1957 of Orchard Building, so called because it stands on part of the Foundress's orchard. Finally, in a move to accommodate the majority of junior members on the College site rather than in hostels in the town, in the 1990s Eric Parry designed a new range of buildings on the site of the Master's Lodge, with a new Lodge at the west end. \"Foundress Court\" was opened in 1997 in celebration of the college's 650th Anniversary. In 2001 the Library was extended to the east and modified internally.\nIn 2017, Pembroke College launched a new campaign of extension called the \"Time and The Place\" (or the Mill Lane project), on the other side of Trumpington Street. The project is to enlarge the size of the college by a third, with new social spaces, rooms and offices.\nGardens.\nPembroke's enclosed grounds include garden areas. Highlights include \"The Orchard\" (a patch of semi-wild ground in the centre of the college), an impressive row of Plane Trees and a bowling green, re-turfed in 1996, which is reputed to be among the oldest in continual use in Europe.\nTraditions.\nPembroke holds Formal Hall four evenings a week depending on the student's qualifications: a separate Hall is held for BA students. Students of the college must wear gowns and arrive on time for Latin Grace, which starts the dinner. Like many Cambridge colleges, Pembroke also has an annual May Ball.\nAccording to popular legends, Pembroke is inhabited by ghosts occupying the Ivy Court.\nCoat of arms.\nThe arms of Pembroke College were officially recorded in 1684. The formal blazon combines the arms of De Valence (bars), dimidiated with the arms of St. Pol (vair). It is described as :\n\"Barry of ten argent and azure, an orle of five martlets gules dimidiated with paly vair and gules, on a chief Or a label of five points throughout azure.\"\nStudent life.\nPembroke College has both graduate and undergraduate students, termed Valencians, after the college's original name, and its recreational rooms named as \"parlours\" rather than the more standard \"combination room\". The undergraduate student body is represented by the Junior Parlour Committee (JPC). The graduate community is represented by the Graduate Parlour Committee (GPC). In March 2016, the Junior Parlour Committee was featured in national newspapers after it cancelled the theme of an \"Around The World in 80 Days\" dance party.\nThere are many sports and societies organised by members of the college. Amongst the most established are Pembroke College Boat Club and the Pembroke Players, the college's dramatic society which has been made famous by alumni including Peter Cook, Eric Idle, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Clive James and Bill Oddie, and is now in its 67th year. Pembroke College Association Football Club (PCAFC) and Women's Association Football Club (PCWAFC) compete separately in collegiate competitions. Chrembroke Hockey Club (PCHC) compete jointly with Christ's College, and Pirton RUFC, the rugby union team, are merged with Girton College.\nFemale undergraduates were first admitted to the college in 1984.\nInternational Programmes.\nPembroke is the only Cambridge College to have an International Programmes Department, providing opportunities for nearly fifty years for international students to spend a semester or the summer in Cambridge. \nThe Semester Programmes run from September to December as the Fall Semester Programme and from January to June as the Spring Semester Programme, with around forty students on each programme. In addition, a small number of students stay for the whole academic year on both programmes, known as the Combined Semester Programme. The Semester Programmes are highly competitive programmes for academically outstanding students who wish to follow a regular Cambridge degree course as fully matriculated members of the University. \nIn the summer the College offers the six-week Pembroke Cambridge Summer Programme. Around 250 students from around the world attend the programme and take three courses from a broad range of disciplines. The programme offers students the chance to take courses from outside their major as well as experience the Cambridge model of teaching through the additional Independent Supervision Research Project option. Students attend Formal Halls, where three-course candlelit meals are served in Pembroke\u2019s historic dining hall. Students also attend a series of plenary lectures lead by \"eminent figures of University and public life, on a diverse range of topics\u201d. Social activities such as punting and museum visits are organised in and around Cambridge by Programme Assistants, who are current Cambridge undergraduates.\nStudents can also study and conduct research at Pembroke remotely on the Online Summer Research Programme and Online Capstone Programme. The International Programmes Department also runs programmes for Japanese partners as well as language and internship opportunities in Japan for Pembroke undergraduates.\nInstitutions named after the college.\nPembroke College in Brown University, the former women's college at Brown University in the United States, was named for the principal building on the women's campus, Pembroke Hall, which was itself named in honour of the Pembroke College (Cambridge) alumnus Roger Williams, a co-founder of Rhode Island.\nIn 1865 Pembroke College, Cambridge donated land for the formation of the Suffolk memorial to Prince Albert. The land at Framlingham in the county of Suffolk was used to build a school, The Albert Memorial College. The school today is known as Framlingham College and one of its seven houses is named Pembroke House in recognition of the contribution Pembroke College has made to the school.\nIn 1981, a decade after the merger of Pembroke College into Brown University, the Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women there was named in honour of Pembroke College and the history of women's efforts to gain access to higher education.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24928", "revid": "50990236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24928", "title": "Prime ideal", "text": "Ideal in a ring which has properties similar to prime elements\n In algebra, a prime ideal is a subset of a ring that shares many important properties of a prime number in the ring of integers. The prime ideals for the integers are the sets that contain all the multiples of a given prime number, together with the zero ideal. \nPrimitive ideals are prime, and prime ideals are both primary and semiprime.\nPrime ideals for commutative rings.\nDefinition.\nAn ideal P of a commutative ring R is prime if it has the following two properties:\nThis generalizes the following property of prime numbers, known as Euclid's lemma: if \"p\" is a prime number and if \"p\" divides a product \"ab\" of two integers, then \"p\" divides \"a\" or \"p\" divides \"b\". We can therefore say\nA positive integer n is a prime number if and only if formula_1 is a prime ideal in formula_2\nThe set of prime ideals of a commutative ring \"R\" is known as its (prime) spectrum and is denoted formula_3. Depending on context, this terminology and notation are also used to refer to the set of prime ideals equipped with additional structures, a topology and a sheaf of rings, that make it a geometric object known as an affine scheme.\nAlternative Definition.\nAn equivalent and potentially easier to understand definition is as follows.\nLet R be a commutative ring. An ideal I of R is prime if it has the following property:\nThis property is mathematically equivalent to the standard definition used above as it was derived using the contrapositive.\nExamples.\n 0 forms a prime ideal (even a maximal ideal) in R.\nformula_20\nAlthough the first two rings are integral domains (in fact the first is a UFD) the last is not an integral domain since it is isomorphic to\nformula_21\nsince formula_22 factors into formula_23, which implies the existence of zero divisors in the quotient ring, preventing it from being isomorphic to formula_24 and instead to non-integral domain formula_25 (by the Chinese remainder theorem).\nThis shows that the ideal formula_26 is not prime. (See the first property listed below.)\nformula_28 \nbut neither formula_29 nor formula_30 are elements of the ideal.\nProperties.\n {1}, we have Krull's theorem, and this recovers the maximal ideals of R. Another prototypical m-system is the set, {\"x\", \"x\"2, \"x\"3, \"x\"4, ...}, of all positive powers of a non-nilpotent element.\n (\"x\"2 + \"y\"2 \u2212 1) and \"Q\" \n (\"x\") (the ideals generated by \"x\"2 + \"y\"2 \u2212 1 and \"x\" respectively). Their sum \"P\" + \"Q\" \n (\"x\"2 + \"y\"2 \u2212 1, \"x\") \n (\"y\"2 \u2212 1, \"x\") however is not prime: \"y\"2 \u2212 1 \n (\"y\" \u2212 1)(\"y\" + 1) \u2208 \"P\" + \"Q\" but its two factors are not. Alternatively, the quotient ring has zero divisors so it is not an integral domain and thus \"P\" + \"Q\" cannot be prime. \nUses.\nOne use of prime ideals occurs in algebraic geometry, where varieties are defined as the zero sets of ideals in polynomial rings. It turns out that the irreducible varieties correspond to prime ideals. In the modern abstract approach, one starts with an arbitrary commutative ring and turns the set of its prime ideals, also called its spectrum, into a topological space and can thus define generalizations of varieties called schemes, which find applications not only in geometry, but also in number theory.\nThe introduction of prime ideals in algebraic number theory was a major step forward: it was realized that the important property of unique factorisation expressed in the fundamental theorem of arithmetic does not hold in every ring of algebraic integers, but a substitute was found when Richard Dedekind replaced elements by ideals and prime elements by prime ideals; see Dedekind domain.\nPrime ideals for noncommutative rings.\nThe notion of a prime ideal can be generalized to noncommutative rings by using the commutative definition \"ideal-wise\". Wolfgang Krull advanced this idea in 1928. The following content can be found in texts such as Goodearl's and Lam's. If R is a (possibly noncommutative) ring and P is a proper ideal of R, we say that P is prime if for any two ideals A and B of R:\nIt can be shown that this definition is equivalent to the commutative one in commutative rings. It is readily verified that if an ideal of a noncommutative ring R satisfies the commutative definition of prime, then it also satisfies the noncommutative version. An ideal P satisfying the commutative definition of prime is sometimes called a completely prime ideal to distinguish it from other merely prime ideals in the ring. Completely prime ideals are prime ideals, but the converse is not true. For example, the zero ideal in the ring of \"n\"\u2009\u00d7\u2009\"n\" matrices over a field is a prime ideal, but it is not completely prime.\nThis is close to the historical point of view of ideals as ideal numbers, as for the ring formula_33 \"A is contained in P\" is another way of saying \"P divides A\", and the unit ideal R represents unity.\nEquivalent formulations of the ideal \"P\" \u2260 \"R\" being prime include the following properties:\nPrime ideals in commutative rings are characterized by having multiplicatively closed complements in R, and with slight modification, a similar characterization can be formulated for prime ideals in noncommutative rings. A nonempty subset \"S\" \u2286 \"R\" is called an m-system if for any a and b in S, there exists r in R such that \"arb\" is in S. The following item can then be added to the list of equivalent conditions above:\nImportant facts.\n {1}, we have Krull's theorem, and this recovers the maximal ideals of R. Another prototypical m-system is the set, {\"x\", \"x\"2, \"x\"3, \"x\"4, ...}, of all positive powers of a non-nilpotent element.\nConnection to maximality.\nPrime ideals can frequently be produced as maximal elements of certain collections of ideals. For example:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24929", "revid": "50591480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24929", "title": "PC-FX", "text": "1994 video game console\nThe is a 32-bit home video game console co-developed by NEC and Hudson Soft. Released in December 1994, it is based on the NEC V810 CPU and CD-ROM, and was intended as the successor to the PC Engine (known overseas as the TurboGrafx-16). Unlike its predecessor, the PC-FX was only released in Japan.\nIts form factor is like that of a tower PC, intended to be similarly upgradeable. The PC-FX was uncompelling in the marketplace due to lack of a 3D polygon-based graphics chip, high price, and limited developer support and is considered a commercial failure. It was discontinued in February 1998 and NEC subsequently exited the home video game console business.\nHistory.\nIn 1987, NEC partnered with game publisher Hudson Soft to create the PC Engine, released internationally as the TurboGrafx-16. The PC Engine was successful in Japan, but the TG-16 struggled in overseas markets.\nThe success of the PC Engine created a strong relationship between NEC and Hudson, who began work on a true successor (as opposed to the SuperGrafx, an upgraded PC Engine that had been released the year before to low sales and was already discontinued) as early as 1990. The companies designed a prototype system known as \"Tetsujin\" (\"Iron Man\"), a 32-bit console with full-screen video playback, 2 megabytes of RAM, and CD-ROM. NEC designed the console itself based on its previous experience with electronics, and Hudson provided the necessary custom chipset and co-processors. The prototype was announced in 1992 and presented to companies that expressed interest. To demonstrate the system's capabilities, Hudson created a version of \"Star Soldier\" displaying 3D objects over pre-rendered backdrops. When this presentation garnered considerable support, NEC and Hudson began to move forward with the project.\nThe Tetsujin was originally set to be released in 1992, but the lack of completed games pushed the launch date to early 1993, which was also skipped. Publications speculated that the PC Engine's continued success in the market made NEC and Hudson reluctant to release a succeeding platform. The release of technologically-superior consoles in late 1993, such as the Atari Jaguar and 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, made the Tetsujin's hardware look more dated by comparison. Publications grew skeptical on how well it would perform in the market due to its inferior hardware and the amount of competing platforms. While NEC and Hudson knew that the system's technology was unimpressive, time constraints prevented them from designing a new one from scratch. Instead, the system was redesigned to resemble a PC tower with slots that allowed for future modules to increase its capabilities. Very little of the hardware itself was changed from the Tetsujin prototype, although it upgraded to a new 32-bit V-810 RISC CPU. The system was renamed to the PC-FX, the \"PC\" believed to be a nod to the PC Engine brand. Unusual for a fifth generation console, the PC-FX does not have a polygon graphics processor. NEC's reasoning for this was that polygon processors of the time were relatively low-powered, resulting in figures having a blocky appearance, and that it would be better for games to use pre-rendered polygon graphics instead.\nThe PC-FX was announced in late 1993 and showcased at the 1994 Tokyo Toy Show in June. Presented alongside several competing systems\u2014the PlayStation, Sega Saturn, Neo Geo CD, and Bandai Playdia\u2014its PC tower design was met with ridicule from commentators. Hudson demonstrated \"FX Fighter\", a full-motion video fighting game created in response to Sega's \"Virtua Fighter\", to showcase the system's capabilities. Its smooth-shaded polygonal visuals were met with praise from publications, which contributed to the anticipated launch of the console. The system's target audience was roughly five years older than that of the PC Engine, in hopes that PC Engine fans would be brought over to the successor console. The console was launched in Japan on December 23, 1994 at the price of \u00a549,800. In an interview roughly a year before the system launch, a representative stated that NEC had all but ruled out a release outside Japan, concluding that it would most likely sell poorly overseas due to its high price.\nThe PC-FX was discontinued in early 1998 with only 300,000 units sold.\nTechnical specifications.\nThe PC-FX uses CD-ROMs as its storage medium, following on from the expansion released for its HuCard based predecessor. The game controller is virtually identical to a DUO-RX controller, but the rapid fire switches have been replaced with mode A/B switches. Peripherals include a PC-FX mouse, which is supported by strategy games like \"Farland Story FX\" and \"Power DoLLS FX\".\nThe PC-FX uses the HuC6270 and HuC6271 graphic chips, and is able to decompress 30 JPEG pictures per second while playing digitally recorded audio, essentially a form of Motion JPEG. This gives the PC-FX superior full motion video quality over all other fifth generation consoles.\nThe PC-FX's computer-like form factor was unusual for consoles at the time. It stands upright like a tower computer while other contemporary consoles lay flat, and it has three expansion ports. Similar to the 3DO, it features a built in power supply.\nThe PC-FX includes an HU 62 series 32-bit system board, an LSI chip, and a 32-bit V-810 RISC CPU. The system can display 16.77 million colors (the same amount as the PlayStation).\nUnusual for a fifth generation console, the PC-FX does not have a polygon graphics processor. NEC's reasoning for this was that polygon processors of the time were relatively low-powered, resulting in figures having a blocky appearance, and that it would be better for games to use pre-rendered polygon graphics instead.\nPC-FXGA.\nNEC also released the PC-FXGA (\"game accelerator\") expansion cards for PC-9800 and DOS/V computers, allowing those computers to play PC-FX games. The PC-9800 version is a combination of two cards, while the DOS/V variant uses a single ISA card. Both cards integrate an additional 3D chipset (Kubota/Hudson HuC6273) over the regular PC-FX. Unlike most computer graphics accelerators of the time, (as well as arguably the most comparable device to it, the Creative Labs 3DO Blaster) the PC-FXGA outputs over a separate video connection rather than from the PC's interface itself. This makes use of the card somewhat cumbersome, as games are still booted using the DOS prompt, and therefore requiring one to use either a second monitor or an input switcher. The relatively high price of the card, coupled with the state of the PC-FX itself, resulted in the card selling poorly, below even the sales of the dedicated PC-FX unit. The card has since become highly sought after by vintage PC hardware collectors due to its scarcity.\nLibrary.\nThe library consists of 62 games. The launch games were \"Graduation 2: Neo Generation FX\", \"Battle Heat\", and \"Team Innocent\" on December 23, 1994 and the final game released was \"First Kiss Story\" on April 24, 1998. The system and all games were only released in Japan. A number of demo discs were released with publications which allow the user to play the disc in a CD-equipped PC Engine or the PC-FX.\nNEC directed Hudson Soft, continuing their partnership over the PC Engine, to develop only games based on popular anime franchises and using prerendered animated footage. Though this policy played to the hardware's strengths, it barred Hudson Soft from bringing successful PC Engine series such as \"Bomberman\" and \"Bonk\" to the PC-FX.\nReception.\nShortly after the PC-FX launched, \"Famitsu\" awarded the console an 18 out of 40, one point lower than the score it gave the PlayStation. A writer for \"Ultimate Future Games\" in April 1995 said the PC-FX had impressively competitive hardware, but its game library relied largely on animation over gameplay, so readers should \"[not] expect much just yet\". \"Game Criticism\" writers believed the system was troubled by a weak software lineup and a lack of innovation and creativity from NEC, and served as an unsuitable and inferior follow-up to the PC Engine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24930", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24930", "title": "Polymorphism in object-oriented programming", "text": ""}
{"id": "24931", "revid": "50717717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24931", "title": "Psychotherapy", "text": "Clinically applied psychology for desired behavior change\nPsychotherapy (also psychological therapy, talk therapy, or talking therapy) is the use of psychological methods, particularly when based on regular personal interaction, to help a person change behavior, increase happiness, and overcome problems. Psychotherapy aims to improve an individual's well-being and mental health, to resolve or mitigate troublesome behaviors, beliefs, compulsions, thoughts, or emotions, and to improve relationships and social skills. Numerous types of psychotherapy have been designed either for individual adults, families, or children and adolescents. Some types of psychotherapy are considered evidence-based for treating diagnosed mental disorders; other types have been criticized as pseudoscience.\nThere are hundreds of psychotherapy techniques, some being minor variations; others are based on very different conceptions of psychology. Most approaches involve one-to-one sessions, between the client and therapist, but some are conducted with groups, including couples and families.\nPsychotherapists may be mental health professionals such as psychiatrists, psychologists, mental health nurses, clinical social workers, marriage and family therapists, or licensed professional counselors. Psychotherapists may also come from a variety of other backgrounds, and depending on the jurisdiction may be legally regulated, voluntarily regulated or unregulated (and the term itself may be protected or not).\nIt has shown general efficacy across a range of conditions, although its efficacy varies by individual and condition. While large-scale reviews support its benefits, debates continue over the best methods for evaluating outcomes, including the use of randomized controlled trials versus individualized approaches. A 2022 umbrella review of 102 meta-analyses found that effect sizes for both psychotherapies and medications were generally small, leading researchers to recommend a paradigm shift in mental health research. Although many forms of therapy differ in technique, they often produce similar outcomes, leading to theories that common factors\u2014such as the therapeutic relationship\u2014are key drivers of efficacy. Challenges include high dropout rates, limited understanding of mechanisms of change, potential adverse effects, and concerns about therapist adherence to treatment fidelity. Critics have raised questions about psychotherapy's scientific basis, cultural assumptions, and power dynamics, while others argue it is underutilized compared to pharmacological treatments.\nDefinitions.\nThe term \"psychotherapy\" is derived from Ancient Greek \"\" ( meaning \"breath; spirit; soul\") and \"therapeia\" ( \"healing; medical treatment\"). The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines it as \"The treatment of disorders of the mind or personality by psychological means...\", however, in earlier use, it denoted the treatment of disease through hypnotic suggestion. Psychotherapy is often dubbed as a \"talking therapy\" or \"talk therapy\", particularly for a general audience, though not all forms of psychotherapy rely on verbal communication. Children or adults who do not engage in verbal communication (or not in the usual way) are not excluded from psychotherapy; indeed some types are designed for such cases.\nThe American Psychological Association adopted a resolution on the effectiveness of psychotherapy in 2012 based on a definition developed by American psychologist John C. Norcross: \"Psychotherapy is the informed and intentional application of clinical methods and interpersonal stances derived from established psychological principles for the purpose of assisting people to modify their behaviors, cognitions, emotions, and/or other personal characteristics in directions that the participants deem desirable\". Influential editions of a work by psychiatrist Jerome Frank defined psychotherapy as a healing relationship using socially authorized methods in a series of contacts primarily involving words, acts and rituals\u2014which Frank regarded as forms of persuasion and rhetoric. Historically, psychotherapy has sometimes meant \"interpretative\" (i.e. Freudian) methods, namely psychoanalysis, in contrast with other methods to treat psychiatric disorders such as behavior modification.\nSome definitions of counseling overlap with psychotherapy (particularly in non-directive client-centered approaches), or counseling may refer to guidance for everyday problems in specific areas, typically for shorter durations with a less medical or \"professional\" focus. Somatotherapy refers to the use of physical changes as injuries and illnesses, and sociotherapy to the use of a person's social environment to effect therapeutic change. Psychotherapy may address spirituality as a significant part of someone's mental / psychological life, and some forms are derived from spiritual philosophies, but practices based on treating the spiritual as a separate dimension are not necessarily considered as traditional or 'legitimate' forms of psychotherapy.\nDelivery.\nPsychotherapy may be delivered in person (one on one, or with couples, with families, or, in groups) or via telephone counseling or online counseling (see also ). There have also been developments in computer-assisted therapy, such as virtual reality therapy for behavioral exposure, multimedia programs to teach cognitive techniques, and handheld devices for improved monitoring or putting ideas into practice (see also ).\nMost forms of psychotherapy use spoken conversation. Some also use various other forms of communication such as the written word, artwork, drama, narrative story or music. Psychotherapy with children and their parents often involves play, dramatization (i.e. role-play), and drawing, with a co-constructed narrative from these non-verbal and displaced modes of interacting.\nSome therapeutic settings use digital tools to help with session documentation. Ambient systems, for example, employ speech recognition that captures clinician\u2013patient dialogue and generates draft notes for later review. These tools, offered by various vendors including Twofold Health, must comply with privacy and security requirements such as those set out in HIPAA.\nRegulation.\nPsychotherapists traditionally may be mental health professionals like psychologists and psychiatrists; professionals from other backgrounds (family therapists, social workers, nurses, etc.) who have trained in a specific psychotherapy; or (in some cases) academic or scientifically trained professionals. In addition to the training, many countries require psychotherapist to register with a professional body in order to be permitted to offer services.\nPsychiatrists are trained first as physicians, and as such they may prescribe prescription medication; and specialist psychiatric training begins after medical school in psychiatric residencies: however, their specialty is in mental disorders or forms of mental illness. Clinical psychologists have specialist doctoral degrees in psychology with some clinical and research components. Other clinical practitioners, social workers, mental health counselors, pastoral counselors, and nurses with a specialization in mental health, also often conduct psychotherapy. Many of the wide variety of psychotherapy training programs and institutional settings are multi-professional. In most countries, psychotherapy training is completed at a postgraduate level, often at a master's degree (or doctoral) level, over four years, with significant clinical supervision and clinical placements. Mental health professionals that choose to specialize in psychotherapeutic work also require a program of continuing professional education after basic professional training.\nA listing of the extensive professional competencies of a European psychotherapist was developed by the European Association of Psychotherapy (EAP) in 2013.\nAs sensitive and deeply personal topics are often discussed during psychotherapy, therapists are expected, and usually legally bound, to respect client or patient confidentiality. The critical importance of client confidentiality\u2014and the limited circumstances in which it may need to be broken for the protection of clients or others\u2014is enshrined in the regulatory psychotherapeutic organizations' codes of ethical practice. Examples of when it is typically accepted to break confidentiality include when the therapist has knowledge that a child or elder is being physically abused; when there is a direct, clear and imminent threat of serious physical harm to self or to a specific individual. In some countries psychotherapists are required by law to be mandated reporters.\nEurope.\nAs of 2015, there are still a lot of variations between different European countries about the regulation and delivery of psychotherapy. Several countries have no regulation of the practice or no protection of the title. Some have a system of voluntary registration, with independent professional organizations, while other countries attempt to restrict the practice of psychotherapy to 'mental health professionals' (psychologists and psychiatrists) with state-certified training. The titles that are protected also vary. The European Association for Psychotherapy (EAP) established the 1990 Strasbourg Declaration on Psychotherapy, which is dedicated to establishing an independent profession of psychotherapy in Europe, with pan-European standards. The EAP has already made significant contacts with the European Union &amp; European Commission towards this end.\nGiven that the European Union has a primary policy about the free movement of labor within Europe, European legislation can overrule national regulations that are, in essence, forms of restrictive practices.\nIn Germany, the practice of psychotherapy for adults is restricted to qualified psychologists and physicians (including psychiatrists) who have completed several years of specialist practical training and certification in psychotherapy. As psychoanalysis, psychodynamic therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and systemic therapy meet the requirements of German health insurance companies, mental health professionals regularly opt for one of these four specializations in their postgraduate training. For psychologists, this includes three years of full-time practical training (4,200 hours), encompassing a year-long internship at an accredited psychiatric institution, six months of clinical work at an outpatient facility, 600 hours of supervised psychotherapy in an outpatient setting, and at least 600 hours of theoretical seminars. Social workers may complete the specialist training for child and teenage clients. Similarly in Italy, the practice of psychotherapy is restricted to graduates in psychology or medicine who have completed four years of recognised specialist training. Sweden has a similar restriction on the title \"psychotherapist\", which may only be used by professionals who have gone through a post-graduate training in psychotherapy and then applied for a licence, issued by the National Board of Health and Welfare.\nLegislation in France restricts the use of the title \"psychotherapist\" to professionals on the National Register of Psychotherapists, which requires a training in clinical psychopathology and a period of internship which is only open to physicians or titulars of a master's degree in psychology or psychoanalysis.\nAustria and Switzerland (2011) have laws that recognize multi-disciplinary functional approaches. \nIn the United Kingdom, the government and Health and Care Professions Council considered mandatory legal registration but decided that it was best left to professional bodies to regulate themselves, so the Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care (PSA) launched an Accredited Voluntary Registers scheme. Counseling and psychotherapy are not protected titles in the United Kingdom. Counsellors and psychotherapists who have trained and qualify to a certain standard (usually a level 4 Diploma) can apply to be members of the professional bodies who are listed on the PSA Accredited Registers.\nUnited States.\nIn some states, counselors or therapists must be licensed to use certain words and titles on self-identification or advertising. In some other states, the restrictions on practice are more closely associated with the charging of fees. Licensing and regulation are performed by various states. Presentation of practice as licensed, but without such a license, is generally illegal. Without a license, for example, a practitioner cannot bill insurance companies. Information about state licensure of psychologists is provided by the American Psychological Association.\nIn addition to state laws, the American Psychological Association requires its members to adhere to its published \"Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct\". The American Board of Professional Psychology examines and certifies \"psychologists who demonstrate competence in approved specialty areas in professional psychology\".\nCanada.\nRegulation of psychotherapy is in the jurisdiction of, and varies among, the provinces and territories.\nIn Quebec, psychotherapy is a regulated activity which is restricted to psychologists, medical doctors, and holders of a psychotherapy permit issued by the Ordre des psychologues du Qu\u00e9bec, the Quebec order of psychologists. Members of certain specified professions, including social workers, couple and family therapists, occupational therapists, guidance counsellors, criminologists, sexologists, psychoeducators, and registered nurses may obtain a psychotherapy permit by completing certain educational and practice requirements; their professional oversight is provided by their own professional orders. Some other professionals who were practising psychotherapy before the current system came into force continue to hold psychotherapy permits alone.\nOn 1 July 2019, Ontario's Missing Persons Act came into effect, with the purpose of giving police more power to investigate missing persons. It allows police to require (as opposed to permit) health professionals, including psychotherapists, to share otherwise confidential documents about their client, if there is reason to believe their client is missing. Some have expressed concern that this legislation undermines psychotherapy confidentiality and could be abused maliciously by police, while others have praised the act for how it respects privacy and includes checks and balances.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia the peak regulatory bodies are the Australian Counselling Association (ACA) and Psychotherapy and Counselling Federation of Australia (PACFA).\nOn the 13th of October 2025, the National Standards for Counsellors and Psychotherapists entered the counsultation stage.The standards define career stages that have specified requirements in the level of education, training and experience expected of counsellors or psychotherapists at each level. These stages are mapped to the Australian Qualifications Framework.\nHistory.\nPsychotherapy can be said to have been practiced through the ages, as medics, philosophers, spiritual practitioners and people in general used psychological methods to heal others.\nIn the Western tradition, by the 19th century, a moral treatment movement (then meaning morale or mental) developed based on non-invasive non-restraint therapeutic methods. Another influential movement was started by Franz Mesmer (1734\u20131815) and his student Armand-Marie-Jacques de Chastenet, Marquis of Puys\u00e9gur (1751\u20131825). Called Mesmerism or animal magnetism, it would have a strong influence on the rise of dynamic psychology and psychiatry as well as theories about hypnosis. In 1853, Walter Cooper Dendy introduced the term \"psycho-therapeia\" regarding how physicians might influence the mental states of patients and thus their bodily ailments, for example by creating opposing emotions to promote mental balance. Daniel Hack Tuke cited the term and wrote about \"psycho-therapeutics\" in 1872 in his book \"Illustrations of the Influence of the Mind upon the Body in Health and Disease\", in which he also proposed making a science of animal magnetism.\nHippolyte Bernheim and his colleagues in the \"Nancy School\" (Ambroise-Auguste Li\u00e9beault, Henri-\u00c9tienne Beaunis, and Jules Li\u00e9geois) developed the concept of \"psychotherapy\" in the sense of using the mind to heal the body through hypnotism, yet further. Charles Lloyd Tuckey's 1889 work, \"Psycho-therapeutics, or Treatment by Hypnotism and Suggestion\" popularized the work of the Nancy School in English. Also in 1889 a clinic used the word in its title for the first time, when Frederik van Eeden and Albert Willem van Renterghem in Amsterdam renamed theirs \"Clinique de Psycho-th\u00e9rapeutique Suggestive\" after visiting Nancy. During this time, travelling stage hypnosis became popular, and such activities added to the scientific controversies around the use of hypnosis in medicine. Also in 1892, at the second congress of experimental psychology, van Eeden attempted to take the credit for the term psychotherapy and to distance the term from hypnosis. In 1896, the German journal Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Hypnotismus, Suggestionstherapie, Suggestionslehre und verwandte psychologische Forschungen changed its name to Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Hypnotismus, Psychotherapie sowie andere psychophysiologische und psychopathologische Forschungen, which is probably the first journal to use the term. Thus psychotherapy initially meant \"the treatment of disease by psychic or hypnotic influence, or by suggestion\".\nSigmund Freud visited the Nancy School and his early neurological practice involved the use of hypnotism. However following the work of his mentor Josef Breuer\u2014in particular a case where symptoms appeared partially resolved by what the patient, Bertha Pappenheim, dubbed a \"talking cure\"\u2014Freud began focusing on conditions that appeared to have psychological causes originating in childhood experiences and the unconscious mind. He went on to develop techniques such as free association, dream interpretation, transference and analysis of the id, ego and superego. His popular reputation as the father of psychotherapy was established by his use of the distinct term \"psychoanalysis\", tied to an overarching system of theories and methods, and by the effective work of his followers in rewriting history. Many theorists, including Alfred Adler, Carl Jung, Karen Horney, Anna Freud, Otto Rank, Erik Erikson, Melanie Klein and Heinz Kohut, built upon Freud's fundamental ideas and often developed their own systems of psychotherapy. These were all later categorized as \"psychodynamic\", meaning anything that involved the psyche's conscious/unconscious influence on external relationships and the self. Sessions tended to number into the hundreds over several years.\nBehaviorism developed in the 1920s, and behavior modification as a therapy became popularized in the 1950s and 1960s. Notable contributors were Joseph Wolpe in South Africa, M.B. Shapiro and Hans Eysenck in Britain, and John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner in the United States. Behavioral therapy approaches relied on principles of operant conditioning, classical conditioning and social learning theory to bring about therapeutic change in observable symptoms. The approach became commonly used for phobias, as well as other disorders.\nSome therapeutic approaches developed out of the European school of existential philosophy. Concerned mainly with the individual's ability to develop and preserve a sense of meaning and purpose throughout life, major contributors to the field (e.g., Irvin Yalom, Rollo May) and Europe (Viktor Frankl, Ludwig Binswanger, Medard Boss, R.D.Laing, Emmy van Deurzen) attempted to create therapies sensitive to common \"life crises\" springing from the essential bleakness of human self-awareness, previously accessible only through the complex writings of existential philosophers (e.g., S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, Jean-Paul Sartre, Gabriel Marcel, Martin Heidegger, Friedrich Nietzsche). The uniqueness of the patient-therapist relationship thus also forms a vehicle for therapeutic inquiry. A related body of thought in psychotherapy started in the 1950s with Carl Rogers. Based also on the works of Abraham Maslow and his hierarchy of human needs, Rogers brought person-centered psychotherapy into mainstream focus. The primary requirement was that the client receive three core \"conditions\" from his counselor or therapist: unconditional positive regard, sometimes described as \"prizing\" the client's humanity; congruence [authenticity/genuineness/transparency]; and empathic understanding. This type of interaction was thought to enable clients to fully experience and express themselves, and thus develop according to their innate potential. Others developed the approach, like Fritz and Laura Perls in the creation of Gestalt therapy, as well as Marshall Rosenberg, founder of Nonviolent Communication, and Eric Berne, founder of transactional analysis. Later these fields of psychotherapy would become what is known as humanistic psychotherapy today. Self-help groups and books became widespread.\nDuring the 1950s, Albert Ellis originated rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT). Independently a few years later, psychiatrist Aaron T. Beck developed a form of psychotherapy known as cognitive therapy. Both of these included relatively short, structured and present-focused techniques aimed at identifying and changing a person's beliefs, appraisals and reaction-patterns, by contrast with the more long-lasting insight-based approach of psychodynamic or humanistic therapies. Beck's approach used primarily the socratic method, and links have been drawn between ancient stoic philosophy and these cognitive therapies.\nCognitive and behavioral therapy approaches were increasingly combined and grouped under the umbrella term cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in the 1970s. Many approaches within CBT are oriented towards active/directive yet collaborative empiricism (a form of reality-testing), and assessing and modifying core beliefs and dysfunctional schemas. These approaches gained widespread acceptance as a primary treatment for numerous disorders. A \"third wave\" of cognitive and behavioral therapies developed, including acceptance and commitment therapy and dialectical behavior therapy, which expanded the concepts to other disorders and/or added novel components and mindfulness exercises. However the \"third wave\" concept has been criticized as not essentially different from other therapies and having roots in earlier ones as well. Counseling methods developed include solution-focused therapy and systemic coaching.\nPostmodern psychotherapies such as narrative therapy and coherence therapy do not impose definitions of mental health and illness, but rather see the goal of therapy as something constructed by the client and therapist in a social context. Systemic therapy also developed, which focuses on family and group dynamics\u2014and transpersonal psychology, which focuses on the spiritual facet of human experience. Other orientations developed in the last three decades include feminist therapy, brief therapy, somatic psychology, expressive therapy, applied positive psychology and the human givens approach. A survey of over 2,500 US therapists in 2006 revealed the most utilized models of therapy and the ten most influential therapists of the previous quarter-century.\nTypes.\nThere are hundreds of psychotherapy approaches or schools of thought. By 1980 there were more than 250; by 1996 more than 450; and at the start of the 21st century there were over a thousand different named psychotherapies\u2014some being minor variations while others are based on very different conceptions of psychology, ethics (how to live) or technique. In practice therapy is often not of one pure type but draws from a number of perspectives and schools\u2014known as an integrative or eclectic approach. Contemporary integrative models increasingly emphasize identifying and modifying recurrent cognitive, emotional, and interpersonal patterns, combining techniques from cognitive-behavioral, psychodynamic, and attachment-based frameworks. The importance of the therapeutic relationship, also known as therapeutic alliance, between client and therapist is often regarded as crucial to psychotherapy. Common factors theory addresses this and other core aspects thought to be responsible for effective psychotherapy.\nSigmund Freud (1856\u20131939), a Viennese neurologist who studied with Jean-Martin Charcot in 1885, is often considered the father of modern psychotherapy. His methods included analyzing his patient's dreams in search of important hidden insights into their unconscious minds. Other major elements of his methods, which changed throughout the years, included identification of childhood sexuality, the role of anxiety as a manifestation of inner conflict, the differentiation of parts of the psyche (id, ego, superego), transference and countertransference (the patient's projections onto the therapist, and the therapist's emotional responses to that). Some of his concepts were too broad to be amenable to empirical testing and invalidation, and he was critiqued for this by Jaspers. Numerous major figures elaborated and refined Freud's therapeutic techniques including Melanie Klein, Donald Winnicott, and others. Since the 1960s, however, the use of Freudian-based analysis for the treatment of mental disorders has declined substantially. Different types of psychotherapy have been created along with the advent of clinical trials to test them scientifically. These incorporate subjective treatments (after Beck), behavioral treatments (after Skinner and Wolpe) and additional time-constrained and centered structures, for example, interpersonal psychotherapy. In youth issue and in schizophrenia, the systems of family treatment hold esteem. A portion of the thoughts emerging from therapy are presently pervasive and some are a piece of the tool set of ordinary clinical practice. They are not just medications, they additionally help to understand complex conduct.\nTherapy may address specific forms of diagnosable mental illness, or everyday problems in managing or maintaining interpersonal relationships or meeting personal goals. A course of therapy may happen before, during or after pharmacotherapy (e.g. taking psychiatric medication).\nPsychotherapies are categorized in several different ways. A distinction can be made between those based on a medical model and those based on a humanistic model. In the medical model, the client is seen as unwell and the therapist employs their skill to help the client back to health. The extensive use of the DSM-IV, the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders in the United States is an example of a medically exclusive model. The humanistic or non-medical model in contrast strives to depathologise the human condition. The therapist attempts to create a relational environment conducive to experiential learning and help build the client's confidence in their own natural process resulting in a deeper understanding of themselves. The therapist may see themselves as a facilitator/helper.\nAnother distinction is between individual one-to-one therapy sessions, and group psychotherapy, including couples therapy and family therapy.\nTherapies are sometimes classified according to their duration; a small number of sessions over a few weeks or months may be classified as brief therapy (or short-term therapy), others, where regular sessions take place for years, may be classified as long-term.\nSome practitioners distinguish between more \"uncovering\" (or \"depth\") approaches and more \"supportive\" psychotherapy. Uncovering psychotherapy emphasizes facilitating the client's insight into the roots of their difficulties. The best-known example is classical psychoanalysis. Supportive psychotherapy by contrast stresses strengthening the client's coping mechanisms and often providing encouragement and advice, as well as reality-testing and limit-setting where necessary. Depending on the client's issues and situation, a more supportive or more uncovering approach may be optimal.\nHumanistic.\nThese psychotherapies, also known as \"experiential\", are based on humanistic psychology and emerged in reaction to both behaviorism and psychoanalysis, being dubbed the \"third force\". They are primarily concerned with the human development and needs of the individual, with an emphasis on subjective meaning, a rejection of determinism, and a concern for positive growth rather than pathology. Some posit an inherent human capacity to maximize potential, \"the self-actualizing tendency\"; the task of therapy is to create a relational environment where this tendency might flourish. Humanistic psychology can, in turn, be rooted in existentialism\u2014the belief that human beings can only find meaning by creating it. This is the goal of existential therapy. Existential therapy is in turn philosophically associated with phenomenology.\nPerson-centered therapy, also known as client-centered, focuses on the therapist showing openness, empathy and \"unconditional positive regard\", to help clients express and develop their own self.\nHumanistic Psychodrama (HPD) is based on the human image of humanistic psychology. So all rules and methods follow the axioms of humanistic psychology. The HPD sees itself as development-oriented psychotherapy and has completely moved away from the psychoanalytic catharsis theory.\nSelf-awareness and self-realization are essential aspects in the therapeutic process. Subjective experiences, feelings and thoughts and one's own experiences are the starting point for a change or reorientation in experience and behavior in the direction of more self-acceptance and satisfaction. Dealing with the biography of the individual is closely related to the sociometry of the group.\nGestalt therapy, originally called \"concentration therapy\", is an existential/experiential form that facilitates awareness in the various contexts of life, by moving from talking about relatively remote situations to action and direct current experience. Derived from various influences, including an overhaul of psychoanalysis, it stands on top of essentially four load-bearing theoretical walls: phenomenological method, dialogical relationship, field-theoretical strategies, and experimental freedom.\nA briefer form of humanistic therapy is the human givens approach, introduced in 1998\u201399. It is a solution-focused intervention based on identifying emotional needs\u2014such as for security, autonomy and social connection\u2014and using various educational and psychological methods to help people meet those needs more fully or appropriately.\nInsight-oriented.\nInsight-oriented psychotherapies focus on revealing or interpreting unconscious processes. Most commonly referring to psychodynamic therapy, of which psychoanalysis is the oldest and most intensive form, these applications of depth psychology encourage the verbalization of all the patient's thoughts, including free associations, fantasies, and dreams, from which the analyst formulates the nature of the past and present unconscious conflicts which are causing the patient's symptoms and character problems.\nThere are six main schools of psychoanalysis, which all influenced psychodynamic theory: Freudian, ego psychology, object relations theory, self psychology, interpersonal psychoanalysis, and relational psychoanalysis. Techniques for analytic group therapy have also developed.\nCognitive-behavioral.\nBehavior therapies use behavioral techniques, including applied behavior analysis (also known as behavior modification), to change maladaptive patterns of behavior to improve emotional responses, cognitions, and interactions with others. Functional analytic psychotherapy is one form of this approach. By nature, behavioral therapies are empirical (data-driven), contextual (focused on the environment and context), functional (interested in the effect or consequence a behavior ultimately has), probabilistic (viewing behavior as statistically predictable), monistic (rejecting mind-body dualism and treating the person as a unit), and relational (analyzing bidirectional interactions).\nCognitive therapy focuses directly on changing the thoughts, in order to improve the emotions and behaviors.\nCognitive behavioral therapy attempts to combine the above two approaches, focused on the construction and reconstruction of people's cognitions, emotions and behaviors. Generally in CBT, the therapist, through a wide array of modalities, helps clients assess, recognize and deal with problematic and dysfunctional ways of thinking, emoting and behaving.\nThe concept of \"third wave\" psychotherapies reflects an influence of Eastern philosophy in clinical psychology, incorporating principles such as meditation into interventions such as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, and dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder.\nInterpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a relatively brief form of psychotherapy (deriving from both CBT and psychodynamic approaches) that has been increasingly studied and endorsed by guidelines for some conditions. It focuses on the links between mood and social circumstances, helping to build social skills and social support. It aims to foster adaptation to current interpersonal roles and situations.\nExposure and response prevention (ERP) is primarily deployed by therapists in the treatment of OCD. The American Psychiatric Association (APA) state that CBT drawing primarily on behavioral techniques (such as ERP) has the \"strongest evidence base\" among psychosocial interventions. By confronting feared scenarios (i.e., exposure) and refraining from performing rituals (i.e., responsive prevention), patients may gradually feel less distress in confronting feared stimuli, while also feeling less inclination to use rituals to relieve that distress. Typically, ERP is delivered in \"hierarchical fashion\", meaning patients confront increasingly anxiety-provoking stimuli as they progress through a course of treatment.\nOther types include reality therapy/choice theory, multimodal therapy, and therapies for specific disorders including PTSD therapies such as cognitive processing therapy, substance abuse therapies such as relapse prevention and contingency management; and co-occurring disorders therapies such as Seeking Safety.\nSystemic.\nSystemic therapy seeks to address people not just individually, as is often the focus of other forms of therapy, but in relationship, dealing with the interactions of groups, their patterns and dynamics (includes family therapy and marriage counseling). Community psychology is a type of systemic psychology.\nThe term group therapy was first used around 1920 by Jacob L. Moreno, whose main contribution was the development of psychodrama, in which groups were used as both cast and audience for the exploration of individual problems by reenactment under the direction of the leader. The more analytic and exploratory use of groups in both hospital and out-patient settings was pioneered by a few European psychoanalysts who emigrated to the US, such as Paul Schilder, who treated severely neurotic and mildly psychotic out-patients in small groups at Bellevue Hospital, New York. The power of groups was most influentially demonstrated in Britain during the Second World War, when several psychoanalysts and psychiatrists proved the value of group methods for officer selection in the War Office Selection Boards. A chance to run an Army psychiatric unit on group lines was then given to several of these pioneers, notably Wilfred Bion and Rickman, followed by S. H. Foulkes, Main, and Bridger. The Northfield Hospital in Birmingham gave its name to what came to be called the two \"Northfield Experiments\", which provided the impetus for the development since the war of both social therapy, that is, the therapeutic community movement, and the use of small groups for the treatment of neurotic and personality disorders. Today group therapy is used in clinical settings and in private practice settings.\nExpressive.\nExpressive psychotherapy is a form of therapy that utilizes artistic expression (via improvisational, compositional, re-creative, and receptive experiences) as its core means of treating clients. Expressive psychotherapists use the different disciplines of the creative arts as therapeutic interventions. This includes the modalities dance therapy, drama therapy, art therapy, music therapy, writing therapy, among others. This may include techniques such as affect labeling. Expressive psychotherapists believe that often the most effective way of treating a client is through the expression of imagination in creative work and integrating and processing what issues are raised in the act.\nPostmodernist.\nAlso known as post-structuralist or constructivist. Narrative therapy gives attention to each person's \"dominant story\" through therapeutic conversations, which also may involve exploring unhelpful ideas and how they came to prominence. Possible social and cultural influences may be explored if the client deems it helpful. Coherence therapy posits multiple levels of mental constructs that create symptoms as a way to strive for self-protection or self-realization. Feminist therapy does not accept that there is one single or correct way of looking at reality and therefore is considered a postmodernist approach.\nOther.\nTranspersonal psychology addresses the client in the context of a spiritual understanding of consciousness. Positive psychotherapy (PPT) (since 1968) is a method in the field of humanistic and psychodynamic psychotherapy and is based on a positive image of humans, with a health-promoting, resource-oriented and conflict-centered approach.\nHypnotherapy is undertaken while a subject is in a state of hypnosis. Hypnotherapy is often applied in order to modify a subject's behavior, emotional content, and attitudes, as well as a wide range of conditions including: dysfunctional habits, anxiety, stress-related illness, pain management, and personal development.\nPsychedelic therapy are therapeutic practices involving psychedelic drugs, such as LSD, psilocybin, DMT, and MDMA. In psychedelic therapy, in contrast to conventional psychiatric medication taken by the patient regularly or as needed, patients generally remain in an extended psychotherapy session during the acute psychedelic activity with additional sessions both before and after in order to help integrate experiences with the psychedelics. Psychedelic therapy has been compared with the shamanic healing rituals of indigenous people. Researchers identified two main differences: the first is the shamanic belief that multiple realities exist and can be explored through altered states of consciousness, and second the belief that spirits encountered in dreams and visions are real. The charitable initiative Founders Pledge has written a research report on cost-effective giving opportunities for funding psychedelic-assisted mental health treatments.\nBody psychotherapy, part of the field of somatic psychology, focuses on the link between the mind and the body and tries to access deeper levels of the psyche through greater awareness of the physical body and emotions. There are various \"body-oriented\" approaches, such as Reichian (Wilhelm Reich) character-analytic vegetotherapy and orgonomy; neo-Reichian bioenergetic analysis; somatic experiencing; integrative body psychotherapy; Ron Kurtz's Hakomi psychotherapy; sensorimotor psychotherapy; Biosynthesis psychotherapy; and Biodynamic psychotherapy. These approaches are not to be confused with body work or body-therapies that seek to improve primarily physical health through direct work (touch and manipulation) on the body, rather than through directly psychological methods.\nSome non-Western indigenous therapies have been developed. In African countries this includes harmony restoration therapy, meseron therapy and systemic therapies based on the Ubuntu philosophy.\nIntegrative psychotherapy is an attempt to combine ideas and strategies from more than one theoretical approach. These approaches include mixing core beliefs and combining proven techniques. Forms of integrative psychotherapy include multimodal therapy, the transtheoretical model, cyclical psychodynamics, systematic treatment selection, cognitive analytic therapy, internal family systems model, multitheoretical psychotherapy and conceptual interaction. In practice, most experienced psychotherapists develop their own integrative approach over time.\nChild.\nPsychotherapy needs to be adapted to meet the developmental needs of children. Depending on age, it is generally held to be one part of an effective strategy to help the needs of a child within the family setting. Child psychotherapy training programs necessarily include courses in human development. Since children often do not have the ability to articulate thoughts and feelings, psychotherapists will use a variety of media such as musical instruments, sand and toys, crayons, paint, clay, puppets, bibliocounseling (books), or board games. The use of play therapy is often rooted in psychodynamic theory, but other approaches also exist.\nIn addition to therapy for the child, sometimes instead of it, children may benefit if their parents work with a therapist, take parenting classes, attend grief counseling, or take other action to resolve stressful situations that affect the child. Parent management training is a highly effective form of psychotherapy that teaches parenting skills to reduce their child's behavior problems.\nIn many cases a different psychotherapist will work with the care taker of the child, while a colleague works with the child. Therefore, contemporary thinking on working with the younger age group has leaned towards working with parent and child simultaneously, as well as individually as needed.\nComputer-supported.\nResearch on computer-supported and computer-based interventions has increased significantly over the course of the last two decades. The following applications frequently have been investigated:\nEffects.\nEfficacy.\nThere is considerable controversy about whether, or when, psychotherapy efficacy is best evaluated by randomized controlled trials or more individualized idiographic methods.\nOne issue with trials is what to use as a placebo treatment group or non-treatment control group. Often, this group includes patients on a waiting list, or those receiving some kind of regular non-specific contact or support. Researchers must consider how best to match the use of inert tablets or sham treatments in placebo-controlled studies in pharmaceutical trials. Several interpretations and differing assumptions and language remain. Another issue is the attempt to standardize and manualize therapies and link them to specific symptoms of diagnostic categories, making them more amenable to research. Some report that this may reduce efficacy or gloss over individual needs. Fonagy and Roth's opinion is that the benefits of the evidence-based approach outweighs the difficulties.\nThere are several formal frameworks for evaluating whether a psychotherapist is a good fit for a patient. One example is the Scarsdale Psychotherapy Self-Evaluation (SPSE). However, some scales, such as the SPS, elicit information specific to certain schools of psychotherapy alone (e.g. the superego).\nMany psychotherapists believe that the nuances of psychotherapy cannot be captured by questionnaire-style observation, and prefer to rely on their own clinical experiences and conceptual arguments to support the type of treatment they practice. Psychodynamic therapists increasingly believe that evidence-based approaches are appropriate to their methods and assumptions, and have increasingly accepted the challenge to implement evidence-based approaches in their methods.\nA pioneer in investigating the results of different psychological therapies was psychologist Hans Eysenck, who argued that psychotherapy does not produce any improvement in patients. He held that behavior therapy is the only effective one. However, it was revealed that Eysenck (who died in 1997) falsified data in his studies about this subject, fabricating data that would indicate that behavioral therapy enables achievements that are impossible to believe. Fourteen of his papers were retracted by journals in 2020, and journals issued 64 statements of concern about publications by him. Rod Buchanan, a biographer of Eysenck, has argued that 87 publications by Eysenck should be retracted.\nThe response rate of psychotherapy varies, no reliable changes due to psychotherapy can be found in up to 33% of patients.\nComparison with other treatments.\nLarge-scale international reviews of scientific studies have concluded that psychotherapy is effective for numerous conditions. A 2022 umbrella review of 102 meta-analyses found that most effect sizes reported for both psychotherapies and pharmacotherapies, compared to treatment-as-usual or placebo, were small for most disorders and treatments, and concluded that a \"paradigm shift in research\" was needed to advance the field and improve treatment strategies for mental disorders.\nOne line of research consistently found that supposedly different forms of psychotherapy show similar effectiveness. According to the 2008 edition of \"The Handbook of Counseling Psychology\": \"Meta-analyses of psychotherapy studies have consistently demonstrated that there are no substantial differences in outcomes among treatments\". The handbook stated that \"little evidence suggests that any one treatment consistently outperforms any other for any specific psychological disorders\". This is sometimes called the Dodo bird verdict after a scene/section in Alice in Wonderland where every competitor in a race was called a winner and is given prizes.\nFurther analyses seek to identify the factors that the psychotherapies have in common that seem to account for this, known as common factors theory; for example the quality of the therapeutic relationship, interpretation of problem, and the confrontation of painful emotions.\nOutcome studies have been critiqued for being too removed from real-world practice in that they use carefully selected therapists who have been extensively trained and monitored, and patients who may be non-representative of typical patients by virtue of strict inclusionary/exclusionary criteria. Such concerns impact the replication of research results and the ability to generalize from them to practicing therapists.\nHowever, specific therapies have been tested for use with specific disorders, and regulatory organizations in both the UK and US make recommendations for different conditions.\nThe Helsinki Psychotherapy Study was one of several large long-term clinical trials of psychotherapies that have taken place. Anxious and depressed patients in two short-term therapies (solution-focused and brief psychodynamic) improved faster, but five years long-term psychotherapy and psychoanalysis gave greater benefits. Several patient and therapist factors appear to predict suitability for different psychotherapies.\nMeta-analyses have established that cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and psychodynamic psychotherapy are equally effective in treating depression.\nA 2014 meta analysis over 11,000 patients reveals that Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) is of comparable effectiveness to CBT for depression but is inferior to the latter for eating disorders. For children and adolescents, interpersonal psychotherapy and CBT are the best methods according to a 2014 meta analysis of almost 4000 patients.\nAdverse effects.\nResearch on adverse effects of psychotherapy has been limited, yet worsening of symptoms may be expected to occur in 3% to 15% of patients, with variability across patient and therapist characteristics. Potential problems include deterioration of symptoms or developing new symptoms, strains in other relationships, social stigma, and therapy dependence. Some techniques or therapists may carry more risks than others, and some client characteristics may make them more vulnerable. Side-effects from properly conducted therapy should be distinguished from harms caused by malpractice.\nAdherence.\nPatient adherence to a course of psychotherapy\u2014continuing to attend sessions or complete tasks\u2014is a major issue.\nThe dropout level\u2014early termination\u2014ranges from around 30% to 60%, depending partly on how it is defined. The range is lower for research settings for various reasons, such as the selection of clients and how they are inducted. Early termination is associated on average with various demographic and clinical characteristics of clients, therapists and treatment interactions. The high level of dropout has raised some criticism about the relevance and efficacy of psychotherapy.\nMost psychologists use between-session tasks in their general therapy work, and cognitive behavioral therapies in particular use and see them as an \"active ingredient\". It is not clear how often clients do not complete them, but it is thought to be a pervasive phenomenon.\nFrom the other side, the adherence of therapists to therapy protocols and techniques\u2014known as \"treatment integrity\" or \"fidelity\"\u2014has also been studied, with complex mixed results. In general, however, it is a hallmark of evidence-based psychotherapy to use fidelity monitoring as part of therapy outcome trials and ongoing quality assurance in clinical implementation.\nMechanisms of change.\nIt is not yet understood how psychotherapies can succeed in treating mental illnesses. Different therapeutic approaches may be associated with particular theories about what needs to change in a person for a successful therapeutic outcome.\nIn general, processes of emotional arousal and memory have long been held to play an important role. One theory combining these aspects proposes that permanent change occurs to the extent that the neuropsychological mechanism of memory reconsolidation is triggered and is able to incorporate new emotional experiences.\nGeneral critiques.\nSome critics are skeptical of the healing power of psychotherapeutic relationships. Some dismiss psychotherapy altogether in the sense of a scientific discipline requiring professional practitioners, instead favoring either nonprofessional help or biomedical treatments. Others have pointed out ways in which the values and techniques of therapists can be harmful as well as helpful to clients (or indirectly to other people in a client's life).\nMany resources available to a person experiencing emotional distress\u2014the friendly support of friends, peers, family members, clergy contacts, personal reading, healthy exercise, research, and independent coping\u2014all present considerable value. Critics note that humans have been dealing with crises, navigating severe social problems and finding solutions to life problems long before the advent of psychotherapy.\nOn the other hand, some argue psychotherapy is under-utilized and under-researched by contemporary psychiatry despite offering more promise than stagnant medication development. In 2015, the US National Institute of Mental Health allocated only 5.4% of its budget to new clinical trials of psychotherapies (medication trials are largely funded by pharmaceutical companies), despite plentiful evidence they can work and that patients are more likely to prefer them.\nFurther critiques have emerged from feminist, constructionist and discourse-analytical sources. Key to these is the issue of power. In this regard there is a concern that clients are persuaded\u2014both inside and outside the consulting room\u2014to understand themselves and their difficulties in ways that are consistent with therapeutic ideas. This means that alternative ideas (e.g., feminist, economic, spiritual) are sometimes implicitly undermined. Critics suggest that we idealize the situation when we think of therapy only as a helping relationship\u2014arguing instead that it is fundamentally a political practice, in that some cultural ideas and practices are supported while others are undermined or disqualified, and that while it is seldom intended, the therapist\u2013client relationship always participates in society's power relations and political dynamics. A noted academic who espoused this criticism was Michel Foucault.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24932", "revid": "3200311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24932", "title": "Posen", "text": "Posen may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24933", "revid": "40826289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24933", "title": "Polywater", "text": "Hypothetical polymerized form of water\nPolywater was a hypothesized polymerized form of water that was the subject of much scientific controversy during the late 1960s, first described by Soviet scientist Nikolai Fedyakin. By 1969 the popular press had taken notice of Western attempts to recreate the substance and sparked fears of a \"polywater gap\" between the United States and Soviet Union. Increased press attention also brought with it increased scientific attention, and as early as 1970 doubts about its authenticity were being circulated. By 1973 it was found to be illusory, being just water with any number of common compounds contaminating it. Today, polywater is best known as an example of pathological science.\nBackground.\nIn 1961, the Soviet physicist Nikolai Fedyakin, working at the Technological Institute of Kostroma, Russia, performed measurements on the properties of water which had been condensed in, or repeatedly forced through, narrow quartz capillary tubes. Some of these experiments resulted in what was seemingly a new form of water with a higher boiling point, lower freezing point, and much higher viscosity than ordinary water \u2013 about that of a syrup.\nBoris Derjaguin, director of the laboratory for surface physics at the Institute for Physical Chemistry in Moscow, heard about Fedyakin's experiments. He improved on the method to produce the new water, and though he still produced very small quantities of this mysterious material, he did so substantially faster than Fedyakin did. Investigations of the material properties showed a substantially lower freezing point of \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C or less, a boiling point of 150\u00a0\u00b0C or greater, a density of approx. 1.1 to 1.2\u00a0g/cm3, and increased expansion with increasing temperature. The results were published in Soviet science journals, and short summaries were published in \"Chemical Abstracts\" in English, but Western scientists took no notice of the work.\nIn 1966, Derjaguin travelled to England for the \"Discussions of the Faraday Society\" in Nottingham. There, he presented the work again, and this time English scientists took note of what he referred to as \"anomalous water\". English scientists then started researching the effect as well, and by 1968 it was also under study in the United States.\nBy 1969, the concept had spread to newspapers and magazines. There was claimed interest at the Pentagon that there was a so-called \"polywater gap\" with the Soviet Union, a popular media term indicating a possible capability \"gap\", or discrepancy, between the US and the USSR, popularized by media hype of the \"bomber gap\" and the \"missile gap\", during periods when the USSR appeared to be outstripping the US in numbers of these various weapons.\nA scientific furore followed. Some experiments carried out were able to reproduce Derjaguin's findings, while others failed. Several theories were advanced to explain the phenomenon. Some proposed it was the cause for increasing resistance on trans-Atlantic phone cables, while others predicted that if polywater were to contact ordinary water, it would convert that water into polywater, echoing the doomsday scenario in Kurt Vonnegut's novel \"Cat's Cradle\". By the 1970s, polywater was well known in the general population.\nDuring this time, several people questioned the authenticity of what had come to be known in the West as polywater. The main concern was contamination of the water, but the papers went to great lengths to note the care taken to avoid this. Denis Rousseau and Sergio Porto of Bell Labs carried out infrared spectrum analysis, which showed polywater to be mostly chlorine and sodium.\nDenis Rousseau undertook an experiment with his own sweat after playing a handball game at the lab and found it had identical properties. He then published a paper suggesting polywater was nothing more than water with small amounts of biological impurities.\nAnother wave of research followed, this time more tightly controlled. Invariably, polywater could no longer be made. Chemical analysis found the samples of polywater to be contaminated with other substances (explaining the changes in melting and boiling points due to colligative properties), and examination of polywater by electron microscopy showed it also contained small particles of various solids \u2013 from silica to phospholipids, explaining its greater viscosity.\nWhen the experiments which had initially produced polywater were repeated with thoroughly cleaned glassware, the anomalous properties of the resulting water vanished, and even the scientists who had originally advanced the case for polywater agreed it did not exist.\nIn August 1973, Derjaguin and N. V. Churaev published a letter in the journal \"Nature\" in which they wrote; \"these [anomalous] properties should be attributed to impurities rather than to the existence of polymeric water molecules\".\nDenis Rousseau used polywater as a classic example of pathological science and has since written on other examples as well.\nIt has been suggested that polywater should have been dismissed on theoretical grounds. The laws of thermodynamics predicted that, since polywater had a higher boiling point than ordinary water, it meant it was more stable, and thus all of Earth's water should have turned spontaneously into polywater, instead of just part of it. Richard Feynman remarked that if such a material existed, then an animal would exist that would ingest water and excrete polywater, using the energy released from the process to survive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24934", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24934", "title": "Polywater theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "24935", "revid": "1310728700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24935", "title": "Pathological science", "text": "Area of research which persists despite being widely discredited\nPathological science is an area of research where \"people are tricked into false results ... by subjective effects, wishful thinking or threshold interactions.\" The term was first used by Irving Langmuir, Nobel Prize-winning chemist, during a 1953 colloquium at the Knolls Research Laboratory. Langmuir said a pathological science is an area of research that simply will not \"go away\"\u2014long after it was given up on as \"false\" by the majority of scientists in the field. He called pathological science \"the science of things that aren't so.\"\nIn his 2002 book, \"Undead Science\", sociology and anthropology Professor Bart Simon lists it among practices that are falsely perceived or presented to be science, \"categories ... such as ... pseudoscience, amateur science, deviant or fraudulent science, bad science, junk science, pathological science, cargo cult science, and voodoo science.\" Examples of pathological science include the Martian canals, N-rays, polywater, and cold fusion. The theories and conclusions behind all of these examples are currently rejected or disregarded by the majority of scientists.\nDefinition.\nPathological science, as defined by Langmuir, is a psychological process in which a scientist, originally conforming to the scientific method, unconsciously veers from that method, and begins a pathological process of wishful data interpretation &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Some characteristics of pathological science are:\nLangmuir never intended the term to be rigorously defined; it was simply the title of his talk on some examples of \"weird science\". As with any attempt to define the scientific endeavor, examples and counterexamples can always be found.\nLangmuir's examples.\nN-rays.\nLangmuir's discussion of N-rays has led to their traditional characterization as an instance of pathological science.\nIn 1903, Prosper-Ren\u00e9 Blondlot was working on X-rays (as were other physicists of the era) and noticed a new visible radiation that could penetrate aluminium. He devised experiments in which a barely visible object was illuminated by these N-rays, and thus became \"more visible\". Blondlot claimed that N-rays were causing a small visual reaction, too small to be seen under normal illumination, but just visible when most normal light sources were removed and the target was just barely visible to begin with.\nN-rays became the topic of some debate within the science community. After a time, American physicist Robert W. Wood decided to visit Blondlot's lab, which had moved on to the physical characterization of N-rays. An experiment passed the rays from a 2\u00a0mm slit through an aluminum prism, from which he was measuring the index of refraction to a precision that required measurements accurate to within 0.01\u00a0mm. Wood asked how it was possible that he could measure something to 0.01\u00a0mm from a 2\u00a0mm source, a physical impossibility in the propagation of any kind of wave. Blondlot replied, \"That's one of the fascinating things about the N-rays. They don't follow the ordinary laws of science that you ordinarily think of.\" Wood then asked to see the experiments being run as usual, which took place in a room required to be very dark so the target was barely visible. Blondlot repeated his most recent experiments and got the same results\u2014despite the fact that Wood had reached over and covertly sabotaged the N-ray apparatus by removing the prism.\nOther examples.\nLangmuir offered additional examples of what he regarded as pathological science in his original speech:\nLater examples.\nA 1985 version of Langmuir's speech offered more examples, although at least one of these (polywater) occurred entirely after Langmuir's death in 1957:\nNewer examples.\nSince Langmuir's original talk, a number of newer examples of what appear to be pathological science have appeared. Denis Rousseau, one of the main debunkers of polywater, gave an update of Langmuir in 1992, and he specifically cited as examples the cases of polywater, Martin Fleischmann's cold fusion and Jacques Benveniste's \"infinite dilution\".\nPolywater.\nPolywater was a form of water which appeared to have a much higher boiling point and much lower freezing point than normal water. During the 1960s, a number of articles were published on the subject, and research on polywater was done around the world with mixed results. Eventually it was determined that some of the properties of polywater could be explained by biological contamination. When more rigorous cleaning of glassware and experimental controls were introduced, polywater could no longer be produced. It took several years for the concept of polywater to die in spite of the later negative results.\nCold fusion.\nIn 1989, Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons announced the discovery of a simple and cheap procedure to obtain room-temperature nuclear fusion. Although there were multiple instances where successful results were reported, they lacked consistency and hence cold fusion came to be considered to be an example of pathological science. Two panels convened by the US Department of Energy, one in 1989 and a second in 2004, did not recommend a dedicated federal program for cold fusion research. A small number of researchers continue working in the field.\nWater memory.\nJacques Benveniste was a French immunologist who in 1988 published a paper in the prestigious scientific journal \"Nature\" describing the action of high dilutions of anti-IgE antibody on the degranulation of human basophils, findings which seemed to support the concept of homeopathy. Biologists were puzzled by Benveniste's results, as only molecules of water, and no molecules of the original antibody, remained in these high dilutions. Benveniste concluded that the configuration of molecules in water was biologically active. Subsequent investigations have not supported Benveniste's findings.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24936", "revid": "33450425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24936", "title": "Pneumatic tube", "text": "Compressed air or vacuum transport system\nPneumatic tubes (or capsule pipelines, also known as pneumatic tube transport or PTT or PTS or pneumatic tube systems ) are systems that propel cylindrical containers/carriers through networks of tubes by compressed air or by partial vacuum. They are used for transporting solid objects, as opposed to conventional pipelines which transport fluids. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries pneumatic tube networks were most often found in offices that needed to transport small, urgent packages such as mail, other paperwork, or money over relatively short distances; with most systems confined to a single building or at most an area within a city. The largest installations became quite complex in their time, but have mostly been superseded by digitisation in the information age. Some systems have been further developed in the 21st century in places such as hospitals, to send blood samples and similar time-sensitive packages to clinical laboratories for analysis.\nA small number of pneumatic transportation systems were built for larger cargo, to compete with train and subway systems. However these systems never gained popularity.\nHistory.\nHistorical use.\nPneumatic transportation was invented by William Murdoch around 1799. \"Capsule pipelines\" were first used in the Victorian era, to transmit telegrams from telegraph stations to nearby buildings. The system is known as pneumatic dispatch.\nIn 1854, Josiah Latimer Clark was issued a patent \"for conveying letters or parcels between places by the pressure of air and vacuum\". In 1853, he installed a pneumatic system between the London Stock Exchange in Threadneedle Street, London, and the offices of the Electric Telegraph Company in Lothbury. The Electric Telegraph Company used the system to acquire stock prices and other financial information to pass to subscribers of their service over their telegraph wires. This enabled much more rapid dissemination of information, as without the pneumatic system the company would have had to employ runners to carry messages between the two buildings, or else employ trained telegraph operators within the Stock Exchange. In the mid-1860s the company installed similar systems to local stock exchanges in Liverpool, Birmingham, and Manchester. After the telegraphs were nationalised in Britain the pneumatic system continued to be expanded under Post Office Telegraphs. That expansion was primarily driven by Joseph William Willmot (previously employed at the Electric &amp; International Telegraph Company) improving Latimer-Clark's invention in 1870 with the \"double sluice pneumatic valve\", and in 1880 with the \"intermediate signaller/quick break switch for pneumatic tubes\", which dramatically sped up operations and made it possible for a number of carrier messages to be in the tube at any one time. By 1880 there were over of tube in London. A tube was laid between the Aberdeen fish market office and the main post office to facilitate the rapid sale of the very perishable commodity.\nWhile they are commonly used for small parcels and documents, including cash carriers at banks or supermarkets, in the early 19th century they were proposed for transport of heavy freight. It was once envisaged that networks of massive tubes might be used to transport people.\nPneumatic tube systems in hospitals.\nHospitals deploy PTS as part of broader automation strategies to handle rising patient volumes and throughput pressures in many settings, particularly those with aging populations and high admission rates. International indicators show heterogeneous trends\u2014discharges fell in many OECD countries between 2011 and 2019, but rose substantially in others (e.g., Korea and Japan), and increased in large partner countries such as China\u2014illustrating why capacity solutions like PTS are adopted to alleviate internal logistics bottlenecks.\nHistory and adoption\nHospitals have deployed PTS for decades, with contemporary systems shifting from single-zone layouts to multi-zone architectures that connect high-traffic clinical areas. Vendors emphasize interdepartmental connectivity (e.g., pharmacy\u2013lab\u2013ward links) and auditability as part of hospital logistics.\nApplications\nLaboratory specimen transport\nPTS are widely used for routine and urgent specimen transport from wards and emergency departments to central laboratories. Studies show that, when validated, PTS can achieve fast transit times without degrading analytical quality; however, laboratories typically perform local validation because effects can vary by analyte and system design\nPharmacy logistics and Unit Dose\nHospital pharmacies use PTS to expedite medication distribution to wards and automated dispensing points. Integration with Unit Dose packaging and dispensing solutions enables patient-specific, traceable medication flows and supports closed-loop medication management. Industry systems (e.g., TheraPick; Baxter\u2019s unit-dose platforms) and hospital PTS vendors describe end-to-end traceability and secure handover at sending/receiving stations.\nAutomated handover to laboratories and pharmacies\nSome PTS installations provide automated interfaces to pre-analytical laboratory lines, allowing carriers to be received, identified, and unloaded robotically so that standard tests enter fully automated tracks with minimal manual handling. Pharmacies likewise integrate stations that enforce controlled access and electronic logging at dispatch and receipt.\nFurther Uses and Logistics Integration.\nIn the United States, drive-up banks often used pneumatic tubes to transport cash and documents between cars and tellers; by the 2020s some of these have been removed, obviated by the rise of mobile banking apps and the increasing sophistication of ATMs. Many hospitals have a computer-controlled pneumatic tube system to deliver drugs, documents, and specimens to and from laboratories and nurses' stations. Many factories use them to deliver parts quickly across large campuses. Many larger stores use systems to securely transport excess cash from checkout stands to back offices, and to send change back to cashiers. They are used in casinos to move money, chips, and cards quickly and securely. Japanese love hotels use them to allow customers to settle bills anonymously. NASA's original Mission Control Center had pneumatic tubes connecting controller consoles with staff support rooms. Mission Operations Control Room 2 was last used in its original configuration in 1992 and then remodeled for other missions. Because the room was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1985, it was decided in 2017 to restore it to its 1960s condition. The pneumatic tubes were removed and sent to the Cosmosphere in Kansas for restoration.\nPneumatic tube systems have been used in nuclear chemistry to transport samples during neutron activation analysis. Samples must be moved from the nuclear reactor core, in which they are bombarded with neutrons, to the instrument that measures the resulting radiation. As some of the radioactive isotopes in the sample can have very short half-lives, speed is important. These systems may be automated, with a magazine of sample tubes that are moved into the reactor core in turn for a predetermined time, before being moved to the instrument station and finally to a container for storage and disposal.\nUntil it closed in early 2011, a McDonald's in Edina, Minnesota claimed to be the \"World's Only Pneumatic Air Drive-Thru,\" sending food from their strip-mall location to a drive-through in the middle of a parking lot.\nTechnology editor Quentin Hardy noted renewed interest as of 2015[ [update]] in transmission of data by pneumatic tube accompanied discussions of digital network security, and he cited research into London's forgotten pneumatic network.\nTranslogic is one of the largest modern healthcare pneumatic tube providers. KUKA is a German manufacturer of industrial robots and factory automation systems. In 2016, the company was acquired by the Chinese appliance manufacturer Midea Group. KUKA acquired Swisslog in 2014 and Translogic in 1999.\nRelated applications include fish cannons which use mechanisms very similar to pneumatic tube systems.\nApplications.\nIn postal service.\nPneumatic post or pneumatic mail is a system to deliver letters through pressurized air tubes. It was invented by the Scottish engineer William Murdoch in the 19th century and was later developed by the London Pneumatic Despatch Company. Pneumatic post systems were used in several large cities starting in the second half of the 19th century (including an 1866 London system powerful and large enough to transport humans during trial runs \u2013 though not intended for that purpose), but later were largely abandoned.\nA major network of tubes in Paris (the Paris pneumatic post) was in use until 1984, when it was abandoned in favor of computers and fax machines. The Prague pneumatic post commenced for the public in 1889 in Prague, now in the Czech Republic, and the network extended approximately .\nPneumatic post stations usually connect post offices, stock exchanges, banks and ministries. Italy was the only country to issue postage stamps (between 1913 and 1966) specifically for pneumatic post. Austria, France, and Germany issued postal stationery for pneumatic use.\nTypical applications are in banks, hospitals, and supermarkets. Many large retailers used pneumatic tubes to transport cheques or other documents from cashiers to the accounting office.\nIn public transportation.\nIn 1812, George Medhurst first proposed, but never implemented, blowing passenger carriages through a tunnel. Precursors of pneumatic tube systems for passenger transport, the atmospheric railway (for which the tube was laid between the rails, with a piston running in it suspended from the train through a sealable slot in the top of the tube) were operated as follows:\nIn 1861, the London Pneumatic Despatch Company built a system large enough to move a person, although it was intended for parcels. The inauguration of the new Holborn Station on 10 October 1865 was marked by having the Duke of Buckingham, the chairman, and some company directors blown through the tube to Euston (a five-minute trip).\nThe Crystal Palace pneumatic railway was exhibited at the Crystal Palace in 1864. This was a prototype for a proposed Waterloo and Whitehall Railway that would have run under the River Thames linking Waterloo and Charing Cross. Digging commenced in 1865 but was halted in 1868 due to financial problems.\nIn 1867 at the American Institute Fair in New York, Alfred Ely Beach demonstrated a long, diameter pipe that was capable of moving 12 passengers plus a conductor. One year after New York City's first-ever elevated rail line went into service; in 1869, the Beach Pneumatic Transit Company of New York secretly constructed a long, diameter pneumatic subway line under Broadway, to demonstrate the possibilities of the new transport mode. The line only operated for a few months, closing after Beach was unsuccessful in getting permission to extend it \u2013 Boss Tweed, a corrupt influential politician, did not want it to go ahead as he was intending to personally invest into competing schemes for an elevated rail line.\nIn the 1920s, the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National Railways cooperated together to lay an elaborate system of 4,500 metre pneumatic tubing between four of their offices to Postal Station A at Union Station in Toronto, Canada. There was also a connection to the mail room at the Royal York Hotel. The newspapers the Star and Telegram joined into the system, laying pipes.\nIn the 1960s, Lockheed and MIT with the United States Department of Commerce conducted feasibility studies on a vactrain system powered by ambient atmospheric pressure and \"gravitational pendulum assist\" to connect cities on the country's East Coast. They calculated that the run between Philadelphia and New York City would average 174 meters per second, that is 626\u00a0km/h (388\u00a0mph). When those plans were abandoned as too expensive, Lockheed engineer L.K. Edwards founded Tube Transit, Inc. to develop technology based on \"gravity-vacuum transportation\". In 1967 he proposed a \"Bay Area Gravity-Vacuum Transit\" for California that would run alongside the then-under construction BART system. It was never built.\nResearch into trains running in partially evacuated tubes, such as the Vactrain and Hyperloop, is continuing.\nPneumatic elevator.\nA pneumatic elevator https:// consists of a cylindrical vertical shaft (typically made of transparent plastic), and a passenger capsule (also transparent) within the shaft which moves vertically by means of differential air pressure above and below. The main advantage that it requires neither a pit below or a loft above the shaft.\nFor ascending operations, a vacuum pump at the top of the elevator shaft creates a low pressure by drawing air from above the capsule while below the greater normal atmospheric pressure is permitted to enter at the lower (ground floor) level below the capsule providing lift.\nTo descend, electronically controlled valves inside the tubular shaft regulate the entry and exit of air within the cylinder lowering the car smoothly by means of programmed operation. In the event of a failure of the vacuum pump or electronically controlled valves, the trapped volume of air below the capsule acts as a cushion that is allowed to slowly escape by means of a mechanical valve, gently returning the capsule to the lowest level.\nIn money transfer.\nIn large retail stores, pneumatic tube systems were used to transport sales slips and money from the salesperson to a centralized tube room, where cashiers could make change, reference credit records, and so on.\nMany banks with drive-throughs also use pneumatic tubes.\nIn medicine.\nMany hospitals have pneumatic tube systems which send samples to laboratories. Blood preservations are transported, where weight and transport duration matter as well as preventing haemolysis caused by centrifugal and accelerating forces. Pneumatic tube systems are also used in hospitals to transport X-rays, patient documents, general documents, drugs and test results.\n pneumatic tube systems have been shown to handle heavy liter-capacity IV bags with significantly fewer jams compared to the systems.\nDepartment stores.\nTo manage its mail order business the department store Sears built \"massive warehouses, like its central facility in Chicago, in which messages to various departments and assembly workers were sent through pneumatic tubes\". Many other department stores had pneumatic tube systems in the 20th century, such as Jacksons of Reading and Myer in Melbourne, Australia. The National Library of Australia's building (opened 1968), incorporates a pneumatic tube system for sending book requests from the reading rooms to the book stacks. The system is no longer used, but remains partially operational, and is demonstrated on behind the scenes tours.\nWaste disposal.\nThe use of pneumatic tubes in waste disposal units include the Masjid al-Haram, Mecca, GlashusEtt in the Hammarby Sj\u00f6stad area of Stockholm (Sweden), Old Montreal (Canada), Disney World (US) and Roosevelt Island and Hudson Yards (US).\nIn production.\nPneumatic tube systems are used in production plants. Uses include conveying spare parts, measuring instruments, tools, or work pieces alongside conveyor belts or in the production process. In industrial laboratories samples are transported through the pneumatic tube systems. These can be conveyed in any physical state (solid, liquid, gas) and at any temperature. For example, the industrial company ThyssenKrupp sends steel samples through pneumatic tubes at a rate of per second from the furnace to the laboratory.\nTechnical characteristics.\nModern systems (for smaller, i.e. \u201cnormal\u201d, tube diameters as used in the transport of small capsules) reach speeds of around per second, though some historical systems already achieved speeds of per second. At the same time, varying air pressures allow capsules to brake slowly, removing the jarring arrival that used to characterise earlier systems and make them unsuitable for fragile contents.\nVery powerful systems can transport items with a weight of up to and a diameter of up to . More than 100 lines and 1000 stations can be connected.\nFurther, modern systems can be computer-controlled for tracking of any specific capsule and managing priority deliveries as well as system efficiency. With this technology, time-critical items can be transported, such as tissue samples taken during a surgery in a hospital. RFID chips within the capsules gather data \u2013 e. g. about the location of the carrier, its transport speed or its destination. The systems collect and save these data to help users optimize their internal processes and turnaround times. The facilities can be linked to the company's software systems, e.g. laboratory information systems, for full integration into company logistical management and production chains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24937", "revid": "13541347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24937", "title": "Pinzgauer", "text": "Pinzgauer may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24942", "revid": "31439127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24942", "title": "Patrilineality", "text": "Tracing of kinship through the male line\nPatrilineality, also known as the male line, the spear side or agnatic kinship, is a common kinship system in which an individual's family membership derives from and is recorded through their father's lineage. It generally involves the inheritance of property, rights, names, or titles by persons related through male kin. This is sometimes distinguished from cognate kinship, through the mother's lineage, also called the spindle side or the distaff side.\nA patriline (\"father line\") is a person's father, and additional ancestors, as traced only through males.\nIn the Bible.\nIn the Bible, family and tribal membership appears to be transmitted through the father. For example, a person is considered to be a priest or Levite, if his father is a priest or Levite, and the members of all the Twelve Tribes are called Israelites because their father is Israel (Jacob).\nIn the first lines of the New Testament, the descent of Jesus Christ is counted through the male lineage from Abraham through King David to Joseph (the husband of Mary, mother of Jesus).\nAgnatic succession.\nPatrilineal or agnatic succession gives priority to or restricts inheritance of a throne or fief to male heirs descended from the original title holder through males only. Traditionally, agnatic succession is applied in determining the names and membership of European dynasties. The prevalent forms of dynastic succession in Europe, Asia and parts of Africa were male-preference primogeniture, agnatic primogeniture, or agnatic seniority until after World War II. The agnatic succession model, also known as Salic law, meant the total exclusion of women as hereditary monarchs and restricted succession to thrones and inheritance of fiefs or land to men in parts of medieval and later Europe. This form of strict agnatic inheritance has been officially revoked in all extant European monarchies except the Principality of Liechtenstein.\nBy the 21st century, most ongoing European monarchies had replaced their traditional agnatic succession with absolute primogeniture, meaning that the first child born to a monarch inherits the throne, regardless of the child's sex.\nGenetic genealogy.\nThe fact that human Y-chromosome DNA (Y-DNA) is paternally inherited enables patrilines and agnatic kinships of men to be traced through genetic analysis.\nY-chromosomal Adam (Y-MRCA) is the patrilineal most recent common ancestor from whom all Y-DNA in living men is descended. An identification of a very rare and previously unknown Y-chromosome variant in 2012 led researchers to estimate that Y-chromosomal Adam lived 230,000 years ago. Before this discovery, estimates of the date when Y-chromosomal Adam lived were much more recent, estimated to be tens of thousands of years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24943", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24943", "title": "Patrilocality", "text": ""}
{"id": "24944", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24944", "title": "Plate tectonics", "text": "Movement of Earth's lithosphere\nPlate tectonics (from lat, from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'pertaining to building') is the scientific theory that Earth's lithosphere comprises a number of large tectonic plates, which have been slowly moving since 3\u20134 billion years ago. The model builds on the concept of continental drift, an idea developed during the first decades of the 20th century. Plate tectonics came to be accepted by geoscientists after seafloor spreading was validated in the mid- to late 1960s. The processes that result in plates and shape Earth's crust are called \"tectonics\".\nEarth's lithosphere, the rigid outer shell of the planet including the crust and upper mantle, is fractured into seven or eight major plates (depending on how they are defined) and many minor plates or \"platelets\". Where the plates meet, their relative motion determines the type of plate boundary (or fault): convergent, divergent, or transform. The relative movement of the plates typically ranges from zero to 10 cm annually. Faults tend to be geologically active, experiencing earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation.\nTectonic plates are composed of the oceanic lithosphere and the thicker continental lithosphere, each topped by its own kind of crust. Along convergent plate boundaries, the process of subduction carries the edge of one plate down under the other plate and into the mantle. This process reduces the total surface area (crust) of Earth. The lost surface is balanced by the formation of new oceanic crust along divergent margins by seafloor spreading, keeping the total surface area constant in a tectonic \"conveyor belt\".\nWhile Earth is the only planet known to currently have active plate tectonics, evidence suggests that other planets and moons have experienced or exhibit forms of tectonic activity. For example, Jupiter's moon Europa shows signs of ice crustal plates moving and interacting, similar to Earth's plate tectonics. Additionally, Mars and Venus are thought to have had past tectonic activity, though not in the same form as Earth.\nTectonic plates are relatively rigid and float across the ductile asthenosphere beneath. Lateral density variations in the mantle result in convection currents, the slow creeping motion of Earth's solid mantle. At a seafloor spreading ridge, plates move away from the ridge, which is a topographic high, and the newly formed crust cools as it moves away, increasing its density and contributing to the motion. At a subduction zone, the relatively cold, dense oceanic crust sinks down into the mantle, forming the downward convecting limb of a mantle cell, which is the strongest driver of plate motion. The relative importance and interaction of other proposed factors such as active convection, upwelling inside the mantle, and tidal drag of the Moon is still the subject of debate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKey principles.\nThe outer layers of Earth are divided into the lithosphere and asthenosphere. The division is based on differences in mechanical properties and in the method for the transfer of heat. The lithosphere is cooler and more rigid, while the asthenosphere is hotter and flows more easily. In terms of heat transfer, the lithosphere loses heat by conduction, whereas the asthenosphere also transfers heat by convection and has a nearly adiabatic temperature gradient. This division should not be confused with the \"chemical\" subdivision of these same layers into the mantle (comprising both the asthenosphere and the mantle portion of the lithosphere) and the crust: a given piece of mantle may be part of the lithosphere or the asthenosphere at different times depending on its temperature and pressure.\nThe key principle of plate tectonics is that the lithosphere exists as separate and distinct tectonic plates, which ride on the viscoelastic asthenosphere. Plate motions range from at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (about as fast as fingernails grow), to about for the Nazca plate (about as fast as hair grows).\nTectonic lithospheric plates consist of lithospheric mantle overlain by one or two types of crustal material: oceanic crust (in older texts called \"sima\" from silicon and magnesium) and continental crust (\"sial\" from silicon and aluminium). The distinction between oceanic crust and continental crust is based on their modes of formation. Oceanic crust is formed at sea-floor spreading centers. Continental crust is formed through arc volcanism and accretion of terranes through plate tectonic processes. Oceanic crust is denser than continental crust because it has less silicon and more of the heavier elements than continental crust. As a result of this density difference, oceanic crust generally lies below sea level, while continental crust buoyantly projects above sea level.\nAverage oceanic lithosphere is typically thick. Its thickness is a function of its age. As time passes, it cools by conducting heat from below, and releasing it radiatively into space. The adjacent mantle below is cooled by this process and added to its base. Because it is formed at mid-ocean ridges and spreads outwards, its thickness is therefore a function of its distance from the mid-ocean ridge where it was formed. For a typical distance that oceanic lithosphere must travel before being subducted, the thickness varies from about thick at mid-ocean ridges to greater than at subduction zones. For shorter or longer distances, the subduction zone, and therefore also the mean, thickness becomes smaller or larger, respectively. Continental lithosphere is typically about thick, though this varies considerably between basins, mountain ranges, and stable cratonic interiors of continents.\nThe location where two plates meet is called a \"plate boundary\". Plate boundaries are where geological events occur, such as earthquakes and the creation of topographic features such as mountains, volcanoes, mid-ocean ridges, and oceanic trenches. The vast majority of the world's active volcanoes occur along plate boundaries, with the Pacific plate's Ring of Fire being the most active and widely known. Some volcanoes occur in the interiors of plates, and these have been variously attributed to internal plate deformation and to mantle plumes.\nTectonic plates may include continental crust or oceanic crust, or both. For example, the African plate includes the continent and parts of the floor of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans.\nSome pieces of oceanic crust, known as ophiolites, failed to be subducted under continental crust at destructive plate boundaries; instead, these oceanic crustal fragments were pushed upward and were preserved within continental crust.\nTypes of plate boundaries.\nThree types of plate boundaries exist, characterized by the way the plates move relative to each other. They are associated with different types of surface phenomena. The different types of plate boundaries are:\nSubduction zones are of two types: ocean-to-continent subduction, where the dense oceanic lithosphere plunges beneath the less dense continent, or ocean-to-ocean subduction where older, cooler, denser oceanic crust slips beneath less dense oceanic crust. Deep marine trenches are typically associated with subduction zones, and the basins that develop along the active boundary are often called \"foreland basins\". \nEarthquakes trace the path of the downward-moving plate as it descends into asthenosphere, a trench forms, and as the subducted plate is heated it releases volatiles, mostly water from hydrous minerals, into the surrounding mantle. The addition of water lowers the melting point of the mantle material above the subducting slab, causing it to melt. The magma that results typically leads to volcanism. \nAt zones of ocean-to-ocean subduction a deep trench forms in an arc shape. The upper mantle of the subducted plate then heats and magma rises to form curving chains of volcanic islands e.g. the Aleutian Islands, the Mariana Islands, the Japanese island arc. \nAt zones of ocean-to-continent subduction mountain ranges form, e.g. the Andes, the Cascade Range.\nAt continental collision zones there are two masses of continental lithosphere converging. Since they are of similar density, neither is subducted. The plate edges are compressed, folded, and uplifted forming mountain ranges, e.g. Himalayas and Alps. Closure of ocean basins can occur at continent-to-continent boundaries.\nDriving forces of plate motion.\nTectonic plates are able to move because of the relative density of oceanic lithosphere and the relative weakness of the asthenosphere. Dissipation of heat from the mantle is the original source of the energy required to drive plate tectonics through convection or large scale upwelling and doming. As a consequence, a powerful source generating plate motion is the excess density of the oceanic lithosphere sinking in subduction zones. When the new crust forms at mid-ocean ridges, this oceanic lithosphere is initially less dense than the underlying asthenosphere, but it becomes denser with age as it conductively cools and thickens. The greater density of old lithosphere relative to the underlying asthenosphere allows it to sink into the deep mantle at subduction zones, providing most of the driving force for plate movement. The weakness of the asthenosphere allows the tectonic plates to move easily towards a subduction zone.\nDriving forces related to mantle dynamics.\nFor much of the first quarter of the 20th century, the leading theory of the driving force behind tectonic plate motions envisaged large scale convection currents in the upper mantle, which can be transmitted through the asthenosphere. This theory was launched by Arthur Holmes and some forerunners in the 1930s and was immediately recognized as the solution for the acceptance of the theory as originally discussed in the papers of Alfred Wegener in the early years of the 20th century. However, despite its acceptance, it was long debated in the scientific community because the leading theory still envisaged a static Earth without moving continents up until the major breakthroughs of the early sixties.\nTwo- and three-dimensional imaging of Earth's interior (seismic tomography) shows a varying lateral density distribution throughout the mantle. Such density variations can be material (from rock chemistry), mineral (from variations in mineral structures), or thermal (through thermal expansion and contraction from heat energy). The manifestation of this varying lateral density is mantle convection from buoyancy forces.\nHow mantle convection directly and indirectly relates to plate motion is a matter of ongoing study and discussion in geodynamics. Somehow, this energy must be transferred to the lithosphere for tectonic plates to move. There are essentially two main types of mechanisms that are thought to exist related to the dynamics of the mantle that influence plate motion which are primary (through the large scale convection cells) or secondary. The secondary mechanisms view plate motion driven by friction between the convection currents in the asthenosphere and the more rigid overlying lithosphere. This is due to the inflow of mantle material related to the downward pull on plates in subduction zones at ocean trenches. Slab pull may occur in a geodynamic setting where basal tractions continue to act on the plate as it dives into the mantle (although perhaps to a greater extent acting on both the under and upper side of the slab). Furthermore, slabs that are broken off and sink into the mantle can cause viscous mantle forces driving plates through slab suction.\nPlume tectonics.\nIn the theory of plume tectonics followed by numerous researchers during the 1990s, a modified concept of mantle convection currents is used. It asserts that super plumes rise from the deeper mantle and are the drivers or substitutes of the major convection cells. These ideas find their roots in the early 1930s in the works of Beloussov and van Bemmelen, which were initially opposed to plate tectonics and placed the mechanism in a fixed frame of vertical movements. Van Bemmelen later modified the concept in his \"Undation Models\" and used \"Mantle Blisters\" as the driving force for horizontal movements, invoking gravitational forces away from the regional crustal doming.\nThe theories find resonance in the modern theories which envisage hot spots or mantle plumes which remain fixed and are overridden by oceanic and continental lithosphere plates over time and leave their traces in the geological record (though these phenomena are not invoked as real driving mechanisms, but rather as modulators).\nThe mechanism is still advocated to explain the break-up of supercontinents during specific geological epochs. It has followers amongst the scientists involved in the theory of Earth expansion.\nSurge tectonics.\nAnother theory is that the mantle flows neither in cells nor large plumes but rather as a series of channels just below Earth's crust, which then provide basal friction to the lithosphere. This theory, called \"surge tectonics\", was popularized during the 1980s and 1990s. Recent research, based on three-dimensional computer modelling, suggests that plate geometry is governed by a feedback between mantle convection patterns and the strength of the lithosphere.\nDriving forces related to gravity.\nForces related to gravity are invoked as secondary phenomena within the framework of a more general driving mechanism such as the various forms of mantle dynamics described above. In modern views, gravity is invoked as the major driving force, through slab pull along subduction zones.\nGravitational sliding away from a spreading ridge is one of the proposed driving forces: plate motion is driven by the higher elevation of plates at ocean ridges. As oceanic lithosphere is formed at spreading ridges from hot mantle material, it gradually cools and thickens with age (and thus adds distance from the ridge). Cool oceanic lithosphere is significantly denser than the hot mantle material from which it is derived and so with increasing thickness it gradually subsides into the mantle to compensate the greater load. The result is a slight lateral incline with increased distance from the ridge axis.\nThis force is regarded as a secondary force and is often referred to as \"ridge push\". This is a misnomer as there is no force \"pushing\" horizontally, indeed tensional features are dominant along ridges. It is more accurate to refer to this mechanism as \"gravitational sliding\", since the topography across the whole plate can vary considerably and spreading ridges are only the most prominent feature. Other mechanisms generating this gravitational secondary force include flexural bulging of the lithosphere before it dives underneath an adjacent plate, producing a clear topographical feature that can offset, or at least affect, the influence of topographical ocean ridges. Mantle plumes and hot spots are also postulated to impinge on the underside of tectonic plates.\nSlab pull: Scientific opinion is that the asthenosphere is insufficiently competent or rigid to directly cause motion by friction along the base of the lithosphere. Slab pull is therefore most widely thought to be the greatest force acting on the plates. In this understanding, plate motion is mostly driven by the weight of cold, dense plates sinking into the mantle at trenches. Recent models indicate that trench suction plays an important role as well. However, the fact that the North American plate is nowhere being subducted, although it is in motion, presents a problem. The same holds for the African, Eurasian, and Antarctic plates.\nGravitational sliding away from mantle doming: According to older theories, one of the driving mechanisms of the plates is the existence of large scale asthenosphere/mantle domes which cause the gravitational sliding of lithosphere plates away from them (see the paragraph on Mantle Mechanisms). This gravitational sliding represents a secondary phenomenon of this basically vertically oriented mechanism. It finds its roots in the Undation Model of van Bemmelen. This can act on various scales, from the small scale of one island arc up to the larger scale of an entire ocean basin.\nDriving forces related to Earth rotation.\nAlfred Wegener, being a meteorologist, had proposed tidal forces and centrifugal forces as the main driving mechanisms behind continental drift; however, these forces were considered far too small to cause continental motion as the concept was of continents plowing through oceanic crust. Therefore, Wegener later changed his position and asserted that convection currents are the main driving force of plate tectonics in the last edition of his book in 1929.\nHowever, in the plate tectonics context (accepted since the seafloor spreading proposals of Heezen, Hess, Dietz, Morley, Vine, and Matthews (see below) during the early 1960s), the oceanic crust is suggested to be in motion \"with\" the continents, which caused the proposals related to Earth rotation to be reconsidered. In more recent literature, these driving forces are:\nForces that are small and generally negligible are:\nFor these mechanisms to be overall valid, systematic relationships should exist all over the globe between the orientation and kinematics of deformation and the geographical latitudinal and longitudinal grid of Earth itself. Systematic relations studies in the second half of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century underlined exactly the opposite: that the plates had not moved in time, that the deformation grid was fixed with respect to Earth's equator and axis, and that gravitational driving forces were generally acting vertically and caused only local horizontal movements (the so-called pre-plate tectonic, \"fixist theories\"). Later studies (discussed below on this page), therefore, invoked many of the relationships recognized during this pre-plate tectonics period to support their theories (see reviews of these various mechanisms related to Earth rotation in the work of van Dijk and collaborators).\nPossible tidal effect on plate tectonics.\nOf the many forces discussed above, tidal force is still highly debated and defended as a possible principal driving force of plate tectonics. The other forces are only used in global geodynamic models not using plate tectonics concepts (therefore beyond the discussions treated in this section) or proposed as minor modulations within the overall plate tectonics model.\nIn 1973, George W. Moore of the USGS and R. C. Bostrom presented evidence for a general westward drift of Earth's lithosphere with respect to the mantle, based on the steepness of the subduction zones (shallow dipping towards the east, steeply dipping towards the west). They concluded that tidal forces (the tidal lag or \"friction\") caused by Earth's rotation and the forces acting upon it by the Moon are a driving force for plate tectonics. As Earth spins eastward beneath the Moon, the Moon's gravity ever so slightly pulls Earth's surface layer back westward, just as proposed by Alfred Wegener (see above). Since 1990 this theory has been mainly advocated by Doglioni and co-workers , such as in a more recent 2006 study, where scientists reviewed and advocated these ideas. It has been suggested in that this observation may also explain why Venus and Mars have no plate tectonics, as Venus has no moon and Mars' moons are too small to have significant tidal effects on the planet. In a paper by Torsvik et al., it was suggested that, on the other hand, it can easily be observed that many plates are moving north and eastward, and that the dominantly westward motion of the Pacific Ocean basins derives simply from the eastward bias of the Pacific spreading center (which is not a predicted manifestation of such lunar forces). In the same paper the authors admit, however, that relative to the lower mantle, there is a slight westward component in the motions of all the plates. They demonstrated though that the westward drift, seen only for the past 30\u00a0Ma, is attributed to the increased dominance of the steadily growing and accelerating Pacific plate. The debate is still open, and a 2022 paper by Hofmeister et al. revived the idea of the interaction between Earth's rotation and the Moon as the main driving force for plate movement.\nRole of water.\nThe role of water has been proposed to be crucial in plate tectonics on Earth.\nRelative significance of each driving force mechanism.\nThe vector of a plate's motion is a function of all the forces acting on the plate; however, therein lies the problem regarding the degree to which each process contributes to the overall motion of each tectonic plate.\nThe diversity of geodynamic settings and the properties of each plate result from the impact of the various processes actively driving each individual plate. One method of dealing with this problem is to consider the relative rate at which each plate is moving as well as the evidence related to the significance of each process to the overall driving force on the plate.\nOne of the most significant correlations discovered to date is that lithospheric plates attached to downgoing (subducting) plates move much faster than other types of plates. The Pacific plate, for instance, is essentially surrounded by zones of subduction (the so-called Ring of Fire) and moves much faster than the plates of the Atlantic basin, which are attached (perhaps one could say 'welded') to adjacent continents instead of subducting plates. It is thus thought that forces associated with the downgoing plate (slab pull and slab suction) are the driving forces which determine the motion of plates, except for those plates which are not being subducted. This view however has been contradicted by a recent study which found that the actual motions of the Pacific plate and other plates associated with the East Pacific Rise do not correlate mainly with either slab pull or slab push, but rather with a mantle convection upwelling whose horizontal spreading along the bases of the various plates drives them along via viscosity-related traction forces. The driving forces of plate motion continue to be active subjects of on-going research within geophysics and tectonophysics.\nHistory of the theory.\nSummary.\nThe development of the theory of plate tectonics was the scientific and cultural change which occurred during a period of 50 years of scientific debate. The event of the acceptance itself was a paradigm shift and can therefore be classified as a scientific revolution, now described as the Plate Tectonics Revolution.\nAround the start of the twentieth century, various theorists unsuccessfully attempted to explain the many geographical, geological, and biological continuities between continents. In 1912, the meteorologist Alfred Wegener described what he called continental drift, an idea that culminated fifty years later in the modern theory of plate tectonics.\nWegener expanded his theory in his 1915 book \"The Origin of Continents and Oceans\". Starting from the idea (also expressed by his forerunners) that the present continents once formed a single land mass (later called Pangaea), Wegener suggested that these separated and drifted apart, likening them to \"icebergs\" of low density sial floating on a sea of denser sima. Supporting evidence for the idea came from the dove-tailing outlines of South America's east coast and Africa's west coast Antonio Snider-Pellegrini had drawn on his maps, and from the matching of the rock formations along these edges. Confirmation of their previous contiguous nature also came from the fossil plants \"Glossopteris\" and \"Gangamopteris\", and the therapsid or mammal-like reptile \"Lystrosaurus\", all widely distributed over South America, Africa, Antarctica, India, and Australia. The evidence for such an erstwhile joining of these continents was patent to field geologists working in the southern hemisphere. The South African Alex du Toit put together a mass of such information in his 1937 publication \"Our Wandering Continents\", and went further than Wegener in recognising the strong links between the Gondwana fragments.\nWegener's work was initially not widely accepted, in part due to a lack of detailed evidence but mostly because of the lack of a reasonable physically supported mechanism. Earth might have a solid crust and mantle and a liquid core, but there seemed to be no way that portions of the crust could move around. Many distinguished scientists of the time, such as Harold Jeffreys and Charles Schuchert, were outspoken critics of continental drift.\nDespite much opposition, the view of continental drift gained support and a lively debate started between \"drifters\" or \"mobilists\" (proponents of the theory) and \"fixists\" (opponents). During the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s, the former reached important milestones proposing that convection currents might have driven the plate movements, and that spreading may have occurred below the sea within the oceanic crust. Concepts close to the elements of plate tectonics were proposed by geophysicists and geologists (both fixists and mobilists) like Vening-Meinesz, Holmes, and Umbgrove. In 1941, Otto Ampferer described, in his publication \"Thoughts on the motion picture of the Atlantic region\", processes that anticipated seafloor spreading and subduction. One of the first pieces of geophysical evidence that was used to support the movement of lithospheric plates came from paleomagnetism. This is based on the fact that rocks of different ages show a variable magnetic field direction, evidenced by studies since the mid\u2013nineteenth century. The magnetic north and south poles reverse through time, and, especially important in paleotectonic studies, the relative position of the magnetic north pole varies through time. Initially, during the first half of the twentieth century, the latter phenomenon was explained by introducing what was called \"polar wander\" (see apparent polar wander) (i.e., it was assumed that the north pole location had been shifting through time). An alternative explanation, though, was that the continents had moved (shifted and rotated) relative to the north pole, and each continent, in fact, shows its own \"polar wander path\". During the late 1950s, it was successfully shown on two occasions that these data could show the validity of continental drift: by Keith Runcorn in a paper in 1956, and by Warren Carey in a symposium held in March 1956.\nThe second piece of evidence in support of continental drift came during the late 1950s and early 60s from data on the bathymetry of the deep ocean floors and the nature of the oceanic crust such as magnetic properties and, more generally, with the development of marine geology which gave evidence for the association of seafloor spreading along the mid-oceanic ridges and magnetic field reversals, published between 1959 and 1963 by Heezen, Dietz, Hess, Mason, Vine &amp; Matthews, and Morley.\nSimultaneous advances in early seismic imaging techniques in and around Wadati\u2013Benioff zones along the trenches bounding many continental margins, together with many other geophysical (e.g., gravimetric) and geological observations, showed how the oceanic crust could disappear into the mantle, providing the mechanism to balance the extension of the ocean basins with shortening along its margins.\nAll this evidence, both from the ocean floor and from the continental margins, made it clear around 1965 that continental drift was feasible. The theory of plate tectonics was defined in a series of papers between 1965 and 1967. The theory revolutionized the Earth sciences, explaining a diverse range of geological phenomena and their implications in other studies such as paleogeography and paleobiology.\nContinental drift.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, geologists assumed that Earth's major features were fixed, and that most geologic features such as basin development and mountain ranges could be explained by vertical crustal movement, described in what is called the geosynclinal theory. Generally, this was placed in the context of a contracting planet Earth due to heat loss in the course of a relatively short geological time.\nIt was observed as early as 1596 that the opposite coasts of the Atlantic Ocean\u2014or, more precisely, the edges of the continental shelves\u2014have similar shapes and seem to have once fitted together.\nSince that time many theories were proposed to explain this apparent complementarity, but the assumption of a solid Earth made these various proposals difficult to accept.\nThe discovery of radioactivity and its associated heating properties in 1895 prompted a re-examination of the apparent age of Earth. This had previously been estimated by its cooling rate under the assumption that Earth's surface radiated like a black body. Those calculations had implied that, even if it started at red heat, Earth would have dropped to its present temperature in a few tens of millions of years. Armed with the knowledge of a new heat source, scientists realized that Earth would be much older, and that its core was still sufficiently hot to be liquid.\nBy 1915, after having published a first article in 1912, Alfred Wegener was making serious arguments for the idea of continental drift in the first edition of \"The Origin of Continents and Oceans\". In that book (re-issued in four successive editions up to the final one in 1936), he noted how the east coast of South America and the west coast of Africa looked as if they were once attached. Wegener was not the first to note this (Abraham Ortelius, Antonio Snider-Pellegrini, Eduard Suess, Roberto Mantovani and Frank Bursley Taylor preceded him just to mention a few), but he was the first to marshal significant fossil and paleo-topographical and climatological evidence to support this simple observation (and was supported in this by researchers such as Alex du Toit). Furthermore, when the rock strata of the margins of separate continents are very similar it suggests that these rocks were formed in the same way, implying that they were joined initially. For instance, parts of Scotland and Ireland contain rocks very similar to those found in Newfoundland and New Brunswick. Furthermore, the Caledonian Mountains of Europe and parts of the Appalachian Mountains of North America are very similar in structure and lithology.\nHowever, his ideas were not taken seriously by many geologists, who pointed out that there was no apparent mechanism for continental drift. Specifically, they did not see how continental rock could plow through the much denser rock that makes up oceanic crust. Wegener could not explain the force that drove continental drift, and his vindication did not come until after his death in 1930.\nFloating continents, paleomagnetism, and seismicity zones.\nAs it was observed early that although granite existed on continents, seafloor seemed to be composed of denser basalt, the prevailing concept during the first half of the twentieth century was that there were two types of crust, named \"sial\" (continental type crust) and \"sima\" (oceanic type crust). Furthermore, it was supposed that a static shell of strata was present under the continents. It therefore looked apparent that a layer of basalt (sial) underlies the continental rocks.\nHowever, based on abnormalities in plumb line deflection by the Andes in Peru, Pierre Bouguer had deduced that less-dense mountains must have a downward projection into the denser layer underneath. The concept that mountains had \"roots\" was confirmed by George B. Airy a hundred years later, during study of Himalayan gravitation, and seismic studies detected corresponding density variations. Therefore, by the mid-1950s, the question remained unresolved as to whether mountain roots were clenched in surrounding basalt or were floating on it like an iceberg.\nDuring the 20th century, improvements in and greater use of seismic instruments such as seismographs enabled scientists to learn that earthquakes tend to be concentrated in specific areas, most notably along the oceanic trenches and spreading ridges. By the late 1920s, seismologists were beginning to identify several prominent earthquake zones parallel to the trenches that typically were inclined 40\u201360\u00b0 from the horizontal and extended several hundred kilometers into Earth. These zones later became known as Wadati\u2013Benioff zones, or simply Benioff zones, in honor of the seismologists who first recognized them, Kiyoo Wadati of Japan and Hugo Benioff of the United States. The study of global seismicity greatly advanced in the 1960s with the establishment of the Worldwide Standardized Seismograph Network (WWSSN) to monitor the compliance of the 1963 treaty banning above-ground testing of nuclear weapons. The much improved data from the WWSSN instruments allowed seismologists to map precisely the zones of earthquake concentration worldwide.\nMeanwhile, debates developed around the phenomenon of polar wander. Since the early debates of continental drift, scientists had discussed and used evidence that polar drift had occurred because continents seemed to have moved through different climatic zones during the past. Furthermore, paleomagnetic data had shown that the magnetic pole had also shifted during time. Reasoning in an opposite way, the continents might have shifted and rotated, while the pole remained relatively fixed. The first time the evidence of magnetic polar wander was used to support the movements of continents was in a paper by Keith Runcorn in 1956, and successive papers by him and his students Ted Irving (who was actually the first to be convinced of the fact that paleomagnetism supported continental drift) and Ken Creer.\nThis was immediately followed by a symposium on continental drift in Tasmania in March 1956 organised by S. Warren Carey who had been one of the supporters and promotors of Continental Drift since the thirties During this symposium, some of the participants used the evidence in the theory of an expansion of the global crust, a theory which had been proposed by other workers decades earlier. In this hypothesis, the shifting of the continents is explained by a large increase in the size of Earth since its formation. However, although the theory still has supporters in science, this is generally regarded as unsatisfactory because there is no convincing mechanism to produce a significant expansion of Earth. Other work during the following years would soon show that the evidence was equally in support of continental drift on a globe with a stable radius.\nDuring the 1930s up to the late 1950s, works by Vening-Meinesz, Holmes, Umbgrove, and numerous others outlined concepts that were close or nearly identical to modern plate tectonics theory. In particular, the English geologist Arthur Holmes proposed in 1920 that plate junctions might lie beneath the sea, and in 1928 that convection currents within the mantle might be the driving force. Often, these contributions are forgotten because:\nMid-oceanic ridge spreading and convection.\nIn 1947, a team of scientists led by Maurice Ewing utilizing the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's research vessel \"Atlantis\" and an array of instruments, confirmed the existence of a rise in the central Atlantic Ocean, and found that the floor of the seabed beneath the layer of sediments consisted of basalt, not the granite which is the main constituent of continents. They also found that the oceanic crust was much thinner than continental crust. All these new findings raised important and intriguing questions.\nThe new data that had been collected on the ocean basins also showed particular characteristics regarding the bathymetry. One of the major outcomes of these datasets was that all along the globe, a system of mid-oceanic ridges was detected. An important conclusion was that along this system, new ocean floor was being created, which led to the concept of the \"Great Global Rift\". This was described in the crucial paper of Bruce Heezen (1960) based on his work with Marie Tharp, which would trigger a real revolution in thinking. A profound consequence of seafloor spreading is that new crust was, and still is, being continually created along the oceanic ridges. For this reason, Heezen initially advocated the so-called \"expanding Earth\" hypothesis of S. Warren Carey (see above). Therefore, the question remained as to how new crust could continuously be added along the oceanic ridges without increasing the size of Earth. In reality, this question had been solved already by numerous scientists during the 1940s and the 1950s, like Arthur Holmes, Vening-Meinesz, Coates and many others: The crust in excess disappeared along what were called the oceanic trenches, where so-called \"subduction\" occurred. Therefore, when various scientists during the early 1960s started to reason on the data at their disposal regarding the ocean floor, the pieces of the theory quickly fell into place.\nThe question particularly intrigued Harry Hammond Hess, a Princeton University geologist and a Naval Reserve Rear Admiral, and Robert S. Dietz, a scientist with the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey who coined the term \"seafloor spreading\". Dietz and Hess (the former published the same idea one year earlier in \"Nature\", but priority belongs to Hess who had already distributed an unpublished manuscript of his 1962 article by 1960) were among the small number who really understood the broad implications of sea floor spreading and how it would eventually agree with the, at that time, unconventional and unaccepted ideas of continental drift and the elegant and mobilistic models proposed by previous workers like Holmes.\nIn the same year, Robert R. Coats of the U.S. Geological Survey described the main features of island arc subduction in the Aleutian Islands. His paper, though little noted (and sometimes even ridiculed) at the time, has since been called \"seminal\" and \"prescient\". In reality, it shows that the work by the European scientists on island arcs and mountain belts performed and published during the 1930s up until the 1950s was applied and appreciated also in the United States.\nIf Earth's crust was expanding along the oceanic ridges, Hess and Dietz reasoned like Holmes and others before them, it must be shrinking elsewhere. Hess followed Heezen, suggesting that new oceanic crust continuously spreads away from the ridges in a conveyor belt\u2013like motion. And, using the mobilistic concepts developed before, he correctly concluded that many millions of years later, the oceanic crust eventually descends along the continental margins where oceanic trenches\u2014very deep, narrow canyons\u2014are formed, e.g. along the rim of the Pacific Ocean basin. The important step Hess made was that convection currents would be the driving force in this process, arriving at the same conclusions as Holmes had decades before with the only difference that the thinning of the ocean crust was performed using Heezen's mechanism of spreading along the ridges. Hess therefore concluded that the Atlantic Ocean was expanding while the Pacific Ocean was shrinking. As old oceanic crust is \"consumed\" in the trenches (like Holmes and others, he thought this was done by thickening of the continental lithosphere, not, as later understood, by underthrusting at a larger scale of the oceanic crust itself into the mantle), new magma rises and erupts along the spreading ridges to form new crust. In effect, the ocean basins are perpetually being \"recycled\", with the forming of new crust and the destruction of old oceanic lithosphere occurring simultaneously. Thus, the new mobilistic concepts neatly explained why Earth does not get bigger with sea floor spreading, why there is so little sediment accumulation on the ocean floor, and why oceanic rocks are much younger than continental rocks.\nMagnetic striping.\nBeginning in the 1950s, scientists like Victor Vacquier, using magnetic instruments (magnetometers) adapted from airborne devices developed during World War II to detect submarines, began recognizing odd magnetic variations across the ocean floor. This finding, though unexpected, was not entirely surprising because it was known that basalt\u2014the iron-rich, volcanic rock making up the ocean floor\u2014contains a strongly magnetic mineral (magnetite) and can locally distort compass readings. This distortion was recognized by Icelandic mariners as early as the late 18th century. More importantly, because the presence of magnetite gives the basalt measurable magnetic properties, these newly discovered magnetic variations provided another means to study the deep ocean floor. When newly formed rock cools, such magnetic materials recorded Earth's magnetic field at the time.\nAs more and more of the seafloor was mapped during the 1950s, the magnetic variations turned out not to be random or isolated occurrences, but instead revealed recognizable patterns. When these magnetic patterns were mapped over a wide region, the ocean floor showed a zebra-like pattern: one stripe with normal polarity and the adjoining stripe with reversed polarity. The overall pattern, defined by these alternating bands of normally and reversely polarized rock, became known as magnetic striping, and was published by Ron G. Mason and co-workers in 1961, who did not find, though, an explanation for these data in terms of sea floor spreading, like Vine, Matthews and Morley a few years later.\nThe discovery of magnetic striping called for an explanation. In the early 1960s scientists such as Heezen, Hess and Dietz had begun to theorise that mid-ocean ridges mark structurally weak zones where the ocean floor was being ripped in two lengthwise along the ridge crest (see the previous paragraph). New magma from deep within Earth rises easily through these weak zones and eventually erupts along the crest of the ridges to create new oceanic crust. This process, at first denominated the \"conveyer belt hypothesis\" and later called seafloor spreading, operating over many millions of years continues to form new ocean floor all across the 50,000\u00a0km-long system of mid-ocean ridges.\nOnly four years after the maps with the \"zebra pattern\" of magnetic stripes were published, the link between sea floor spreading and these patterns was recognized independently by Lawrence Morley, and by Fred Vine and Drummond Matthews, in 1963, (the Vine\u2013Matthews\u2013Morley hypothesis). This hypothesis linked these patterns to geomagnetic reversals and was supported by several lines of evidence:\nBy explaining both the zebra-like magnetic striping and the construction of the mid-ocean ridge system, the seafloor spreading hypothesis (SFS) quickly gained converts and represented another major advance in the development of the plate-tectonics theory. Furthermore, the oceanic crust came to be appreciated as a natural \"tape recording\" of the history of the geomagnetic field reversals (GMFR) of Earth's magnetic field. Extensive studies were dedicated to the calibration of the normal-reversal patterns in the oceanic crust on one hand and known timescales derived from the dating of basalt layers in sedimentary sequences (magnetostratigraphy) on the other, to arrive at estimates of past spreading rates and plate reconstructions.\nDefinition and refining of the theory.\nAfter all these considerations, plate tectonics (or, as it was initially called \"New Global Tectonics\") became quickly accepted and numerous papers followed that defined the concepts:\nImplications for life.\nAccording to a hypothesis proposed by Robert Stern and Taras Gerya, plate tectonics are a necessary criterion for a planet to be able to sustain complex life because of the role plate tectonics plays in regulating the carbon cycle.\nContinental drift theory helps biogeographers to explain the disjunct biogeographic distribution of present-day life found on different continents but having similar ancestors.\nPlate reconstruction.\nReconstruction is used to establish past (and future) plate configurations, helping determine the shape and make-up of ancient supercontinents and providing a basis for paleogeography.\nDefining plate boundaries.\nActive plate boundaries are defined by their seismicity. Past plate boundaries within existing plates are identified from a variety of evidence, such as the presence of ophiolites that are indicative of vanished oceans.\nEmergence of plate tectonics and past plate motions.\nThe timing of the emergence of plate tectonics on Earth has been the subject of considerable controversy, with the estimated time varying wildly between researchers, spanning 85% of Earth's history. Some authors have suggested that during at least part of the Archean period (~4-2.5 billion years ago) the mantle was between 100 and 250\u00a0\u00b0C warmer than at present, which is thought to be incompatible with modern-style plate tectonics, and that Earth may have had a stagnant lid or other kinds of regimes. The increasingly felsic nature of preserved rocks between 3 and 2.5 billion years ago implies that subduction zones had emerged by this time, with preserved zircons suggesting that subduction may have begun as early as 3.8 billion years ago. Early subduction zones appear to have been temporary and localized, though to what degree is controversial. Modern plate tectonics are suggested to have emerged by at least 2.2 billion years ago with the formation of the first recognised supercontinent Columbia, though some authors have suggested that modern-style plate tectonics did not appear until 800 million years ago based on the late appearance of rock types like blueschist which require cold subducted material. Other authors have suggested that plate tectonics were already functional in the Hadean, over 4 billion years ago.\nVarious types of quantitative and semi-quantitative information are available to constrain past plate motions. The geometric fit between continents, such as between west Africa and South America is still an important part of plate reconstruction. Magnetic stripe patterns provide a reliable guide to relative plate motions going back into the Jurassic period. The tracks of hotspots give absolute reconstructions, but these are only available back to the Cretaceous. Older reconstructions rely mainly on paleomagnetic pole data, although these only constrain the latitude and rotation, but not the longitude. Combining poles of different ages in a particular plate to produce apparent polar wander paths provides a method for comparing the motions of different plates through time. Additional evidence comes from the distribution of certain sedimentary rock types, faunal provinces shown by particular fossil groups, and the position of orogenic belts.\nFormation and break-up of continents.\nThe movement of plates has caused the formation and break-up of continents over time, including occasional formation of a supercontinent that contains most or all of the continents. The supercontinent Columbia or Nuna formed during a period of https:// 1800 and broke up about https:// 1300. The supercontinent Rodinia is thought to have formed about 1billion years ago and to have embodied most or all of Earth's continents, and broken up into eight continents around https://\u00a0million years ago. The eight continents later re-assembled into another supercontinent called Pangaea; Pangaea broke up into Laurasia (which became North America and Eurasia) and Gondwana (which became the remaining continents).\nThe Himalayas, the world's tallest mountain range, are assumed to have been formed by the collision of two major plates. Before uplift, the area where they stand was covered by the Tethys Ocean.\nModern plates.\nDepending on how they are defined, there are usually seven or eight \"major\" plates: African, Antarctic, Eurasian, North American, South American, Pacific, and Indo-Australian. The latter is sometimes subdivided into the Indian and Australian plates.\nThere are dozens of smaller plates, the eight largest of which are the Arabian, Caribbean, Juan de Fuca, Cocos, Nazca, Philippine Sea, Scotia and Somali.\nDuring the 2020s, new proposals have come forward that divide Earth's crust into many smaller plates, called terranes, which reflects the fact that Plate reconstructions show that the larger plates have been internally deformed and oceanic and continental plates have been fragmented over time. This has resulted in the definition of roughly 1200 terranes inside the oceanic plates, continental blocks and the mobile zones (mountainous belts) that separate them.\nThe motion of the tectonic plates is determined by remote sensing satellite data sets, calibrated with ground station measurements.\nOther celestial bodies.\nThe appearance of plate tectonics on terrestrial planets is related to planetary mass, with more massive planets than Earth expected to exhibit plate tectonics. Earth may be a borderline case, owing its tectonic activity to abundant water (silica and water form a deep eutectic).\nVenus.\nVenus shows no evidence of active plate tectonics. There is debatable evidence of active tectonics in the planet's distant past; however, events taking place since then (such as the plausible and generally accepted hypothesis that the Venusian lithosphere has thickened greatly over the course of several hundred million years) has made constraining the course of its geologic record difficult. However, the numerous well-preserved impact craters have been used as a dating method to approximately date the Venusian surface (since there are thus far no known samples of Venusian rock to be dated by more reliable methods). Dates derived are dominantly in the range https:// 750, although ages of up to https://\u00a0million years ago have been calculated. This research has led to the fairly well accepted hypothesis that Venus has undergone an essentially complete volcanic resurfacing at least once in its distant past, with the last event taking place approximately within the range of estimated surface ages. While the mechanism of such an impressive thermal event remains a debated issue in Venusian geosciences, some scientists are advocates of processes involving plate motion to some extent.\nOne explanation for Venus's lack of plate tectonics is that on Venus temperatures are too high for significant water to be present. Earth's crust is soaked with water, and water plays an important role in the development of shear zones. Plate tectonics requires weak surfaces in the crust along which crustal slices can move, and it may well be that such weakening never took place on Venus because of the absence of water. However, some researchers remain convinced that plate tectonics is or was once active on this planet.\nMars.\nMars is considerably smaller than Earth and Venus, and there is evidence for ice on its surface and in its crust.\nIn the 1990s, it was proposed that Martian Crustal Dichotomy was created by plate tectonic processes. Scientists have since determined that it was created either by upwelling within the Martian mantle that thickened the crust of the Southern Highlands and formed Tharsis or by a giant impact that excavated the Northern Lowlands.\nValles Marineris may be a tectonic boundary.\nObservations made of the magnetic field of Mars by the \"Mars Global Surveyor\" spacecraft in 1999 showed patterns of magnetic striping discovered on this planet. Some scientists interpreted these as requiring plate tectonic processes, such as seafloor spreading. However, their data failed a \"magnetic reversal test\", which is used to see if they were formed by flipping polarities of a global magnetic field.\nExoplanets.\nOn Earth-sized planets, plate tectonics is more likely if there are oceans of water. However, in 2007, two independent teams of researchers came to opposing conclusions about the likelihood of plate tectonics on larger super-Earths with one team saying that plate tectonics would be episodic or stagnant and the other team saying that plate tectonics is very likely on super-earths even if the planet is dry.\nConsideration of plate tectonics is a part of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence and extraterrestrial life.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideos"}
{"id": "24946", "revid": "15415726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24946", "title": "Philips Videopac+ G7400", "text": "Third-generation home video game console\nThe Philips Videopac+ G7400 is a third-generation home video game console released in limited quantities in 1983, and only in Europe; an American release as the Odyssey\u00b3 Command Center was planned for the Odyssey series but never occurred. The G7400 was the successor to the Philips Videopac G7000, the European counterpart to the American Magnavox Odyssey\u00b2. The system featured excellently tailored background and foreground graphics.\nThe G7400 could play three types of games: all normal G7000 games, special G7000 games with additional high-res background graphics that would appear only when played on the G7400, and G7400-only games with high-res sprites and backgrounds.\nOdyssey\u00b3.\nThere were plans to release the G7400 in the United States as the Odyssey\u00b3 and later as the Odyssey\u00b3 Command Center; the system was demonstrated at the 1983 Consumer Electronics Show, and some prototypes have been found. The Odyssey\u00b3 was never released, mostly because company executives concluded that it was not technologically advanced enough to compete in the marketplace, and the video game crash of 1983 ended all lingering hopes for a release.\nThe Odyssey\u00b3 was to feature a real mechanical keyboard, unlike the membrane keyboard found in the G7000 and Odyssey\u00b2, as well as a built-in joystick holder for dual-joystick games. Prototypes for a 300 baud modem and a speech synthesizer are known to have been made, and a laserdisc interface was planned to allow even more advanced games.\nLegacy.\nThe Videopac Collection Volume 1 was released on Steam on November 24, 2022. It uses O2EM for emulation and includes the G7400 versions of the games when applicable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24947", "revid": "46790959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24947", "title": "Pong", "text": "1972 video game\nPong is a 1972 sports video game developed and published by Atari, Inc. for arcades. It was created by Allan Alcorn as a training exercise assigned to him by Atari co-founder Nolan Bushnell. Bushnell and Atari co-founder Ted Dabney were so surprised by the quality of Alcorn's work that they decided to manufacture the game. Bushnell based the game's concept on an electronic ping-pong game included on the Magnavox Odyssey, the first home video game console; in response, Magnavox later sued Atari for patent infringement.\n\"Pong\" was the first commercially successful video game, helping to establish the video game industry along with the Magnavox Odyssey. Soon after its release, several companies began producing games that closely mimicked its gameplay. Eventually, Atari's competitors released new types of video games that deviated from \"Pong\"'s original format to varying degrees; this, in turn, led Atari to encourage its staff to move beyond \"Pong\" and produce more innovative games themselves.\nAtari released several sequels to \"Pong\" that built upon the original's gameplay by adding new features. During the 1975 Christmas season, Atari released a home version of \"Pong\" exclusively through Sears retail stores. The home version was also a commercial success and led to numerous clones. The game was remade on numerous home and portable platforms following its release. \"Pong\" is considered to be one of the most culturally significant and greatest video games of all time, and is part of the permanent collection of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.\nGameplay.\n\"Pong\" is a two-dimensional sports game that simulates table tennis. The player controls an in-game paddle by moving it vertically across the left or right side of the screen. They can compete against another player controlling a second paddle on the opposing side. Players use the paddles to hit a ball back and forth. The goal is for each player to reach eleven points before the opponent; points are earned when one fails to return the ball to the other.\nDevelopment and history.\n\"Pong\" was the first game developed by Atari. In 1971, Bushnell and Dabney founded Syzygy Engineering to develop the concept of a standalone computer system with a monitor and attaching a coin slot to it to play games on. Drawing inspiration from \"Spacewar!\", the duo created \"Computer Space\". As the game did not fare well commercially, Bushnell decided to form a company to produce more games by licensing ideas to other companies. The first contract was with Bally Manufacturing Corporation for a pinball game and a video game that Bushnell told Bally would have a hockey theme. Soon after the founding, Bushnell hired Allan Alcorn because of his experience with electrical engineering and computer science; Bushnell and Dabney also had previously worked with him at Ampex. Prior to working at Atari, Alcorn had no experience with video games.\nTo acclimate Alcorn to creating games, Bushnell gave him a project secretly meant to be a warm-up exercise. Bushnell told Alcorn that he had a contract with General Electric for a product, and asked Alcorn to create a simple game with one moving spot, two paddles, and digits for score keeping. In 2011, Bushnell stated that the game was inspired by previous versions of electronic tennis he had played before; Bushnell played a version on a PDP-1 computer in 1964 while attending college. However, Alcorn has claimed it was in direct response to Bushnell's viewing of the Magnavox Odyssey's Tennis game. In May 1972, Bushnell had visited the Magnavox Profit Caravan in Burlingame, California where he played the Magnavox Odyssey demonstration, specifically the table tennis game. Though he thought the game lacked quality, seeing it prompted Bushnell to assign the project to Alcorn.\nAlcorn first examined Bushnell's schematics for \"Computer Space\", but found them to be illegible. He went on to create his own designs based on his knowledge of transistor\u2013transistor logic (TTL) and Bushnell's game. Feeling the basic game was too boring, Alcorn added features to give the game more appeal. He divided the paddle into eight segments to change the ball's angle of return. For example, the center segments return the ball at a 90\u00b0 angle in relation to the paddle, while the outer segments return the ball at smaller angles. He also made the ball accelerate the longer it remained in play; missing the ball reset the speed. Another feature was that the in-game paddles were unable to reach the top of the screen. This was caused by a simple circuit that had an inherent defect. Instead of dedicating time to fixing the defect, Alcorn decided it gave the game more difficulty and helped limit the time the game could be played; he imagined two skilled players being able to play forever otherwise.\nThree months into development, Bushnell told Alcorn he wanted the game to feature realistic sound effects and a roaring crowd. Dabney wanted the game to \"boo\" and \"hiss\" when a player lost a round. Alcorn had limited space available for the necessary electronics and was unaware of how to create such sounds with digital circuits. After inspecting the sync generator, he discovered that it could generate different tones and used those for the game's sound effects. To construct the prototype, Alcorn purchased a $75 Hitachi black-and-white television set from a local store, placed it into a wooden cabinet, and soldered the wires into boards to create the necessary circuitry. The prototype impressed Bushnell and Dabney so much that they felt it could be a profitable product and decided to test its marketability.\nIn August 1972, Bushnell and Alcorn installed the \"Pong\" prototype at a local bar, Andy Capp's Tavern. They selected the bar because of their good working relation with the bar's owner and manager, Bill Gaddis; Atari supplied pinball machines to Gaddis. Bushnell and Alcorn placed the prototype on one of the tables near the other entertainment machines: a jukebox, pinball machines, and \"Computer Space\". The game was well received the first night and its popularity continued to grow over the next one and a half weeks. Bushnell then went on a business trip to Chicago to demonstrate \"Pong\" to executives at Bally and Midway Manufacturing; he intended to use \"Pong\" to fulfill his contract with Bally. A few days later, the prototype began exhibiting technical issues and Gaddis contacted Alcorn to fix it. Upon inspecting the machine, Alcorn discovered that the problem was due to the coin mechanism overflowing with quarters.\nAfter hearing about the game's success, Bushnell decided there would be more profit for Atari to manufacture the game rather than license it. Bushnell had difficulty finding financial backing for \"Pong\"; banks viewed it as a variant of pinball, which at the time the general public associated with the Mafia. Atari eventually obtained a line of credit from Wells Fargo that it used to expand its facilities to house an assembly line. The company announced \"Pong\" on 29 November 1972. Management sought assembly workers at the local unemployment office, but was unable to keep up with demand. The first arcade cabinets produced were assembled very slowly, about ten machines a day, many of which failed quality testing. Atari eventually streamlined the process and began producing the game in greater quantities. By 1973, they began shipping \"Pong\" to other countries with the aid of foreign partners.\nIn Japan, \"Pong\" was officially released in November 1973 by Atari Japan, which would later be sold to Namco. However, \"Pong\" had been beaten to the market by two Japanese \"Pong\" clones released in July 1973: Sega's \"Pong Tron\" and Taito's \"Elepong\".\nHome version.\nAfter the success of \"Pong\", Bushnell pushed his employees to create new products. A new electronic technology, the large-scale integration (LSI) chip, had recently become available, which Bushnell believed would \"allow pioneering in new\" game concepts. Atari began working on the reduction of \"Pong\" from a large arcade printed circuit board (PCB) down to a small LSI chip for use in a home system. The initial development cost for a game on a single LSI chip was expensive, costing around $, but once the chip was developed, it became significantly cheaper to mass-produce the game as well as more difficult to reverse-engineer.\nIn 1974, Atari engineer Harold Lee proposed a home version of \"Pong\" that would connect to a television: \"Home Pong\". The system began development under the codename \"Darlene\", named after an employee at Atari. Alcorn worked with Lee to develop the designs and prototype and based them on the same digital technology used in their arcade games. The two worked in shifts to save time and money; Lee worked on the design's logic during the day, while Alcorn debugged the designs in the evenings. After the designs were approved, fellow Atari engineer Bob Brown assisted Alcorn and Lee in building a prototype. The prototype consisted of a device attached to a wooden pedestal containing over a hundred wires, which would eventually be replaced with a single chip designed by Alcorn and Lee; the chip had yet to be tested and built before the prototype was constructed. The chip was finished in the latter half of 1974, and was, at the time, the highest-performing chip used in a consumer product.\nBushnell and Gene Lipkin, Atari's vice-president of sales, approached toy and electronic retailers to sell \"Home Pong\", but were rejected. Retailers felt the product was too expensive and would not interest consumers. Bushnell contacted Sears after coming across a Magnavox Odyssey advertisement in the sporting goods section of its catalog. Atari staff (including Bushnell and Lipkin) discussed the game with a representative, Tom Quinn, who expressed enthusiasm and offered the company an exclusive deal. Believing they could find more favorable terms elsewhere, Atari's executives declined and continued to pursue toy retailers. In January 1975, Atari staff set up a \"Home Pong\" booth at the American Toy Fair (a trade fair) in New York City, but was unsuccessful in soliciting orders due to high price of the unit.\nWhile at the show, they met Quinn again, and, a few days later, set up a meeting with him to obtain a sales order. In order to gain approval from the Sporting Goods department, Quinn suggested Atari demonstrate the game to executives in Chicago. Alcorn and Lipkin traveled to the Sears Tower and, despite a technical complication in connection with an antenna on top of the building which broadcast on the same channel as the game, obtained approval. Bushnell told Quinn he could produce 75,000\u00a0units in time for the Christmas season; however, Quinn requested double the amount. Though Bushnell knew Atari lacked the capacity to manufacture 150,000\u00a0units, he agreed. Atari acquired a new factory through funding obtained by venture capitalist Don Valentine. Supervised by Jimm Tubb, the factory fulfilled the Sears order. The first units manufactured, branded with Sears' \"Tele-Games\" name, started to sell around the end of October to mid November 1975 with a 1-year warranty for $98.95 and an additional $7.95 for the optional AC adapter. Atari later released a version under its own brand in 1976.\nLawsuit from Magnavox.\nIn April 1974, Magnavox filed suit against Atari, Allied Leisure, Bally Midway and Chicago Dynamics. Magnavox argued that Atari had infringed on Sanders Associates' patents relating both to the concept of TV games generally and to the interaction of player and machine-controlled objects rendered on a screen and presented detailed records Ralph Baer kept of the Odyssey's design process dating back to 1966. Other documents included depositions from witnesses and a signed guest book that demonstrated Bushnell had played the Odyssey's table tennis game prior to releasing \"Pong\". In response to claims that he saw the Odyssey, Bushnell later stated that, \"The fact is that I absolutely did see the Odyssey game and I didn't think it was very clever.\"\nAfter considering his options, Bushnell decided to settle with Magnavox out of court in June 1976. Bushnell's lawyer felt they could win; however, he estimated legal costs of US$1.5 million, which would have exceeded Atari's funds. Magnavox offered Atari an agreement to become a licensee for US$1.5 million payable in eight installments. In addition, Magnavox obtained the right to full information on Atari products publicly announced or released over the next year. Magnavox continued to pursue legal action against the other companies, and proceedings began shortly after Atari's settlement. The first case took place at the district court in Chicago, with Judge John Grady presiding. Magnavox won the suit against the remaining defendants. Atari may have delayed the announcement of the Atari 2600 by a few months to avoid disclosing information about the system under the settlement agreement.\nImpact and legacy.\nThe \"Pong\" arcade games manufactured by Atari were a great success. The prototype was well received by Andy Capp's Tavern patrons; people came to the bar solely to play the game. Following its release, \"Pong\" consistently earned four times more revenue than other coin-operated machines. Bushnell estimated that the game earned US$35\u201340 per day (i.e.140\u2013160 plays daily per console at $0.25 per play), which he described as nothing he'd ever seen before in the coin-operated entertainment industry at the time. The game's earning power resulted in an increase in the number of orders Atari received. This provided Atari with a steady source of income; the company sold the machines at three times the cost of production. By 1973, the company had filled 2,500\u00a0orders, and at the end of 1974, sold more than 8,000\u00a0units. The arcade cabinets have since become collector's items, with cocktail cabinets being the rarest. Soon after the game's successful testing at Andy Capp's Tavern, other companies began visiting the bar to inspect it. Similar games appeared on the market three months later, produced by companies like Ramtek and Nutting Associates. Atari could do little against the competitors as they had not initially filed for patents on the solid state technology used in the game. When the company did file for patents, complications delayed the process. As a result, the market consisted primarily of \"\"Pong\" clones\"; author Steven Kent estimated that Atari had produced less than a third of the machines. Bushnell referred to the competitors as \"Jackals\" because he felt they had an unfair advantage. His solution to competing against them was to produce more innovative games and concepts.\n\"Home Pong\" was an instant success following its limited 1975 release through Sears; around 150,000\u00a0units were sold that holiday season. The game became Sears' most successful product at the time, which earned Atari a Sears Quality Excellence Award. Atari's own version sold an additional 50,000 units. Similar to the arcade version, several companies released clones to capitalize on the home console's success, many of which continued to produce new consoles and video games. Magnavox re-released their Odyssey system with simplified hardware and new features and, later, released updated versions. Coleco entered the video game market with their Telstar console; it features three \"Pong\" variants and was also succeeded by newer models. The dedicated \"Pong\" consoles and the numerous clones have since become varying levels of rare; Atari's \"Pong\" consoles are common, while APF Electronics' TV Fun consoles are moderately rare. Prices among collectors, however, vary with rarity; the Sears Tele-Games versions are often cheaper than those with the Atari brand.\nSeveral publications consider \"Pong\" the game that launched the video game industry as a lucrative enterprise. Video game author David Ellis sees the game as the cornerstone of the video game industry's success, and called the arcade game \"one of the most historically significant\" titles. Kent attributes the \"arcade phenomenon\" to \"Pong\" and Atari's games that followed it, and considers the release of the home version the successful beginning of home video game consoles. Bill Loguidice and Matt Barton of Gamasutra referred to the game's release as the start of a new entertainment medium, and commented that its simple, intuitive gameplay made it a success. In 1995, Flux magazine ranked the game 56th on their \"Top 100 Video Games.\" In 1996 \"Next Generation\" named it one of the \"Top 100 Games of All Time\", recounting that \"\"Next Generation\" staff ignor[ed] hundreds of thousands of dollars of 32-bit software to play \"Pong\" for hours when the Genesis version was released.\" In 1999, \"Next Generation\" listed \"Pong\" as number 34 on their \"Top 50 Games of All Time\", commenting that, \"Despite, or perhaps because of, its simplicity, \"Pong\" is the ultimate two-player challenge \u2013 a test of reaction times and very simple strategy stripped down to its barest essentials.\" \"Entertainment Weekly\" named \"Pong\" one of the top ten games for the Atari 2600 in 2013. Many of the companies that produced their own versions of \"Pong\" eventually became well known within the industry. Nintendo entered the video game market with clones of \"Home Pong\". The revenue generated from them\u2014two systems sold over a million units combined\u2014helped the company survive a difficult financial time, and spurred them to pursue video games further. In 2015, The Strong National Museum of Play inducted \"Pong\" to its World Video Game Hall of Fame.\nBushnell felt that \"Pong\" was especially significant in its role as a social lubricant, since it was multiplayer-only and did not require each player to use more than one hand: \"It was very common to have a girl with a quarter in hand pull a guy off a bar stool and say, 'I'd like to play \"Pong\" and there's nobody to play.' It was a way you could play games, you were sitting shoulder to shoulder, you could talk, you could laugh, you could challenge each other ... As you became better friends, you could put down your beer and hug. You could put your arm around the person. You could play left-handed if you so desired. In fact, there are a lot of people who have come up to me over the years and said, 'I met my wife playing \"Pong\",' and that's kind of a nice thing to have achieved.\"\nPorts.\nAtari remade the game on numerous platforms. In 1977, \"Pong\" and several variants of the game were featured in \"Video Olympics\", one of the original release titles for the Atari 2600.\n\"Pong\" has also been included in several Atari compilations on many different platforms, such as \"Arcade Classics\" on the Sega Genesis, Paired with \"Asteroids\" and \"Yars' Revenge\" on the Game Boy Advance. \"Atari Classics Evolved\" on the PlayStation Portable, \"Retro Atari Classics\" on the Nintendo DS, and \"Atari: 80 Classic Games in One!\" for personal computer, and the \"Atari 50: The Anniversary Celebration\" (2022) compilation for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Steam, and Xbox One.\nThrough an agreement with Atari, Bally Gaming and Systems developed a slot machine version of the game.\nThe game was also included as a loading screen minigame on the PlayStation 2 and Xbox versions of \"\"; however, the Windows version does not include it.\nSequels and remakes.\nBushnell felt the best way to compete against imitators was to create better products, leading Atari to produce sequels in the years following the original's release: \"Pong Doubles\", \"Super Pong\", \"Quadrapong\" and \"Pinpong\". The sequels feature similar graphics, but include new gameplay elements; for example, \"Pong Doubles\" allows four players to compete in pairs, while \"Quadrapong\"\u2014also released by Kee Games as \"Elimination\"\u2014has them compete against each other in a four-way field. Bushnell also conceptualized a free-to-play version of \"Pong\" to entertain children in a doctor's office. He initially titled it \"Snoopy Pong\" and fashioned the cabinet after Snoopy's doghouse with the character on top, but retitled it to \"Puppy Pong\" and altered Snoopy to a generic dog to avoid legal action. Bushnell later used the game in his chain of Chuck E. Cheese's restaurants. In 1976, Atari released \"Breakout\", a single-player variation of \"Pong\" where the object of the game is to remove bricks from a wall by hitting them with a ball. Like \"Pong\", \"Breakout\" was followed by numerous clones that copied the basic gameplay, such as \"Arkanoid\", \"Alleyway\", and \"Break 'Em All\".\nA 3D platform game with puzzle and shooter elements was reportedly in development by Atari Corporation for the Atari Jaguar in September 1995 under the title \"Pong 2000\", as part of their series of arcade game updates for the system and was set to have an original storyline for it, but it was never released.\nIn 1999, Hasbro Interactive released a new title known as \"\" for home computers and the PlayStation. This game was released as part of a trend within the time period of popular arcade games being remade with 3D graphics and art styles. The game also featured many power-ups.\nIn 2012, Atari celebrated the 40th anniversary of \"Pong\" by releasing \"Pong World\" for iOS, which was developed by zGames. In 2020, a new game titled \"Pong Quest\" was developed by Chequered Ink and released by Atari on Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch. A remake of \"Pong\" has been announced for release exclusively for the Intellivision Amico.\nIn popular culture.\nThe game is featured in episodes of television series including \"That '70s Show\", \"King of the Hill\" and \"Saturday Night Live\". In 2006, an American Express commercial featured Andy Roddick in a tennis match against the white, in-game paddle. Other video games have also referenced and parodied \"Pong\"; for example \"Neuromancer\" for the Commodore 64 and \"\" for the Xbox 360. The concert event Video Games Live has performed audio from \"Pong\" as part of a special retro \"Classic Arcade Medley\". Frank Black's song \"Whatever Happened to Pong?\" on the album \"Teenager of the Year\" references the game's elements.\nDutch design studio Buro Vormkrijgers created a \"Pong\"-themed clock as a fun project within their offices. After the studio decided to manufacture it for retail, Atari took legal action in February 2006. The two companies eventually reached an agreement in which Buro Vormkrijgers could produce a limited number under license. In 1999, French artist Pierre Huyghe created an installation titled \"Atari Light\", in which two people use handheld gaming devices to play \"Pong\" on an illuminated ceiling. The work was shown at the Venice Biennale in 2001, and the Museo de Arte Contempor\u00e1neo de Castilla y Le\u00f3n in 2007. The game was included in the London Barbican Art Gallery's 2002 Game On exhibition meant to showcase the various aspects of video game history, development, and culture.\nBeginning in 2012, Chuck E. Cheese's began referencing Pong as a part of the rebranding of the Chuck E. Cheese character. According to a backstory of the character published in 2014, Chuck E. won $50 in a Pong tournament and moved to New York City, where he eventually met the rest of the band members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24949", "revid": "11745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24949", "title": "Post office", "text": "Customer service facility of a postal system\nA post office is a public facility and a retailer that provides mail services, such as accepting letters and parcels, providing post office boxes, and selling postage stamps, packaging, and stationery. Post offices may offer additional services, which vary by country. These include providing and accepting government forms (such as passport applications), and processing government services and fees (such as road tax, postal savings, or bank fees). The chief administrator of a post office is called a postmaster. During the 19th century, when the postal deliveries were made, it would often be delivered to public places. For example, it would be sent to bars or general stores. This would often be delivered with newspapers and those who were expecting a post would go into town to pick up the mail, along with anything that was needed to be picked up in town.\nBefore the advent of postal codes and the post office, postal systems would route items to a specific post office for receipt or delivery. During the 19th century in the United States, this often led to smaller communities being renamed after their post offices, particularly after the Post Office Department began to require that post office names not be duplicated within a state.\nName.\nThe term \"post-office\" has been in use since the 1650s, shortly after the legislation of private mail services in England in 1635. In early modern England, post riders\u2014mounted couriers\u2014were placed, or \"posted\", every few hours along post roads at posting houses (also known as post houses) between major cities, or \"post towns\". These stables or inns permitted important correspondence to travel without delay. In early America, post offices were also known as stations. This term, as well as the term \"post house\", fell from use as horse and coach services were replaced by railways, aircraft, and automobiles.\nThe term \"post office\" usually refers to government postal facilities providing customer service. \"General Post Office\" is sometimes used for the national headquarters of a postal service, even if the building does not provide customer service. A postal facility that is used exclusively for processing mail is instead known as a sorting office or delivery office, which may have a large central area known as a sorting or postal hall. Integrated facilities combining mail processing with railway stations or airports are known as mail exchanges.\nPrivate courier and delivery services often have offices as well, although these are usually not called \"post offices\", except in the case of Germany, which has fully privatised its national postal system.\nAs abbreviation \"PO\" is used, together with \"GPO\" for General Post Office and \"LPO\" for Licensed Post Office.\nHistory.\nThere is evidence of corps of royal couriers disseminating the decrees of Egyptian pharaohs as early as 2400BCE, and it is possible that the service greatly precedes that date. Similarly, there may be ancient organised systems of post houses providing mounted courier service, although sources vary as to precisely who initiated the practice.\nIn the Persian Empire, a Chapar Khaneh system existed along the Royal Road. Similar postage systems were established in India and China by the Mauryan and Han dynasties in the 2nd century BCE.\nThe Roman historian Suetonius credited Augustus with regularizing the Roman transportation and courier network, the \"Cursus Publicus\". Local officials were obliged to provide couriers who would be responsible for their message's entire course. Locally maintained post houses () privately owned rest houses () and were obliged or honored to care for couriers along their way. The Roman emperor Diocletian later established two parallel systems: one providing fresh horses or mules for urgent correspondence and the other providing sturdy oxen for bulk shipments. The Byzantine historian Procopius, though not unbiased, records the \"Cursus Publicus\" system remained largely intact until it was dismantled in the Byzantine empire by the emperor Justinian in the 6th century.\nThe Princely House of Thurn and Taxis family initiated regular mail service from Brussels in the 16th century, directing the Imperial Post of the Holy Roman Empire. The British Postal Museum claims that the oldest functioning post office in the world is on High Street in Sanquhar, Scotland. The post office has functioned continuously since 1712, during which horses and stagecoaches were used to carry mail.\nRural parts of Canada in the 19th century utilized the way office system. Villagers could leave their letters at the way office which were then taken to the nearest post office, as well as pick up their mail from the way office.\nIn parts of Europe, special postal censorship offices existed to intercept and censor mail. In France, such offices were known as cabinets noirs.\nUnstaffed postal facilities.\nIn many jurisdictions, mailboxes and post office boxes have long been in widespread use for drop-off and pickup (respectively) of mail and small packages outside post offices or when offices are closed. Germany's national postage system Deutsche Post introduced the Pack-Station for package delivery, including both drop-off and pickup, in 2001. In the 2000s, the United States Postal Service began to install Automated Postal Centers (APCs) in many locations in both post offices, for when they are closed or busy, and retail locations. APCs can print postage and accept mail and small packages.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24951", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24951", "title": "PlayStation 3", "text": "Sony's third home video game console, part of the seventh generation\nThe PlayStation 3 (PS3, initially stylized in all caps) is a home video game console developed and marketed by Sony Computer Entertainment (SCE). It is the successor to the PlayStation 2, and both are part of the PlayStation brand of consoles. The PS3 was first released on November 11, 2006, in Japan, followed by November 17 in North America and March 23, 2007, in Europe and Australasia. It competed primarily with Microsoft's Xbox 360 and Nintendo's Wii as part of the seventh generation of video game consoles.\nThe PlayStation 3 was built around the custom-designed Cell Broadband Engine processor, co-developed with IBM and Toshiba. SCE president Ken Kutaragi envisioned the console as a supercomputer for the living room, capable of handling complex multimedia tasks. It was the first console to use the Blu-ray disc as its primary storage medium, the first to be equipped with an HDMI port, and the first capable of outputting games in 1080p (Full HD) resolution. It also launched alongside the PlayStation Network online service and supported Remote Play connectivity with the PlayStation Portable and PlayStation Vita handheld consoles. In September 2009, Sony released the PlayStation 3 Slim, which removed hardware support for PlayStation 2 games (though limited software-based emulation remained) and introduced a smaller, more energy-efficient design. A further revision, the Super Slim, was released in late 2012, offering additional refinements to the console's form factor.\nAt launch, the PS3 received a mixed reception, largely due to its high price\u2014US$ for the 60 GB model and $ for the 20 GB model\u2014as well as its complex system architecture and limited selection of launch titles. The hardware was also costly to produce, and Sony sold the console at a significant loss for several years. However, the PS3 was praised for its technological ambition and support for Blu-ray, which helped Sony establish the format as the dominant standard over HD DVD. Reception improved over time, aided by a library of critically acclaimed games, the Slim and Super Slim hardware revisions that reduced manufacturing costs, and multiple price reductions. These factors helped the console recover commercially. Ultimately, the PS3 sold approximately 87.4 million units worldwide, narrowly surpassing the Xbox 360 and becoming the eighth best-selling console of all time. As of early 2019,[ [update]] nearly 1 billion PlayStation 3 games had been sold worldwide.\nThe PlayStation 4 was released in November 2013 as the PS3's successor. Sony began phasing out the PlayStation 3 within two years. Shipments ended in most regions by 2016, with final production continuing for the Japanese market until May 29, 2017.\nHistory.\nDevelopment of the PlayStation 3 began on March 9, 2001, when Sony Computer Entertainment president Ken Kutaragi announced a partnership with Toshiba and IBM to develop the Cell microprocessor. Around the same time, Shuhei Yoshida led a team focused on exploring next-generation game development. By early 2005, Sony shifted its focus toward preparing PS3 launch titles.\nIn September 2004, Sony confirmed that the PlayStation 3 would use Blu-ray as its primary media format, with support for DVDs and CDs. Nvidia was announced as the partner for the console's graphics processing unit in December 2004. The PS3 was officially unveiled on May 16, 2005, at E3, alongside a prototype of the Sixaxis controller featuring a boomerang-shaped design. No working hardware was present at E3 or at the Tokyo Game Show in September, though demonstrations such as \"\" were shown running on software development kits and comparable PC hardware. Sony also showcased concept footage based on projected system specifications, including a \"Final Fantasy VII\" tech demo.\nThe 2005 prototype included two HDMI ports, three Ethernet ports and six USB ports, but by E3 2006, these had been reduced to one HDMI, one Ethernet, and four USB ports to cut costs. Sony also announced two launch models: a 60\u00a0GB version at US$ / \u00a5 / \u20ac and a 20\u00a0GB version at US$ / \u00a5 / \u20ac. To further reduce costs, the 60\u00a0GB model was to be the only configuration to feature HDMI output, Wi-Fi, flash card readers and chrome trim. It was scheduled to launch on November 11, 2006, in Japan and November 17, 2006, in North America and Europe.\nOn September 6, 2006, Sony delayed the PAL region launch to March 2007 due to a shortage of Blu-ray drive components, and announced it would not sell the 20\u00a0GB model in the region. Later that month at the Tokyo Game Show, Sony confirmed that it had decided to include HDMI output on the 20\u00a0GB model. The Japanese launch price for the 20\u00a0GB model was also reduced by more than 20%, while the 60\u00a0GB model would be sold under an open pricing scheme. Sony showcased 27 playable titles running on final PS3 hardware at the event.\nDespite the cost-cutting efforts, the PS3 would still be sold at a loss due to high component costs, including the GPU (estimated at US$129) and Blu-ray Disc drive (estimated at US$125). The 20\u00a0GB model was estimated to cost US$805.85 to manufacture, about US$307 more than its retail price, while the 60\u00a0GB model was estimated at US$840.35, or US$241 above its retail price. Subsidizing the hardware contributed to SCE reporting an operating loss of \u00a5232\u202fbillion (approximately US$1.91\u202fbillion) for the fiscal year following the launch of the PS3. Sony later acknowledged cumulative losses of about US$3.3\u202fbillion on the PS3 hardware through mid\u20112008.\nLaunch.\nThe PlayStation 3 was first released in Japan on November 11, 2006, selling over 81,000 units within 24 hours. It launched in North America on November 17, where demand was high and incidents of violence were reported at retail locations. The console was released the same day in Hong Kong and Taiwan.\nThe console launched in Europe, Australia, and other PAL regions on March 23, 2007. It sold 600,000 units across Europe in its first two days, with 165,000 sold in the UK, making it the region's fastest-selling home console at the time. Sales dropped sharply in the following weeks, with some retailers citing high price points and early cancellations.\nThe PS3 launched in other markets throughout 2007, including Singapore (March 7), India (April 27), Mexico (April), and South Korea (June 16). Sony often hosted promotional events or offered bundled content in these regions to drive interest.\n\"Slim\" model.\nFollowing months of speculation, Sony officially unveiled the \"Slim\" hardware revision (model CECH-2000) on August 18, 2009, during its Gamescom press conference, and it was released in major territories by September 2009. This model featured a significantly slimmer and lighter chassis, reduced power consumption, and a quieter cooling system. These improvements were made possible in part by transitioning to smaller fabrication processes for the system's CPU and GPU. The manufacturing changes reportedly reduced production costs by about 70\u202fpercent. Nevertheless, due to the console's simultaneous price reduction to US$299, Sony was still estimated to be losing around US$37 per unit at launch, with losses per unit reduced to approximately US$18 by early 2010.\n\"Super Slim\" model.\nSony announced the \"Super Slim\" hardware revision (model CECH-4000) in September 2012, which launched in major markets later that year. Compared to the previous \"Slim\" model, the new chassis was approximately 20\u202fpercent smaller and 25\u202fpercent lighter, featured reduced power consumption, and replaced the slot-loading disc drive with a top-loading drive, changes that further lowered manufacturing costs. While the redesigned disc mechanism helped cut costs and save space, reviewers criticized it as feeling cheap and described it as \"ultimately a step back\". The Super Slim was offered with larger 250\u00a0GB and 500\u00a0GB hard drives, as well as a low-cost model featuring 16\u00a0GB of eMMC flash storage, with the option to install a hard drive later.\nGames.\nPlayStation 3 launched in North America with 14 titles, with ' emerging as the top seller. The game received critical acclaim and was named PS3 Game of the Year by both GameSpot and IGN. Some anticipated titles, such as ' \"and\" \"F.E.A.R.\", missed the launch window and arrived in early 2007. In Japan, \"Ridge Racer 7\" led launch sales, while the European launch featured 24 titles, including \"MotorStorm\" and \"Virtua Fighter 5\". \"MotorStorm\" and \"\" became the platform's most successful titles of 2007, and each received sequels.\nAt E3 2007, Sony showcased its upcoming first-party lineup including ', ', and \"Warhawk\", along with future titles such as \"Killzone 2\", \"LittleBigPlanet\", and \"Gran Turismo 5 Prologue\". Key third-party games such as ', \"Assassin's Creed\", ', and \"Grand Theft Auto IV\" also helped drive platform momentum.\nSony introduced stereoscopic 3D support to PS3 via firmware updates beginning in 2010. The technology was first demonstrated in the January 2009 Consumer Electronics Show, with \"Wipeout HD\" and \"Gran Turismo 5 Prologue\" used to show how the technology would work. Firmware update 3.30 enabled 3D gaming, while 3.50 added support for 3D movie playback.\nAs of early 2019,[ [update]] nearly 1 billion PS3 games had been sold worldwide. The platform's best-selling titles include \"Grand Theft Auto V\", \"Gran Turismo 5\", \"The Last of Us\", and the \"Uncharted\" franchise.\nHardware.\nThe PlayStation 3 retained the same basic design across its three major hardware revisions, featuring a black plastic shell with a convex top when placed horizontally, or a convex-left side when oriented vertically. The original model used glossy piano black plastic and featured a logo inspired by the font used in the 2002 \"Spider-Man\" film, also produced by Sony. According to PlayStation designer Teiyu Goto, this logo was one of the first design elements selected by SCEI president Ken Kutaragi and helped shape the console's overall aesthetic.\nThe font would be abandoned at the introduction of the \"Slim\" revision in favor of an updated version of the PS2 logo with more curved edges, a design that would remain in use for the PS4 and PS5 logos.\nTechnical specifications.\nThe PlayStation 3 is powered by the Cell Broadband Engine, a 64-bit CPU co-developed by Sony, Toshiba and IBM. It includes a 3.2\u00a0GHz PowerPC-based Power Processing Element (PPE) and seven Synergistic Processing Elements (SPEs). To improve manufacturing yield, the processor is initially fabricated with eight SPEs. After production, each chip is tested, and if a defect is found in one SPE, it is disabled using laser trimming. This approach minimizes waste by utilizing processors that would otherwise be discarded. Even in chips without defects, one SPE is intentionally disabled to ensure consistency across units. Of the seven operational SPEs, six are available for developers to use in games and applications, while the seventh is reserved for the console's operating system. The Cell processor is paired with 256\u00a0MB of high-bandwidth XDR DRAM.\nGraphics processing is managed by the Reality Synthesizer (RSX), developed by Nvidia and paired with 256\u00a0MB of GDDR3 SDRAM video memory. The RSX chip can produce resolutions ranging from standard-definition (480i/576i) up to high-definition (1080p). Initially, Sony's hardware development team did not plan to include a dedicated GPU, believing the Cell processor could handle all graphics processing tasks. However, game developers, including Sony's ICE team (the central graphics technologies group for its game studios), demonstrated that without a dedicated GPU, the PlayStation 3's performance would fall short, particularly when compared to the Xbox 360. This feedback prompted the late-stage addition of the RSX GPU during the console's development.\nPhysical media games for the PlayStation 3 were sold on Blu-ray discs and the console features a 2\u00d7 speed drive which is also capable of reading Blu-ray movies, DVDs, and CDs. Early models came with 20 GB or 60\u00a0GB hard drives, with later versions offering up to 500 GB. (see: model comparison) All models have user-upgradeable hard drives. Connectivity options include Bluetooth 2.0 (supporting up to seven devices), Gigabit Ethernet, USB 2.0, and HDMI 1.4. All models except one early version feature built-in Wi-Fi, and some early units include flash card readers for Memory Stick, SD and CompactFlash formats.\nModels.\nThe PlayStation 3 was released in three main designs: the original, the Slim, and the Super Slim. These revisions introduced changes such as reduced power consumption, smaller form factors, expanded storage, and the removal of certain features to lower costs.\nControllers and accessories.\nThe standard controller at the PlayStation 3's launch in 2006 was the wireless Sixaxis, which featured a built-in accelerometer capable of motion sensing across three directional and three rotational axes\u2014six in total, hence the name. However, it lacked vibration functionality. In late 2007, Sony released the DualShock 3, which added vibration support while retaining all motion-sensing features.\nNumerous other accessories for the console were also developed including the Logitech Driving Force GT, the Logitech Cordless Precision Controller, the Blu-ray Disc Remote, and the PlayTV DVB-T tuner and digital video recorder.\nIn response to the popularity of Nintendo\u2019s motion controls on the Wii, Sony introduced the PlayStation Move in 2010. Its wand-style controllers use internal inertial sensors and a glowing orb tracked by the PlayStation Eye camera to enable precise motion-controlled gameplay.\nStatistics regarding reliability.\nIn September 2009, the BBC television program \"Watchdog\" aired a report investigating hardware failures in the PlayStation 3, referring to the issue as the \"yellow light of death\" (YLOD). The report claimed that affected consoles typically failed 18\u201324 months after purchase\u2014outside of Sony's standard one-year warranty. After this period, users were required to pay a fixed fee to receive a refurbished replacement console from Sony.\nHowever, according to \"Ars Technica\", the failure rate of PlayStation 3 consoles remained within the expected range for consumer electronics. A 2009 study by warranty provider SquareTrade found a two-year failure rate of 10% for the PlayStation 3. Sony said its internal data indicated that only about 0.5% of consoles were returned with symptoms of the YLOD. In response to the \"Watchdog\" report, Sony issued a statement disputing the accuracy and tone of the report, arguing it was misleading.\nUse in supercomputing.\nBeyond gaming, the PlayStation 3's hardware was embraced by researchers for high-performance computing applications. Thanks in part to Sony's early support for third-party operating systems, the PS3 was repurposed for tasks ranging from academic research to distributed computing. Dr. Frank Mueller of North Carolina State University clustered eight PS3s in 2007 using Fedora Linux and open-source toolsets. Although limited by the console's 256 MB of RAM, he called the system a cost-effective entry point into parallel computing. Sony and Stanford University also launched the Folding@home client, allowing PS3 owners to contribute processing power to study protein folding for disease research.\nThe U.S. military recognized the PS3's computing eventually potential as well. In 2010, the Air Force Research Laboratory built the Condor Cluster using 1,760 PS3 consoles, achieving 500\u00a0trillion floating-point operations per second. At the time, it was the 33rd most powerful supercomputer in the world and was used for analyzing high-resolution satellite imagery. The PS3 was also employed in cybersecurity research; in 2008, a group of researchers used a 200-console cluster to crack SSL encryption. These unconventional applications were curtailed by later hardware revisions that removed support for third-party operating systems.\nSoftware.\nSystem software.\nSony has included the ability for the operating system, referred to as \"System Software\", to be updated. The updates can be acquired in several ways:\nThe original PlayStation 3 also included the ability to install other operating systems, such as Linux. This was not included in the newer slim models and was removed from all older PlayStation 3 consoles with the release of firmware update 3.21 in April 2010. The functionality is now only available to users of original consoles who choose not to update their system software beyond version 3.15 or who have installed third-party, modified and unofficial versions of the firmware instead.\nGraphical user interface.\nThe standard PlayStation 3 version of the XrossMediaBar (pronounced \"Cross Media Bar\" and abbreviated XMB) includes nine categories of options. These are: \"Users\", \"Settings\", \"Photo\", \"Music\", \"Video\", \"TV/Video Services\", \"Game\", \"Network\", \"PlayStation Network\" and \"Friends\" (similar to the PlayStation Portable media bar). The\"TV/Video Services\" category is for services like Netflix and if PlayTV or torne is installed; the first category in this section is \"My Channels\", which lets users download various streaming services, including Sony's own streaming services Crackle and PlayStation Vue. By default, the \"What's New\" section of \"PlayStation Network\" is displayed when the system starts up. PS3 includes the ability to store various master and secondary user profiles, manage and explore photos with or without a musical slide show, play music and copy audio CD tracks to an attached data storage device, play movies and video files from the hard disk drive, an optical disc (Blu-ray Disc or DVD-Video) or an optional USB mass storage or Flash card, compatibility for a USB keyboard and mouse and a web browser supporting compatible-file download function. Additionally, UPnP media will appear in the respective audio/video/photo categories if a compatible media server or DLNA server is detected on the local network. The Friends menu allows mail with emoticon and attached picture features and video chat which requires an optional PlayStation Eye or EyeToy webcam. The Network menu allows online shopping through the PlayStation Store and connectivity to PlayStation Portable via Remote Play.\nDigital rights management.\nPlayStation 3 console protects certain types of data and uses digital rights management to limit the data's use. Purchased games and content from the PlayStation Network store are governed by PlayStation's Network Digital Rights Management (NDRM). The NDRM allows users to access the data from up to 2 different PlayStation 3's that have been activated using a user's PlayStation Network ID. PlayStation 3 also limits the transfer of copy protected videos downloaded from its store to other machines and states that copy protected video \"may not restore correctly\" following certain actions after making a backup such as downloading a new copy protected movie.\nPhoto management.\nPhoto Gallery is an optional application to view, create, and group photos from PS3, which is installed separately from the system software at 105\u00a0MB. It was introduced in system software version 2.60 and provides a range of tools for sorting through and displaying the system's pictures. The key feature of this application is that it can organize photos into groups according to various criteria. Notable categorizations are colors, ages, or facial expressions of the people in the photos. Slideshows can be viewed with the application, along with music and playlists. The software was updated with the release of system software version 3.40 allowing users to upload and browse photos on Facebook and Picasa.\nPlayMemories is an optional stereoscopic 3D (and also standard) photo viewing application, which is installed from the PlayStation Store at 956\u00a0MB. The application is dedicated specifically to 3D photos and features the ability to zoom into 3D environments and change the angle and perspective of panoramas. It requires system software 3.40 or higher; 3D photos; a 3D HDTV, and an HDMI cable for the 3D images to be viewed properly.\nVideo services.\nA new application was released as part of system software version 3.40 which allows users to edit videos on PlayStation 3 and upload them to the Internet. The software features basic video editing tools including the ability to cut videos and add music and captions. Videos can then be rendered and uploaded to video sharing websites such as Facebook and YouTube.\nIn addition to the video service provided by the Sony Entertainment Network, the PlayStation 3 console has access to a variety of third-party video services, dependent on the region:\nSince June 2009, VidZone has offered a free music video streaming service in Europe, Australia and New Zealand. In October 2009, Sony Computer Entertainment and Netflix announced that the Netflix streaming service would also be available on PlayStation 3 in the United States. A paid Netflix subscription was required for the service. The service became available in November 2009. Initially users had to use a free Blu-ray disc to access the service; however, in October 2010 the requirement to use a disc to gain access was removed.\nIn April 2010, support for MLB.tv was added, allowing MLB.tv subscribers to watch regular season games live in HD and access new interactive features designed exclusively for PSN.\nIn November 2010, access to the video and social networking site MUBI was enabled for European, New Zealand, and Australian users; the service integrates elements of social networking with rental or subscription video streaming, allowing users to watch and discuss films with other users. Also in November 2010 the video rental service VUDU, NHL GameCenter Live, and subscription service Hulu Plus launched on PlayStation 3 in the United States.\nIn August 2011, Sony, in partnership with DirecTV, added NFL Sunday Ticket. Then in October 2011, Best Buy launched an app for its CinemaNow service. In April 2012, Amazon.com launched an Amazon Video app, accessible to Amazon Prime subscribers (in the US).\nUpon reviewing the PlayStation and Netflix collaboration, Pocket-Lint said \"We've used the Netflix app on Xbox too and, as good as it is, we think the PS3 version might have the edge here.\" and stated that having Netflix and LoveFilm on PlayStation is \"mind-blowingly good.\"\nIn July 2013, YuppTV OTT player launched its branded application on the PS3 computer entertainment system in the United States.\nAudio capabilities.\nThe PlayStation 3 has the ability to play standard audio CDs, a feature that was notably removed from its successors. PlayStation 3 added the ability for ripping audio CDs to store them on the system's hard disk; the system has transcoders for ripping to either MP3, AAC, or Sony's own ATRAC (ATRAC3plus) formats. Early models were also able to playback Super Audio CDs, however this support was dropped in the third generation revision of the console from late 2007. However, all models do retain Direct Stream Digital playback ability.\nPlayStation 3 can also play music from portable players by connecting the player to the system's USB port, including from Walkman digital audio players and other ATRAC players and other players that use the UMS protocol. The PlayStation 3 did not feature the Sony CONNECT Music Store.\nOtherOS support.\nPlayStation 3 initially shipped with the ability to install an alternative operating system alongside the main system software; Linux and other Unix-based operating systems were available. The hardware allowed access to six of the seven \"Synergistic Processing Elements\" of the Cell microprocessor, but not the RSX 'Reality Synthesizer' graphics chip.\nThe 'OtherOS' functionality was not present in the updated PS Slim models, and the feature was subsequently removed from previous versions of the PS3 as part of the machine's firmware update version 3.21 which was released on April 1, 2010; Sony cited security concerns as the rationale. The firmware update 3.21 was mandatory for access to the PlayStation Network.\nThe removal caused some controversy; as the update removed officially advertised features from already sold products, and gave rise to several class action lawsuits aimed at making Sony return the feature or provide compensation.\nOn December 8, 2011, U.S. District Judge Richard Seeborg dismissed the last remaining count of the class action lawsuit (other claims in the suit had previously been dismissed), stating: \"As a legal matter, ... plaintiffs have failed to allege facts or articulate a theory on which Sony may be held liable.\"\nAs of \u00a02014[ [update]], the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit partially reversed the dismissal and have sent the case back to the district court.\nLeap year bug.\nOn March 1, 2010 (UTC), many of the original PlayStation 3 models worldwide were experiencing errors related to their internal system clock. The error had many symptoms. Initially, the main problem seemed to be the inability to connect to the PlayStation Network. However, the root cause of the problem was unrelated to the PlayStation Network, since even users who had never been online also had problems playing installed offline games (which queried the system timer as part of startup) and using system themes. At the same time, many users noted that the console's clock had gone back to December 31, 1999. The event was nicknamed the ApocalyPS3, a play on the word \"apocalypse\" and PS3, the abbreviation for the PlayStation 3 console.\nThe error code displayed was typically 8001050F and affected users were unable to sign in, play games, use dynamic themes, and view/sync trophies. The problem only resided within the first- through third-generation original PS3 units while the newer \"Slim\" models were unaffected because of different internal hardware for the clock.\nSony confirmed that there was an error and stated that it was narrowing down the issue and were continuing to work to restore service. By March 2 (UTC), 2010, owners of original PS3 models could connect to PSN successfully and the clock no longer showed December 31, 1999. Sony stated that the affected models incorrectly identified 2010 as a leap year, because of a bug in the BCD method of storing the date. However, for some users, the hardware's operating system clock (mainly updated from the internet and not associated with the internal clock) needed to be updated manually or by re-syncing it via the internet.\nOn June 29, 2010, Sony released PS3 system software update 3.40, which improved the functionality of the internal clock to properly account for leap years.\nFeatures.\nPlayStation Portable connectivity.\nPlayStation Portable can connect with PlayStation 3 in many ways, including in-game connectivity. For example, \"Formula One Championship Edition\", a racing game, was shown at E3 2006 using a PSP as a real-time rear-view mirror. In addition, users are able to download original PlayStation format games from the PlayStation Store, transfer and play them on PSP as well as PS3 itself. It is also possible to use the Remote Play feature to play these and some PlayStation Network games, remotely on PSP over a network or internet connection.\nSony has also demonstrated PSP playing back video content from PlayStation 3 hard disk across an ad hoc wireless network. This feature is referred to as Remote Play located under the browser icon on both PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable. Remote play has since expanded to allow remote access to PS3 via PSP from any wireless access point in the world.\nPlayStation Network.\nPlayStation Network is the unified online multiplayer gaming and digital media delivery service provided by Sony Computer Entertainment for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable, announced during the 2006 PlayStation Business Briefing meeting in Tokyo. The service is always connected, free, and includes multiplayer support. The network enables online gaming, the PlayStation Store, PlayStation Home and other services. PlayStation Network uses real currency and PlayStation Network Cards as seen with the PlayStation Store and PlayStation Home.\nPlayStation Plus.\nPlayStation Plus (commonly abbreviated \"PS+\" and occasionally referred to as \"PSN Plus\") is a premium PlayStation Network subscription service that was officially unveiled at E3 2010 by Jack Tretton, President and CEO of SCEA. Rumors of such service had been in speculation since Kaz Hirai's announcement at TGS 2009 of a possible paid service for PSN but with the current PSN service still available. Launched alongside PS3 firmware 3.40 and PSP firmware 6.30 on June 29, 2010, the paid-for subscription service provides users with enhanced services on the PlayStation Network, on top of the current PSN service which is still available with all of its features. These enhancements include the ability to have demos and game updates download automatically to PlayStation 3. Subscribers also get early or exclusive access to some betas, game demos, premium downloadable content, and other PlayStation Store items. North American users also get a free subscription to Qore. Users may choose to purchase either a one-year or a three-month subscription to PlayStation Plus.\nPlayStation Store.\nThe PlayStation Store is an online virtual market available to users of Sony's PlayStation 3 (PS3) and PlayStation Portable (PSP) game consoles via the PlayStation Network. The Store offers a range of downloadable content both for purchase and available free of charge. Available content includes full games, add-on content, playable demos, themes and game and movie trailers. The service is accessible through an icon on the XMB on PS3 and PSP. The PS3 store can also be accessed on PSP via a Remote Play connection to PS3. The PSP store is also available via the PC application, Media Go. As of \u00a024, 2009[ [update]], there have been over 600\u00a0million downloads from the PlayStation Store worldwide.\nThe PlayStation Store is updated with new content each Tuesday in North America, and each Wednesday in PAL regions. In May 2010 this was changed from Thursdays to allow PSP games to be released digitally, closer to the time they are released on UMD.\nOn March 29, 2021, Sony announced that it would shut down the PS3 version of the Store on July 2, though previous purchases on the store will remain downloadable. However, on April 19, following fan feedback, Sony reversed their decision and confirmed that the PS3 store would remain operational.\nWhat's New.\nWhat's New was announced at Gamescom 2009 and was released on September 1, 2009, with PlayStation 3 system software 3.0. The feature was to replace the existing [Information Board], which displayed news from the PlayStation website associated with the user's region. The concept was developed further into a major PlayStation Network feature, which interacts with the [Status Indicator] to display a ticker of all content, excluding recently played content (currently in North America and Japan only).\nThe system displays the What's New screen by default instead of the [Games] menu (or [Video] menu, if a movie was inserted) when starting up. What's New has four sections: \"Our Pick\", \"Recently Played\", the latest information, and new content available in PlayStation Store. There are four kinds of content the What's New screen displays and links to, on the sections. \"Recently Played\" displays the user's recently played games and online services only, whereas, the other sections can contain website links, links to play videos, and access to selected sections of the PlayStation Store.\nThe PlayStation Store icons in the [Game] and [Video] section act similarly to the What's New screen, except that they only display and link to games and videos in the PlayStation Store, respectively.\nPlayStation Home.\nPlayStation Home was a virtual 3D social networking service for the PlayStation Network. Home allowed users to create a custom avatar, which could be groomed realistically. Users could edit and decorate their personal apartments, avatars, or club houses with free, premium, or won content. Users could shop for new items or win prizes from PS3 games, or Home activities. Users could interact and connect with friends and customize content in a virtual world. Home also acted as a meeting place for users that wanted to play multiplayer video games with others.\nA closed beta began in Europe from May 2007 and expanded to other territories soon after. Home was delayed and expanded several times before initially releasing. The Open Beta test was started on December 11, 2008. It remained as a perpetual beta until its closure on March 31, 2015. Home was available directly from the PlayStation 3 XrossMediaBar. Membership was free, but required a PSN account.\nHome featured places to meet and interact, dedicated game spaces, developer spaces, company spaces, and events. The service underwent a weekly maintenance and frequent updates. At the time of its closure in March 2015, Home had been downloaded by over 41\u00a0million users. \nLife with PlayStation.\nLife with PlayStation, released on September 18, 2008 to succeed Folding@home, was retired November 6, 2012. \"Life with PlayStation\" used virtual globe data to display news and information by city. Along with Folding@home functionality, the application provided access to three other information \"channels\", the first being the \"Live Channel\" offering news headlines and weather which were provided by Google News, The Weather Channel, the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison Space Science and Engineering Center, among other sources. The second channel was the World Heritage channel which offered historical information about historical sites. The third channel was the United Village channel. United Village was designed to share information about communities and cultures worldwide. An update allowed video and photo viewing in the application. The fourth channel was the U.S. exclusive PlayStation Network Game Trailers Channel for direct streaming of game trailers.\nOutage.\nOn April 20, 2011, Sony shut down the PlayStation Network and Qriocity for a prolonged interval, revealing on April 23 that this was due to \"an external intrusion on our system\". Sony later revealed that the personal information of 77\u00a0million users might have been taken, including: names; addresses; countries; email addresses; birthdates; PSN/Qriocity logins, passwords and handles/PSN online IDs.&lt;ref name=\"PSN/Qriocity Service Update\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It also stated that it was possible that users' profile data, including purchase history and billing address, and PlayStation Network/Qriocity password security answers may have been obtained. There was no evidence that any credit card data had been taken, but the possibility could not be ruled out, and Sony advised customers that their credit card data may have been obtained. Additionally, the credit card numbers were encrypted and Sony never collected the three digit CVC or CSC number from the back of the credit cards which is required for authenticating some transactions. In response to the incident, Sony announced a \"Welcome Back\" program, 30 days free membership of PlayStation Plus for all PSN members, two free downloadable PS3 games, and a free one-year enrollment in an identity theft protection program.\nSales and production costs.\nAlthough its PlayStation predecessors had been very dominant against the competition and were hugely profitable for Sony, PlayStation 3 had an inauspicious start, and Sony chairman and CEO Sir Howard Stringer initially could not convince investors of a turnaround in its fortunes. The PS3 lacked the unique gameplay of the more affordable Wii which became that generation's most successful console in terms of units sold. Furthermore, PS3 had to compete directly with Xbox 360 which had a market head start, and as a result the platform no longer had exclusive titles that the PS2 enjoyed such as the \"Grand Theft Auto\" and \"Final Fantasy\" series (regarding cross-platform games, Xbox 360 versions were generally considered superior in 2006, although by 2008 the PS3 versions had reached parity or surpassed), and it took longer than expected for PS3 to enjoy strong sales and close the gap with Xbox 360. Sony also continued to lose money on each PS3 sold through 2010, although the redesigned \"slim\" PS3 cut these losses.\nPlayStation 3's initial production cost is estimated by iSuppli to have been US$805.85 for the 20\u00a0GB model and US$840.35 for the 60\u00a0GB model. However, they were priced at US$499 and US$599, respectively, meaning that units may have been sold at an estimated loss of $306 or $241 depending on model, if the cost estimates were correct, and thus may have contributed to Sony's games division posting an operating loss of \u00a5232.3\u00a0billion (US$1.97\u00a0billion) in the fiscal year ending March 2007. In April 2007, soon after these results were published, Ken Kutaragi, President of Sony Computer Entertainment, announced plans to retire. Various news agencies, including \"The Times\" and \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that this was due to poor sales, while SCEI maintains that Kutaragi had been planning his retirement for six months prior to the announcement.\nIn January 2008, Kaz Hirai, CEO of Sony Computer Entertainment, suggested that the console may start making a profit by early 2009, stating that, \"the next fiscal year starts in April and if we can try to achieve that in the next fiscal year that would be a great thing\" and that \"[profitability] is not a definite commitment, but that is what I would like to try to shoot for\". However, market analysts Nikko Citigroup have predicted that PlayStation 3 could be profitable by August 2008. In a July 2008 interview, Hirai stated that his objective is for PlayStation 3 to sell 150\u00a0million units by its ninth year, surpassing PlayStation 2's sales of 140\u00a0million in its nine years on the market. In January 2009 Sony announced that their gaming division was profitable in Q3 2008.\nAfter the system's launch, production costs were reduced significantly as a result of phasing out the Emotion Engine chip and falling hardware costs. The cost of manufacturing Cell microprocessors had fallen dramatically as a result of moving to the 65\u00a0nm production process, and Blu-ray Disc diodes had become cheaper to manufacture. As of January 2008, each unit cost around $400 to manufacture; by August 2009, Sony had reduced costs by a total of 70%, meaning it only cost Sony around $240 per unit. The PlayStation 3's actual manufacturing cost at launch was never officially disclosed; SCE's Phil Harrison said in a 2019 interview that during the system's launch \"it was a worry because 600 bucks was actually too cheap, because the machine was \"so\" expensive to make\", before telling the interviewer that he can't disclose the real figure but that it would \"make your eyebrows shoot clear off the top of your head\".\nCritical reception.\nEarly PlayStation 3 reviews after launch were critical of its high price and lack of quality games. Game developers regarded the architecture as difficult to program for. PS3 was, however, commended for its hardware including its Blu-ray home theater capabilities and graphics potential.\nCritical and commercial reception to PS3 improved over time, after a series of price revisions, Blu-ray's victory over HD DVD, and the release of several well received titles. \"Ars Technica\"'s original launch review gave PS3 only a 6/10, but second review of the console in June 2008 rated it a 9/10. In September 2009, IGN named PlayStation\u00a03 the 15th-best gaming console of all time, behind both of its competitors: Wii (10th) and Xbox 360 (6th). However, PS3 has won IGN's \"Console Showdown\"\u2014based on which console offers the best selection of games released during each year\u2014in three of the four years since it began (2008, 2009 and 2011, with Xbox winning in 2010). IGN judged PlayStation 3 to have the best game line-up of 2008, based on their review scores in comparison to those of Wii and Xbox 360. In a comparison piece by \"PC Magazine\"'s Will Greenwald in June 2012, PS3 was selected as an overall better console compared to Xbox 360.\nPocket-Lint said of the console \"The PS3 has always been a brilliant games console,\" and that \"For now, this is just about the best media device for the money.\"\nOriginal model.\nPS3 was given the number-eight spot on \"PC World\" magazine's list of \"The Top 21 Tech Screwups of 2006\", where it was criticized for being \"Late, Expensive and Incompatible\". GamesRadar ranked PS3 as the top item in a feature on game-related PR disasters, asking how Sony managed to \"take one of the most anticipated game systems of all time and\u2014within the space of a year\u2014turn it into a hate object reviled by the entire internet\", but added that despite its problems the system has \"untapped potential\". \"Business Week\" summed up the general opinion by stating that it was \"more impressed with what the PlayStation 3 could do than with what it currently does\".\nDevelopers also found the machine difficult to program for. In 2007, Gabe Newell of Valve said \"The PS3 is a total disaster on so many levels, I think it's really clear that Sony lost track of what customers and what developers wanted\". He continued \"I'd say, even at this late date, they should just cancel it and do a do over. Just say, 'This was a horrible disaster and we're sorry and we're going to stop selling this and stop trying to convince people to develop for it'\". Doug Lombardi VP of Marketing for Valve has since stated that Valve is interested in developing for the console and is looking to hire talented PS3 programmers for future projects. He later restated Valve's position, \"Until we have the ability to get a PS3 team together, until we find the people who want to come to Valve or who are at Valve who want to work on that, I don't really see us moving to that platform\". At Sony's E3 2010 press conference, Newell made a live appearance to recant his previous statements, citing Sony's move to make the system more developer-friendly, and to announce that Valve would be developing \"Portal 2\" for the system. He also claimed that the inclusion of Steamworks (Valve's system to automatically update their software independently) would help to make the PS3 version of \"Portal 2\" the best console version on the market.\nActivision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick has criticized PS3's high development costs and inferior attach rate and return to that of Xbox 360 and Wii. He believes these factors are pushing developers away from working on the console. In an interview with \"The Times\" Kotick stated \"I'm getting concerned about Sony; the PlayStation 3 is losing a bit of momentum and they don't make it easy for me to support the platform.\" He continued, \"It's expensive to develop for the console, and the Wii and the Xbox are just selling better. Games generate a better return on invested capital (ROIC) on the Xbox than on the PlayStation.\" Kotick also claimed that Activision Blizzard may stop supporting the system if the situation is not addressed. \"[Sony has] to cut the [PS3's retail] price, because if they don't, the attach rates are likely to slow. If we are being realistic, we might have to stop supporting Sony.\" Kotick received heavy criticism for the statement, notably from developer BioWare who questioned the wisdom of the threatened move, and referred to the statement as \"silly.\"\nDespite the initial negative press, several websites have given the system very good reviews mostly regarding its hardware. CNET United Kingdom praised the system saying, \"the PS3 is a versatile and impressive piece of home-entertainment equipment that lives up to the hype [...] the PS3 is well worth its hefty price tag.\" CNET awarded it a score of 8.8 out of 10 and voted it as its number one \"must-have\" gadget, praising its robust graphical capabilities and stylish exterior design while criticizing its limited selection of available games. In addition, both \"Home Theater Magazine\" and \"Ultimate AV\" have given the system's Blu-ray playback very favorable reviews, stating that the quality of playback exceeds that of many current standalone Blu-ray Disc players.\nIn an interview, Kazuo Hirai, chairman of Sony Computer Entertainment argued for the choice of a complex architecture. Hexus Gaming reviewed the PAL version and summed the review up by saying, \"as the PlayStation 3 matures and developers start really pushing it, we'll see the PlayStation 3 emerge as the console of choice for gaming.\" At GDC 2007, Shiny Entertainment founder Dave Perry stated, \"I think that Sony has made the best machine. It's the best piece of hardware, without question\".\nSlim model and rebranding.\nThe PlayStation 3 Slim received extremely positive reviews as well as a boost in sales; less than 24 hours after its announcement, PS3 Slim took the number-one bestseller spot on Amazon.com in the video games section for fifteen consecutive days. It regained the number-one position again one day later. PS3 Slim also received praise from PC World giving it a 90 out of 100 praising its new repackaging and the new value it brings at a lower price as well as praising its quietness and the reduction in its power consumption. This is in stark contrast to the original PS3's launch in which it was given position number-eight on their \"The Top 21 Tech Screwups of 2006\" list.\nCNET awarded PS3 Slim four out of five stars praising its Blu-ray capabilities, 120\u00a0GB hard drive, free online gaming service and more affordable pricing point, but complained about the lack of backward compatibility for PlayStation 2 games. TechRadar gave PS3 Slim four and a half stars out of five praising its new smaller size and summed up its review stating \"Over all, the PS3 Slim is a phenomenal piece of kit. It's amazing that something so small can do so much\". However, they criticized the exterior design and the build quality in relation to the original model.\nEurogamer called it \"a product where the cost-cutting has\u2014by and large\u2014been tastefully done\" and said \"It's nothing short of a massive win for Sony.\"\nSuper Slim model.\nThe Super Slim model of PS3 has received positive reviews. Gaming website \"Spong\" praised the new Super Slim's quietness, stating \"The most noticeable noise comes when the drive seeks a new area of the disc, such as when starting to load a game, and this occurs infrequently.\" They added that the fans are quieter than those of Slim, and went on to praise the new smaller, lighter size.\nCriticism was placed on the new disc loader, stating: \"The cover can be moved by hand if you wish, there's also an eject button to do the work for you, but there is no software eject from the triangle button menus in the Xross Media Bar (XMB) interface. In addition, you have to close the cover by hand, which can be a bit fiddly if it's upright, and the PS3 won't start reading a disc unless you do [close the cover].\" They also said there is no real drop in retail price.\nTech media website CNET gave new Super Slim 4 out of 5 stars (\"Excellent\"), saying \"The Super Slim PlayStation 3 shrinks a powerful gaming machine into an even tinier package while maintaining the same features as its predecessors: a great gaming library and a strong array of streaming services [...]\", whilst also criticising the \"cheap\" design and disc-loader, stating: \"Sometimes [the cover] doesn't catch and you feel like you're using one of those old credit card imprinter machines. In short, it feels cheap. You don't realize how convenient autoloading disc trays are until they're gone. Whether it was to cut costs or save space, this move is ultimately a step back.\" The criticism also was due to price, stating the cheapest Super Slim model was still more expensive than the cheapest Slim model, and that the smaller size and bigger hard drive should not be considered an upgrade when the hard drive on a Slim model is easily removed and replaced. They did praise that the hard drive of the Super Slim model is \"the easiest yet. Simply sliding off the side panel reveals the drive bay, which can quickly be unscrewed.\" They also stated that whilst the Super Slim model is not in any way an upgrade, it could be an indicator as to what's to come. \"It may not be revolutionary, but the Super Slim PS3 is the same impressive machine in a much smaller package. There doesn't seem to be any reason for existing PS3 owners to upgrade, but for the prospective PS3 buyer, the Super Slim is probably the way to go if you can deal with not having a slot-loading disc drive.\"\nPocket-Lint gave Super Slim a very positive review saying \"It's much more affordable, brilliant gaming, second-to-none video and media player.\" They think it is \"A blinding good console and one that will serve you for years to come with second-hand games and even new releases. Without doubt, if you don't have a PS3, this is the time to buy.\" They gave Super Slim &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 stars out of 5.\nTechnology magazine \"T3\" gave the Super Slim model a positive review, stating the console is almost \"nostalgic\" in the design similarities to the original \"fat\" model, \"While we don't know whether it will play PS3 games or Blu-ray discs any differently yet, the look and feel of the new PS3 Slim is an obvious homage to the original PS3, minus the considerable excess weight. Immediately we would be concerned about the durability of the top loading tray that feels like it could be yanked straight out off the console, but ultimately it all feels like Sony's nostalgic way of signing off the current-generation console in anticipation for the PS4.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24953", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24953", "title": "Pel\u00e9", "text": "Brazilian footballer (1940\u20132022)\nEdson Arantes do Nascimento (; 23 October 1940 \u2013 29 December 2022), better known by his nickname Pel\u00e9 (), was a Brazilian professional footballer who played as a forward. Widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, he was among the most successful and popular sports figures of the 20th century. His 1,279 goals in 1,363 games, which includes friendlies, is recognised as a Guinness World Record. In 1999, he was named Athlete of the Century by the International Olympic Committee and was included in the \"Time\" list of the . In 2000, Pel\u00e9 was voted World Player of the Century by the International Federation of Football History &amp; Statistics (IFFHS) and was one of the two joint winners of the FIFA Player of the Century, alongside Diego Maradona.\nPel\u00e9 began playing for Santos at age 15 and the Brazil national team at 16. During his international career, he won three FIFA World Cups: 1958, 1962 and 1970, the only player to do so and the youngest player to win a World Cup (17), though he only played two matches during the 1962 edition. He was nicknamed (The King) following the 1958 tournament. With 77 goals in 92 games for Brazil, Pel\u00e9 held the record as the national team's top goalscorer for over fifty years. At club level, he is Santos's all-time top goalscorer with 643 goals in 659 games. In a golden era for Santos, he led the club to the 1962 and 1963 Copa Libertadores, and to the 1962 and 1963 Intercontinental Cup. Credited with connecting the phrase \"The Beautiful Game\" with football, Pel\u00e9's \"electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals\" made him a global star, and his teams toured internationally to take full advantage of his popularity. During his playing days, Pel\u00e9 was for a period the best-paid athlete in the world. After retiring in 1977, Pel\u00e9 was a worldwide ambassador for football and made many acting and commercial ventures. In 2010, he was named the honorary president of the New York Cosmos.\nPel\u00e9 averaged almost a goal per game throughout his career and could strike the ball with either foot, as well as being able to anticipate his opponents' movements. While predominantly a striker, he could also be a playmaker, providing assists with his vision and passing ability. He would often use his dribbling skills to go past opponents. In Brazil, he was hailed as a national hero for his accomplishments in football and for his outspoken support of policies that improve the social conditions of the poor. His emergence at the 1958 World Cup, where he became a black global sporting star, was a source of inspiration. Throughout his career and in his retirement, Pel\u00e9 received numerous individual and team awards for his performance on the field, his record-breaking achievements, and his legacy in the sport. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly years.\nPel\u00e9 was born Edson Arantes do Nascimento on 23 October 1940 in Tr\u00eas Cora\u00e7\u00f5es, Minas Gerais, the son of Fluminense footballer Dondinho (born Jo\u00e3o Ramos do Nascimento) and Celeste Arantes (1922\u20132024). He was the elder of two siblings, with brother Zoca also playing for Santos, albeit not as successfully. He was named after the American inventor Thomas Edison. His parents decided to remove the \"i\" and call him \"Edson\", but there was a typo on his birth certificate, leading many documents to show his name as \"Edison\", not \"Edson\", as he was called. He was originally nicknamed \"Dico\" by his family. He received the nickname \"Pel\u00e9\" during his school days, it is claimed, after mispronouncing the name of his favourite player, Vasco da Gama goalkeeper Bil\u00e9. In his autobiography released in 2006, Pel\u00e9 stated he had no idea what the name means, nor did his old friends, and the word has no meaning in Portuguese. He would later learn it means \"miracle\" () in Hebrew.\nPel\u00e9 grew up in poverty in Bauru in the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. He earned extra money by working in tea shops as a servant. Taught to play by his father, he could not afford a proper football and usually played with either a sock stuffed with newspaper and tied with string or a grapefruit. He played for several amateur teams in his youth, including \"Sete de Setembro\", \"Canto do Rio\", \"S\u00e3o Paulinho\", and \"Ameriquinha\". Pel\u00e9 led \"Bauru Atl\u00e9tico Clube\" juniors (coached by Waldemar de Brito) to two S\u00e3o Paulo state youth championships. In his mid-teens, he played for an indoor football team called Radium. Indoor football had just become popular in Bauru when Pel\u00e9 began playing it. He was part of the first futsal (indoor football) competition in the region. Pel\u00e9 and his team won the first championship and several others.\nAccording to Pel\u00e9, futsal (indoor football) presented difficult challenges: he said it was a lot quicker than football on the grass, and that players were required to think faster because everyone is close to each other in the pitch. Pel\u00e9 credits futsal for helping him think better on the spot. In addition, futsal allowed him to play with adults when he was about 14 years old. In one of the tournaments he participated in, he was initially considered too young to play, but eventually went on to end up top scorer with 14 or 15 goals. \"That gave me a lot of confidence\", Pel\u00e9 said, \"I knew then not to be afraid of whatever might come\".\nClub career.\nSantos.\n1956\u20131962: early years with Santos and declared a national treasure.\nIn 1956, de Brito took Pel\u00e9 to Santos, an industrial and port city located near S\u00e3o Paulo, to try out for professional club Santos FC, telling the club's directors that the 15-year-old would be \"the greatest football player in the world\". Pel\u00e9 impressed Santos coach Lula during his trial at the Est\u00e1dio Vila Belmiro, and he signed a professional contract with the club in June 1956. Pel\u00e9 was highly promoted in the local media as a future superstar. He made his senior team debut on 7 September 1956 at the age of 15 against Corinthians de Santo Andr\u00e9 and had an impressive performance in a 7\u20131 victory, scoring the first goal in his prolific career during the match.\nWhen the 1957 season started, Pel\u00e9 was given a starting place in the first team and, at the age of 16, became the top scorer in the league. Ten months after signing professionally, the teenager was called up to the Brazil national team. After the 1958 and the 1962 World Cup, wealthy European clubs, such as Real Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United, tried to sign him in vain. In 1958, Inter Milan even managed to get him a regular contract, but Angelo Moratti was forced to tear the contract up at the request of Santos's chairman following a revolt by Santos's Brazilian fans. Valencia CF also arranged an agreement that would have brought Pel\u00e9 to the club after the 1958 World Cup, however after his performances at the tournament, Santos declined to let the player leave. In 1961 the government of Brazil under President J\u00e2nio Quadros declared Pel\u00e9 an \"official national treasure\" to prevent him from being transferred out of the country.\nPel\u00e9 won his first major title with Santos in 1958 as the team won the Campeonato Paulista; he would finish the tournament as the top scorer, with 58 goals, a record that still stands today. A year later, he would help the team earn their first victory in the Torneio Rio-S\u00e3o Paulo with a 3\u20130 over Vasco da Gama. However, Santos was unable to retain the Paulista title. In 1960, Pel\u00e9 scored 33 goals to help his team regain the Campeonato Paulista trophy but lost out on the Rio-S\u00e3o Paulo tournament after finishing in 8th place. In the 1960 season, Pel\u00e9 scored 47 goals and helped Santos regain the Campeonato Paulista. The club went on to win the Ta\u00e7a Brasil that same year, beating Bahia in the finals; Pel\u00e9 finished as the top scorer of the tournament with nine goals. The victory allowed Santos to participate in the Copa Libertadores, the most prestigious club tournament in the Western hemisphere.\n1962\u20131965: Copa Libertadores success.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I arrived hoping to stop a great man, but I went away convinced I had been undone by someone who was not born on the same planet as the rest of us.\"\n\u2014Benfica goalkeeper Costa Pereira following the loss to Santos in 1962.\nSantos's most successful Copa Libertadores season started in 1962; the team was seeded in Group One alongside Cerro Porte\u00f1o and Deportivo Municipal Bolivia, winning every match of their group but one (a 1\u20131 away tie versus Cerro). Santos defeated Universidad Cat\u00f3lica in the semi-finals and met defending champions Pe\u00f1arol in the finals. Pel\u00e9 scored twice in the playoff match to secure the first title for a Brazilian club. Pel\u00e9 finished as the second top scorer of the competition with four goals. That same year, Santos would successfully defend the Campeonato Paulista (with 37 goals from Pel\u00e9) and the Ta\u00e7a Brasil (Pel\u00e9 scoring four goals in the final series against Botafogo). Santos would also win the 1962 Intercontinental Cup against Benfica. Wearing his number 10 shirt, Pel\u00e9 produced one of the best performances of his career, scoring a hat-trick in Lisbon as Santos won 5\u20132.\nPel\u00e9 states that his most memorable goal was scored at the Est\u00e1dio Rua Javari on a Campeonato Paulista match against S\u00e3o Paulo rival Clube Atl\u00e9tico Juventus on 2 August 1959. As there is no video footage of this match, Pel\u00e9 asked that a computer animation be made of this specific goal. In March 1961, Pel\u00e9 scored the \"gol de placa\" (goal worthy of a plaque), against Fluminense at the Maracan\u00e3. Pel\u00e9 received the ball on the edge of his own penalty area, and ran the length of the field, eluding opposition players with feints, before striking the ball beyond the goalkeeper. A plaque was commissioned with a dedication to \"the most beautiful goal in the history of the Maracan\u00e3\".\nAs the defending champions, Santos qualified automatically to the semi-final stage of the 1963 Copa Libertadores. The \"bal\u00e9 branco\" (white ballet), the nickname given to Santos at the time, managed to retain the title after victories over Botafogo and Boca Juniors. Pel\u00e9 helped Santos overcome a Botafogo team that featured Brazilian greats such as Garrincha and Jairzinho with a last-minute goal in the first leg of the semi-finals which made it 1\u20131. In the second leg, Pel\u00e9 scored a hat-trick in the Est\u00e1dio do Maracan\u00e3 as Santos won, 0\u20134, in the second leg. Santos started the final series by winning, 3\u20132, in the first leg and defeating Boca Juniors 1\u20132, in La Bombonera. It was a rare feat in official competitions, with another goal from Pel\u00e9. Santos became the first Brazilian team to lift the Copa Libertadores in Argentine soil. Pel\u00e9 finished the tournament with five goals. Santos lost the Campeonato Paulista after finishing in third place but went on to win the Rio-S\u00e3o Paulo tournament after a 0\u20133 win over Flamengo in the final, with Pel\u00e9 scoring one goal. Pel\u00e9 would also help Santos retain the Intercontinental Cup and the Ta\u00e7a Brasil against AC Milan and Bahia respectively.\nIn the 1964 Copa Libertadores, Santos was beaten in both legs of the semi-finals by Independiente. The club won the Campeonato Paulista, with Pel\u00e9 netting 34 goals. Santos also shared the Rio-S\u00e3o Paulo title with Botafogo and won the Ta\u00e7a Brasil for the fourth consecutive year. In the 1965 Copa Libertadores, Santos reached the semi-finals and met Pe\u00f1arol in a rematch of the 1962 final. After two matches, a playoff was needed to break the tie. Unlike 1962, Pe\u00f1arol came out on top and eliminated Santos 2\u20131. Pel\u00e9 would, however, finish as the top scorer of the tournament with eight goals.\n1965\u20131974: \"O Mil\u00e9simo\" and final years with Santos.\nIn December 1965, Santos won the Ta\u00e7a Brasil, their fifth straight Brazilian league title, with Pel\u00e9 scoring the last goal in the final series. In 1966, Santos failed to retain the Ta\u00e7a Brasil as Pel\u00e9's goals were not enough to prevent a 9\u20134 defeat by Cruzeiro (led by Tost\u00e3o) in the final series. The club did, however, win the Campeonato Paulista in 1967, 1968, and 1969. On 19 November 1969, Pel\u00e9 scored his 1,000th goal in all competitions, in what was a highly anticipated moment in Brazil. The goal dubbed \"O Mil\u00e9simo\" (The Thousandth), occurred in a match against Vasco da Gama, when Pel\u00e9 scored from a penalty kick, at the Maracan\u00e3 Stadium.\nVarious sources have said that the two factions involved in the Nigerian Civil War agreed to a 48-hour ceasefire in 1969 so they could watch Pel\u00e9 play an exhibition game in Lagos. An early source for this story was \"Ebony\" magazine in 1975. Santos ended up playing to a 2\u20132 draw with Lagos side Stationary Stores FC and Pel\u00e9 scored his team's goals. The civil war went on for one more year after this game. In his autobiography, Pel\u00e9 was unsure that there was a ceasefire, but said that there was an increased security presence at the game. Some sources, including Santos's website, say that the ceasefire was instead for the friendly in Benin City, bordering Biafra. Local researchers have not found contemporary reports of any ceasefire.\nDuring his time at Santos, Pel\u00e9 played alongside many gifted players, including Zito, Pepe, and Coutinho; the latter partnered him in numerous one-two plays, attacks, and goals. After Pel\u00e9's 19th season with Santos, he left Brazilian football. Pel\u00e9's 643 goals for Santos were the most goals scored for a single club until it was surpassed by Lionel Messi of Barcelona in December 2020. \nTours with Santos.\nEven though he never played in a European league, Pel\u00e9 played exhibition games in several countries all over the world in tours with Santos. He played in Spain against Real Madrid and Barcelona, in Italy against Juventus, Inter Milan, AC Milan and AS Roma. Pel\u00e9 travelled to Egypt in 1973, and played with Santos against Al Ahly. This trip was days after his team's trip to Kuwait to play a match against Qadsia.\nIn Kuwait, Pel\u00e9 met by chance the Egyptian movie star Zubaida Tharwat, who was in Kuwait attending a cinematic event. The two had a couple of photos and he admired her beauty. She said in a television interview about this incident that: she had traveled to Kuwait City in 1973 at the invitation of the Kuwaiti Minister of Culture at the time, and when she went to the hotel where she was going to stay, she was surprised by the presence of many people and flowers inside the hotel, and among these people came to her \"Pel\u00e9\" wearing a collar of roses, and he removed it from him and put it on her.\nWhen she asked what was going on and who was this person, whom she did not know because she did not like football, the hotel staff told her that he was the famous Brazilian football player, and that the hotel was crowded with his fans who wanted to see him. Zubaida Tharwat stated that after he saw her for the first time inside the hotel where they happened to be, he kept chasing her day and night, and wanted to take her with him to Brazil. By chance, the next stop for Pel\u00e9's tour was to Cairo, and he met again with Tharwat, who stated that she could not communicate with him as he did not speak English at the time.\nNew York Cosmos.\nAfter the 1974 season (his 19th with Santos), Pel\u00e9 retired from Brazilian club football although he continued to occasionally play for Santos in official competitive matches. A year later, he came out of semi-retirement to sign with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League (NASL) for the 1975 season. At a chaotic press conference at New York's 21 Club, the Cosmos unveiled Pel\u00e9. John O'Reilly, the club's media spokesman, stated, \"We had superstars in the United States but nothing at the level of Pel\u00e9. Everyone wanted to touch him, shake his hand, get a photo with him.\" Though well past his prime at this point, Pel\u00e9 was credited with significantly increasing public awareness and interest of the sport in the US. During his first public appearance in Boston, he was injured by a crowd of fans who had surrounded him and was evacuated on a stretcher.\nPel\u00e9 made his debut for the Cosmos on 15 June 1975 against the Dallas Tornado at Downing Stadium, scoring one goal in a 2\u20132 draw. Pel\u00e9 opened the door for many other stars to play in North America. Giorgio Chinaglia followed him to the Cosmos, then Franz Beckenbauer and his former Santos teammate Carlos Alberto. Over the next few years other players came to the league, including Johan Cruyff, Eus\u00e9bio, Bobby Moore, George Best and Gordon Banks.\nIn 1975, one week before the Lebanese Civil War, Pel\u00e9 played a friendly game for the Lebanese club Nejmeh against a team of Lebanese Premier League stars, scoring two goals which were not included in his official tally. On the day of the game, 40,000 spectators were at the stadium from early morning to watch the match.\nPel\u00e9 led the Cosmos to the 1977 Soccer Bowl, in his third and final season with the club. In June 1977, the Cosmos attracted an NASL record 62,394 fans to Giants Stadium for a 3\u20130 victory past the Tampa Bay Rowdies with a 37-year-old Pel\u00e9 scoring a hat-trick. In the first leg of the quarter-finals, they attracted a US record crowd of 77,891 for what turned into an 8\u20133 rout of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers at Giants Stadium. In the second leg of the semi-finals against the Rochester Lancers, the Cosmos won 4\u20131. Pel\u00e9 finished his official playing career on 28 August 1977, by leading the New York Cosmos to their second Soccer Bowl title with a 2\u20131 win over the Seattle Sounders at the Civic Stadium in Portland, Oregon.\nOn 1 October 1977, Pel\u00e9 closed out his career in an exhibition match between the Cosmos and Santos. The match was played in front of a sold-out crowd at Giants Stadium and was televised in the US on ABC's \"Wide World of Sports\" as well as throughout the world. Pel\u00e9's father and wife both attended the match, as well as Muhammad Ali and Bobby Moore. Delivering a message to the audience before the start of the game \u2013 \"Love is more important than what we can take in life\" \u2013 Pel\u00e9 played the first half with the Cosmos, the second with Santos. The game ended with the Cosmos winning 2\u20131, with Pel\u00e9 scoring with a 30-yard free-kick for the Cosmos in what was the final goal of his career. During the second half, it started to rain, prompting a Brazilian newspaper to come out with the headline the following day: \"Even The Sky Was Crying.\"\nInternational career.\nPel\u00e9's first international match was a 2\u20131 defeat against Argentina on 7 July 1957 at the Maracan\u00e3. In that match, he scored his first goal for Brazil aged 16 years and eight months, and he remains the youngest goalscorer for his country.\n1958 World Cup.\nPel\u00e9 arrived in Sweden sidelined by a knee injury but on his return from the treatment room, his colleagues stood together and insisted upon his selection. His first match was against the USSR in the third match of the first round of the 1958 FIFA World Cup, where he gave the assist to Vav\u00e1's second goal. He was at the time the youngest player ever to participate in the World Cup. He scored his first World Cup goal against Wales in the quarter-finals, the only goal of the match, to help Brazil advance to the semi-finals while becoming the youngest ever World Cup goalscorer at 17 years and 239 days. Against France in the semi-final, Brazil was leading 2\u20131 at halftime, and then Pel\u00e9 scored a hat-trick, becoming the youngest player in World Cup history to do so.\nOn 29 June 1958, Pel\u00e9 became the youngest player to play in a World Cup final match at 17 years and 249 days. He scored two goals in that final as Brazil beat Sweden 5\u20132 in Stockholm, the capital. Pel\u00e9 hit the post and then Vav\u00e1 scored two goals to give Brazil the lead. Pel\u00e9's first goal, where he flicked the ball over a defender before volleying into the corner of the net, was selected as one of the best goals in the history of the World Cup. Following Pel\u00e9's second goal, Swedish player Sigvard Parling would later comment, \"When Pel\u00e9 scored the fifth goal in that Final, I have to be honest and say I felt like applauding\". When the match ended, Pel\u00e9 passed out on the field, and was revived by Garrincha. He then recovered, and was compelled by the victory to weep as he was being congratulated by his teammates. He finished the tournament with six goals in four matches played, tied for second place, behind record-breaker Just Fontaine, and was named best young player of the tournament. His impact was arguably greater off the field, with Barney Ronay writing, \"With nothing but talent to guide him, the boy from Minas Gerais became the first black global sporting superstar, and a source of genuine uplift and inspiration.\"\nIt was in the 1958 World Cup that Pel\u00e9 began wearing a jersey with the number 10, which was the result of disorganization: the leaders of the Brazilian Federation did not allocate the shirt numbers of players and it was up to FIFA to choose the number 10 shirt for Pel\u00e9, who was a substitute on the occasion. The press proclaimed Pel\u00e9 the greatest revelation of the 1958 World Cup, and he was also retroactively given the Silver Ball as the second best player of the tournament, behind Didi.\n1959 South American Championship.\nPel\u00e9 also played in the South American Championship. In the 1959 competition he was named best player of the tournament and was the top scorer with eight goals, as Brazil came second despite being unbeaten in the tournament. He scored in five of Brazil's six games, including two goals against Chile and a hat-trick against Paraguay.\n1962 World Cup.\nWhen the 1962 World Cup started, Pel\u00e9 was considered the best player in the world. In the first match of the 1962 World Cup in Chile, against Mexico, Pel\u00e9 assisted the first goal and then scored the second one, after a run past four defenders, to go up 2\u20130. He got injured in the next game while attempting a long-range shot against Czechoslovakia. This would keep him out of the rest of the tournament, and forced coach Aymor\u00e9 Moreira to make his only lineup change of the tournament. The substitute was Amarildo, who performed well for the rest of the tournament. However, it was Garrincha who would take the leading role and carry Brazil to their second World Cup title, after beating Czechoslovakia at the final in Santiago. At the time, only players who appeared in the final were eligible for a medal before FIFA regulations were changed in 1978 to include the entire squad, with Pel\u00e9 receiving his winner's medal retroactively in 2007.\n1966 World Cup.\nPel\u00e9 was the most famous footballer in the world during the 1966 World Cup in England, and Brazil fielded some world champions like Garrincha, Gilmar and Djalma Santos with the addition of other stars like Jairzinho, Tost\u00e3o and G\u00e9rson, leading to high expectations for them. Brazil was eliminated in the first round, playing only three matches. The World Cup was marked, among other things, for brutal fouls on Pel\u00e9 that left him injured by the Bulgarian and Portuguese defenders.\nPel\u00e9 scored the first goal from a free kick against Bulgaria, becoming the first player to score in three successive FIFA World Cups, but due to his injury, a result of persistent fouling by the Bulgarians, he missed the second game against Hungary. His coach stated that after the first game he felt \"every team will take care of him in the same manner\". Brazil lost that game and Pel\u00e9, although still recovering, was brought back for the last crucial match against Portugal at Goodison Park in Liverpool by the Brazilian coach Vicente Feola. Feola changed the entire defense, including the goalkeeper, while in midfield he returned to the formation of the first match. During the game, Portugal defender Jo\u00e3o Morais fouled Pel\u00e9, but was not sent off by referee George McCabe; a decision retrospectively viewed as being among the worst refereeing errors in World Cup history. Pel\u00e9 had to stay on the field limping for the rest of the game since substitutes were not allowed in football at that time. Brazil lost the match against the Portuguese led by Eus\u00e9bio and were eliminated from the tournament as a result. After this game he vowed he would never again play in the World Cup, a decision he would later change.\n1970 World Cup.\nPel\u00e9 was called to the national team in early 1969, he refused at first, but then accepted and played in six World Cup qualifying matches, scoring six goals. The 1970 World Cup in Mexico was expected to be Pel\u00e9's last. Brazil's squad for the tournament featured major changes to the 1966 squad. Players like Garrincha, Nilton Santos, Valdir Pereira, Djalma Santos, and Gilmar had already retired. However, Brazil's 1970 World Cup squad, which included players like Pel\u00e9, Rivellino, Jairzinho, G\u00e9rson, Carlos Alberto Torres, Tost\u00e3o and Clodoaldo, is often considered to be the greatest football team in history.\nThe front five of Jairzinho, Pel\u00e9, Gerson, Tost\u00e3o, and Rivellino together created an attacking momentum, with Pel\u00e9 having a central role in Brazil's way to the final. All of Brazil's matches in the tournament (except the final) were played in Guadalajara, and in the first match against Czechoslovakia, Pel\u00e9 gave Brazil a 2\u20131 lead, by controlling Gerson's 50-yard pass with his chest and then scoring. In this match Pel\u00e9 attempted to lob goalkeeper Ivo Viktor from the halfway line, only narrowly missing the Czechoslovak goal. Brazil went on to win the match, 4\u20131. In the first half of the match against England, Pel\u00e9 nearly scored with a header that was saved by the England goalkeeper Gordon Banks. Pel\u00e9 recalled he was already shouting \"Goal\" when he headed the ball. It was often referred to as the \"save of the century\". In the second half, he controlled a cross from Tost\u00e3o before flicking the ball to Jairzinho who scored the only goal.\nAgainst Romania, Pel\u00e9 scored two goals, which included a 20-yard bending free-kick, with Brazil winning 3\u20132. In the quarter-final against Peru, Brazil won 4\u20132, with Pel\u00e9 assisting Tost\u00e3o for Brazil's third goal. In the semi-final, Brazil faced Uruguay for the first time since the 1950 World Cup final round match. Jairzinho put Brazil ahead 2\u20131, and Pel\u00e9 assisted Rivellino for the 3\u20131. During that match, Pel\u00e9 made one of his most famous plays. Tost\u00e3o passed the ball for Pel\u00e9 to collect which Uruguay's goalkeeper Ladislao Mazurkiewicz took notice of and ran off his line to get the ball before Pel\u00e9. However, Pel\u00e9 got there first and fooled Mazurkiewicz with a feint by not touching the ball, causing it to roll to the goalkeeper's left, while Pel\u00e9 went to the goalkeeper's right. Pel\u00e9 ran around the goalkeeper to retrieve the ball and took a shot while turning towards the goal, but he turned in excess as he shot, and the ball drifted just wide of the far post.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I have scored more than a thousand goals in my life and the thing people always talk to me about is the one I didn't score.\" \u2014 Pel\u00e9 on the extraordinary save by England goalkeeper Gordon Banks in their 1970 World Cup match.\nBrazil played Italy in the final at the Azteca Stadium in Mexico City. Pel\u00e9 scored the opening goal with a header after out jumping Italian defender Tarcisio Burgnich. Brazil's 100th World Cup goal, Pel\u00e9's leap of joy into the arms of teammate Jairzinho in celebrating the goal is regarded as one of the most iconic moments in World Cup history. He then made assists for Brazil's third goal, scored by Jairzinho, and the fourth finished by Carlos Alberto. The last goal of the game is often considered the greatest team goal of all time because it involved all but two of the team's outfield players. The play culminated after Pel\u00e9 made a blind pass that went into Carlos Alberto's running trajectory. He came running from behind and struck the ball to score. Brazil won the match 4\u20131, keeping the Jules Rimet Trophy indefinitely, and Pel\u00e9 received the Golden Ball as the player of the tournament. Burgnich, who marked Pel\u00e9 during the final, was quoted saying, \"I told myself before the game, \"he's made of skin and bones just like everyone else\"\u00a0\u2013 but I was wrong\". In terms of his goals and assists throughout the 1970 World Cup, Pel\u00e9 was directly responsible for 53% of Brazil's goals throughout the tournament.\nPel\u00e9's last international match was on 18 July 1971 against Yugoslavia in Rio de Janeiro. With Pel\u00e9 on the field, the Brazilian team's record was 67\u00a0wins, 14\u00a0draws, and 11\u00a0losses. Brazil never lost a match while fielding both Pel\u00e9 and Garrincha. Pel\u00e9's 77 goals (in 92 games) for Brazil saw him hold the record as the national team's top goalscorer for over fifty years until it was surpassed by Neymar (in his 125th game) in September 2023.\nOn 19 December 1973, Pel\u00e9 played for a Brazil XI side against the Rest of The World in a farewell game for Garrincha, scoring the equalizer in an eventual 2\u20131 win. On 21 July 1983, the 42-year-old Pel\u00e9 played for another Brazil XI side against a South Brazil team in Goi\u00e2nia in a friendly match organized by Zico to benefit the victims of a flood in Santa Catarina; he scored a free-kick in a 1\u20132 loss.\nStyle of play.\nPel\u00e9 was known for connecting the phrase \"The Beautiful Game\" with football. A prolific goalscorer, he was known for his ability to anticipate his opponents' movements and finish off chances with an accurate and powerful shot with either foot. Pel\u00e9 was also a hard-working and complete player with exceptional vision and intelligence, who was recognised for his precise passing and the ability to provide teammates with assists.\nIn his early career, he played in a variety of attacking positions. Although he often operated inside the penalty area as a striker or centre forward, his wide range of skills allowed him to play as an inside forward or a second striker. In his later career, he took on a playmaking role behind the strikers, often functioning as an attacking midfielder. Pel\u00e9's unique playing style combined speed, creativity, and technical skill with physical power, stamina, and athleticism. His technique, flair, agility, and dribbling skills allowed him to beat opponents with the ball, and frequently saw him use sudden changes of direction and elaborate feints to get past players, such as his trademark move, the \"drible da vaca\". Another one of his signature moves was the \"paradinha\", or little stop.\nPel\u00e9 excelled in the air, due to his heading accuracy, timing, and elevation. Renowned for his bending shots, he was also an accurate free-kick taker (ranked second of all time with 70) and penalty taker, although he often refrained from taking penalties, stating that he believed it to be a cowardly way to score.\nPel\u00e9 was also known to be a fair and highly influential player, who stood out for his charismatic leadership and sportsmanship on the pitch. His warm embrace of Bobby Moore following the Brazil vs England game at the 1970 World Cup is viewed as the embodiment of sportsmanship, with \"The New York Times\" stating the image \"captured the respect that two great players had for each other. As they exchanged jerseys, touches, and looks, the sportsmanship between them was all in the image. No gloating and no fist-pumping from Pel\u00e9. No despair, no defeatism from Bobby Moore.\" Pel\u00e9 also earned a reputation for being a \"big game player\" due to his tendency to score crucial goals in important matches.\nLegacy.\nNamed the \"greatest\" by FIFA in 2012 and 2024, Pel\u00e9 is one of the most lauded players in the history of football and has been frequently ranked as the greatest and most important player ever.\nFollowing his emergence at the 1958 World Cup he was nicknamed \"O Rei\" (\"The King\"). Among his contemporaries, Dutch star Johan Cruyff stated, \"Pel\u00e9 was the only footballer who surpassed the boundaries of logic.\" Brazil's 1970 World Cup-winning captain Carlos Alberto Torres opined: \"His great secret was improvisation. Those things he did were in one moment. He had an extraordinary perception of the game.\" According to Tost\u00e3o, his strike partner at the 1970 World Cup: \"Pel\u00e9 was the greatest \u2013 he was simply flawless. And off the pitch he is always smiling and upbeat. You never see him bad-tempered. He loves being Pel\u00e9.\" His Brazilian teammate Clodoaldo commented on the adulation he witnessed: \"In some countries they wanted to touch him, in some they wanted to kiss him. In others they even kissed the ground he walked on. I thought it was beautiful, just beautiful.\" According to Franz Beckenbauer, West Germany's 1974 World Cup-winning captain: \"Pel\u00e9 is the greatest player of all time. He reigned supreme for 20 years. There's no one to compare with him.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I used to go out and people said Pel\u00e9! Pel\u00e9! Pel\u00e9! Pel\u00e9! all over the world, but no one remembers Edson. Edson is the person who has the feelings, who has the family, who works hard, and Pel\u00e9 is the idol. Pel\u00e9 doesn't die. Pel\u00e9 will never die. Pel\u00e9 is going to go on for ever. But Edson is a normal person who is going to die one day, and the people forget that.\" \u2014 Pel\u00e9 on his lasting legacy.\nFormer Real Madrid and Hungary star Ferenc Pusk\u00e1s stated: \"The greatest player in history was Di St\u00e9fano. I refuse to classify Pel\u00e9 as a player. He was above that.\" Just Fontaine, French striker and the leading scorer at the 1958 World Cup said \"When I saw Pel\u00e9 play, it made me feel I should hang up my boots.\" England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Bobby Moore commented: \"Pel\u00e9 was the most complete player I've ever seen, he had everything. Two good feet. Magic in the air. Quick. Powerful. Could beat people with skill. Could outrun people. Only five feet and eight inches tall, yet he seemed a giant of an athlete on the pitch. Perfect balance and impossible vision. He was the greatest because he could do anything and everything on a football pitch. I remember Jo\u00e3o Saldanha the coach being asked by a Brazilian journalist who was the best goalkeeper in his squad. He said Pel\u00e9. The man could play in any position\". Former Manchester United striker and member of England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning team Sir Bobby Charlton stated, \"I sometimes feel as though football was invented for this magical player.\" During the 1970 World Cup, when Manchester United defender Paddy Crerand (who was part of the ITV panel) was asked, \"How do you spell Pel\u00e9?\", he replied, \"Easy: G-O-D.\" Following Pel\u00e9's death, former Brazilian international and World Cup Winner Ronaldo stated that his \"legacy transcends generations\". Ronaldo's teammate for club and country, Roberto Carlos, also expressed gratitude towards Pele, saying that the \"football world thanks you for everything you did for us\". Many of such tributes were issued after Pel\u00e9's death at the age of 82.\nAccolades.\nAfter retiring, Pel\u00e9 continued to be lauded by players, coaches, journalists and others. Brazilian attacking midfielder Zico, who represented Brazil at the 1978, 1982 and 1986 FIFA World Cup, stated: \"This debate about the player of the century is absurd. There's only one possible answer: Pel\u00e9. He's the greatest player of all time, and by some distance I might add\". French three-time Ballon d'Or winner Michel Platini said: \"There's Pel\u00e9 the man, and then Pel\u00e9 the player. And to play like Pel\u00e9 is to play like God.\" Diego Maradona, joint FIFA Player of the Century, and the player Pel\u00e9 is historically compared with, stated, \"It's too bad we never got along, but he was an awesome player\". Prolific Brazilian striker Rom\u00e1rio, winner of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and player of the tournament, remarked: \"It's only inevitable I look up to Pel\u00e9. He's like a God to us\". Five-time FIFA Ballon d'Or winner Cristiano Ronaldo said, \"Pel\u00e9 is the greatest player in football history, and there will only be one Pel\u00e9\", while Jos\u00e9 Mourinho, two-time UEFA Champions League winning manager, commented: \"I think he is football. You have the real special one \u2013 Mr. Pel\u00e9.\" Real Madrid honorary president and former player, Alfredo Di St\u00e9fano, opined: \"The best player ever? Pel\u00e9. Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are both great players with specific qualities, but Pel\u00e9 was better\".\nPresenting Pel\u00e9 with the Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award, former South African president Nelson Mandela said, \"To watch him play was to watch the delight of a child combined with the extraordinary grace of a man in full.\" US politician and political scientist Henry Kissinger stated: \"Performance at a high level in any sport is to exceed the ordinary human scale. But Pel\u00e9's performance transcended that of the ordinary star by as much as the star exceeds ordinary performance.\" After a reporter asked if his fame compared to that of Jesus, Pel\u00e9 joked, \"There are parts of the world where Jesus Christ is not so well known.\" The artist Andy Warhol (who painted a portrait of Pel\u00e9) also quipped, \"Pel\u00e9 was one of the few who contradicted my theory: instead of 15 minutes of fame, he will have 15 centuries.\" David Goldblatt wrote that his emergence at the World Cup in 1958 coincided with \"the explosive spread of television, which massively amplified his presence everywhere\", while Barney Ronay states, \"What is certain is that Pel\u00e9 invented this game, the idea of individual global sporting superstardom, and in a way that is unrepeatable now.\"\nIn 1999, the International Olympic Committee elected him the Athlete of the Century and \"Time\" magazine named Pel\u00e9 one of the . In 2000, the International Federation of Football History &amp; Statistics (IFFHS) voted Pel\u00e9 the World Player of the Century. During his playing days, Pel\u00e9 was for a period the highest-paid athlete in the world. Pel\u00e9's \"electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals\" made him a star around the world. To take full advantage of his popularity, his teams toured internationally. During his career, he became known as \"The Black Pearl\" (\"A P\u00e9rola Negra\"), \"The King of Football\" (\"O Rei do Futebol\"), \"The King Pel\u00e9\" (\"O Rei Pel\u00e9\") or simply \"The King\" (O Rei). In 2014, the city of Santos inaugurated the Pel\u00e9 museum \u2013 Museu Pel\u00e9 \u2013 which displays a 2,400 piece collection of Pel\u00e9 memorabilia. Approximately $22\u00a0million was invested in the construction of the museum, housed in a 19th-century mansion.\nIn January 2014, Pel\u00e9 was awarded the first ever FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur as an acknowledgment from the world governing body of the sport for his contribution to world football. After changing the rules in 1995, \"France Football\" did an extensive analysis in 2015 of the players who would have won the award if it had been open for them beginning in 1956: the year the Ballon d'Or award started. Their study revealed that Pel\u00e9 would have received the award a record seven times (\"Ballon d'or: Le nouveau palmar\u00e8s\"). The original recipients, however, remain unchanged. In 2020, Pel\u00e9 was named in the Ballon d'Or Dream Team, a greatest all-time XI.\nAccording to the RSSSF, Pel\u00e9 was one of the most successful goal-scorers in the world, scoring 538 league goals, a total of 775 in 840 official games and a tally of 1,301 goals in 1,390 appearances during his professional senior career, which included friendlies and tour games. He is ranked among the leading scorers in football history in both official and total matches. After his retirement in 1977 he played eight exhibition games and scored three goals.\n\"Pel\u00e9 Pact\" and Puma sponsorship.\nIn the lead up to the 1970 World Cup, Adidas and Puma established the \"Pel\u00e9 Pact\", where both German sportswear companies, owned by the rival Dassler brothers, agreed not to sign a deal with Pel\u00e9, feeling that a bidding war would become too expensive. However, Puma would break the pact by signing Pel\u00e9, and in addition to paying him a percentage of Puma King boot sales, gave him $120,000 ($2.85 million in 2022) to tie his laces prior to Brazil's quarter-final against Peru to advertise their boots. With the camera panning in on the most famous athlete in the world, the Puma King Pel\u00e9 boots were broadcast to a global audience, generating enormous publicity for the brand. Praised as a shrewd marketing move by Puma, the Pel\u00e9 deal played a prominent role in the Dassler brothers feud, with many business experts crediting the rivalry and competition for transforming sports apparel into a multi-billion pound industry.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Children\nPel\u00e9 married three times and had several affairs, fathering seven children in all.\nIn 1966, Pel\u00e9 married Rosemeri dos Reis Cholbi. They had two daughters, Kely Cristina (born 13 January 1967), who married Arthur DeLuca, and Jennifer (b. 1978), as well as one son, Edson (\"Edinho\", b. 27 August 1970). The couple divorced in 1982. In May 2014, Edinho was sentenced to 33 years in jail for laundering money from drug trafficking. On appeal, the sentence was reduced to 12 years and 10 months.\nFrom 1981 to 1986, Pel\u00e9 was romantically linked with TV presenter Xuxa. She was 17 when they started dating. In April 1994, Pel\u00e9 married psychologist and gospel singer Ass\u00edria Lemos Seixas, who gave birth on 28 September 1996 to twins Joshua and Celeste through fertility treatments. The couple divorced in 2008.\nPel\u00e9 had at least two more children from affairs. Sandra Machado, who was born from an affair Pel\u00e9 had in 1964 with a housemaid, Anizia Machado, fought for years to be acknowledged by Pel\u00e9, who refused to submit to DNA tests.&lt;ref name=\"PELE/SANDRA/ESPN\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Pel\u00e9 finally relented after a court-ordered DNA test proved she was his daughter. Sandra Machado died of cancer in 2006.\nAt the age of 73, Pel\u00e9 announced his intention to marry 41-year-old Marcia Aoki, a Japanese-Brazilian importer of medical equipment from Pen\u00e1polis, S\u00e3o Paulo, whom he had been dating since 2010. They first met in the mid-1980s in New York, before meeting again in 2008. They married in July 2016.\nPolitics.\nIn January 1995, he was appointed by Fernando Cardoso as minister of sports. During his tenure, multiple reforms against corruption in state football associations were presented. He resigned from the post on 30 April 1998.\nDuring the 2013 protests in Brazil, Pel\u00e9 asked for people to put aside the demonstrations and support the Brazil national team.\nOn 1 June 2022, Pel\u00e9 published an open letter to the President of Russia Vladimir Putin on his Instagram account, in which he made a public plea to stop the \"evil\" and \"unjustified\" Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nReligion.\nA Catholic, Pel\u00e9 donated a signed jersey to Pope Francis. Accompanied by a signed football from Ronaldo Nazario, it is located in one of the Vatican Museums.\nHealth.\nIn 1977, Brazilian media reported that Pel\u00e9 had his right kidney removed. In November 2012, Pel\u00e9 underwent a successful hip operation. In December 2017, Pel\u00e9 appeared in a wheelchair at the 2018 World Cup draw in Moscow where he was pictured with President Vladimir Putin and Argentine footballer Diego Maradona. A month later, he collapsed from exhaustion and was taken to hospital. In 2019, after a hospitalisation because of a urinary tract infection, Pel\u00e9 underwent surgery to remove kidney stones. In February 2020, his son Edinho reported that Pel\u00e9 was unable to walk independently and reluctant to leave home, ascribing his condition to a lack of rehabilitation following his hip operation.\nIn September 2021, Pel\u00e9 had surgery to remove a tumour on the right side of his colon. Although his eldest daughter Kely stated he was \"doing well\", he was reportedly readmitted to intensive care a few days later, before finally being released on 30 September 2021 to begin chemotherapy. In November 2022, ESPN Brasil reported that Pel\u00e9 had been taken to hospital with \"general swelling\", along with cardiac issues and concerns that his chemotherapy treatment was not having the expected effect; his daughter Kely stated there was \"no emergency\".\nAfter football.\nIn 1994, Pel\u00e9 was appointed a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador. In 1995, Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso appointed Pel\u00e9 to the position of extraordinary minister for sport. During this time he proposed legislation to reduce corruption in Brazilian football, which became known as the \"Pel\u00e9 law\". Cardoso eliminated the post of sports minister in 1998. In 2001, Pel\u00e9 was accused of involvement in a corruption scandal that stole $700,000 from UNICEF. It was claimed that money given to Pel\u00e9's company for a benefit match was not returned after it was cancelled, although nothing was proven, and it was denied by UNICEF. In 1997, he received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II at a ceremony in Buckingham Palace. Pel\u00e9 also helped inaugurate the 2006 FIFA World Cup, alongside supermodel Claudia Schiffer.\nIn 1993, Pel\u00e9 publicly accused the Brazilian football administrator Ricardo Teixeira of corruption after Pel\u00e9's television company was rejected in a contest for the Brazilian domestic rights to the 1994 World Cup. Pel\u00e9's accusations led to an eight-year feud between the pair. As a consequence of the affair, the President of FIFA, Jo\u00e3o Havelange, Teixeira's father-in-law, banned Pel\u00e9 from the draw for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in Las Vegas. Criticisms over the ban were perceived to have damaged Havelange's chances of re-election as FIFA's president in 1994.\nIn 1976, Pel\u00e9 was on a Pepsi-sponsored trip in Lagos, Nigeria, when the military attempted a coup. Pel\u00e9 was trapped in a hotel together with Arthur Ashe and other tennis pros, who were participating in the interrupted 1976 Lagos WCT tournament. Pel\u00e9 and his crew eventually left the hotel to stay at the residence of Brazil's ambassador as they could not leave the country for a couple of days. Later the airport was opened and Pel\u00e9 left the country disguised as a pilot.\nPel\u00e9 published several autobiographies, starred in documentary films, and composed musical pieces, including S\u00e9rgio Mendes' soundtrack for the film \"Pel\u00e9\" directed by Fran\u00e7ois Reichenbach in 1977. He appeared in the 1981 film \"Escape to Victory\", about a World War II-era football match between Allied prisoners of war and a German team. Pel\u00e9 starred alongside other footballers of the 1960s and 1970s, with actors Michael Caine and Sylvester Stallone. In 1969, Pel\u00e9 starred in a telenovela called \"Os Estranhos\", about first contact with aliens. It was created to drum up interest in the Apollo missions. In 2001, he had a cameo role in the football satire film '. Pel\u00e9 was asked to participate in the 2006 ESPN documentary film ', but declined when the producers refused to pay his requested $100,000 fee.\nPel\u00e9 appeared at the 2006 World Economic Forum in Davos, and spoke on the subject titled, \"Can a Ball Change the World: The Role of Sports in Development\". In November 2007, Pel\u00e9 was in Sheffield, England, to mark the 150th anniversary of the world's oldest football club, Sheffield F.C. Pel\u00e9 was the guest of honour at Sheffield's anniversary match against Inter Milan at Bramall Lane. As part of his visit, Pel\u00e9 opened an exhibition which included the first public showing in 40 years of the original hand-written rules of football. Pel\u00e9 scouted for Premier League club Fulham in 2002. He made the draw for the qualification groups for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals. On 1 August 2010, Pel\u00e9 was introduced as the honorary president of a revived New York Cosmos, aiming to field a team in Major League Soccer. In August 2011, ESPN reported that Santos was considering bringing him out of retirement for a cameo role in the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup, although this turned out to be false.\nThe most notable area of Pel\u00e9's life since football was his ambassadorial work. In 1992, he was appointed a UN ambassador for ecology and the environment. He was also awarded Brazil's gold medal for outstanding services to the sport in 1995. In 2012, Pel\u00e9 was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh for \"significant contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes, as well as his sporting achievements\".\nIn 2009, Pel\u00e9 assisted the Rio de Janeiro bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics. In July 2009, he spearheaded the Rio 2016 presentation to the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa General Assembly in Abuja, Nigeria.\nOn 12 August 2012, Pel\u00e9 was an attendee at the 2012 Olympic hunger summit hosted by British prime minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street, London, part of a series of international efforts which have sought to respond to the return of hunger as a high-profile global issue. Later on the same day, Pel\u00e9 appeared at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, following the handover section to the next host city for the 2016 Summer Olympics, Rio de Janeiro.\nIn March 2016, Pel\u00e9 filed a lawsuit against Samsung Electronics in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois seeking US$30\u00a0million in damages claiming violations under the Lanham Act for false endorsement and a state law claim for violation of his right of publicity. The suit alleged that at one point, Samsung and Pel\u00e9 came close to entering into a licensing agreement for Pel\u00e9 to appear in a Samsung advertising campaign, but Samsung abruptly pulled out of the negotiations. The October 2015 Samsung ad in question included a partial face shot of a man who allegedly \"very closely resembles\" Pel\u00e9 and also a superimposed high-definition television screen next to the image of the man featuring a \"modified bicycle or scissors-kick\", often used by Pel\u00e9. The case was settled out-of-court several years later.\nIn addition to his ambassadorial work, Pel\u00e9 supported various charitable causes, such as Action for Brazil's Children, Gols Pela Vida, SOS Children's Villages, The Littlest Lamb, Prince's Rainforests Project and many more. In 2016, Pel\u00e9 auctioned more than 1600 items from a collection he accumulated over decades and raised \u00a33.6\u00a0million for charity. In 2018, Pel\u00e9 founded his charitable organisation, the Pel\u00e9 Foundation, which endeavours to empower impoverished and disenfranchised children from around the globe.\nDeath and funeral.\nIn 2021, Pel\u00e9 was diagnosed with colon cancer. He underwent surgery the same month, and afterwards was treated with several rounds of chemotherapy. In early 2022, metastasis were detected in the intestine, lung and liver. On 29 November, he was admitted to the Albert Einstein Israelite Hospital in S\u00e3o Paulo due to a respiratory infection after he contracted COVID-19 and for reassessment of the treatment of his colon cancer. On 3 December 2022, it was reported that Pel\u00e9 had become unresponsive to chemotherapy and that it was replaced with palliative care.\nOn 21 December 2022, the Albert Einstein Israelite Hospital, where Pel\u00e9 was being treated, stated that his tumour had advanced and he required \"greater care related to renal and cardiac dysfunctions\". Therefore, he was not allowed to spend Christmas at home, as his family had wanted. Pel\u00e9 died on 29 December 2022, at 3:27\u00a0pm, at the age of 82, due to multiple organ failure, a complication of colon cancer. Pel\u00e9's death certificate stated that he had died of kidney failure, heart failure, bronchopneumonia and colon adenocarcinoma. His 100-year-old mother, Dona Celeste, survived him, though she had been in a vegetative state since 2019, and was thus unaware of his death; she would later die in June 2024. Pel\u00e9's sister Maria Lucia do Nascimento described their mother as \"in her own little world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe had a magnetic presence and, when you were with him, the rest of the world stopped. Today, the whole world mourns the loss of Pel\u00e9; the greatest footballer of all time.\n\u2014FIFA President, Gianni Infantino\nTributes were paid by current players, including Neymar, Cristiano Ronaldo, Kylian Mbapp\u00e9 and Lionel Messi, along with other major sporting figures, celebrities, and world leaders. The outgoing Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, declared a three-day period of national mourning. The national flags of the 211 member associations of FIFA were flown at half-mast at FIFA headquarters in Z\u00fcrich. Landmarks and stadiums lit up in honour of Pel\u00e9 included the Christ the Redeemer statue and Maracan\u00e3 Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, the headquarters of CONMEBOL in Paraguay and Wembley Stadium in London. There was applause and a minute's silence at matches in honour of Pel\u00e9.\nPel\u00e9's funeral, which involved his body being publicly displayed in an open coffin which was draped with the flags of Brazil and Santos FC, began at Vila Belmiro stadium in Santos on 2 January 2023. Thousands of fans flooded the streets to attend the first day of the funeral service, with some in attendance claiming that they had to wait three hours in line. The public wake would continue to 3 January, and saw more than 230,000 people in attendance. Many in attendance were wearing the yellow and green No. 10 Brazilian jerseys and the black and white Santos football club jersey, which Pel\u00e9 wore during his career. Brazil television channels suspended normal broadcasting to cover the funeral procession. Pel\u00e9's wife Marcia Aoki, his son Edinho, FIFA president Gianni Infantino, CONMEBOL president Alejandro Dom\u00ednguez and president of the Brazilian Football Confederation Ednaldo Rodrigues were among those in attendance. It would continue on 3 January 2023. Newly sworn in Brazilian president Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva was also among those who attended the wake. After the funeral procession, Pel\u00e9 was buried at the Memorial Necr\u00f3pole Ecum\u00eanica.\nKigali Pel\u00e9 Stadium in Rwanda was renamed for him in March 2023 by Rwandan president Paul Kagame and FIFA president Gianni Infantino as part of the 73rd FIFA Congress. On 26 April 2023, the nickname became synonymous with \"exceptional, incomparable, unique\" in \"Michaelis\" Portuguese-language dictionary after a campaign with 125,000 signatories.\nCareer statistics.\nClub.\nPel\u00e9's goalscoring record is often reported by FIFA as being 1,281 goals in 1,363 games. This figure includes goals scored by Pel\u00e9 in friendly club matches, including international tours Pel\u00e9 completed with Santos and the New York Cosmos, and a few games Pel\u00e9 played in for the Brazilian armed forces teams during his national service in Brazil and the state team of S\u00e3o Paulo who competed for the Brazilian Championship of States Teams (\"Campeonato Brasileiro de Sele\u00e7\u00f5es Estaduais\"). He was listed in the \"Guinness World Records\" for most career goals scored in football. In 2000, IFFHS declared Pel\u00e9 as the \"World's Best and successful Top Division Goal Scorer of all time\" with 541 goals in 560 games and honoured him with a trophy.\nThe tables below record every goal Pel\u00e9 scored in official club competitions for Santos FC and all matches and goals for the New York Cosmos.\nInternational.\nWith 77 goals in 92 official appearances, Pel\u00e9 is the second highest goalscorer of the Brazil national football team. He scored twelve goals and is credited with ten assists in fourteen World Cup appearances, including four goals and seven assists in 1970.\nHonours.\nS\u00e3o Paulo state team\nSantos\nNew York Cosmos\nBrazil\nIndividual\nIn December 2000, Pel\u00e9 and Maradona shared the prize of FIFA Player of the Century by FIFA. The award was originally intended to be based upon votes in a web poll, but after it became apparent that it favoured Diego Maradona after a reported cyber-blitz by Maradona fans, FIFA then appointed a \"Family of Football\" committee of FIFA members to decide the winner of the award together with the votes of the readers of the FIFA magazine. The committee chose Pel\u00e9. Since Maradona was winning the Internet poll, however, it was decided he and Pel\u00e9 should share the award.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24954", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24954", "title": "Personal computers", "text": ""}
{"id": "24955", "revid": "49965408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24955", "title": "Polycarp", "text": "Christian bishop of Smyrna (69\u2013155)\nPolycarp (; , \"Pol\u00fdkarpos\"; ; AD 69 \u2013 155) was a Christian bishop of Smyrna. According to the \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\", he died a martyr, bound and burned at the stake, then stabbed when the fire failed to consume his body. Polycarp is regarded as a saint and Church Father in the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Catholic Church, Oriental Orthodox Churches, Lutheranism, and Anglicanism.\nBoth Irenaeus and Tertullian say that Polycarp had been a disciple of John the Apostle, one of Jesus's disciples. In \"On Illustrious Men\", Jerome similarly writes that Polycarp was a disciple of John the Apostle, who had ordained him as a bishop of Smyrna. Polycarp is regarded as one of three chief Apostolic Fathers, along with Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch.\nSurviving writings and early accounts.\nThe sole surviving work attributed to him is the \"Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians\", a mosaic of references to the Septuagint, which, along with an account of the \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\", forms part of the collection of writings called \"Apostolic Fathers\". After the Acts of the Apostles, which describes the death of Stephen, the \"Martyrdom\" is considered one of the earliest genuine accounts of a Christian martyrdom. Charles E. Hill argues extensively that the teachings Irenaeus ascribes to a certain apostolic presbyter throughout his writings represent lost teachings of Polycarp, his teacher. Within the lost epistle of Irenaeus to Florinus as cited by Eusebius within his \"Ecclesiastical History\" book 5.20. we observe Irenaeus make mention of multiple epistles authored by him to the neighbouring churches and to certain individuals.\nSome scholars (e.g., Hans von Campenhausen) attribute the pastoral epistles\u2014the biblical books 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and the Epistle to Titus\u2014to Polycarp. Since the text of those books includes attribution to Paul, this theory regarding Polycarp's authorship places the books in the category of pseudepigrapha.\nLife.\nThe chief sources of information concerning the life of Polycarp are \"The Martyrdom of Polycarp\", \"Against Heresies\", \"The Epistle to Florinus\", the epistles of Ignatius, and Polycarp's own letter to the Philippians. In 1999, the Harris Fragments, a collection of 3rd- to 6th-century Coptic texts that mention Polycarp, were published.\nLink to the Apostles and Jesus.\nAccording to Irenaeus, Polycarp was a companion of Papias, another \"hearer of John\", and a correspondent of Ignatius of Antioch which the document titled \"The Martyrdom of Ignatius\" confirms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And after a great deal of suffering he came to Smyrna, where he disembarked with great joy, and hastened to see the holy Polycarp, formerly his fellow disciple, and now bishop of Smyrna. For they had both, in old times, been disciples of St. John the Apostle.\u2014\u200a\nIgnatius addressed a letter to Polycarp and mentions him in his letters to the Ephesians and to the Magnesians. Polycarp's epistle to the Philippians gives us some insights to the early usage of early Christian texts from the quotes used within his letter. Irenaeus regarded the memory of Polycarp as a link to the apostolic past. In his letter to Florinus, a fellow student of Polycarp, Irenaeus relates how and when he became a Christian:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn particular, Irenaeus had heard the account of Polycarp's discussion with John and with others who had seen Jesus. Irenaeus reports that Polycarp was converted to Christianity by apostles, was consecrated a presbyter, and communicated with many who had seen Jesus. He writes that he had had the good fortune, when young, to know Polycarp, who was then far advanced in years.\nVisit to Anicetus.\nAccording to Irenaeus, during the time his fellow Syrian Anicetus was Bishop of Rome, Polycarp visited Rome to discuss differences in the practices of the churches of Anatolia and Rome. Irenaeus states that on certain issues the two speedily came to an understanding, while as to the observance of Easter, each adhered to his own custom without breaking off full communion with the other. Polycarp followed the Eastern practice of celebrating the feast on the 14th of Nisan, the day of the Jewish Passover, regardless of the day of the week on which it fell, while Anicetus followed the Western practice of celebrating the feast on the first Sunday following the first full moon after the spring equinox. Anicetus allowed Polycarp to celebrate the Eucharist in his own church, which was regarded by the Romans as a great honor.\nMartyrdom.\nIn the \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\", Polycarp is reported to say on the day of his death: \"Eighty and six years I have served Him, and He has done me no wrong.\" This could indicate either that he was then eighty-six years old or that he had lived eighty-six years after his conversion. Polycarp goes on to say: \"How then can I blaspheme my King and Savior? You threaten me with a fire that burns for a season, and after a little while is quenched; but you are ignorant of the fire of everlasting punishment that is prepared for the wicked.\" Polycarp was burned at the stake and pierced with a spear for refusing to burn incense to the Roman emperor. On his farewell, he said: \"I bless you, Father, for judging me worthy of this hour, so that in the company of the martyrs I may share the cup of Christ.\"\nThe date of Polycarp's death is in dispute. Eusebius dates it to the reign of Marcus Aurelius, c. 166\u2013167. However, a post-Eusebian addition to the \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\" dates his death to Saturday, 23 February, during the proconsulship of Lucius Statius Quadratus, c. 155 or 156. These earlier dates better fit the tradition of his association with Ignatius and John the Apostle.\nThe \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\" states that Polycarp was taken on the Sabbath and killed on \"the Great Sabbath\". English patristic scholar William Cave wrote that this was evidence that the Smyrnaeans under Polycarp observed the seventh-day Sabbath (i.e. assembled on Saturdays). J. B. Lightfoot records as a common interpretation of the expression \"the Great Sabbath\" to refer to Passover or another Jewish festival. This is contradicted by the standard Jewish calendar, under which the 14th of Nisan (the date of Passover) can fall no earlier than late March and hence at least a month after the traditional date of Polycarp's death 23 February. Hence, Lightfoot understood the expression in reference to the Purim festival, celebrated a month before Passover. Other scholars suggest that at the time the Jewish calendar had not yet been standardized, and that this day, Jews and Christians celebrated Passover and a Christian Passover, respectively.\nImportance.\nPolycarp occupies an important place in the history of the early Christian Church, was called \"the most admirable Polycarp one of these [elect], in whose times among us he showed himself an apostolic and prophetic teacher and bishop of the Catholic Church in Smyrna\" by his contemporaries. He is among the earliest Christians whose writings survived. Jerome wrote that Polycarp was a \"disciple of the apostle John and by him ordained presbyter of Smyrna\". He was an elder of an important congregation that was a large contributor to the founding of the Christian Church. He is from an era whose orthodoxy is accepted alongside Catholics by the ancient Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches, and widely also by mainstream Protestants, Church of God groups, and Sabbatarians.\nAccording to Eusebius, Polycrates of Ephesus cited the example of Polycarp in defense of local practices during the quartodeciman controversy.\nIrenaeus, who as a young man had heard Polycarp preach, described him as \"a man who was of much greater weight, and a more steadfast witness of truth, than Valentinus, and Marcion, and the rest of the heretics.\" Polycarp lived in an age after the deaths of the apostles, when a variety of interpretations of the sayings of Jesus were being preached. His role was to authenticate orthodox teachings through his connection with the apostle John: \"a high value was attached to the witness Polycarp could give as to the genuine tradition of old apostolic doctrine\", \"his testimony condemning as offensive novelties the figments of the heretical teachers\". Irenaeus states (iii. 3) that on Polycarp's visit to Rome, his testimony converted many disciples of Marcion and Valentinus.\nVeneration and commemoration.\nThe \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\" is one of the earliest, if not the earliest, accounts of the veneration of the relics of a saint and the annual commemoration of a saint on the date of his or her death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And so we afterwards took up his bones which are more valuable than precious stones and finer than refined gold, and laid them in a suitable place; where the Lord will permit us to gather ourselves together, as we are able, in gladness and joy, and to celebrate the birth-day of his martyrdom for the commemoration of those that have already fought in the contest, and for the training and preparation of those that shall do so hereafter.\nRelics of Polycarp are under the main altar of the church of Sant'Ambrogio della Massima. The right arm of St. Polycarp had been kept at the Monastery of the Dormition of the Theotokos-Saint Polycarp, in Ampelakiotissa near Nafpaktos, Greece, for over 500 years. It was stolen on 14 March 2013 and never recovered; however, a fragment, taken from the arm on a previous occasion, was discovered and returned to the monastery on 14 July 2019.\nIn the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Greek Catholic Churches, the feast day of Saint Polycarp is 23 February. In the Roman Catholic liturgical calendar, the feast day has the liturgical rank of obligatory memorial, but if the memorial is within the season of Lent that year, it is reduced in rank to a commemoration. In the Coptic Orthodox Church, his feast day is on 29 Amshir (8 March in the Gregorian calendar). Polycarp is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 23 February. He is also honored in the Lutheran Churches on 23 February.\nTheology.\nPolycarp's soteriology is not clear; he does cite Ephesians 2:8 to say salvation is by grace rather than works, though later exhorts his readers to do good works. It is not clear from the text how he views works in relation to salvation as his comments are too little to make a clear conclusion. He could have believed that works are mere results of saving grace or that they are necessary to keep salvation and that they have meritorious value, thus we cannot know if he was a monergist or a synergist.\nPolycarp in his letter calls Jesus the \"son of God\" and the \"eternal high priest\" and that \"to him all heavenly and earthly things were subjected, whom every breath worships, who comes as a judge of the living and the dead\". He also highlighted the sinlessness of Jesus, defended the doctrine of the Incarnation and the death of Christ on the cross, and clearly opposed docetism. Polycarp outright denied the teachings of Marcion, claiming he was the firstborn of Satan. Polycarp's statements in the \"Martyrdom of Polycarp\" also appear to have trinitarian theology.\nWhat we know of Polycarp's eschatology is largely confined to the affirmation of the resurrection of the dead and Christ's second coming as a judge. Polycarp was perhaps a premillennialist; Polycarp's student Irenaeus was a premillennialist along with his associate Papias, which suggests that Polycarp also held similar views.\nPolycarp refers to multiple books of the New Testament as scripture, including: Matthew, Acts, 1 John, Philippians, Jude, 1 Peter, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, Romans and others. Polycarp also quotes the deuterocanonical book of Tobit; however, from his manner of quotation it is not possible to know how much authority he afforded it.\nPolycarp's letter to the Philippians only mentions presbyters and deacons, which indicates the church at Philippi was led by a plurality of \"elder-bishops\", which would imply a different ecclesiastical polity than what is found in Ignatius of Antioch's letters. Against this, according to Steinhauser, the letter does not offer concrete evidence that the Philippian church viewed presbyters and bishops as synonyms, though still admitting that the letter still raises questions about the polity of the early church. Steinhauser hypothesized that there was possibly a temporary vacancy in the Philippian church.\nPolycarp was a Quartodeciman. According to Eusebius, Polycarp claimed that he celebrated Easter on the 14th of Nisan with John the Apostle. Polycarp appears to make heresy a more serious issue than immorality. Polycarp calls immoral people to repent but called the false teachers \"firstborn of Satan.\"\nPolycarp stated, \"I have served him [Christ] eighty-six years and in no way has he dealt unjustly with me.\" Proponents of infant baptism have argued that this quote shows Polycarp being baptized as an infant, the argument being that if Polycarp was a servant of Christ for 86 years, he would have been a servant of Christ from infancy, suggesting infant baptism. However, Credobaptists such as Schoedel William have offered a different interpretation of the words of Polycarp, stating that the quote is ambiguous as regards to baptism, and that Polycarp can be understood as meaning by paraphrasing: \"I have always served Jesus and I am not going to cease even at the age of 86.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24956", "revid": "51059208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24956", "title": "Pacifism", "text": "Philosophy opposing war or violence\nPacifism is the opposition to war or violence. The word \"pacifism\" was coined by the French peace campaigner \u00c9mile Arnaud and adopted by other peace activists at the tenth Universal Peace Congress in Glasgow in 1901. A related term is \"ahimsa\" (to do no harm), which is a core philosophy in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. While modern connotations are recent, having been explicated since the 19th century, ancient references abound.\nIn modern times, interest was revived by Leo Tolstoy in his late works, particularly in \"The Kingdom of God Is Within You\". Mahatma Gandhi propounded the practice of steadfast nonviolent opposition which he called \"satyagraha\", instrumental in its role in the Indian independence movement. Its effectiveness served as inspiration to Martin Luther King Jr., James Lawson, Mary and Charles Beard, James Bevel, Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh, and many others in the civil rights movement.\nDefinition.\nPacifism covers a spectrum of views, including the belief that international disputes can and should be peacefully resolved, calls for the abolition of the institutions of the military and war, opposition to any organization of society through governmental force (anarchist or libertarian pacifism), rejection of the use of physical violence to obtain political, economic or social goals, the obliteration of force, and opposition to violence under any circumstance, even defence of self and others. Historians of pacifism Peter Brock and Thomas Paul Socknat define pacifism \"in the sense generally accepted in English-speaking areas\" as \"an unconditional rejection of all forms of warfare\". Philosopher Jenny Teichman defines the main form of pacifism as \"anti-warism\", the rejection of all forms of warfare. Teichman's beliefs have been summarized by Brian Orend as \"A pacifist rejects war and believes there are no moral grounds which can justify resorting to war. War, for the pacifist, is always wrong.\" In a sense the philosophy is based on the idea that the ends do not justify the means. The word \"pacific\" denotes conciliatory.\nMoral considerations.\nPacifism may be based on moral principles (a deontological view) or pragmatism (a consequentialist view). Principled pacifism holds that at some point along the spectrum from war to interpersonal physical violence, such violence becomes morally wrong. Pragmatic pacifism holds that the costs of war and interpersonal violence are so substantial that better ways of resolving disputes must be found.\nNonviolence.\nSome pacifists follow principles of nonviolence, believing that nonviolent action is morally superior and/or most effective. Some however, support physical violence for emergency defence of self or others. Others support destruction of property in such emergencies or for conducting symbolic acts of resistance like pouring red paint to represent blood on the outside of military recruiting offices or entering air force bases and hammering on military aircraft.\nNot all nonviolent resistance (sometimes also called civil resistance) is based on a fundamental rejection of all violence in all circumstances. Many leaders and participants in such movements, while recognizing the importance of using non-violent methods in particular circumstances, have not been absolute pacifists. Sometimes, as with the civil rights movement's march from Selma to Montgomery in 1965, they have called for armed protection. The interconnections between civil resistance and factors of force are numerous and complex.\nTypes.\nAbsolute pacifism.\nAn absolute pacifist is described by the BBC as one who believes that human life is so valuable, that a human should never be killed and war should never be conducted, even in self-defense (except for non-violence type). The principle is described as difficult to abide by consistently, due to violence not being available as a tool to aid a person who is being harmed or killed. It is further claimed that such a pacifist could logically argue that violence leads to more undesirable results than non-violence.\nConditional pacifism.\nTapping into just war theory \"conditional pacifism\" represents a spectrum of positions departing from positions of absolute pacifism. One such conditional pacifism is the common pacificism, which may allow defense but is not advocating a default defensivism or even interventionism.\nPolice actions and national liberation.\nAlthough all pacifists are opposed to war between nation states, there have been occasions where pacifists have supported military conflict in the case of civil war or revolution. For instance, during the American Civil War, both the American Peace Society and some former members of the Non-Resistance Society supported the Union's military campaign, arguing they were carrying out a \"police action\" against the Confederacy, whose act of Secession they regarded as criminal. Following the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, French pacifist Ren\u00e9 G\u00e9rin urged support for the Spanish Republic. G\u00e9rin argued that the Spanish Nationalists were \"comparable to an individual enemy\" and the Republic's war effort was equivalent to the action of a domestic police force suppressing crime.\nIn the 1960s, some pacifists associated with the New Left supported wars of national liberation and supported groups such as the Viet Cong and the Algerian FLN, arguing peaceful attempts to liberate such nations were no longer viable, and war was thus the only option.\nHistory.\nEarly traditions.\nDuring the Warring States period in China, the pacifist Mohist School opposed aggressive war between the feudal states, using their famed defensive strategies to defend smaller states from invasion from larger states, hoping to dissuade feudal lords from costly warfare. The Seven Military Classics of ancient China view warfare negatively, and as a last resort. For example, the \"Three Strategies of Huang Shigong\" says: \"As for the military, it is not an auspicious instrument; it is the way of heaven to despise it\", and the \"Wei Liaozi\" writes: \"As for the military, it is an inauspicious instrument; as for conflict and contention, it runs counter to virtue\". The Taoist scripture \"\"Classic of Great Peace\" (\"Taiping jing\")\" foretells \"the coming Age of Great Peace (\"Taiping\")\". The \"Taiping Jing\" advocates \"a world full of peace\".\nThe Lemba religion of southern French Congo, along with its symbolic herb, is named for pacifism : \"\"lemba, lemba\" (peace, peace), describes the action of the plant \"lemba-lemba\" (\"Brillantaisia patula T. Anders\"). Likewise in Cabinda, \"Lemba\" is the spirit of peace, as its name indicates.\"\nThe Moriori, of the Chatham Islands, practiced pacifism by order of their ancestor Nunuku-whenua. This enabled the Moriori to preserve what limited resources they had in their harsh climate, avoiding waste through warfare. In turn, this led to their almost complete annihilation in 1835 by invading Ng\u0101ti Mutunga and Ng\u0101ti Tama M\u0101ori from the Taranaki region of the North Island of New Zealand. The invading M\u0101ori killed, enslaved and cannibalised the Moriori. A Moriori survivor recalled : \"[The Maori] commenced to kill us like sheep\u00a0... [We] were terrified, fled to the bush, concealed ourselves in holes underground, and in any place to escape our enemies. It was of no avail; we were discovered and killed \u2013 men, women and children indiscriminately.\"\nIn Ancient Greece, pacifism seems not to have existed except as a broad moral guideline against violence between individuals. Aristophanes, in his play Lysistrata, creates the scenario of an Athenian woman's anti-war sex strike during the Peloponnesian War of 431\u2013404 BCE, and the play has gained an international reputation for its anti-war message. Nevertheless, it is both fictional and comical, and its message seems to stem from frustration with the existing conflict (then in its twentieth year) rather than from a philosophical position against violence or war. Equally fictional is the nonviolent protest of Hegetorides of Thasos. Euripides also expressed strong anti-war ideas in his work, especially \"The Trojan Women\". In \"Plato's Republic\" Socrates makes the pacifistic argument that a just person would not harm anyone. In Plato's earlier work Crito Socrates asserts that it is not moral to return evil with further evil, an original moral conception, according to Gregory Vlastos, that undermines all justifications for war and violence.\nSeveral Roman writers rejected the militarism of Roman society and gave voice to anti-war sentiments,\nincluding Propertius, Tibullus and Ovid. The Stoic Seneca the Younger criticised warfare in his book \"Naturales quaestiones\" (c. 65 CE). Maximilian of Tebessa was a Christian conscientious objector, killed for refusing to be conscripted.\nChristianity.\nThroughout history many have understood Jesus of Nazareth to have been a pacifist, drawing on his Sermon on the Mount. In the sermon Jesus stated that one should \"not resist an evildoer\" and promoted his turn the other cheek philosophy. \"If anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other also; and if anyone wants to sue you and take your coat, give your cloak as well\u00a0... Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you.\" When one of his apostles drew a sword to defend Jesus, Jesus told him, \"Put your sword back into its place. For all who take the sword will perish by the sword\" (Matthew 26:52).\nThere are those, however, who deny that Jesus was a pacifist and state that Jesus never said not to fight, citing examples from the New Testament. One such instance portrays an angry Jesus driving dishonest market traders from the temple. A frequently quoted passage is Luke 22:36: \"He said to them, 'But now, the one who has a purse must take it, and likewise a bag. And the one who has no sword must sell his cloak and buy one.'\" Pacifists have typically explained that verse as Jesus fulfilling prophecy, since in the next verse, Jesus continues to say: \"It is written: 'And he was numbered with the transgressors'; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment.\" Others have interpreted the non-pacifist statements in the New Testament to be related to self-defense or to be metaphorical and state that on no occasion did Jesus shed blood or urge others to shed blood.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Medieval era, a similar form of Christian pacifism found within the Gospel of St. Matthew reemerged in the writings of St. Francis of Assisi in 1221. In his denunciation of the religious violence which characterized the Fifth Crusade, Francis drew upon his own disillusionment as a solder in Pope Innocent III's crusade to observe, \"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called children of God ((Mt.5.9). They are truly peacemakers who are able to preserve their peace of mind and heart for love of our Lord Jesus Christ, despite all they suffer in this world.\" According to St. Bonaventure, Francis maintained that this form of universal pacifism requires humanity to transcend a limited \"theoretical\" or \"abstract\" understanding of it as a \"concept\", by \"practicing\" \"peace through word and through the example of one's own life.\" In this sense, Christian pacifism for St. Francis was yet another expression of a reverence for all living creatures of the natural world as outlined within his \"Canticle of the Sun\".\nModern history.\nBeginning in the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation gave rise to a variety of new Christian sects, including the historic peace churches. Foremost among them were the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), Amish, Mennonites, Hutterites, and Church of the Brethren. The humanist writer Desiderius Erasmus was one of the most outspoken pacifists of the Renaissance, arguing strongly against warfare in his essays \"The Praise of Folly\" (1509) and \"The Complaint of Peace\" (1517).\nThe Quakers were prominent advocates of pacifism, who as early as 1660 had repudiated violence in all forms and adhered to a strictly pacifist interpretation of Christianity. Throughout the many 18th century wars in which Great Britain participated, the Quakers maintained a principled commitment not to serve in the army and militia or even to pay the alternative \u00a310 fine. The English Quaker William Penn, who founded the Province of Pennsylvania, employed an anti-militarist public policy. Unlike residents of many of the colonies, Quakers chose to trade peacefully with the Native Americans, including for land. The colonial province was, for the 75 years from 1681 to 1756, essentially unarmed and experienced little or no warfare in that period.\nFrom the 16th to the 18th centuries, a number of thinkers devised plans for an international organisation that would promote peace, and reduce or even eliminate the occurrence of war. These included the French politician Duc de Sully, the philosophers \u00c9meric Cruc\u00e9 and the Abbe de Saint-Pierre, and the English Quakers William Penn and John Bellers.\nPacifist ideals emerged from two strands of thought that coalesced at the end of the 18th century. One, rooted in the secular Enlightenment, promoted peace as the rational antidote to the world's ills, while the other was a part of the evangelical religious revival that had played an important part in the campaign for the abolition of slavery. Representatives of the former included Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in \"Extrait du Projet de Paix Perpetuelle de Monsieur l'Abbe Saint-Pierre\" (1756), Immanuel Kant, in his \"Thoughts on Perpetual Peace\", and Jeremy Bentham who proposed the formation of a peace association in 1789. Representative of the latter, was William Wilberforce who thought that strict limits should be imposed on British involvement in the French Revolutionary Wars based on Christian ideals of peace and brotherhood. Bohemian Bernard Bolzano taught about the social waste of militarism and the needlessness of war. He urged a total reform of the educational, social, and economic systems that would direct the nation's interests toward peace rather than toward armed conflict between nations.\nDuring the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, pacifism was not entirely frowned upon throughout Europe. It was considered a political stance against costly capitalist-imperialist wars, a notion particularly popular in the British Liberal Party of the twentieth century. However, during the eras of World War One and especially World War Two, public opinion on the ideology split. Those against the Second World War, some argued, were not fighting against unnecessary wars of imperialism but instead acquiescing to the fascists of Germany, Italy and Japan.\nPeace movements.\nDuring the period of the Napoleonic Wars, although no formal peace movement was established until the end of hostilities, a significant peace movement animated by universalist ideals did emerge, due to the perception of Britain fighting in a reactionary role and the increasingly visible impact of the war on the welfare of the nation in the form of higher taxation levels and high casualty rates. Sixteen peace petitions to Parliament were signed by members of the public, anti-war and anti-Pitt demonstrations convened and peace literature was widely published and disseminated.\nThe first peace movements appeared in 1815\u201316. In the United States the first such movement was the New York Peace Society, founded in 1815 by the theologian David Low Dodge, and the Massachusetts Peace Society. It became an active organization, holding regular weekly meetings, and producing literature which was spread as far as Gibraltar and Malta, describing the horrors of war and advocating pacificism on Christian grounds. The London Peace Society (also known as the Society for the Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace) was formed in 1816 to promote permanent and universal peace by the philanthropist William Allen. In the 1840s, British women formed \"Olive Leaf Circles\", groups of around 15 to 20 women, to discuss and promote pacifist ideas.\nThe peace movement began to grow in influence by the mid-nineteenth century. The London Peace Society, under the initiative of American consul Elihu Burritt and the reverend Henry Richard, convened the first International Peace Congress in London in 1843. The congress decided on two aims: the ideal of peaceable arbitration in the affairs of nations and the creation of an international institution to achieve that. Richard became the secretary of the Peace Society in 1850 on a full-time basis, a position which he would keep for the next 40 years, earning himself a reputation as the 'Apostle of Peace'. He helped secure one of the earliest victories for the peace movement by securing a commitment from the Great Powers in the Treaty of Paris (1856) at the end of the Crimean War, in favour of arbitration. On the European continent, wracked by social upheaval, the first peace congress was held in Brussels in 1848 followed by Paris a year later.\nAfter experiencing a recession in support due to the resurgence of militarism during the American Civil War and Crimean War, the movement began to spread across Europe and began to infiltrate the new socialist movements. In 1870, Randal Cremer formed the Workman's Peace Association in London. Cremer, alongside the French economist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Passy was also the founding father of the first international organisation for the arbitration of conflicts in 1889, the Inter-Parliamentary Union. The National Peace Council was founded in after the 17th Universal Peace Congress in London (July August 1908).\nAn important thinker who contributed to pacifist ideology was Russian writer Leo Tolstoy. In one of his latter works, \"The Kingdom of God Is Within You\", Tolstoy provides a detailed history, account and defense of pacifism. Tolstoy's work inspired a movement named after him advocating pacifism to arise in Russia and elsewhere. The book was a major early influence on Mahatma Gandhi, and the two engaged in regular correspondence while Gandhi was active in South Africa.\nBertha von Suttner, the first woman to be a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, became a leading figure in the peace movement with the publication of her novel, \"Die Waffen nieder!\" (\"Lay Down Your Arms!\") in 1889 and founded an Austrian pacifist organization in 1891.\nNonviolent resistance.\nIn colonial New Zealand, during the latter half of the 19th century European settlers used numerous tactics to confiscate land from the indigenous M\u0101ori, including warfare. In the 1870s and 1880s, Parihaka, then reported to be the largest M\u0101ori settlement in New Zealand, became the centre of a major campaign of non-violent resistance to land confiscations. One M\u0101ori leader, Te Whiti-o-Rongomai, quickly became the leading figure in the movement, stating in a speech that \"Though some, in darkness of heart, seeing their land ravished, might wish to take arms and kill the aggressors, I say it must not be. Let not the Pakehas think to succeed by reason of their guns... I want not war\". Te Whiti-o-Rongomai achieved renown for his non-violent tactics among the M\u0101ori, which proved more successful in preventing land confiscations than acts of violent resistance.\nMahatma Gandhi was a major political and spiritual leader of India, instrumental in the Indian independence movement. The Nobel prize winning great poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was also an Indian, gave him the honorific \"Mahatma\", usually translated \"Great Soul\". He was the pioneer of a brand of nonviolence (or \"ahimsa\") which he called \"satyagraha\"\u00a0\u2013 translated literally as \"truth force\". This was the resistance of tyranny through civil disobedience that was not only nonviolent but also sought to change the heart of the opponent. He contrasted this with \"duragraha\", \"resistant force\", which sought only to change behaviour with stubborn protest. During his 30 years of work (1917\u20131947) for the independence of his country from British colonial rule, Gandhi led dozens of nonviolent campaigns, spent over seven years in prison, and fasted nearly to the death on several occasions to obtain British compliance with a demand or to stop inter-communal violence. His efforts helped lead India to independence in 1947, and inspired movements for civil rights and freedom worldwide.\nWorld War I.\nPeace movements became active in the Western world after 1900, often focusing on treaties that would settle disputes through arbitration, and efforts to support the Hague conventions.\nThe sudden outbreak of the First World War in July 1914 dismayed the peace movement. Socialist parties in every industrial nation had committed themselves to antiwar policies, but when the war came, all of them, except in Russia and the United States, supported their own governments. There were highly publicized dissidents, some of whom were imprisoned for opposing draft laws, such as Eugene Debs in the U.S. In Britain, the prominent activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse was jailed for refusing military service, citing his convictions as a \"socialist and a Christian\". Many socialist groups and movements were antimilitarist, arguing that war by its nature was a type of governmental coercion of the working class for the benefit of capitalist elites. The French socialist pacifist leader Jean Jaur\u00e8s was assassinated by a nationalist fanatic on 31 July 1914. The national parties in the Second International increasingly supported their respective nations in war, and the International was dissolved in 1916.\nIn 1915, the League of Nations Society was formed by British liberal leaders to promote a strong international organisation that could enforce the peaceful resolution of conflict. Later that year, the League to Enforce Peace was established in the U.S. to promote similar goals. Hamilton Holt published a 28 September 1914, editorial in his magazine the \"Independent\" called \"The Way to Disarm: A Practical Proposal\" that called for an international organization to agree upon the arbitration of disputes and to guarantee the territorial integrity of its members by maintaining military forces sufficient to defeat those of any non-member. The ensuing debate among prominent internationalists modified Holt's plan to align it more closely with proposals offered in Great Britain by Viscount James Bryce, a former British ambassador to the United States. These and other initiatives were pivotal in the change in attitudes that gave birth to the League of Nations after the war.\nIn addition to the traditional peace churches, some of the many groups that protested against the war were the Woman's Peace Party (which was organized in 1915 and led by noted reformer Jane Addams), the International Committee of Women for Permanent Peace (ICWPP) (also organized in 1915), the American Union Against Militarism, the Fellowship of Reconciliation and the American Friends Service Committee. Jeannette Rankin, the first woman elected to Congress, was another fierce advocate of pacifism, the only person to vote against American entrance into both wars.\nBetween the two World Wars.\nAfter the immense loss of nearly ten million men to trench warfare, a sweeping change of attitude toward militarism crashed over Europe, particularly in nations such as Great Britain, where many questioned its involvement in the war. After World War I's official end in 1918, peace movements across the continent and the United States renewed, gradually gaining popularity among young Europeans who grew up in the shadow of Europe's trauma over the Great War. Organizations formed in this period included the War Resisters' International, the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, the No More War Movement, the Service Civil International and the Peace Pledge Union (PPU). The League of Nations also convened several disarmament conferences in the interbellum period such as the Geneva Conference, though the support that pacifist policy and idealism received varied across European nations. These organizations and movements attracted tens of thousands of Europeans, spanning most professions including \"scientists, artists, musicians, politicians, clerks, students, activists and thinkers.\"\nGreat Britain.\nPacifism and revulsion with war were very popular sentiments in 1920s Britain. Novels and poems on the theme of the futility of war and the slaughter of the youth by old fools were published, including, Death of a Hero by Richard Aldington, Erich Remarque's translated All Quiet on the Western Front and Beverley Nichols's expose \"Cry Havoc\". A debate at the University of Oxford in 1933 on the motion 'one must fight for King and country' captured the changed mood when the motion was resoundingly defeated. Dick Sheppard established the Peace Pledge Union in 1934, which totally renounced war and aggression. The idea of collective security was also popular; instead of outright pacifism, the public generally exhibited a determination to stand up to aggression, but preferably with the use of economic sanctions and multilateral negotiations. Many members of the Peace Pledge Union later joined the Bruderhof during its period of residence in the Cotswolds, where Englishmen and Germans, many of whom were Jewish, lived side by side despite local persecution.\nThe British Labour Party had a strong pacifist wing in the early 1930s, and between 1931 and 1935 it was led by George Lansbury, a Christian pacifist who later chaired the No More War Movement and was president of the PPU. The 1933 annual conference resolved unanimously to \"pledge itself to take no part in war\". Researcher Richard Toye writes that \"Labour's official position, however, although based on the aspiration towards a world socialist commonwealth and the outlawing of war, did not imply a renunciation of force under all circumstances, but rather support for the ill-defined concept of 'collective security' under the League of Nations. At the same time, on the party's left, Stafford Cripps's small but vocal Socialist League opposed the official policy, on the non-pacifist ground that the League of Nations was 'nothing but the tool of the satiated imperialist powers'.\"\nLansbury was eventually persuaded to resign as Labour leader by the non-pacifist wing of the party and was replaced by Clement Attlee. As the threat from Nazi Germany increased in the 1930s, the Labour Party abandoned its pacifist position and supported rearmament, largely as the result of the efforts of Ernest Bevin and Hugh Dalton, who by 1937 had also persuaded the party to oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement.\nThe League of Nations attempted to play its role in ensuring world peace in the 1920s and 1930s. However, with the increasingly revisionist and aggressive behaviour of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and Imperial Japan, it ultimately failed to maintain such a world order. Economic sanctions were used against states that committed aggression, such as those against Italy when it invaded Abyssinia, but there was no will on the part of the principal League powers, Britain and France, to subordinate their interests to a multilateral process or to disarm at all themselves.\nSpain.\nThe Spanish Civil War proved a major test for international pacifism, and the work of pacifist organisations (such as War Resisters' International and the Fellowship of Reconciliation) and individuals (such as Jos\u00e9 Brocca and Amparo Poch) in that arena has until recently been ignored or forgotten by historians, overshadowed by the memory of the International Brigades and other militaristic interventions. Shortly after the war ended, Simone Weil, despite having volunteered for service on the republican side, went on to publish \"The Iliad or the Poem of Force\", a work that has been described as a pacifist manifesto. In response to the threat of fascism, some pacifist thinkers, such as Richard B. Gregg, devised plans for a campaign of nonviolent resistance in the event of a fascist invasion or takeover.\nFrance.\nAs the prospect of a second major war began to seem increasingly inevitable, much of France adopted pacifist views, though some historians argue that France felt more war anxiety than a moral objection to a second war. Hitler's spreading influence and territory posed an enormous threat to French livelihood from their neighbors. The French countryside had been devastated during World War I and the entire nation was reluctant to subject its territory to the same treatment. Though all countries in the First World War had suffered great losses, France was one of the most devastated and many did not want a second war.\nGermany.\nAs Germany dealt with the burdens of the Treaty of Versailles, a conflict arose in the 1930s between German Christianity and German nationalism. Many Germans found the terms of the treaty debilitating and humiliating, so German nationalism offered a way to regain the country's pride. German Christianity warned against the risks of entering a war similar to the previous one. As the German depression worsened and fascism began to rise in Germany, a greater tide of Germans began to sway toward Hitler's brand of nationalism that would come to crush pacifism.\nWorld War II.\nWith the start of World War II, pacifist and antiwar sentiment declined in nations affected by the war. Even the communist-controlled American Peace Mobilization reversed its antiwar activism once Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941. After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the non-interventionist America First Committee dropped its opposition to American involvement in the war and disbanded, but many smaller religious and socialist groups continued their opposition to war.\nGreat Britain.\nBertrand Russell argued that the necessity of defeating Adolf Hitler and the Nazis was a unique circumstance in which war was not the worst of the possible evils; he called his position \"relative pacifism\". Shortly before the outbreak of war, British writers such as E. M. Forster, Leonard Woolf, David Garnett and Storm Jameson all rejected their earlier pacifism and endorsed military action against Nazism. Similarly, Albert Einstein wrote: \"I loathe all armies and any kind of violence; yet I'm firmly convinced that at present these hateful weapons offer the only effective protection.\" The British pacifists Reginald Sorensen and C. J. Cadoux, while bitterly disappointed by the outbreak of war, nevertheless urged their fellow pacifists \"not to obstruct the war effort.\"\nPacifists across Great Britain further struggled to uphold their anti-military values during the Blitz, a coordinated, long-term attack by the \"Luftwaffe\" on Great Britain. As the country was ravaged nightly by German bombing raids, pacifists had to seriously weigh the importance of their political and moral values against the desire to protect their nation.\nFrance.\nSome scholars theorize that pacifism was the cause of France's rapid fall to the Germans after it was invaded by the Nazis in June 1940, resulting in a takeover of the government by the German military. Whether or not pacifism weakened French defenses against the Germans, there was no hope of sustaining a real pacifist movement after Paris fell. Just as peaceful Germans succumbed to violent nationalism, the pacifist French were muzzled by the totality of German control over nearly all of France.\nThe French pacifists Andr\u00e9 and Magda Trocm\u00e9 helped conceal hundreds of Jews fleeing the Nazis in the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon. After the war, the Trocm\u00e9s were declared Righteous Among the Nations.\nGermany.\nPacifists in Nazi Germany were dealt with harshly, reducing the movement into almost nonexistence; those who continued to advocate for the end of the war and violence were often sent to labor camps; German pacifist Carl von Ossietzky and Olaf Kullmann, a Norwegian pacifist active during the Nazi occupation, were both imprisoned in concentration camps and died as a result of their mistreatment there. Austrian farmer Franz J\u00e4gerst\u00e4tter was executed in 1943 for refusing to serve in the Wehrmacht.\nGerman nationalism consumed even the most peaceful of Christians, who may have believed that Hitler was acting in the good faith of Germany or who may have been so suppressed by the Nazi regime that they were content to act as bystanders to the violence occurring around them. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, an anti-Nazi German pastor who later died in 1945 in the Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp, once wrote in a letter to his grandmother: \"The issue really is: Germanism or Christianity.\"\nAfter the end of the war, it was discovered that \"The Black Book\" or \"Sonderfahndungsliste G.B.\", a list of Britons to be arrested in the event of a successful German invasion of Britain, included three active pacifists: Vera Brittain, Sybil Thorndike and Aldous Huxley (who had left the country).\nConscientious objectors.\nThere were conscientious objectors and war tax resisters in both World War I and World War II. The United States government allowed sincere objectors to serve in noncombatant military roles. However, those draft resisters who refused any cooperation with the war effort often spent much of the wars in federal prisons. During World War II, pacifist leaders such as Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy of the Catholic Worker Movement urged young Americans not to enlist in military service.\nDuring the two world wars, young men conscripted into the military, but who refused to take up arms, were called conscientious objectors. Though these men had to either answer their conscription or face prison time, their status as conscientious objectors permitted them to refuse to take part in battle using weapons, and the military was forced to find a different use for them. Often, these men were assigned various tasks close to battle such as medical duties, though some were assigned various civilian jobs including farming, forestry, hospital work and mining. Conscientious objectors were often viewed by soldiers as cowards and liars, and they were sometimes accused of shirking military duty out of fear rather than as the result of conscience. In Great Britain during World War II, the majority of the public did not approve of moral objection by soldiers but supported their right to abstain from direct combat. On the more extreme sides of public opinion were those who fully supported the objectors and those who believed they should be executed as traitors. The World War II objectors were often scorned as fascist sympathizers and traitors, though many of them cited the influence of World War I and their shell shocked fathers as major reasons for refusing to participate.\nLater 20th century.\nBaptist minister Martin Luther King Jr. led a civil rights movement in the U.S., employing Gandhian nonviolent resistance to repeal laws enforcing racial segregation and to work for integration of schools, businesses and government. In 1957, his wife Coretta Scott King, along with Albert Schweitzer, Benjamin Spock and others, formed the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy (now Peace Action) to resist the nuclear arms race. In 1958 British activists formed the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament with Bertrand Russell as its president.\nIn 1960, Thich Nhat Hanh came to the U.S. to study comparative religion at Princeton University and was subsequently appointed a lecturer in Buddhism at Columbia University. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh had written a letter to King in 1965 entitled \"Searching for the Enemy of Man\" and met with King in 1966 to urge him to publicly denounce the Vietnam War. In a famous 1967 speech at Riverside Church in New York City, King publicly questioned the U.S. involvement in Vietnam for the first time.\nOther examples from this period include the 1986 People Power Revolution in the Philippines led by Corazon Aquino and the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, with the broadly publicized \"Tank Man\" incident as its indelible image.\nOn 1 December 1948, President Jos\u00e9 Figueres Ferrer of Costa Rica abolished the Costa Rican military. In 1949, the abolition of the military was introduced in Article 12 of the Costa Rican constitution. The budget previously dedicated to the military is now dedicated to providing healthcare services and education.\nWithin the halls of academe, several philosophers endeavored to demonstrate that the theoretical principles underlying secular pacifism could be successfully applied in order to resolve several unique forms of international conflict which emerged as the 20th century came to a close. Included in this group is Robert L. Holmes, who illustrates that four principles of \"moral personalism\" can be utilized within the context of both nuclear war and terrorism in order to promote an ethically viable outcome. He further argues that waging war in the modern era is unjustifiable when considered in its totality and that by transcending the particular perceptions of injustice in a conflict it is possible to be a \"pragmatic pacifist\".\nReligious attitudes.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith abolished holy war and emphasized its abolition as a central teaching of his faith. However, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith does not have an absolute pacifistic position. For example, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds are advised to do social service instead of active army service, but when this is not possible because of obligations in certain countries, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed law of \"loyalty to one's government\" is preferred and the individual should perform the army service. Shoghi Effendi, the head of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in the first half of the 20th century, noted that in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed view, absolute pacifists are anti-social and exalt the individual over society which could lead to anarchy; instead he noted that the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed conception of social life follows a moderate view where the individual is not suppressed or exalted.\nOn the level of society, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h promotes the principle of collective security, which does not abolish the use of force, but prescribes \"a system in which Force is made the servant of Justice\". The idea of collective security from the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed teachings states that if a government violates a fundamental norm of international law or provision of a future world constitution which Bah\u00e1'\u00eds believe will be established by all nations, then the other governments should step in.\nBuddhism.\nAhimsa (do no harm), is a primary virtue in Buddhism (as well as other Indian religions such as Hinduism and Jainism). This leads to a misconception that Buddhism is a religion based solely on peace; however, like all religions, there is a long history of violence in various Buddhist traditions and many examples of prolonged violence in its 2,500-year existence. Like many religious scholars and believers of other religions, many Buddhists disavow any connection between their religion and the violence committed in its name or by its followers, and find various ways of dealing with problematic texts.\nNotable pacifists or peace activists within Buddhist traditions include Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh who advocated for peace in response to the Vietnam War, founded the Plum Village Tradition, and helped popularize engaged Buddhism, Robert Baker Aitken and Anne Hopkins Aitken who founded the Buddhist Peace Fellowship, Cheng Yen founder of the Tzu Chi Foundation, Bhikkhu Bodhi American Theravada Buddhist monk and founder of Buddhist Global Relief, Thai activist and author Sulak Sivaraksa, Cambodian activist Preah Maha Ghosananda. and Japanese activist and peace pagoda builder Nichidatsu Fujii.\nChristianity.\nPeace churches.\nPeace churches are Christian denominations explicitly advocating pacifism. The term \"historic peace churches\" refers specifically to three church traditions: the Church of the Brethren, the Mennonites (and other Anabaptists, such as the Amish, Hutterites and Apostolic Christian Church), as well as the Quakers (Religious Society of Friends). The historic peace churches have, from their origins as far back as the 16th century, always taken the position that Jesus was himself a pacifist who explicitly taught and practiced pacifism, and that his followers must do likewise. Pacifist churches vary on whether physical force can ever be justified in self-defense or protecting others, as many adhere strictly to nonresistance when confronted by violence. But all agree that violence on behalf of a country or a government is prohibited for Christians.\nHoliness movement.\nThe Emmanuel Association of Churches, Immanuel Missionary Church, Church of God (Guthrie, Oklahoma), First Bible Holiness Church, and Christ's Sanctified Holy Church are denominations in the holiness movement (which is largely Methodist with a minority from other backgrounds such as Quaker, Anabaptist and Restorationist) known for their opposition to war today; they are known as \"holiness pacifists\". The Emmanuel Association teaches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPentecostal churches.\nJay Beaman's thesis states that 13 of 21, or 62% of American Pentecostal groups formed by 1917 show evidence of being pacifist sometime in their history. Furthermore, Jay Beaman has shown in his thesis that there has been a shift away from pacifism in the American Pentecostal churches to more a style of military support and chaplaincy. The major organisation for Pentecostal Christians who believe in pacifism is the PCPF, the Pentecostal Charismatic Peace Fellowship.\nThe United Pentecostal Church, the largest Apostolic/Oneness denomination, takes an official stand of conscientious objection: its Articles of Faith read, \"We are constrained to declare against participating in combatant service in war, armed insurrection\u00a0... aiding or abetting in or the actual destruction of human life. We believe that we can be consistent in serving our Government in certain noncombatant capacities, but not in the bearing of arms.\"\nOther denominations.\nThe Peace Pledge Union is a pacifist organisation from which the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship (APF) later emerged within the Anglican Church. The APF succeeded in gaining ratification of the pacifist position at two successive Lambeth Conferences, but many Anglicans would not regard themselves as pacifists. South African Bishop Desmond Tutu is the most prominent Anglican pacifist. Rowan Williams led an almost united Anglican Church in Britain in opposition to the 2003 Iraq War. In Australia Peter Carnley similarly led a front of bishops opposed to the Government of Australia's involvement in the invasion of Iraq.\nThe Catholic Worker Movement is concerned with both social justice and pacifist issues, and voiced consistent opposition to the Spanish Civil War and World War II. Many of its early members were imprisoned for their opposition to conscription. Within the Roman Catholic Church, the Pax Christi organisation is the premier pacifist lobby group. It holds positions similar to APF, and the two organisations are known to work together on ecumenical projects. Within Roman Catholicism there has been a discernible move towards a more pacifist position through the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Popes Benedict XV, John XXIII and John Paul II were all vocal in their opposition to specific wars. By taking the name Benedict XVI, some suspected that Joseph Ratzinger would continue the strong emphasis upon nonviolent conflict resolution of his predecessor. However, the Roman Catholic Church officially maintains the legitimacy of Just War, which is rejected by some pacifists.\nIn the twentieth century, there was a notable trend among prominent Roman Catholics towards pacifism. Individuals such as Dorothy Day and Henri Nouwen stand out among them. The monk and mystic Thomas Merton was noted for his commitment to pacifism during the Vietnam War era. Murdered Salvadoran Bishop \u00d3scar Romero was notable for using non-violent resistance tactics and wrote meditative sermons focusing on the power of prayer and peace. School of the Americas Watch was founded by Maryknoll Fr. Roy Bourgeois in 1990 and uses strictly pacifist principles to protest the training of Latin American military officers by United States Army officers at the School of the Americas in the state of Georgia.\nThe Southern Baptist Convention has stated in the Baptist Faith and Message, \"It is the duty of Christians to seek peace with all men on principles of righteousness. In accordance with the spirit and teachings of Christ they should do all in their power to put an end to war.\"\nThe United Methodist Church explicitly supports conscientious objection by its members \"as an ethically valid position\" while simultaneously allowing for differences of opinion and belief for those who do not object to military service.\nMembers of the Rastafari Movement's Mansion Nyabinghi are specifically noted for having a large population of Pacifist members, though not all of them are.\nHinduism.\nNonviolence, or ahimsa, is a central part of Hinduism and is one of the fundamental Yamas \u2013 self restraints needed to live a proper life. The concept of ahimsa grew gradually within Hinduism, one of the signs being the discouragement of ritual animal sacrifice. Many Hindus today have a vegetarian diet. The classical texts of Hinduism devote numerous chapters discussing what people who practice the virtue of Ahimsa, can and must do when they are faced with war, violent threat or need to sentence someone convicted of a crime. These discussions have led to theories of just war, theories of reasonable self-defence and theories of proportionate punishment. Arthashastra discusses, among other things, why and what constitutes proportionate response and punishment.\nThe precepts of Ahimsa under Hinduism require that war must be avoided, with sincere and truthful dialogue. Force must be the last resort. If war becomes necessary, its cause must be just, its purpose virtuous, its objective to restrain the wicked, its aim peace, its method lawful. While the war is in progress, sincere dialogue for peace must continue.\nIslam.\nDifferent Muslim movements through history had linked pacifism with Muslim theology. However, warfare has been integral part of Islamic history both for the defense and the spread of the faith since the time of Muhammad.\nPeace is an important aspect of Islam, and Muslims are encouraged to strive for peace and peaceful solutions to all problems. However, most Muslims are generally not pacifists, as the teachings in the Qur'an and Hadith allow for wars to be fought if they are justified.\nAn example of non-violent civil disobedience was brought about by Egyptians against the British in the Egyptian Revolution of 1919.\nSufism.\nPrior to the Hijra travel, Muhammad struggled non-violently against his opposition in Mecca, providing a basis for Islamic pacifist schools of thought such as some Sufi orders.\nIn the 13th century, Salim Suwari a philosopher in Islam, came up with a peaceful approach to Islam known as the Suwarian tradition.\nKh\u0101n Abdul Ghaff\u0101r Kh\u0101n was a Pashtun independence activist against British colonial rule. He was a political and spiritual leader known for his nonviolent opposition, and a lifelong pacifist and devout Muslim. A close friend of Mahatma Gandhi, Bacha Khan was nicknamed the \"Frontier Gandhi\" in British India. Bacha Khan founded the Khudai Khidmatgar (\"Servants of God\") movement in 1929, whose success triggered severe crackdowns by the colonial government against Khan and his supporters, and they experienced some of the strongest repression of the Indian independence movement.\nAhmadiyya.\nAccording to the Ahmadiyya understanding of Islam, pacifism is a strong current, and jihad is one's personal inner struggle and should not be used violently for political motives. Violence is the last option only to be used to protect religion and one's own life in extreme situations of persecution. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, said that in contrary to the current views, Islam \"does not allow the use of sword in religion, except in the case of defensive wars, wars waged to punish a tyrant, or those meant to uphold freedom\".\nAhmadiyya claims its objective to be the peaceful propagation of Islam with special emphasis on spreading the true message of Islam by the pen. Ahmadis point out that as per prophecy, who they believe was the promised messiah, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, rendered the concept of violent jihad unnecessary in modern times. They believe that the answer of hate should be given by love. Many Muslims consider Ahmadi Muslims as either \"kafirs\" or heretics, an animosity sometimes resulting in murder.\nJainism.\nAbsolute Non-violence and compassion for all life is central to Jainism. Human life is valued as a unique, rare opportunity to reach enlightenment. Killing any person or living creature seen or unseen, no matter what crime may have committed, is considered unimaginably terrible. It is a religion that requires monks, from all its sects and traditions, to be lacto-vegetarianism. Most or all Jains are lacto-vegetarians. Some Indian regions, such as Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh have been strongly influenced by Jains and often the majority of the local Hindus of every denomination are also lacto-vegetarian.\nJudaism.\nAlthough Judaism is not a pacifist religion, it does believe that peace is highly desirable. Most Jews will hope to limit or minimise conflict and violence but they accept that, given human nature and the situations which arise from time to time in the world, there will be occasions when violence and war may be justified. The Jewish Peace Fellowship is a New-York based nonprofit, nondenominational organization set up to provide a Jewish voice in the peace movement. The organization was founded in 1941 in order to support Jewish conscientious objectors who sought exemption from combatant military service. It is affiliated to the International Fellowship of Reconciliation. The fringe Neturei Karta group of anti-Zionist, ultra-orthodox Jews, supposedly take a pacifist line, saying that \"Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.\" The Hebrew Bible has many examples of Jews being told to go and war against enemy lands or within the Israelite community as well as instances where God, as destroyer and protector, goes to war for non-participant Jews.\nGovernment and political movements.\nWhile many governments have tolerated pacifist views and even accommodated pacifists' refusal to fight in wars, others at times have outlawed pacifist and anti-war activity. In 1918, The United States Congress passed the Sedition Act of 1918. During the periods between World Wars I and World War II, pacifist literature and public advocacy was banned in Italy under Benito Mussolini, Germany after the rise of Adolf Hitler, Spain under Francisco Franco, and the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin. In these nations, pacifism was denounced as cowardice; indeed, Mussolini referred to pacifist writings as the \"propaganda of cowardice\".\nToday, the United States requires that all young men register for selective service but does not allow them to be classified as conscientious objectors unless they are drafted in some future reinstatement of the draft, allowing them to be discharged or transferred to noncombatant status. Some European governments like Switzerland, Greece, Norway and Germany offer civilian service. However, even during periods of peace, many pacifists still refuse to register for or report for military duty, risking criminal charges.\nAnti-war and \"pacifist\" political parties seeking to win elections may moderate their demands, calling for de-escalation or major arms reduction rather than the outright disarmament which is advocated by many pacifists. Green parties list \"non-violence\" and \"decentralization\" towards anarchist co-operatives or minimalist village government as two of their ten key values. However, in power, Greens often compromise. The German Greens in the cabinet of Social Democrat Gerhard Schr\u00f6der supported an intervention by German troops in Afghanistan in 2001 if that they hosted the peace conference in Berlin. However, during the 2002 election Greens forced Schr\u00f6der to swear that no German troops would invade Iraq.\nSome pacifists and multilateralists are in favor of international criminal law as means to prevent and control international aggression. The International Criminal Court has jurisdiction over war crimes, but the crime of aggression has yet to be clearly defined in international law.\nThe Italian Constitution enforces a mild pacifist character on the Italian Republic, as Article 11 states that \"Italy repudiates war as an instrument offending the liberty of the peoples and as a means for settling international disputes\u00a0...\" Similarly, Articles 24, 25 and 26 of the German Constitution (1949), Alinea 15 of the French Constitution (1946), Article 20 of the Danish Constitution (1953), Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution (1947) and several other mostly European constitutions correspond to the United Nations Charter by rejecting the institution of war in favour of collective security and peaceful cooperation.\nPacifism and abstention from political activity.\nHowever, some pacifists, such as the Christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy and autarchist Robert LeFevre, consider the state a form of warfare. In addition, for doctrinal reason that a manmade government is inferior to divine governance and law, many pacifist-identified religions/religious sects also refrain from political activity altogether, including the Anabaptists, Jehovah's Witnesses and Mandaeans. This means that such groups refuse to participate in government office or serve under an oath to a government.\nAnarcho-pacifism.\nAnarcho-pacifism is a form of anarchism which completely rejects the use of violence in any form for any purpose. The main precedent was Henry David Thoreau who through his work Civil Disobedience influenced the advocacy of both Leo Tolstoy and Mahatma Gandhi for nonviolent resistance. As a global movement, anarcho-pacifism emerged shortly before World War II in the Netherlands, Great Britain and the United States and was a strong presence in the subsequent campaigns for nuclear disarmament.\nViolence has always been controversial in anarchism. While many anarchists during the 19th century embraced propaganda of the deed, Leo Tolstoy and other anarcho-pacifists directly opposed violence as a means for change. He argued that anarchism must by nature be nonviolent since it is, by definition, opposition to coercion and force and since the state is inherently violent, meaningful pacifism must likewise be anarchistic. His philosophy was cited as a major inspiration by Mahatma Gandhi, an Indian independence leader and pacifist who self-identified as an anarchist. Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis was also instrumental in establishing the pacifist trend within the anarchist movement. In France, anti-militarism appeared strongly in individualist anarchist circles as \u00c9mile Armand founded \"Ligue Antimilitariste\" in 1902 with Albert Libertad and George Mathias Paraf-Javal.\nOpposition to military taxation.\nMany pacifists who would be conscientious objectors to military service are also opposed to paying taxes to fund the military. In the United States, the National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund works to pass a national law to allow conscientious objectors to redirect their tax money to be used only for non-military purposes.\nCriticism.\nOne common argument against pacifism is the possibility of using violence to prevent further acts of violence (and reduce the \"net-sum\" of violence). This argument hinges on consequentialism: an otherwise morally objectionable action can be justified if it results in a positive outcome. For example, either violent rebellion, or foreign nations sending in troops to end a dictator's violent oppression may save millions of lives, even if many thousands died in the war. Those pacifists who base their beliefs on deontological grounds would oppose such violent action. Others would oppose organized military responses but support individual and small group self-defense against specific attacks if initiated by the dictator's forces. Pacifists may argue that military action could be justified should it subsequently advance the general cause of peace.\nStill more pacifists would argue that a nonviolent reaction may not save lives immediately but would in the long run. The acceptance of violence for any reason makes it easier to use in other situations. Learning and committing to pacifism helps to send a message that violence is, in fact, not the most effective way. It can also help people to think more creatively and find more effective ways to stop violence without more violence.\nIn light of the common criticism of pacifism as not offering a clear alternative policy, one approach to finding \"more effective ways\" has been the attempt to develop the idea of \"defence by civil resistance\", also called \"social defence\". This idea, which is not necessarily dependent on acceptance of pacifist beliefs, is based on relying on nonviolent resistance against possible threats, whether external (such as invasion) or internal (such as coup d'\u00e9tat).\nThere have been some works on this topic, including by Adam Roberts and Gene Sharp. However, no country has adopted this approach as the sole basis of its defence. (For further information and sources see social defence.)\nAxis aggression that precipitated World War II has been cited as an argument against pacifism. If these forces had not been challenged and defeated militarily, the argument goes, many more people would have died under their oppressive rule. Adolf Hitler told the British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax in 1937 that the British should \"shoot Gandhi, and if this doesn't suffice to reduce them to submission, shoot a dozen leading members of the Congress, and if that doesn't suffice shoot 200, and so on, as you make it clear that you mean business.\"\nAdolf Hitler noted in his Second Book: \"...\u00a0Later, the attempt to adapt the living space to increased population turned into unmotivated wars of conquest, which in their very lack of motivation contained the germ of the subsequent reaction. Pacifism is the answer to it. Pacifism has existed in the world ever since there have been wars whose meaning no longer lay in the conquest of territory for a Folk's sustenance. Since then it has been war's eternal companion. It will again disappear as soon as war ceases to be an instrument of booty hungry or power hungry individuals or nations, and as soon as it again becomes the ultimate weapon with which a Folk fights for its daily bread.\"\nHermann G\u00f6ring described, during an interview at the Nuremberg Trials, how denouncing and outlawing pacifism was an important part of the Nazis' seizure of power: \"The people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders. That is easy. All you have to do is tell them they are being attacked and denounce the pacifists for lack of patriotism and exposing the country to danger. It works the same way in any country.\"\nSome commentators on the most nonviolent forms of pacifism, including Jan Narveson, argue that such pacifism is a self-contradictory doctrine. Narveson claims that everyone has rights and corresponding responsibilities not to violate others' rights. Since pacifists give up their ability to protect themselves from violation of their right not to be harmed, then other people thus have no corresponding responsibility, thus creating a paradox of rights. Narveson said that \"the prevention of infractions of that right is precisely what one has a right to when one has a right at all.\" Narveson then discusses how rational persuasion is a good but often inadequate method of discouraging an aggressor. He considers that everyone has the right to use any means necessary to prevent deprivation of their civil liberties, and force could be necessary. Peter Gelderloos criticizes the idea that nonviolence is the only way to fight for a better world. According to Gelderloos, pacifism as an ideology serves the interests of the state and is hopelessly caught up psychologically with the control schema of patriarchy and white supremacy. Anne Appelbaum has argued that advocating pacifism in response to the Russo-Ukrainian War overlooks the lessons of history, as surrendering territory and principles enables atrocities, and early military support for Ukraine might have deterred the invasion, revealing that misguided pacifism can sometimes lead to greater conflict.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24958", "revid": "10689882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24958", "title": "Piet Hein", "text": "Piet Hein or Piet-Hein may refer to:\nShips.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24959", "revid": "49626159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24959", "title": "Proteinoid", "text": "Proteinoids, or thermal proteins, are protein-like, often cross-linked molecules formed abiotically from amino acids. Sidney W. Fox initially proposed that they may have been precursors to the first living cells (protocells). The term was also used in the 1960s to describe peptides that are shorter than twenty amino acids found in hydrolysed protein, but this term is no longer commonly used.\nHistory.\nIn trying to uncover the intermediate stages of abiogenesis, scientist Sidney W. Fox in the 1950s and 1960s, studied the spontaneous formation of peptide structures under conditions that might plausibly have existed early in Earth's history. He demonstrated that amino acids could spontaneously form small chains called peptides. In one of his experiments, he allowed amino acids to dry out as if puddled in a warm, dry spot in prebiotic conditions. He found that, as they dried, the amino acids formed long, often cross-linked, thread-like microscopic polypeptide globules, he named \"proteinoid microspheres\".\nPolymerization.\nThe abiotic polymerization of amino acids into proteins through the formation of peptide bonds was thought to occur only at temperatures over 140\u00a0\u00b0C. However, the biochemist Sidney Walter Fox and his co-workers discovered that phosphoric acid acted as a catalyst for this reaction. They were able to form protein-like chains from a mixture of 18 common amino acids at 70\u00a0\u00b0C in the presence of phosphoric acid, and dubbed these protein-like chains proteinoids. Fox later found naturally occurring proteinoids similar to those he had created in his laboratory in lava and cinders from Hawaiian volcanic vents and determined that the amino acids present polymerized due to the heat of escaping gases and lava. Other catalysts have since been found; one of them, amidinium carbodiimide, is formed in primitive Earth experiments and is effective in dilute aqueous solutions.\nWhen present in certain concentrations in aqueous solutions, proteinoids form small microspheres. This is because some of the amino acids incorporated into proteinoid chains are more hydrophobic than others, and so proteinoids cluster together like droplets of oil in water. These structures exhibit a few characteristics of living cells:\nFox thought that the microspheres may have provided a cell compartment within which organic molecules could have become concentrated and protected from the outside environment during the process of chemical evolution.\nProteinoid microspheres are today being considered for use in pharmaceuticals, providing microscopic biodegradable capsules in which to package and deliver oral drugs.\nIn another experiment using a similar method to set suitable conditions for life to form, Fox collected volcanic material from a cinder cone in Hawaii. He discovered that the temperature was over just beneath the surface of the cinder cone, and suggested that this might have been the environment in which life was created\u2014molecules could have formed and then been washed through the loose volcanic ash and into the sea. He placed lumps of lava over amino acids derived from methane, ammonia and water, sterilized all materials, and baked the lava over the amino acids for a few hours in a glass oven. A brown, sticky substance formed over the surface and when the lava was drenched in sterilized water a thick, brown liquid leached out. It turned out that the amino acids had combined to form proteinoids, and the proteinoids had combined to form small spheres. Fox called these \"microspheres\". His protobionts were not cells, although they formed clumps and chains reminiscent of bacteria. Based upon such experiments, Colin Pittendrigh stated in December 1967 that \"laboratories will be creating a living cell within ten years,\" a remark that reflected the typical contemporary levels of ignorance of the complexity of cell structures.\nLegacy.\nFox has likened the amino acid globules to cells, and proposed it bridged the macromolecule to cell transition. However, his hypothesis was later dismissed as proteinoids are not proteins, they feature mostly non-peptide bonds and amino acid cross-linkages not present in living organisms. Furthermore, they have no compartmentalization and there is no information content in the molecules.\nAlthough their role as an evolutionary precursor has been superseded, the hypothesis was a catalyst to further investigate other mechanisms that could have brought about abiogenesis, such as the RNA world, PAH world, Iron\u2013sulfur world, and protocell hypotheses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24960", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24960", "title": "Permanent Court of International Justice", "text": "International court from 1922 to 1946\nThe Permanent Court of International Justice, often called the World Court, existed from 1922 to 1946. It was an international court attached to the League of Nations. Created in 1920 (although the idea of an international court was several centuries old), the court was initially well-received from states and academics alike, with many cases submitted to it for its first decade of operation.\nBetween 1922 and 1940 the court heard a total of 29 cases and delivered 27 separate advisory opinions. With the heightened international tension in the 1930s, the court became less used. By a resolution from the League of Nations on 18 April 1946, both the court and the league ceased to exist and were replaced by the International Court of Justice and the United Nations.\nThe court's mandatory jurisdiction came from three sources: the Optional Clause of the League of Nations, general international conventions and special bipartite international treaties. Cases could also be submitted directly by states, but they were not bound to submit material unless it fell into those three categories. The court could issue either judgments or advisory opinions. Judgments were directly binding but not advisory opinions. In practice, member states of the League of Nations followed advisory opinions anyway for fear of possibly undermining the moral and legal authority of the court and the league.\nHistory.\nFounding and early years.\nAn international court had long been proposed; Pierre Dubois suggested it in 1305 and \u00c9meric Cruc\u00e9 in 1623. An idea of an international court of justice arose in the political world at the First Hague Peace Conference in 1899, where it was declared that arbitration between states was the easiest solution to disputes, providing a temporary panel of judges to arbitrate in such cases, the Permanent Court of Arbitration. At the Second Hague Peace Conference in 1907, a draft convention for a permanent Court of Arbitral Justice was written although disputes and other pressing business at the Conference meant that such a body was never established, owing to difficulties agreeing on a procedure to select the judges. The outbreak of the First World War, and, in particular, its conclusion made it clear to many academics that some kind of world court was needed, and it was widely expected that one would be established. Article 14 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, created after the Treaty of Versailles, allowed the league to investigate setting up an international court. In June 1920, an Advisory Committee of jurists appointed by the League of Nations finally established a working guideline for the appointment of judges, and the committee was then authorised to draft a constitution for a permanent court not of arbitration but of justice. The Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice was accepted in Geneva on 13 December 1920.\nThe court first sat on 30 January 1922, at the Peace Palace, The Hague, covering preliminary business during the first session (such as establishing procedure and appointing officers) Nine judges sat, along with three deputies, since Antonio S\u00e1nchez de Bustamante y Sirven, Ruy Barbosa and Wang Ch'ung-hui were unable to attend, the last being at the Washington Naval Conference. The court elected Bernard Loder as president and Max Huber as vice-president; Huber was replaced by Andr\u00e9 Weiss a month later. On 14 February the court was officially opened, and rules of procedure were established on 24 March, when the court ended its first session. The court first sat to decide cases on 15 June. During its first year of business, the court issued three advisory opinions, all related to the International Labour Organization created by the Treaty of Versailles.\nThe initial reaction to the court was good, from politicians, practising lawyers and academics alike. Ernest Pollock, the former Attorney General for England and Wales said, \"May we not as lawyers regard the establishment of an International Court of Justice as an advance in the science that we pursue?\" John Henry Wigmore said that the creation of the court \"should have given every lawyer a thrill of cosmic vibration\", and James Brown Scott wrote that \"the one dream of our ages has been realised in our time\". Much praise was heaped upon the appointment of an American judge despite the fact that the United States had not become a signatory to the court's protocol, and it was thought that it would soon do so.\nIncreasing work.\nThe court faced increasing work as it went on, allaying the fears of those commentators who had believed the court would become like the Supreme Court of the United States, which was not presented with a case for its first six terms. The court was given nine cases during 1922, however, with judgments called \"cases\" and advisory opinions called \"questions\". Three cases were disposed of during the court's first session, one during an extraordinary sitting between 8 January and 7 February 1923 (the Tunis-Morocco Nationality Question), four during the second ordinary sitting between 15 June 1923 and 15 September 1923 (Eastern Carelia Question, S.S. \"Wimbledon\" case, German Settlers Question, Acquisition of Polish Nationality Question) and one during a second extraordinary session from 12 November to 6 December 1923 (Jaworznia Question). A replacement for Ruy Barbosa (who had died on 1 March 1923 without hearing any cases) was also found, with the election of Epit\u00e1cio Pessoa on 10 September 1923. The workload the following year was reduced, containing two judgments and one advisory opinion; the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions Case, the Interpretation of the Treaty of Neuilly Case (the first case of the court's Chamber of Summary Procedure) and the Monastery of Saint-Naoum Question. During the same year, a new president and vice-president were elected, since they were mandated to serve for a term of three years. At the elections on 4 September 1924, Andr\u00e9 Weiss was again elected vice-president and Max Huber became the second president of the court. Judicial pensions were created at the same time, with a judge being given 1/30th of his annual pay for every year he had served once he had both retired and turned 65.\n1925 was an exceedingly busy year for the court, which sat for 210 days, with four extraordinary sessions as well as the ordinary session, producing 3 judgments and 4 advisory opinions. The first judgment was given in the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations Case, the second (by the Court of Summary Procedure) was on the interpretation of the Interpretation of the Treaty of Neuilly Case, and the third in the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions Case. The 4 advisory opinions issued by the court were in the Polish Postal Service in Danzig Question, the Expulsion of the Ecumenical Patriarch Question, the Treaty of Lausanne Question and the German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia Question. 1926 saw reduced business, with only one ordinary session and one extraordinary session; it was, however, the first year that all 11 judges had been present to hear cases. The court heard two cases, providing one judgment and one advisory opinion; a second question on German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia, this time a judgment rather than an advisory opinion, and an advisory opinion on the International Labour Organization.\nDespite the reduction of work in 1926, 1927 was another busy year, the court sitting continuously from 15 June to 16 December, handing down 4 orders, 4 judgments and 1 advisory opinion. The judgments were in the Belgium-China Case, the Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzow, the Lotus Case and a continuation of the Mavrommatis Jerusalem Concessions Case. 3 of the advisory opinions were on the Competence of the European Commission on the Danube, and the 4th was on the Jurisdiction of Danzig Courts. The 4 orders were on the German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia. This year saw another set of elections; on 6 December, with Dionisio Anzilotti elected president and Andr\u00e9 Weiss elected vice-president. Weiss died the following year, and John Bassett Moore resigned; Max Huber was elected vice-president on 12 September 1928 to succeed Weiss, while a second death (Lord Finlay) left the court increasingly understaffed. Replacements for Moore and Finlay were elected on 19 September 1929; Henri Fromageot and Cecil Hurst respectively.\nAfter the second round of elections in September 1930, the court was reorganised. On 16 January 1931 Mineichir\u014d Adachi was appointed president, and Gustavo Guerrero vice-president.\nAbsence of the United States.\nThe United States never joined the World Court, primarily because enemies of the League of Nations in the Senate argued that the court was too closely linked to the League of Nations. The leading opponent was Senator William Borah, Republican of Idaho. The United States finally recognised the court's jurisdiction, following a long and drawn out process. President Warren G. Harding had first suggested US involvement in 1923, and on 9 December 1929, three court protocols were signed. The U.S. demanded a veto over cases involving the U.S. but other nations rejected the idea.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt did not risk his political capital and gave only passive support even though a two-thirds vote of approval was needed in the Senate. A barrage of telegrams flooded Congress, inspired by attacks made by Charles Coughlin and others. The treaty failed by seven votes on 29 January 1935.\nThe United States finally accepted the court's jurisdiction on 28 December 1935, but the treaty was never ratified, and the U.S. never joined. Francis Boyle attributes the failure to a strong isolationist element in the US Senate, arguing that the ineffectiveness shown by US nonparticipation in the court and other international institutions could be linked to the start of the Second World War.\nGrowing international tension and dissolution of the court.\n1933 was a busy year for the court, which cleared its 20th case (and \"greatest triumph\"); the Eastern Greenland Case. This period was marked by growing international tension, however, with Japan and Germany announcing their withdrawal from the League of Nations, to come into effect in 1935. That did not directly affect the court, since the protocol accepting court jurisdiction was separately ratified, but it influenced whether a nation would be willing to bring a case before it, as evidenced by Germany's withdrawal from two pending cases. There were few cases in 1934 since the world's governments were more concerned with the growing international tension. The court's business continued to be small in 1935, 1936, 1937, 1938, and 1939 although 1937 was marked by Monaco's acceptance of the court protocol. The court's judicial output in 1940 consisted entirely of a set of orders, completed in a meeting between 19 and 26 February, caused by the beginning of World War II, which left the court with \"uncertain prospects for the future\". Following the German invasion of the Netherlands, the court was unable to meet although the registrar and president were afforded full diplomatic immunity. Informed that the situation would not be tolerated after diplomatic missions from other nations left The Hague on 16 July, the president and registrar left the Netherlands and moved to Switzerland, accompanied by their staff.\nThe court was unable to meet between 1941 and 1944, but the framework remained intact, and it soon became apparent that the court would be dissolved. In 1943, an international panel met to consider \"the question of the Permanent Court of International Justice\", meeting from 20 March to 10 February 1944. The panel agreed that the name and functioning of the court should be preserved but for some future court rather than a continuation of the current one. Between 21 August and 7 October 1944, the Dumbarton Oaks Conference was held, which, among other things, created an international court attached to the United Nations, to succeed the Permanent Court of International Justice. As a result of these conferences and others, the judges of the Permanent Court of International Justice officially resigned in October 1945 and, via a resolution by the League of Nations on 18 April 1946, the court and the league both ceased to exist, being replaced by the International Court of Justice and the United Nations.\nOrganisation.\nJudges.\nThe court initially consisted of 11 judges and 4 deputy judges, recommended by member states of the League of Nations to the Secretary general of the League of Nations, who would put them before the Council and Assembly for election. The Council and Assembly were to bear in mind that the elected panel of judges was to represent every major legal tradition in the league, along with \"every major civilisation\". Each member state was allowed to recommend 4 potential judges, with a maximum of 2 from its own nation. Judges were elected by a straight majority vote, held independently in the Council and Assembly. The judges served for a period of nine years, with their term limits all expiring at the same time, necessitating a completely new set of elections. The judges were independent and rid themselves of their nationality for the purposes of hearing cases, owing allegiance to no individual member state, but it was forbidden to have more than one judge from the same state. As a sign of their independence from national ties, judges were given full diplomatic immunity when engaged in court business. The only requirements for judges were \"high moral character\" and \"the qualifications required in their respective countries [for] the highest judicial offices\" or to be \"jurisconsults of recognized competence in international law\".\nThe first panel was elected on 14 September 1921, with the 4 deputies being elected on the 16th. On the first vote, Rafael Altamira y Crevea of Spain, Dionisio Anzilotti of Italy, Bernard Loder of the Netherlands, Ruy Barbosa of Brazil, Yorozu Oda of Japan, Andr\u00e9 Weiss of France, Antonio S\u00e1nchez de Bustamante y Sirven of Cuba and Lord Finlay of the United Kingdom were elected by a majority vote of both the Council and Assembly on the first ballot taken. The second ballot elected John Bassett Moore of the United States, and the sixth Didrik Nyholm of Denmark and Max Huber of Switzerland. As the deputy judges, Wang Ch'ung-hui of China, Demetre Negulesco of Romania and Mihailo Jovanovi\u0107 of Yugoslavia were elected. The Assembly and Council disagreed on the fourth deputy judge, but Frederik Beichmann of Norway was eventually appointed. Deputy judges were only substitutes for absent judges and were not afforded a vote in altering court procedure or contributing at other times. As such, they were allowed to act as counsel in international cases where they were not sitting as judges.\nIn 1930, the number of judges was increased to 15, and a new set of elections were held. The election was held on 25 September 1930, with 14 candidates receiving a majority on the first ballot and a 15th, Francisco Jos\u00e9 Urrutia, receiving a majority on the second. The full court was Urrutia, Mineichiro Adachi, Rafael Altamira y Crevea, Dionisio Anzilotti, Bustamante, Willem van Eysinga, Henri Fromageot, Jos\u00e9 Gustavo Guerrero, Cecil Hurst, Edouard Rolin-Jaequemyns, Frank B. Kellogg, Negulesco, Micha\u0142 Jan Rostworowski, Walther Sch\u00fccking and Wang Ch'ung-hui.\nJudges were paid 15,000 Dutch florins a year, with daily expenses of 50 florins to pay for living expenses, and an additional 45,000 florins for the president, who was required to live at The Hague. Travelling expenses were also provided, and a \"duty allowance\" of 100 florins was provided when the court was sitting, with 150 for the vice-president. This duty allowance was limited to 20,000 florins a year for the judges and 30,000 florins for the vice-president; as such, it provided for 200 days of court hearings, with no allowance provided if the court sat for longer. The deputy judges received no salary but, when called up for service, were provided with travel expenses, 50 florins a day for living expenses and 150 florins a day as a duty allowance.\nProcedure.\nUnder the Covenant of the League of Nations, all League members agreed that if there was a dispute between states they \"recognize to be suitable for submission to arbitration and which cannot be satisfactorily settled by diplomacy\", the matter would be submitted to the court for arbitration, with suitable disputes being over the interpretation of an international treaty, a question on international law, the validity of facts, which, if true, would breach international obligations and the nature of any reparations to be made for breaching international obligations. The original statutes of the court provided that all 11 judges were required to sit in every case. There were three exceptions: when reviewing Labour Clauses from a peace treaty such as the Treaty of Versailles (which was done by a special chamber of five judges, appointed every three years), when reviewing cases on communications or transport arising from a peace treaty (which used a similar procedure) and when hearing summary procedure cases, which were reviewed by a panel of three judges.\nTo prevent the appearance of any bias in the court's makeup, if there was a judge belonging to one member state on the panel and the other member state was not \"represented\", they had the ability to select an \"ad hoc\" judge of their own nationality to hear the case. In a full court hearing, that increased the number to twelve; in one of the five-man chambers, the new judge took the place of one of the original five. That did not apply to summary procedure cases. The \"ad hoc\" judge, selected by the member state, was expected to fulfil all the requirements of a normal judge; the president of the court had ultimate discretion over whether to authorise him to sit. The court was mandated to open on 15 June each year and continue until all cases were finished, with extraordinary sessions if required; by 1927, there were more extraordinary sessions than ordinary ones. The court's business being conducted in English and French as official languages, and hearings were public unless it was otherwise specified.\nAfter receiving files in a case calculated to lead to a judgment, the judges would exchange their views informally on the salient legal points of the case, and a time limit for producing a judgment would then be set. Then, each judge would write an anonymous summary containing his opinion; the opinions would be circulated among the court for 2 or 3 days before the president drafted a judgment containing a summary of those submitted by individual judges. The court would then agree on the decision that they wished to reach, along with the main points of argument they wished to use. Once this was done, a committee of four, including the president, the registrar and two judges elected by secret ballot, drafted a final judgment, which was then voted on by the entire court. Once a final judgment was set, it was given to the public and the press. Every judgment contained the reasons behind the decision and the judges assenting; dissenting judges were allowed to deliver their own judgment, with all judgments read in open court before the agents of the parties to the dispute. Judgments could not be revised except on the discovery of some fact unknown when the court sat but not if the fact was known but not discussed because of negligence.\nThe court also issued \"advisory opinions\", which arose from Article 14 of the covenant creating the court, which provided, \"The Court may also give an advisory opinion upon any dispute referred to it by the Council or Assembly\". Goodrich interprets that as indicating that the drafters intended a purely advisory capacity for the court, not a binding one. Manley Ottmer Hudson (who sat as a judge) said that an advisory opinion \"was what it purported to be. It is advisory. It is not in any sense a judgement\u00a0... hence it is not in any way binding on any state\", but Charles De Visscher argued that in certain situations, an advisory opinion could be binding on the League of Nations Council and, under certain circumstances, some states; M. Politis agreed, saying that the court's advisory opinions were equivalent to a binding judgment. In 1927, the court appointed a committee to look at this issue, and it reported that \"where there are in fact contending parties, the difference between contentious cases and advisory cases is only nominal\u00a0... so the view that advisory opinions are not binding is more theoretical than real\". In practice, advisory opinions were usually followed, mostly due to the fear that if this \"revolutionary\" international court's decisions were not followed, it would undermine its authority. The court retained the discretion to avoid giving an advisory opinion, which it used on occasion.\nRegistrar and registry.\nOther than the judges, the court also included a registrar and his secretariat, the registry. When the court met for its initial session, opened on 30 January 1922 to allow for the establishment of procedure and the appointment of court officials, the secretary-general of the League of Nations passed an emergency resolution through the Assembly, which designated an official of the league and his staff as the registrar and registry respectively, with the first registrar being \u00c5ke Hammarskj\u00f6ld. The registrar, required to reside within The Hague, was initially tasked with drawing up a plan to create an efficient secretariat, using the smallest number of staff possible and costing as little as possible. As a result, he decided to have each member of the secretariat as the head of a particular department, so the numbers of actual employees could be increased or decreased as necessary without impacting on the actual registry. In 1927, the post of deputy-registrar was created, tasked with dealing with legal research for the court and answering all diplomatic correspondence received by the registry.\nThe first deputy-registrar was Paul Ruegger; after his resignation on 17 August 1928, Julio Lopez Olivan was selected to succeed him. Olivan resigned in 1931 to take over from Hammarskj\u00f6ld as registrar, and was replaced by M. L. J. H. Jorstad.\nThe three principal officers of the registry, after the registrar and deputy-registrar, were the three editing secretaries. The first editing secretary, known as the drafting secretary, was tasked with drafting the court's publications (including the Confidential Bulletin, a document exclusively received by judges of the court) and Sections D and E of the official journal, comprising the legislative clauses conferring jurisdiction on the court and the court's Annual Report. The second editing secretary, known as the oral secretary, was mainly responsible for the oral interpretation and translation of the court's discussions. For public hearings, he was assisted by interpreters, but for private meetings, only he, the registrar and the deputy-registrar were admitted. As a result of this duty, the oral secretary was also tasked with writing Section C of the official journal, which comprised the oral interpretations of court minutes, along with cases and questions put before the court. The third secretary, known as the written secretary, was tasked with the written translations of the court's business, which were \"both numerous and voluminous\". He was assisted in this by the other secretaries and by translators for languages not his own; all secretaries were expected to speak English and French fluently and to have working knowledge of German and Spanish.\nThe registry was split into several departments: the Archives, the Accounting and Establishment, the Printing Service and the Copying Department. The Archives included a distribution service for the court's documents and the legal texts used by the court itself and was described as one of the most difficult departments to organise. The Accounting and Establishment Department dealt with the requests for and allocation of the court's yearly budget, which was drawn up by the registrar, approved by the court and submitted to the League of Nations. The Printing Department, run from a single printing plant in Leiden, was created to allow the circulation of the court's publishings. The Copying Department comprised shorthand, typing and copying services, and included secretaries for the registrar and judges, emergency reporters capable of taking notes down verbatim and copyists; the smallest of the departments, it comprised between 12 and 40 staff depending on the business of the court.\nJurisdiction.\nThe court's jurisdiction was largely optional, but there were some situations in which they had \"compulsory jurisdiction\", and states were required to refer cases to them. That came from three sources: the Optional Clause of the League of Nations, general international conventions and \"special bipartite international treaties\". The Optional Clause was a clause attached to the protocol establishing the court and required all signatories to refer certain classes of dispute to the court, with compulsory judgments resulting. There were approximately 30 international conventions under which the court had similar jurisdiction, including the Treaty of Versailles, the Air Navigation Convention, the Treaty of St. Germain and all mandates signed by the League of Nations. It was also foreseen that there would be clauses inserted in bipartite international treaties, which would allow the referral of disputes to the court; that occurred, with such provisions found in treaties between Czechoslovakia and Austria, and between Czechoslovakia and Poland.\nThroughout its existence, the court widened its jurisdiction as much as possible. Strictly speaking, the court's jurisdiction was only for disputes between states, but it regularly accepted disputes that were between a state and an individual if a second state brought the individual's case to the court. It argued that the second state assertsled its rights, and the cases therefore became one between two states.\nThe proviso that the court was for disputes that could not \"be satisfactorily settled by diplomacy\" never made it require evidence that diplomatic discussions had been attempted before bringing the case. In the Loan Cases, it asserted jurisdiction despite the fact that there was no alleged breach of international law, and it could not be shown that there was any international element to the claim. The court justified itself by saying that the Covenant of the League of Nations allowed it to have jurisdiction in cases over \"the existence of any fact which, if established, would constitute a breach of international obligations\" and argued that since the fact \"may be of any kind\", it had jurisdiction if the dispute is one of municipal law. It had been long established that municipal law may be considered as a side point to a dispute over international law, but the Loan Cases discussed municipal law without the application of any international points.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24961", "revid": "1317526448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24961", "title": "Prince Albert (genital piercing)", "text": "Male genital piercing\nThe Prince Albert (PA) is a penis piercing which extends from the urethra to the underside of the glans. It is one of the most common male genital piercings. The related reverse Prince Albert piercing enters through the urethra and exits through a hole pierced in the top of the glans.\nWhile some piercers may choose to avoid the nerve bundle that runs along the center of the frenulum altogether, others may choose otherwise. The piercing can be centred if the bearer is circumcised. Otherwise, the piercing must be done off-centre so that the surrounding skin can reposition itself.\nProcedure.\nThe piercer usually starts by pushing a metal or glass tube down the urethra, or using their fingers to hold the urethra open. The piercer then pushes the needle through the skin beside the frenulum, guiding it into the receiving tube. The chosen jewellery is pushed through the freshly made hole and secured in place depending on the jewellery used.\nDespite expectations of pain, the Prince Albert piercing is frequently cited to be one of the less painful piercings.\nHealing and potential side effects.\nThe Prince Albert healing time can take from 4 weeks to 6 months. A fresh PA piercing may cause bleeding, swelling and inflammation. In rare cases, it can lead to local infections. Some men find that the dribble caused by the PA when urinating necessitates sitting down to urinate. With practice, some men can control the stream while standing.\nSome PA wearers report it enhances sexual pleasure for both partners. However, others penetrated by males with this piercing report discomfort. PA rings can cause additional discomfort to female partners in cases when the penis comes into contact with the cervix. Sexual partners of those with piercings may experience complications during oral sex such as chipped teeth, choking, foreign bodies getting stuck between the partner's teeth, and mucosal injury to receptive partners.\nAs with many piercings, there is a risk of the jewelry becoming caught on clothing and being pulled or torn out. Very large gauge or heavy jewelry can cause thinning of the tissue between the urethral opening and the healed fistula, resulting in accidental tearing or other complications with sexual experiences. Conversely, extremely thin jewelry can cause the same tearing in what is commonly referred to as the \"cheese cutter effect\", either during sudden torsion or over a long period of wearing, especially if the thin jewelry bears any weight.\nJewelry.\nPrince Albert piercings are typically pierced at either 12 or 10g (2 or 2.5mm) or up to 5mm (4g) or a safe maximum of 6mm (2g). They are often (gradually) stretched soon after, with jewelry within the 8g to 00g (3mm to 10mm) range being the most popular. One of the reasons not to perform the initial piercing at a small diameter (16g or 14g) or otherwise to immediately stretch it to 10g or 8g using a taper is to prevent the 'cheese-cutter effect', although personal preference and individual anatomy also play a role in these decisions.\nFurther stretching to sizes 0 or 00g (8 or 10mm) and larger is not fairly common. This may be due to a lack of jewellery options in the 1g (7mm) size, leaving a large jump between 2g (6mm) and 0g (8mm). If a sufficiently heavy barbell or ring is worn continuously, a mild form of 'auto-stretching' can be observed. This means that stretching to a larger gauge is easier and might not require a taper.. While stretching, it's critical that there is 12\u00a0mm of tissue between the piercing hole and urethra to avoid splitting of the urethra with complications.\nWhile most wearers find that PAs are comfortable to wear and rarely remove them, even during sex, some individuals have found that extremely large or heavy jewelry is uncomfortable to wear for long periods or interferes with the sexual functioning of the penis.\nJewelry suitably worn in a Prince Albert piercing includes the circular barbell, curved barbell, captive bead, segment ring, and the prince's wand. Curved barbells used for PA piercings are worn such that one ball sits on the lower side of the penis and the other ball sits at the urethral opening. This type of jewelry prevents discomfort that can come from larger jewelry moving around during daily wear.\nHistory and culture.\nThe origin of this piercing is unknown. Genital piercings appeared in the \"Kama Sutra\" as a way of enhancing sexual pleasure.\nIn modern times, the Prince Albert piercing was popularized by Jim Ward in the early 1970s. In West Hollywood, Ward met Richard Simonton (aka Doug Malloy) and Fakir Musafar. Malloy published a pamphlet in which he concocted fanciful histories of genital piercings in particular. These apocryphal tales\u2014which included the notion that Albert, the Prince Consort invented the piercing that shares his name in order to tame the appearance of his large penis in tight trousers\u2014are widely circulated as urban legend. No historical proof of their veracity has been located independent of Malloy's assertions.\nLike many other male genital piercings, it had a history of practice in gay male subculture in the twentieth century. It became more prominently known when body piercing expanded in the late 1970s and was gradually embraced by popular culture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24962", "revid": "14921515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24962", "title": "Paint Your Wagon (musical)", "text": "Paint Your Wagon is a Broadway musical comedy, with book and lyrics by Alan J. Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe. The story centers on a miner and his daughter and follows the lives and loves of the people in a mining camp in Gold Rush-era California. Popular songs from the show included \"Wand'rin' Star\", \"I Talk to the Trees\", and \"They Call the Wind Maria\".\nThe musical ran on Broadway in 1951 and in the West End in 1953. In 1969, the film version, also titled \"Paint Your Wagon,\" was released. It had a highly revised plot and some new songs composed by Lerner and Andr\u00e9 Previn.\nSynopsis.\nIn the California Wilderness in May 1853, a crusty old miner, Ben Rumson, is conducting a makeshift funeral for a friend. Meanwhile, his 16-year-old daughter Jennifer discovers gold dust. Ben claims the land, and prospectors start flocking to the brand new town of Rumson (\"I'm On My Way\"). Two months later Rumson has a population of 400, all of whom are men except for Jennifer. Prospector Jake Whippany is waiting to save enough money to send for Cherry and her Fandango girls (\"Rumson\"), while Jennifer senses the tension building in town (\"What's Going On Here?\"). Julio Valveras, a handsome young miner forced to live and work outside of town because he is Mexican, comes to town with dirty laundry and runs into Jennifer, who volunteers to do his laundry. They also talk to each other (\"I Talk to the Trees\"). Steve Bulmarck and the other men ponder the lonely nomadic life they lead in the song \"They Call the Wind Maria\".\nTwo months later the men want Ben to send Jennifer away, and he wishes her mother was still alive to help him (\"I Still See Elisa\"). Jennifer is in love with Julio (\"How Can I Wait?\"), and when Ben sees Jennifer dancing with Julio's clothes, he decides to send her East on the next stage. Jacob Woodling, a Mormon man with two wives, Sarah and Elizabeth, arrives in Rumson where the men demand Jacob sell one of his wives. To his surprise, Ben finds himself wooing Elizabeth (\"In Between\") and wins her for $800 (\"Whoop-Ti-Yay\"). Jennifer is disgusted by her father's actions and runs away, telling Julio that she will be reunited with him in a year's time (\"Cari\u00f1o M\u00edo\u201d). Cherry and her Fandango girls arrive (\"There's a Coach Comin' In\"). Julio learns his claim is running dry which means he has to move on to make a living and that he will not be there to greet Jennifer when she returns.\nA year later in October, the miners celebrate the high times in Rumson now that the Fandango girls are around (\"Hand Me Down That Can o' Beans\"). Edgar Crocker, a miner who has saved his money, falls for Elizabeth and she responds, although Ben does not notice since he thinks Raymond Janney is in love with her (he is). Another miner, Mike Mooney, tells Julio about a lake that has gold dust on the bottom and he considers looking for it (\"Another Autumn\"). Jennifer returns in December, having learned civilized ways back East (\"All for Him\"). Ben tells his daughter that he will soon be moving on since he was not meant to stay in one place for long (\"Wand'rin' Star\"). The next day as Cherry and the girls are packing to leave they tell her about Julio leaving to find the lake with a bottom of gold. Raymond Janney offers to buy Elizabeth from Ben for $3,000, but she runs off with Edgar Crocker.\nWord comes of another strike 40 miles south of Rumson and the rest of the town packs up to leave except for Jennifer, who is waiting for Julio to return, and Ben, who suddenly realizes that Rumson is indeed his town. Late in April, Julio appears, a broken man. Ben welcomes him and Julio is amazed to see Jennifer is there. As they move toward each other, the wagons filled with people move on.\nSongs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProductions.\nThe musical had a pre-Broadway try-out at the Shubert Theater in Philadelphia opening on September 17, 1951. It opened on Broadway at the Shubert Theatre on November 12, 1951, and closed on July 19, 1952, after 289 performances. The production was directed by Daniel Mann, set design by Oliver Smith, costume design by Motley, lighting design by Peggy Clark, music for dances arranged by Trude Rittmann, with dances and musical ensembles by Agnes de Mille set to the orchestrations of Ted Royal.\nIt starred James Barton (as Ben Rumson), Olga San Juan (Jennifer Rumson), Tony Bavaar (Julio Valveras), Gemze de Lappe (Yvonne Sorel), James Mitchell (Pete Billings), Kay Medford (Cherry), and Marijane Maricle (Elizabeth Woodling). Burl Ives and Eddie Dowling later took over the role of Ben Rumson, and Ann Crowley was a replacement for Jennifer. De Mille later restaged the dances as a stand-alone ballet, \"Gold Rush\".\nThe West End production opened on February 11, 1953 at Her Majesty's Theatre and ran for 477 performances. It starred real life father and daughter Bobby Howes and Sally Ann Howes. The Australian production opened on November 27, 1954 at Her Majesty's Theatre in Melbourne, with Alec Kellaway as Ben.\nA new production, with a revised libretto by David Rambo, was premiered at the Brentwood Theatre, produced by the Geffen Playhouse in association with Christopher Allen, D. Constantine Conte, and Larry Spellman in Los Angeles, California, from November 23, 2004, to January 9, 2005. This new world premiere adaptation was directed by Gilbert Cates and choreographed by Kay Cole. Design team included musical director Steve Orich, who provided arrangements and orchestrations. The design team featured Daniel Ionazzi (scenic and lighting), David Kay Mickeleson (costume) and Phil Allen (sound). The cast included Thomas F. Wilson as Ben Rumson, Jessica Rush as his daughter Jennifer and Sharon Lawrence as Lily. One change from the original was \"They Call the Wind Maria\" staged as an ensemble number instead of a showcase solo.\nA subsequent production was produced by the Pioneer Theatre Company in Salt Lake City, Utah and ran from September 28, 2007, through October 13, 2007. The director was Charles Morey and choreographer Patti D'Beck, with a cast of nearly 30.\nThe musical was presented in an Encores! staged concert production at New York City Center in March 2015. The production was directed by Marc Bruni, and starred Keith Carradine as Ben Rumson, Alexandra Socha as Jennifer and Justin Guarini as Julio Valveras.\nReception.\nThe New York Times was highly complimentary: \u201cFrederick Loewe\u2019s score\u2026is superb. Developing the theme of life in a gold-mining town of 1853, Mr. Loewe has composed a whole album of roaring ballads and romantic melodies that are tonic and original, and the most accomplished music Broadway has fallen heir to since \u2018The King and I\u2019 and \u2018Guys and Dolls\u2019\u2026.Agnes de Mille has composed and directed some of her most pungent ballets. She has an extraordinary enthusiasm for period ballet, but since she has a sense of humor she is not pedantic about it. Without impairing her taste, she retains the common touch: she enjoys the ancient games of flirtation, courtship and carnival\u2026.As a whole \u2018Paint Your Wagon\u2019 is so heartily enjoyable that a job of loosening and shortening the second act might still be worth attempting. But that could hardly improve the performance of one of the most likable casts recently assembled to entertain a Broadway congregation. James Barton is the greatest of the performers\u2026.he gives one of those humorous, relaxed, lovable and masterful performances that are peculiar to actors with a long and varied experience. Without strutting or hamming, he owns the stage.\u201d\nIn 2010, Steven Suskin wrote, \"The interwoven use of ballet that worked so well in the highlands was less effective on the prairies, and the subject matter was harsh and cold. In spite of the show's failure, Loewe displayed ... an uncanny ability to write scores indigenous to the time and locale of the characters and plots.\"\nTony Bavaar (winner)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24965", "revid": "3619990", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24965", "title": "Pacific Overtures", "text": "1976 musical by Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman\nPacific Overtures is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim, and a book by John Weidman, with \"additional material by\" Hugh Wheeler.\nSet in nineteenth-century Japan, it tells the story of the country's westernization starting in 1853, when American ships forcibly opened it to the rest of the world. The story is told from the point of view of the Japanese, and focuses in particular on the lives of two friends who are caught in the change.\nSondheim wrote the score in a quasi-Japanese style of parallel 4ths and no leading-tone. He did not use the pentatonic scale; the 4th degree of the major scale is represented from the opening number through the finale, as Sondheim found just five pitches too limiting. The music contrasts Japanese contemplation (\"There Is No Other Way\") with Western ingenuousness (\"Please Hello\"), while over the course of the 127 years Western harmonies, tonality, and even lyrics are infused into the score. The score is generally considered to be one of Sondheim's most ambitious and sophisticated efforts.\nThe original Broadway production of \"Pacific Overtures\" in 1976 was staged in Kabuki style, with men playing women's parts and set changes made in full view of the audience by black-clad stagehands. It opened to mixed reviews and closed after six months, despite being nominated for ten Tony Awards.\nGiven its specific casting and production demands, \"Pacific Overtures\" remains one of Stephen Sondheim's least-performed musicals. The show is occasionally staged by opera companies. The cast requires an abundance of male Asian actors who must play male and female parts. As written, women join the ensemble for only half of the last song; all other principal female roles are played by men, as was traditional in Kabuki theatre. In the original production the five female cast members appeared throughout the show in small roles and as stagehands, and more recent productions, including the 2004 Broadway revival, did away with the device of men playing the majority of the women's roles. \nThe most recent revival in 2017 at Classic Stage Company, helmed by John Doyle and starring George Takei as The Reciter, featured a cast of only 10 people, 8 men and 2 women. This also featured a revised book by John Weidman that had a running time of 90 minutes (as compared to the previous 2 hour 30 minute original run time).\nTitle.\nThe title of the work is drawn directly from text in a letter from Admiral Perry addressed to the Emperor dated July 7, 1853:\n\"Many of the large ships-of-war destined to visit Japan have not yet arrived in these seas, though they are hourly expected; and the undersigned, as an evidence of his friendly intentions, has brought but four of the smaller ones, designing, should it become necessary, to return to Edo in the ensuing spring with a much larger force. But it is expected that the government of your imperial majesty will render such return unnecessary, by acceding at once to the very reasonable and \"pacific overtures\" contained in the President's letter, and which will be further explained by the undersigned on the first fitting occasion.\"\nIn addition to playing on the musical term \"overture\" and the geographical reference to the Pacific Ocean there is also the irony, revealed as the story unfolds, that these \"pacific overtures\" to initiate commercial exploitation of the Pacific nation were backed by a none too subtle threat of force.\nProductions.\n\"Pacific Overtures\" previewed in Boston and ran at The Kennedy Center for a month before opening on Broadway at the Winter Garden Theatre on January 11, 1976. It closed after 193 performances on June 27, 1976. Directed by Harold Prince, the choreography was by Patricia Birch, scenic design by Boris Aronson, costume design by Florence Klotz, and lighting design by Tharon Musser. The original cast recording was released originally by RCA Records and later on CD. This production was nominated for 10 Tony Awards, and won Best Scenic Design (Boris Aronson) and Best Costume Design (Florence Klotz). The original Broadway production was filmed and broadcast on Japanese television in 1976.\nMako later directed and reprised his role of the Reciter in a 1979 production at the East West Players in Los Angeles. The production featured multiple members of the original Broadway cast reprising their roles, including Sab Shimono, Ernest Harada, and Alvin Ing, with Soon-tek Oh taking on the role of Kayama. A young John Lone performed in the production as Commodore Perry. \nThe musical was produced again by East West Players in 1998 as the inaugural performance at the David Henry Hwang Theater. East West Players staged Pacific Overtures for a third time in November 2024, led by Jon Jon Briones and Gedde Watanabe, who was part of the original Broadway production.\nAn off-Broadway production ran at the Promenade Theatre from October 25, 1984 for 109 performances, transferring from an earlier production at the York Theatre Company. Directed by Fran Soeder with choreography by Janet Watson, the cast featured Ernest Abuba and Kevin Gray.\nThe European premiere was directed by Howard Lloyd-Lewis (Library Theatre, Manchester) at Wythenshawe Forum in 1986 with choreography by Paul Kerryson who subsequently directed the show in 1993 at Leicester Haymarket Theatre. Both productions featured Mitch Sebastian in the role of Commodore Perry.\nA production was mounted in London by the English National Opera in 1987. The production was recorded in its entirety on CD, preserving nearly the entire libretto as well as the score. Unlike previous productions, this production featured a cast consisting primarily of Caucasian actors and opera singers.\nA critically acclaimed 2001 Chicago Shakespeare Theater production, directed by Gary Griffin, transferred to the West End Donmar Warehouse, where it ran from June 30, 2003 until September 6, 2003 and received the 2004 Olivier Award for Outstanding Musical Production.\nIn 2002 the New National Theatre of Tokyo presented two limited engagements of their production, which was performed in Japanese with English supertitles. The production ran at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center from July 9, 2002 through July 13, and then at the Eisenhower Theater, Kennedy Center, from September 3, 2002, through September 8.\nA Broadway revival by the Roundabout Theatre Company (an English-language mounting of the previous New National Theatre of Tokyo production) ran at Studio 54 from December 2, 2004, to January 30, 2005, directed by Amon Miyamoto and starring BD Wong as the Narrator and several members of the original cast. A new Broadway recording, with new (reduced) orchestrations by Jonathan Tunick was released by PS Classics, with additional material not included on the original cast album. The production was nominated for four Tony Awards, including Best Revival of a Musical. The orchestrations were \"scaled back\" for a 7-piece orchestra. \"Variety\" noted that \"the heavy use of traditional lutes and percussion instruments like wood blocks, chimes and drums showcases the craftsmanship behind this distinctly Japanese-flavored score.\"\nClassic Stage Company revived \"Pacific Overtures\" in 2017 for a limited Off-Broadway run, with a new abridged book by John Weidman, new orchestrations by Jonathan Tunick, directed by John Doyle, and starring George Takei as the Reciter. The production began previews April 6, 2017; after opening May 4, the show's run was twice extended, eventually closing June 18. Staged in one act, with a 10-member cast in modern-dress, the production excised both \"Chrysanthemum Tea\" and the instrumental \"Lion Dance\". The production earned recognition among the year's \"New York Times\" Critic's Picks, the Top 5 NY Theater Productions in \"Variety\", and Top 10 NY Theater Productions in \"Hollywood Reporter\". The show earned nominations from the Drama Desk, Drama League, Outer Critics Circle, and Lucille Lortel Awards.\nIn 2023 a new production debuted in Japan as a co-production between the Umeda Arts Theater in Osaka and the Menier Chocolate Factory in London. Directed by Matthew White, the production uses Sondheim and Weidman's revisions from 2017. The production played March 8-29 at the Nissay Theatre in Tokyo, and then April 8-16 at the Umeda Arts Theater. The all-Japanese cast included Koji Yamamoto and Yuya Matsushita double cast as the Reciter, Eiji Wentz as Manjiro, and Hikaru Asami as the Shogun and Madam. The production, with a London-based cast including Takur\u014d \u014cno as Kayama and Masashi Fujimoto, played at the Menier Chocolate Factory from November 25, 2023 to February 24, 2024.\nPlot summary.\nConceived as a Japanese playwright's version of an American musical about American influences on Japan, \"Pacific Overtures\" opens in July 1853. As traditional Japanese music plays, the Reciter is revealed on stage. Since foreigners were expelled from the island empire two hundred and fifty years previously, explains the Reciter, elsewhere wars are fought and machines are rumbling, but in Nippon they plant rice, exchange bows and enjoy peace and serenity, and there has been nothing to threaten the changeless cycle of their days (\"The Advantages of Floating in the Middle of the Sea\"). But President Millard Fillmore, determined to open up trade with Japan, has sent Commodore Matthew C. Perry across the Pacific.\nTo the consternation of Lord Abe and the Shogun's other Councillors, the stirrings of trouble begin with the appearance of Manjiro, a fisherman who had been lost at sea and rescued by Americans. He has returned to Japan and now attempts to warn the authorities of the approaching warships, but is instead arrested for consorting with foreigners. A minor samurai, Kayama Yezaemon, is appointed Prefect of Police at Uraga to drive the Americans away - news which leaves his wife Tamate grief-stricken, since Kayama will certainly fail and both will then have to commit \"seppuku\". As he leaves, she expresses her feelings in dance as two Observers describe the scene and sing her thoughts and words (\"There Is No Other Way\"). As a Fisherman, a Thief, and other locals relate the sight of the \"Four Black Dragons\" roaring through the sea, an extravagant Oriental caricature of the \"USS Powhatan\" pulls into harbor. Kayama is sent out in a boat to meet with the Americans but he is laughed at and rejected as not being important enough. He enlists the aid of Manjiro, the only man in Japan who has dealt with Americans; disguised as a great lord and speaking arrogantly, Manjiro is able to get an answer from them: Commodore Perry must meet the Shogun within six days or else he will shell the city. Facing this ultimatum, the Shogun refuses to commit himself to an answer and takes to his bed. Exasperated by his indecision and continued procrastination, his Mother, with elaborate courtesy, slowly poisons him. (\"Chrysanthemum Tea\").\nKayama devises a plan by which the Americans can be received without technically setting foot on Japanese soil, thanks to a covering of tatami mats and a raised Treaty House in a small cove in Kanagawa, for which he is made Governor of Uraga. He and Manjiro set off for Uraga, forging a bond of friendship through the exchange of \"Poems\". Kayama has saved Japan, but it is too late to save Tamate: when Kayama arrives at his home, he finds that she is dead, having committed \"seppuku\" after having received no news of Kayama for many days. Already events are moving beyond the control of the old order: the two men pass a Madam instructing her inexperienced Oiran girls in the art of seduction as they prepare for the arrival of the foreign devils (\"Welcome to Kanagawa\").\nCommodore Perry and his men disembark and, on their \"March to the Treaty House\", demonstrate their goodwill by offering such gifts as two bags of Irish potatoes and a copy of Owen's \"Geology of Minnesota\", gifts that make the Nipponese reciprocal gifts seem insignificant. The negotiations themselves are observed through the memories of three who were there: a warrior hidden beneath the floor of the Treaty House who could hear the debates, a young boy who could see the action from his perch in the tree outside, and the boy as an old man recalling that without \"Someone In a Tree\", a silent watcher, history is incomplete. Initially, it seems as if Kayama and the Nipponese have won; the Americans depart in peace. But the barbarian figure of Commodore Perry leaps out to perform a traditional Kabuki \"Lion Dance\", which ends as a strutting, triumphalist, all-American cakewalk.\nThe child emperor (portrayed by a puppet manipulated by his advisors) reacts with pleasure to the departure of the Americans, promoting Lord Abe to Shogun, confirming Kayama as Governor of Uraga and raising Manjiro to the rank of Samurai. The crisis appears to have passed, but to the displeasure of Lord Abe the Americans return to request formal trading arrangements. To the tune of a Sousa march, an American ambassador bids \"Please Hello\" to Japan and is followed by a Gilbertian British ambassador, a clog-dancing Dutchman, a gloomy Russian and a dandified Frenchman all vying for access to Japan's markets. With the appearance of this new group of westerners, the faction of the Lords of the South grow restless. They send a politically charged gift to the Emperor, a storyteller who tells a vivid, allegorical tale of a brave young emperor who frees himself from his cowardly Shogun.\nFifteen years pass as Kayama and Manjiro dress themselves for tea. As Manjiro continues to dress in traditional robes for the tea ceremony, Kayama gradually adopts the manners, culture and dress of the newcomers, proudly displaying a new pocket watch, cutaway coat and \"A Bowler Hat\". Although Kayama, as stated in his reports to the Shogun, manages to reach an \"understanding\" with the Western merchants and diplomats, tensions abound between the Japanese and the \"barbarians\". Three British sailors on shore leave mistake the daughter of a samurai for a geisha and climb over the garden wall to speak to her. Though their approach is initially gentle (\"Pretty Lady\"), they grow more persistent to the point where they offer her money; the girl cries for help and her father kills one of the confused sailors while the others flee. Kayama and Abe travel to the Emperor's court discussing the situation and its political repercussions. While on the road, their party is attacked by cloaked assassins sent by the Lords of the South and Abe is assassinated. Most of the assassins are cut down by Abe's bodyguard, but he himself is killed by the sole remaining assassin. Kayama is horrified to discover that the remaining assassin is his former friend Manjiro; they fight and Kayama is killed.\nIn the ensuing turmoil, the puppet Emperor seizes real power and vows that Japan will modernize itself. As the country moves from one innovation to the \"Next!\", the Imperial robes are removed layer by layer to show the Reciter in 19th century Western military dress. Contemporary Japan - the country of Toyota, Seiko, air and water pollution and market domination - assembles itself around him and its accomplishments are extolled. \"Nippon. The Floating Kingdom. There was a time when foreigners were not welcome here. But that was long ago...\" says the Reciter, now in modern dress, \"Welcome to Japan.\"\nOriginal Broadway cast \u2014 characters.\nProscenium Servants, Sailors and Townspeople: Kenneth S. Eiland, Timm Fujii, Joey Ginza, Patrick Kinser-Lau, Diane Lam, Tony Marinyo, Kevin Maung, Kim Miyori, Dingo Secretario, Freda Foh Shen, Mark Hsu Seyers, Gedde Watanabe, Leslie Watanabe, Ricardo Tobia\n1984 Off-Broadway revival cast \u2014 characters.\nProscenium Servants: Gerri Igarashi, Gayln Kong, Diane Lam, Christine Toy\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCritical response and analysis.\n\"Someone in a Tree\", where two witnesses describe negotiations between the Japanese and Americans, was Sondheim's favorite song out of everything he had written. \"A Bowler Hat\" presents the show's theme, as a samurai gradually becomes more Westernized as he progressively adopts the habits and affectations of the foreigners he is meant to supervise. \u201cPretty Lady\u201d is a contrapuntal trio of three British sailors who have mistaken a young girl for a geisha and are attempting to woo her. This is, perhaps, the musical fusion highlight of the show as the orchestra and lays descending parallel 4ths and the singers use a counterpoint form established during the Western Renaissance; again the chord progression is often IV to I, again eschewing Pentatonics.\n\"The New York Times\" review of the original 1976 production said \"The lyrics are totally Western and\u2014as is the custom with Mr. Sondheim\u2014devilish, wittily and delightfully clever. Mr. Sondheim is the most remarkable man in the Broadway musical today\u2014and here he shows it victoriously ... Mr. Prince's staging uses all the familiar Kabuki tricks\u2014often with voices screeching in the air like lonely sea birds\u2014and stylizations with screens and things, and stagehands all masked in black to make them invisible to the audience. Like choreography, the direction is designed to meld Kabuki with Western forms ... the attempt is so bold and the achievement so fascinating, that its obvious faults demand to be overlooked. It tries to soar\u2014sometimes it only floats, sometimes it actually sinks\u2014but it tries to soar. And the music and lyrics are as pretty and as well-formed as a bonsai tree. \"Pacific Overtures\" is very, very different.\"\nWalter Kerr's article in \"The New York Times\" on the original 1976 production said \"But no amount of performing, or of incidental charm, can salvage \"Pacific Overtures\". The occasion is essentially dull and immobile because we are never properly placed in it, drawn neither East nor West, given no specific emotional or cultural bearings.\" Ruth Mitchell, assistant to Mr. Prince, said in an interview with WPIX that a sense of not belonging was intentional as that was the very point of the show.\nFrank Rich, reviewing the 1984 revival for \"The New York Times\" stated that \"the show attempts an ironic marriage of Broadway and Oriental idioms in its staging, its storytelling techniques and, most of all, in its haunting Stephen Sondheim songs. It's a shotgun marriage, to be sure - with results that are variously sophisticated and simplistic, beautiful and vulgar. But if \"Pacific Overtures\" is never going to be anyone's favorite Sondheim musical, it is a far more forceful and enjoyable evening at the Promenade than it was eight years ago at the Winter Garden...Many of the songs are brilliant, self-contained playlets. In \"Four Black Dragons\" various peasants describe the arrival of the American ships with escalating panic, until finally the nightmarish event does seem to be, as claimed, \"the end of the world\" ... 'Someone in a Tree\"',\" is a compact \"Rashomon\" \u2014 and as fine as anything Mr. Sondheim has written ...The single Act II triumph, 'Bowler Hat', could well be a V. S. Naipaul tale set to music and illustrated with spare Japanese brushstrokes ... 'Bowler Hat' delivers the point of \"Pacific Overtures\" so artfully that the rest of Act II seems superfluous.\"\nThe 2004 production was not as well received. It was based on a critically praised Japanese language production by director Amon Miyamoto. Ben Brantley, reviewing for \"The New York Times\", wrote: \"Now Mr. Miyamoto and \"Pacific Overtures\" have returned with an English-speaking, predominantly Asian-American cast, which makes distracting supertitles unnecessary. The show's sets, costumes and governing concept remain more or less the same. Yet unlike the New National Theater of Tokyo production, which was remarkable for its conviction and cohesiveness, this latest incarnation from the Roundabout Theater Company has the bleary, disoriented quality of someone suffering from jet lag after a sleepless trans-Pacific flight. Something has definitely been lost in the retranslation.\" Of the cast, Brantley wrote, \"Even as they sing sweetly and smile engagingly, they appear to be asking themselves, 'What am I doing here?'\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24967", "revid": "47636664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24967", "title": "Paradoxical intention", "text": "Psychotherapeutic method\nParadoxical intention (PI) is a psychotherapeutic technique used to treat recursive anxiety by repeatedly rehearsing the anxiety-inducing pattern of thought or behaviour, often with exaggeration and humor. Paradoxical intention has been shown to be effective in treating psychosomatic illnesses such as chronic insomnia, public speaking phobias, etc. by making patients do the opposite of their hyper-intended goal, hindering their ability to perform the activity.\nThe term.\nDr. Viktor Frankl, the founder of Logotherapy, coined the term in 1939 and advocated for its use by patients with severe anxiety disorders. Though therapists had been utilizing paradoxical treatments for a long time before the term was coined. Later on paradoxical intention was incorporated into Logotherapy.\nTechnique.\nWithin the framework of Logotherapy, two techniques have been developed: 'paradoxical intention' and 'dereflection.'\nMost anxious behaviours are a result of performance anxiety due to the inability to perform an action, leading to a vicious circle of anticipatory anxiety. Paradoxical intention teaches the patient to distance themselves from the action, gain control over it and eventually, bring about its removal. It attempts to break this circle by replacing the pathogenic fear with a paradoxical wish. Furthermore, by learning to appreciate the humour in their exaggerated responses, individuals observe the non-catastrophic consequences of their fear-inducing stimuli first-hand, accepting the unlikelihood of the feared anxiety-producing outcome occurring. Paradoxical intention is mainly employed to combat discomfort associated with internal causes while fear of external stimuli can still be treated through conventional treatments such as systematic desensitisation, cognitive behavioural therapy, etc. For example, if the patient has a fear of public speaking, paradoxical intention would be employed only if the feelings of apprehension stem from an internal source, e.g. having an increased heart rate leading to a heart attack and not due to external factors such as the size of the crowd, their judgement, etc. In this case, the therapist would prescribe the individual to present to the public while focusing on the most salient aspect of their fear \u2013 in this case, trying to increase heart rate.\nFor phobic and obsessive compulsion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The patient is encouraged to do, or to wish to happen, the very things he fears (the former applying to the phobic patient, the latter to the obsessive-compulsive)\"\u2014\u200a\nFor insomnia.\nParadoxical intention has been shown as an effective therapy in the treatment of chronic insomnia. It attempts to eradicate the anxiety associated with the inability to sleep by instructing patients to do the opposite and attempt to stay awake. By asking patients to keep their eyes open, while lying comfortably in a dark room without sleeping, they are taught to understand the non-disastrous implications of staying awake and thus, the anxiety associated with it diminishes. Thereby in this manner, by eliminating voluntary sleep effort, paradoxical intention minimises sleep performance anxiety, promoting rapid sleep onset. Similarly, it is also suggested that by diverting attention from sleep performance, it allows for cognitive de-arousal leading to relaxation and sleep.\nA study investigating the effects of paradoxical intention on sleep effort, sleep anxiety and objective and subjective sleep showed that relative to control conditions, participants allocated to PI displayed noteworthy reductions in sleep effort and sleep performance anxiety. It has also been found that subjectively measured sleep onset latency [SOL] (time taken to fall asleep) is significantly lower in the PI conditions, with SOL change amongst PI participants being strongly associated with sleep effort change. This shows that sleep effort and sleep anxiety are integral mechanisms overridden by PI to achieve normal sleep functions. A 1984 study analysing cases of paradoxical intention as a treatment showed that PI rapidly reduced SOLs and was also successful at maintaining sleep onset and maximising total sleep time.\nA 2021 meta-analysis conducted a systematic review of randomised control trials and experimental studies comparing PI for insomnia to passive and active comparators. Results showed that relative to passive comparators, PI showed radical improvements in several key insomnia symptoms with moderate improvements as compared to active comparators. It also promoted decreased sleep-related performance anxiety. Additionally, a 2018 meta-analysis contrasted cognitive and behavioural interventions with passive comparators and when compared to recent relations between PI and passive comparators, it is found that the effects of PI on SOL are larger.\nRecursive anxiety.\nResearch has also configured links between the effectiveness of paradoxical intention as a treatment towards recursive anxiety. Patients whose phobias originate from recursive anxiety have shown greater improvement with PI related treatments. This occurs due to paradoxical intention overcoming performance anxiety and facilitating natural sleep, unlike situations where external factors e.g. noise, temperature, etc. affect sleeping ability. Recursive anxiety is also a result of the anticipatory fear that anxiety causes a lack of self-control leading to public embarrassment and judgement. Therefore, recursive anxiety leads to individuals attempting to control their cognitive environment by adjusting thoughts and behaviour to minimize stimuli inhibiting calmness.\nDereflection.\nDereflection is the technique of diverting the client's attention away from their symptoms, as hyper-reflection can lead to inaction.\nDereflection has been developed for people with sexual disorders, in which the patient's desire for sexual pleasure becomes an obstruction to achieving it. The therapist discourages intercourse and breaks the cycle of desire, striving, and disappointment.\nCriticisms.\nRelative effectiveness.\nThe effectiveness of paradoxical intention as a substantial treatment for insomnia has been challenged. In fact, research indicates that stimulus control therapies and sleep restriction therapies have been proven to be more effective in treating insomnia.\nThe current understanding of paradoxical intention with regards to sleep states that it alleviates the patient's \u201ceffort associated with sleep\u201d. Espie and Lindsay argue that instead of eradicating the anxiety, it may simply be redirected towards the \u201ceffort to stay awake\u201d. Espie says that since the objective of sleep therapy is to view sleep as an involuntary physiological process that occurs passively, trying to put it under voluntary control by instructing patients to deliberately stay awake could be counterintuitive.\nLack of reliable and objective research.\nTurner and Ascher say that paradoxical intention has not gained complete acceptance in behaviour therapy because the research supporting its clinical efficacy is mainly limited to uncontrolled case studies.\nSome have argued that studies have also shown a lack of evidence directly gleaned from the clients in order to explain the effectiveness of PI approaches, rendering the data unreliable, and that the insomniac self-reports are unreliable as participants may provide socially desirable answers.\nThereby, paradoxical intention is viewed as a last case resort in the event of the ineffectiveness of other relaxation-desensitisation programs."}
{"id": "24968", "revid": "30820329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24968", "title": "Peter Stuyvesant", "text": "Dutch colonial administrator (1610\u20131672)\nPeter Stuyvesant (c.\u20091610 \u2013 August 1672) was a Dutch colonial administrator who served as the director-general of New Netherland from 1647 to 1664, when the colony was provisionally ceded to the Kingdom of England. He was a major figure in the history of New York City and his name has been given to various landmarks and points of interest throughout the city (e.g. Stuyvesant High School, Stuyvesant Town, Bedford\u2013Stuyvesant neighborhood, etc.).\nStuyvesant's accomplishments as director-general of New Netherland included a great expansion for the settlement of New Amsterdam beyond the southern tip of Manhattan. Among the projects built by Stuyvesant's administration were the protective wall on Wall Street, the canal that became Broad Street, and Broadway. Stuyvesant, himself a member of the Dutch Reformed Church, opposed religious pluralism and came into conflict with Lutherans, Jews, Roman Catholics, and Quakers as they attempted to build places of worship in the city and practice their faiths.\nEarly life.\nPeter Stuyvesant was born around 1610 in Peperga or Scherpenzeel, Friesland, in the Netherlands, to Balthasar Stuyvesant, a Reformed Calvinist minister, and Margaretha Hardenstein. He grew up in Peperga, Scherpenzeel, and Berlikum. There is previously an erroneous report that Stuyvesant was born in Scherpenzeel in 1592 or 1602. However, his father (Balthazar Stuyvesant) only became a pastor in the Frisian Scherpenzeel between 1612 and 1619 and was previously in Peperga, so Peperga is the likely birthplace of Peter.\nCareer.\nAt the age of 20, Stuyvesant went to the University of Franeker, where he studied languages and philosophy, but several years later he was expelled from the school after he seduced the daughter of his landlord. He was then sent to Amsterdam by his father, where Stuyvesant \u2013 now using the Latinized version of his first name, \"Petrus\", to indicate that he had university schooling \u2013 joined the Dutch West India Company (GWC). In 1630, the company assigned him to be their commercial agent on a small island just off of Brazil, Fernando de Noronha, and then five years later transferred him to the nearby Brazilian state of Pernambuco. In 1638, he was moved again, this time to the colony of Cura\u00e7ao, the main Dutch naval base in the West Indies, where, just four years later, aged 30, he became the acting governor of that colony, as well as Aruba and Bonaire, a position he held until 1644.\nIn April 1644, he coordinated and led an attack on the island of Saint Martin, which the Spanish had taken from the Dutch. Stuyvesant thought they had few men. When Stuyvesant raised the Dutch flag, the Spanish fired. Stuyvesant was injured in the leg, which required amputation, and the battle was lost.\nStuyvesant returned to the Netherlands for convalescence, where his right leg was replaced with a wooden peg. Stuyvesant was given the nicknames \"Peg Leg Pete\" and \"Old Silver Nails\" because he used a wooden stick studded with silver nails as a prosthesis. The West India Company saw the loss of Stuyvesant's leg as a \"Roman\" sacrifice, while Stuyvesant himself saw the fact that he did not die from his injury as a sign that God was saving him to do great things. A year later, in May 1645, he was selected by the company to replace Willem Kieft as Director-General of the New Netherland colony, including New Amsterdam, the site of present-day New York City.\nNew Netherland.\nStuyvesant had to wait for his appointment to be confirmed by the Dutch States-General. During that time he married Judith Bayard, who was the daughter of a Huguenot minister and hailed from Breda. Together, they left Amsterdam in December 1646 and, after stopping at Cura\u00e7ao, arrived in New Amsterdam by May 1647.\nKieft's incompetence had left the colony in terrible condition. Only a small number of villages remained after the brutal wars launched by his administration, and many of their inhabitants had given up and returned to Europe, leaving only 250 to 300 men able to carry arms. Kieft himself had obtained a fortune of over 4,000 guilders without explanation and spent much of it to feed his growing alcoholism.\nCertain that righting New Netherland was the work which God had saved him for, Stuyvesant told its remaining people \"I shall govern you as a father his children,\" and began the task of rebuilding the physical and moral state of the colony.\nIn September 1647 he appointed the Nine Men, an advisory council composed of representatives of the colonists, to help rebuild relationships with them, temper his rule with their guidance, and restore New Netherland to the kind of well-run place that the Dutch preferred.\nIn 1648 a conflict began between him and Brant Aertzsz van Slechtenhorst, the commissary of the patroonship Rensselaerwijck, which surrounded Fort Orange (present-day Albany). Stuyvesant claimed he had power over Rensselaerwijck, despite special privileges granted to Kiliaen van Rensselaer in the patroonship regulations of 1629. When Van Slechtenhorst refused, Stuyvesant sent a group of soldiers to enforce his orders. The controversy that followed resulted in the founding of the new settlement, Beverwijck.\nIn an effort to remedy the neglect on the town, previously under Kieft's administration, Stuyvesant took measures to improve the appearance and safety of the town, with numerous regulations to achieve this end that were routinely issued by his office. Building codes were established for houses and other structures, including fences in an effort to control the widespread problem of wandering livestock about the town. As the housing and other structures in New Amsterdam were built almost entirely from wood and stood very close together the possibility of a spreading fire was very great. As governor, Stuyvensant forbid the construction of wooden chimneys, and imposed a tax of a beaver skin, or its trade equivalent, on every householder to finance the cost of two hundred and fifty leather fire buckets and hooks and ladders, which he had sent from Holland. He also established a system of fire wardens and a volunteer fire watch that patrolled the streets to keep an eye on any fire, or potential fire, from nine o'clock in the evening until the morning drum-beat. As such Stuyvesant became the organizer and head of the first volunteer firemen in America\nExternal threats.\nThe colony of New Netherland had severe external problems. The population was too small and contentious, and the Company provided little military support. The most serious was the economic rivalry with England regarding trade. Secondarily there were small scale military conflicts with neighboring Indian tribes, involving fights between mobile bands on the one hand, and scattered small Dutch outposts on the other. With a large area and limited population, defense was a major challenge. Stuyvesant's greatest success came in dealing with the Delaware River colony of New Sweden, which he invaded and annexed in 1655. Relations with the English Connecticut Colony were strained, with disputes over ownership of land in the Connecticut valley, and in eastern Long island. The treaty of Hartford of 1650 was advantageous to the English, as Stuyvesant gave up claims to the Connecticut Valley while gaining only a small portion of Long island. In any case, Connecticut settlers ignored the treaty and steadily poured into the Hudson Valley, where they agitated against Stuyvesant. In 1664, England sent an expeditionary force to capture New Netherland. The colony's settlers refused to fight, forcing Stuyvesant to surrender and demonstrating the dilemma of domestic dissatisfaction, small size, and overwhelming external pressures with inadequate military support from the Company that was fixated on profits.\nExpansion of the colony.\nStuyvesant became involved in a dispute with Theophilus Eaton, the governor of English New Haven Colony, over the border of the two colonies. In September 1650, a meeting of the commissioners on boundaries took place in Hartford, Connecticut, called the Treaty of Hartford, to settle the border between New Amsterdam and the English colonies to the north and east. The border was arranged to the dissatisfaction of the Nine Men, who declared that \"the governor had ceded away enough territory to found fifty colonies each fifty miles square.\" Stuyvesant then threatened to dissolve the council. A new plan of municipal government was arranged in the Netherlands, and the name \"New Amsterdam\" was officially declared on 2 February 1653. Stuyvesant made a speech for the occasion, saying that his authority would remain undiminished.\nStuyvesant was then ordered to the Netherlands, but the order was soon revoked under pressure from the States of Holland and the city of Amsterdam. Stuyvesant prepared against an attack by ordering the citizens to dig a ditch from the North River to the East River and to erect a fortification.\nIn 1653, a convention of two deputies from each village in New Netherland demanded reforms, and Stuyvesant commanded that assembly to disperse, saying: \"We derive our authority from God and the company, not from a few ignorant subjects.\"\nIn 1654, Stuyvesant signed a deed for an allotment of land that corresponds to the modern-day Financial District of lower Manhattan. It was co-signed by land grantee and secretary of the New Netherland Council Cornelis van Ruijven (alternative spelling Ruyven). The lot was given and granted to van Ruijven. The deed conveys a tract of land on Manhattan island in the Sheep Pasture. It was bounded by present-day Broad Street to William Street, and Beaver Street to Exchange Place.\nIn the summer of 1655, he sailed down to the Delaware River with a fleet of seven vessels and about 300 men and took possession of the colony of New Sweden, which was renamed \"New Amstel.\" In his absence, Pavonia and Staten Island were attacked by Native Americans on 15 September 1655 in what became known as the Peach War. In 1660, Stuyvesant was quoted as saying that \"Nothing is of greater importance than the early instruction of youth.\" In 1661, New Amsterdam had one grammar school, two free elementary schools, and had licensed 28 schoolmasters.\nAs director-general of New Netherland, Stuyvesant greatly increased the colony's involvement with slavery. During the late 1640s, authorities in the neighboring English colonies of Connecticut and Maryland encouraged New Netherland slaves to escape there, refusing to return them. In 1650, Stuyvesant threatened to offer freedom to Maryland slaves unless the colony stopped sheltering runaways from New Netherland. In 1657, the GWC's directors wrote to Stuyvesant, telling him that they were not going to be able to send him all the tradesmen that he requested and that he would have to use slaves as well. Although it is commonly thought that Stuyvesant was New Netherland's largest slaveholder, he only owned two slaves, purchasing them as part of the farm he bought from the GWC in 1651.\nReligious freedom.\nStuyvesant did not tolerate full religious freedom in the colony, and was strongly committed to the supremacy of the Dutch Reformed Church. In 1657 he refused Lutherans the right to organize a church. When he also issued an ordinance forbidding them from worshiping in their own homes, the directors of the GWC, three of whom were Lutherans, told him to rescind the order and allow private gatherings of Lutherans. The Company position was that more tolerance led to more trade and benefited everyone.\nFreedom of religion was further tested when Stuyvesant refused to allow the permanent settlement of Jewish refugees from Dutch Brazil in New Amsterdam (without passports), and join the handful of existing Jewish traders (with passports from Amsterdam). Stuyvesant attempted to have Jews leave the colony \"in a friendly way\". As he wrote to the Amsterdam Chamber of the GWC in 1654, he hoped that \"the deceitful race, \u2014 such hateful enemies and blasphemers of the name of Christ, \u2014 be not allowed to further infect and trouble this new colony.\" He referred to Jews as a \"deceitful race\" and \"usurers\", and was concerned that \"Jewish settlers should not be granted the same liberties enjoyed by Jews in Holland, lest members of other persecuted minority groups, such as Roman Catholics, be attracted to the colony.\"\nStuyvesant's decision was again rescinded after pressure from the directors of the company. As a result, Jewish immigrants were allowed to stay in the colony as long as their community was self-supporting. However, Stuyvesant would not allow them to build a synagogue, forcing them to worship instead in a private house.\nIn 1657, the Quakers, who were newly arrived in the colony, drew his attention. He ordered the public torture of Robert Hodgson, a 23-year-old Quaker convert who had become an influential preacher. Stuyvesant then made an ordinance, punishable by fine and imprisonment, against anyone found guilty of harboring Quakers. That action led to a protest from the citizens of Flushing, which came to be known as the Flushing Remonstrance, considered by some historians to be a precursor to the United States Constitution's provision on freedom of religion in the Bill of Rights.\nCapitulation.\nIn 1664, King Charles II of England ceded to his brother, the Duke of York, later King James II, a large tract of land that included all of New Netherland. This came at a period of considerable conflict between England and the Netherlands in the Anglo-Dutch Wars. Four English ships bearing 450 men, commanded by Richard Nicolls, seized the Dutch colony. On 30 August 1664, George Cartwright sent the governor a letter demanding surrender. He promised \"life, estate, and liberty to all who would submit to the king's authority.\"\nOn 6 September 1664, Stuyvesant sent Johannes de Decker, a lawyer for the West India Company, and five others to sign the Articles of Capitulation. Nicolls was declared governor, and the city was renamed New York. Stuyvesant obtained civil rights and freedom of religion in the Articles of Capitulation. The Dutch settlers mainly belonged to the Dutch Reformed church, a Calvinist denomination, holding to the Three Forms of Unity (Belgic Confession, Heidelberg Catechism, Canons of Dordt). The English were Anglicans, holding to the 39 Articles, a Protestant confession, with bishops.\nIn 1665, Stuyvesant went to the Netherlands to report on his term as governor. On his return to the colony, he spent the remainder of his life on his farm, Stuyvesant Farm, of outside the city, called the Great Bouwerie, beyond which stretched the woods and swamps of the village of Nieuw Haarlem. A pear tree that he reputedly brought from the Netherlands in 1647 remained at the corner of Thirteenth Street and Third Avenue until 1867 when it was destroyed by a storm, bearing fruit almost to the last. The house was destroyed by fire in 1777. He also built an executive mansion of stone called Whitehall.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1645, Stuyvesant married Judith Bayard (c.\u20091610\u20131687) of the Bayard family. Her brother, Samuel Bayard, was the husband of Stuyvesant's sister, Anna Stuyvesant. Petrus and Judith had two sons together:\nHe died in August 1672 and his body was entombed in the east wall of St. Mark's Church in-the-Bowery, which sits on the site of Stuyvesant's family chapel.\nDescendants.\nThe last acknowledged descendant of Peter Stuyvesant to bear his surname was Augustus van Horne Stuyvesant Jr., who died a bachelor in 1953 at the age of 83 in his mansion at 2 East 79th Street. Rutherfurd Stuyvesant, the 19th-century New York developer, and his descendants are also descended from Peter Stuyvesant; however, Rutherford Stuyvesant's name was changed from Stuyvesant Rutherford in 1863 to satisfy the terms of the 1847 will of Peter Gerard Stuyvesant.\nHis descendants include:\nLegacy.\nAccording to historian Eleanor Bruchey:\nPeter Stuyvesant was essentially a difficult man thrust into a difficult position. Quick tempered, self-confident, and authoritarian, he was determined...to rule firmly and to repair the fortunes of the company. The company, however, had run the colony solely for trade profits, with scant attention to encouraging immigration and developing local government. Stuyvesant's predecessors...had been dishonest or, at best, inept, so there was no tradition of respect and support for the governorship on which he could build. Furthermore, the colonists were vocal and quick to challenge authority...Throughout his administration there were constant complaints to the company of his tyrannical acts and pressure for more local self-government...His religious intolerance also exacerbated relations with the colonists, most of whom did not share his narrow outlook.\nStuyvesant and his family were large landowners in the northeastern portion of New Amsterdam, and the Stuyvesant name is currently associated with several places in Manhattan's East Side, near present-day Gramercy Park: the Stuyvesant Town housing complex; the site of the original Stuyvesant High School, still marked Stuyvesant on its front face, on East 15th Street near First Avenue; Stuyvesant Cove Park and Stuyvesant Square, public parks in the area; the Stuyvesant Apartments on East 18th Street; and Stuyvesant Street, a thoroughfare in the East Village. The new Stuyvesant High, a premier public high school, is on Chambers Street near the World Trade Center. His farm, called the \"Bouwerij\" \u2013 the seventeenth-century Dutch word for \"farm\" \u2013 was the source for the name of the Manhattan street and surrounding neighborhood named \"The Bowery\". The contemporary neighborhood of Bedford\u2013Stuyvesant, Brooklyn includes Stuyvesant Heights and retains its name. Also named after him are the hamlets of Stuyvesant and Stuyvesant Falls in Columbia County, New York, where descendants of the early Dutch settlers still live and where the Dutch Reformed Church remains an important part of the community, as well as shopping centers, yacht clubs and other buildings and facilities throughout the area where the Dutch colony once was.\nThe \"Peter Stuyvesant Monument\" by J. Massey Rhind situated at Bergen Square in Jersey City was dedicated in 1915 to mark the 250th anniversary of the Dutch settlement there\nThe World War II Liberty Ship was named in his honor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24969", "revid": "50019158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24969", "title": "Phish", "text": "American rock band\nPhish is an American rock band formed in Burlington, Vermont, in 1983. The band consists of guitarist Trey Anastasio, bassist Mike Gordon, drummer Jon Fishman, and keyboardist Page McConnell. All four members perform vocals, with Anastasio being the primary lead vocalist. The band is known for their musical improvisation and jams during their concert performances and for their devoted fan following.\nThe band was formed by Anastasio, Gordon, Fishman and guitarist Jeff Holdsworth, who were joined by McConnell in 1985. Holdsworth left the band in 1986, and the lineup has remained stable since. Most of the band's songs are co-written by Anastasio and lyricist Tom Marshall. Phish began to perform outside of New England in the late 1980s and experienced a rise in popularity in the mid-1990s. In October 2000, the band began a two-year hiatus that ended in December 2002, and they disbanded again in August 2004. Phish reunited officially in October 2008 for subsequent reunion shows in March 2009 and since then have resumed performing regularly. All four members pursued solo careers or performed with side-projects and these projects have continued after the band reunited.\nPhish's music blends elements of a wide variety of genres including funk, reggae, progressive rock, psychedelic rock, folk, country, jazz, blues, bluegrass, electronic music, and pop. The band is part of a movement of improvisational rock groups, inspired by the format of the Grateful Dead's live performances and colloquially known as \"jam bands\", that gained considerable popularity as touring concert acts in the 1990s. Phish has developed a large and dedicated following by word of mouth and the exchange of live recordings. As of 2020, the band had sold more than 8 million albums and DVDs in the United States.\nPhish were signed to major label Elektra Records from 1991 to 2005, when the band formed their own independent label, JEMP Records, to release archival CD and DVD sets.\nHistory.\nFormation, \"The White Tape\" and \"The Man Who Stepped into Yesterday\": 1983\u20131988.\nPhish was formed at the University of Vermont (UVM) in 1983 by guitarists Trey Anastasio and Jeff Holdsworth, bassist Mike Gordon, and drummer Jon Fishman. Anastasio and Fishman had met that October, after Anastasio overheard Fishman playing drums in his dormitory room, and asked if he and Holdsworth could jam with him. Gordon met the trio shortly thereafter, having answered a want-ad for a bass guitarist that Anastasio had posted around the university.\nThe new group performed their first concert at Harris Millis Cafeteria at the University of Vermont on December 2, 1983, where they played a set of classic rock covers, including two songs by the Grateful Dead. The band performed one more concert in 1983, and then did not perform again for nearly a year, stemming from Anastasio's suspension from the university following a prank he had pulled with a friend.\nAnastasio returned to his hometown of Princeton, New Jersey following the prank, and reconnected with his childhood friend Tom Marshall; The duo began a songwriting collaboration and recorded material that would appear on the \"Bivouac Jaun\" demo tape. Marshall and Anastasio have subsequently composed the majority of Phish's original songs throughout their career. Anastasio returned to Burlington in late 1984, and resumed performing with Gordon, Holdsworth and Fishman. The quartet named themselves Phish in October 1984, shortly before they performed their first concert together following Anastasio's return to UVM. Anastasio designed the band's logo, which featured the group's name inside a stylized fish. The band's members have given several different origins for the name Phish. In Parke Puterbaugh's 2009 book \"Phish: The Biography\", the origin is given as a variation on \"phshhhh\", an onomatopoeia of the sound of a brush on a snare drum. In the 2004 official documentary \"Specimens of Beauty\", Anastasio said the band was also named after Fishman, whose nickname is \"Fish.\" In a 1996 interview, Fishman denied that the band was named after him, and said the onomatopoeic inspiration behind the name was the sound of an airplane taking off.\nIn late 1984, Phish began to play regularly at Nectar's bar and restaurant in downtown Burlington, and performed dozens of concerts across multiple residencies through March 1989. The band's 1992 album \"A Picture of Nectar\" was named in honor of the bar's owner, Nectar Rorris, and its cover features his face superimposed onto an orange.\nThe band would collaborate with percussionist Marc Daubert, a friend of Anastasio's, in the fall of 1984. Daubert ceased performing with the band in early 1985. Keyboardist Page McConnell met Phish in early 1985, when he arranged for them to play a spring concert at Goddard College, the small university he attended in Plainfield, Vermont. He began performing with the band as a guest shortly thereafter, and made his live debut during the third set of their May 3, 1985, concert at UVM's Redstone Campus. In the summer of 1985, Phish went on a short hiatus while Anastasio and Fishman vacationed in Europe; during this time, McConnell offered to join the band permanently, and moved to Burlington to learn their repertoire from Gordon. McConnell officially joined Phish as a full-time band member in September 1985.\nPhish performed with a five-piece lineup for about six months after McConnell joined, a period which ended when Holdsworth quit the group in March 1986 following a religious conversion. Anastasio and Fishman relocated in mid-1986 to Goddard College after a recommendation from McConnell. Phish distributed at least six experimental self-titled cassettes during this era, including \"The White Tape\".\nWhile based at Goddard College, Phish began to collaborate with fellow students Richard \"Nancy\" Wright and Jim Pollock. Pollock and Wright were musical collaborators who made experimental recordings on multi-track cassettes, and had been introduced to Phish through McConnell, who co-hosted a radio program on WGDR with Pollock. Phish adopted a number of Nancy's songs into their own set, including \"Halley's Comet\", \"I Didn't Know\", and \"Dear Mrs. Reagan\", the latter song being written by Nancy and Pollock. In his book \"Heads: A Biography of Psychedelic America\", music journalist Jesse Jarnow observed that Wright and his music were highly influential to Phish's early style and experimental sound. Wright amicably ended his association with Phish in 1989, but Pollock has continued to collaborate with Phish over the years, designing some of their album covers and concert posters.\nBy 1985, the group had encountered Burlington luthier Paul Languedoc, who would eventually design custom instruments for Anastasio and Gordon. In October 1986, he began working as their sound engineer. Since then, Languedoc has built exclusively for the two, and his designs and traditional wood choices have given Phish a unique instrumental identity. \nAs his senior project for Goddard College, Anastasio penned \"The Man Who Stepped into Yesterday\", a nine-song progressive rock concept album that would become Phish's second studio experiment. Recorded between 1987 and 1988, it was submitted in July of that year, accompanied by a written thesis. The song cycle that developed from the project \u2013 known as Gamehendge \u2013 grew to include an additional eight songs. The band performed the suite in concert on six occasions: in 1988, 1991, 1993, twice in 1994, and in 2023, without replicating the song list. \"The Man Who Stepped into Yesterday\" has never received an official release, but a bootleg tape has circulated for decades, and songs such as \"Wilson\" and \"The Lizards\" remain concert staples for the band.\nBeginning in the spring of 1988, members of the band began practicing in earnest, sometimes locking themselves in a room and jamming for hours on end. One such jam took place at Anastasio's apartment, with a second at Paul Languedoc's house in August 1989. They called these jam sessions \"Oh Kee Pa Ceremonies\", a reference to the film \"A Man Called Horse\". In July 1988, the band performed their first concerts outside of the northeastern United States, when they embarked on a seven-date tour in Colorado. These shows are excerpted on their 2006 live compilation \"Colorado '88\".\n\"Junta\", \"Lawn Boy\", and \"A Picture of Nectar\": 1989\u20131992.\nOn January 26, 1989, Phish played the Paradise Rock Club in Boston; the owners of the club had never heard of Phish and refused to book them, so the band rented the club for the night. The show sold out due to the caravan of fans that had traveled to see the band. The concert was Phish's breakthrough on the northeastern regional music circuit, and the band began to book concerts at other large rock clubs, theaters, and small auditoriums throughout the area, such as the Somerville Theatre, Worcester Memorial Auditorium and Wetlands Preserve. That spring, the band self-released their debut full-length studio album, \"Junta\", and sold copies on cassette tape at their concerts. The album includes a studio recording of the epic \"You Enjoy Myself\", which is considered to be the band's signature song. Later in 1989, the band hired Chris Kuroda as their lighting director. Kuroda subsequently became well known for his artistic light shows at the group's concerts. A profile on Phish appeared in the October 1989 issue of the Deadhead magazine \"Relix\", which marked the first time the band had been covered in a major national music periodical.\nBy late 1990, Phish's concerts were becoming more and more intricate, often making a consistent effort to involve the audience in the performance. In a special \"secret language\", the audience would react in a certain manner based on a particular musical cue from the band. For instance, if Anastasio \"teased\" a motif from \"The Simpsons\" theme song, the audience would yell, \"D'oh!\" in imitation of . In 1992, Phish introduced a collaboration between audience and band called the \"Big Ball Jam\" in which each band member would throw a large beach ball into the audience and play a note each time his ball was hit. In so doing, the audience was helping to create an original composition. On occasion, performances of \"You Enjoy Myself\" and \"Mike's Song\" involved Gordon and Anastasio performing synchronized maneuvers and jumping on mini-trampolines while simultaneously playing their instruments. Fishman would also regularly step out from behind his drum kit during concerts to sing cover songs, which were often punctuated by him playing an Electrolux vacuum cleaner like an instrument. The band released their second album, \"Lawn Boy\", in September 1990 on Absolute A Go Go, a small independent label that had a distribution deal with the larger Rough Trade Records. The album had been recorded the previous year, after the band had won studio time at engineer Dan Archer's Archer Studios when they came in first place at an April 1989 Battle of the Bands competition in Burlington.\nPhish, along with Bob Dylan, the Grateful Dead, and the Beatles, was one of the first bands to have a Usenet newsgroup, rec.music.phish, which launched in 1992. Aware of the band's growing popularity, Elektra Records signed them that year after they were recommended to the record label by A&amp;R representative Sue Drew. In the summer of 1991, the band embarked on a 14-date tour of the eastern United States accompanied by a three-piece horn section dubbed the Giant Country Horns. In August of that year, Phish played an outdoor concert at their friend Amy Skelton's horse farm in Auburn, Maine that acted as a prototype for their later all-day festival events.\nIn 1992, the band released their third studio album, \"A Picture of Nectar\", their first release for the major label Elektra. Subsequently, the label also reissued the band's first two albums. Later in 1992, Phish participated in the first annual H.O.R.D.E. festival, which provided them with their first national tour of major amphitheaters. The lineup, among others, included Phish, Blues Traveler, the Spin Doctors, and Widespread Panic. That summer, the band toured Europe with the Violent Femmes and later toured Europe and the US with Santana. Throughout the latter tour, Carlos Santana regularly invited some or all of the members of Phish to jam with his band during their headlining performances. The band ended 1992 with a New Year's Eve performance at the Matthews Arena in Boston, Massachusetts, a performance that was simulcast throughout the Boston area by radio station WBCN. The concert was filled with several new \"secret language\" cues they had taught their audience to deliberately confuse radio listeners.\n\"Rift\", \"Hoist\", and \"A Live One\": 1993\u20131995.\nPhish began headlining major amphitheaters in the summer of 1993. That year, the group released their fourth album, \"Rift\", a concept album which featured a cover painted by David Welker that referenced almost all of the songs on the record. The album was the band's first to appear on the \"Billboard 200\" album chart, debuting at No. 51 in February 1993.\nIn March 1994, the band released their fifth studio album \"Hoist.\" The album featured an array of guest performers, including country singer Alison Krauss, banjoist B\u00e9la Fleck, former Sly &amp; The Family Stone member Rose Stone, actor and trombonist Jonathan Frakes, and the horn section of R&amp;B group Tower of Power. To promote the album, Gordon directed the band's only official music video, for its first single \"Down with Disease\". \"Down with Disease\" became a minor hit on rock radio in the United States, and was the band's first song to appear on a \"Billboard\" music chart when it peaked at No. 33 on the magazine's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart that summer. To further promote \"Hoist\", the band released an experimental short-subject documentary called \"Tracking\", also directed by Gordon, which depicted the recording sessions for the album.\nForeshadowing their future tradition of festivals, Phish coupled camping with their 1994 summer tour finale at Sugarbush North in Warren, Vermont, that show eventually being released as \"Live Phish Volume 2\". On Halloween of that year, the group promised to don a fan-selected \"musical costume\" by playing an entire album from another band. After an extensive mail-based poll, Phish performed the Beatles' White Album as the second of their three sets at the Glens Falls Civic Center in upstate New York. The \"musical costume\" concept subsequently became a recurring part of Phish's fall tours, with the band playing a different album whenever they had a concert scheduled for Halloween night.\nIn October 1994, \"Crimes of the Mind\", the debut album by Anastasio's friend and collaborator Steve \"The Dude of Life\" Pollak, was released by Elektra Records; The album, which had been recorded in 1991, was billed to \"The Dude of Life and Phish\" and features all four members of Phish acting as Pollak's backing band.\nOn December 30, 1994, the band made their first appearance on national network television when they performed \"Chalk Dust Torture\" on \"Late Night with David Letterman\". The band would go on to appear on the program seven more times before David Letterman's retirement as host in 2015. For their 1994 New Years Run, Phish played the Civic Centers in Philadelphia and Providence as well as sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden and Boston Garden, which marked their debut performances at both venues. For the December 31 show at the Boston Garden, the band rode around the arena in a float shaped like a hot dog. The stunt was reprised at their 1999 New Year's Eve concert before the hot dog was donated to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. At the end of 1994, Phish appeared on \"Pollstar\"'s list of the highest grossing concert tours in the United States for the first time, as the 32nd highest grossing act, with $10.3\u00a0million in ticket sales.\nFollowing the death of Grateful Dead guitarist Jerry Garcia in the summer of 1995 and the appearance of \"Down with Disease\" on \"Beavis and Butt-Head\", the band experienced a surge in the growth of their fan base and an increased awareness in popular culture. In their tradition of playing a well-known album by another band for Halloween, Phish contracted a full horn section for their performance of The Who's \"Quadrophenia\" in 1995.\nPhish's first live album, \"A Live One\", was released during the summer of 1995 and featured selections from various concerts from their 1994 winter tour. The album charted at number 18 on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart, and was reported to have sold around 50,000 copies in its first week on sale. \"A Live One\" became Phish's first RIAA-certified gold album in November 1995. In 1997, \"A Live One\" became the band's first Platinum album, certified for sales of 1 million copies in the United States, and remains their best selling album to date.\nPhish ended 1995 with their first New Year's Eve concert at Madison Square Garden. The concert was released in its entirety on the live album \"\" in 2005.\n\"Billy Breathes\", \"The Story of the Ghost\", and \"The Siket Disc\": 1996\u20131999.\nIn early 1996, Anastasio and Fishman formed a free jazz side-project called Surrender to the Air, inspired by the music of Sun Ra, which also featured Marshall Allen, Michael Ray, John Medeski, Oteil Burbridge, Kofi Burbridge, and Marc Ribot, among other musicians. The group's only album, \"Surrender to the Air\", was released in March.\nFollowing an appearance at the New Orleans Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival in April 1996, Phish spent the summer of that year opening for Santana on their European tour. In August 1996, the band held their first festival, The Clifford Ball, at the decommissioned Plattsburgh Air Force Base on the New York side of Lake Champlain. The festival attracted 70,000 attendees, making it both Phish's biggest concert crowd to that point and the largest single concert by attendance in the United States in 1996. Phish recorded their sixth album \"Billy Breathes\" in the winter and spring of 1996, and the album was issued in October of that year. The album's first single, \"Free\", peaked at No.\u00a024 on the Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart and No.\u00a011 on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart, and was their most successful song on both charts.\nBy 1997, Phish's concert improvisational ventures were developing into a new funk-inspired long form jamming style. Vermont-based ice cream conglomerate Ben &amp; Jerry's launched \"Phish Food\" that year. The band officially licensed their name for use with the product, the only time they have ever allowed a third-party company to do so, and were directly involved with the creation of the flavor. Proceeds from the flavor are donated to the band's non-profit charity The WaterWheel Foundation, which raises funds for the preservation of Vermont's Lake Champlain. On August 8, 1997, Phish webcast one of their concerts live over the internet for the first time.\nOn August 16 and 17, 1997, Phish held their second festival, The Great Went, over two days at the Loring Air Force Base in Limestone, Maine, near the Canada\u2013United States border. In October 1997, the band released their second live album \"Slip Stitch and Pass\", which featured selections from their March 1997 concert at the Markthalle Hamburg in Hamburg, Germany.\nFollowing the Great Went, the band embarked on a fall tour that was dubbed by fans as the \"Phish Destroys America\" tour after a 1970s kung fu-inspired poster for the opening date in Las Vegas. The 21-date tour is considered one of the group's most popular and acclaimed tours, and several concerts were later officially released on live album sets such as \"Live Phish Volume 11\" in 2002. Phish ended 1997 as one of the ten highest grossing concert acts in the United States that year.\nIn April 1998, the band embarked on the Island Tour \u2013 a four night tour with two shows at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York on Long Island and another two at the Providence Civic Center in Providence, Rhode Island. The four concerts are highly regarded by fans due to the band's exploration of a jazz-funk musical style they had been playing for the previous year, which Anastasio dubbed \"cowfunk\". The band performed the tour in the middle of studio sessions for their seventh album, and were inspired by the quality of their performances to further incorporate the cowfunk style into subsequent sessions. The resulting album, \"The Story of the Ghost\", was released in October 1998. The album's first single \"Birds of a Feather\", which had been premiered on the Island Tour, became a No. 14 hit on Billboard's Adult Alternative Songs chart. To promote \"The Story of the Ghost\", Phish performed several songs from the album on the public television music show \"Sessions at West 54th\" in October 1998, and were interviewed for the program by its host David Byrne of Talking Heads.\nIn the summer of 1998, the band held Lemonwheel, their second festival at Loring Air Force Base in Maine. The two-day event attracted 60,000 attendees. The band played another summer festival in 1999, called Camp Oswego and held at the Oswego County Airport in Volney, New York. Unlike other Phish festivals, Camp Oswego featured a prominent second stage of additional performers aside from Phish, including Del McCoury, The Slip and Ozomatli.\nIn July 1999, the band released an album of improvisational instrumentals titled \"The Siket Disc\". The band followed that release with \"Hampton Comes Alive\", a six-disc box set released in November 1999, which contained the entirety of their performances on November 20 and 21, 1998 at the Hampton Coliseum in Hampton, Virginia. The set marked the first time that complete recordings of Phish concerts were officially released by Elektra Records.\nTo celebrate the new millennium, Phish hosted a two-day outdoor festival at the Big Cypress Seminole Indian Reservation in Florida in December 1999. The festival's climactic New Year's Eve concert, referred to by fans as simply \"The Show\", started at 11:35\u00a0p.m. on December 31, 1999, and continued through to sunrise on January 1, 2000, approximately eight hours later. The band's performance of the song \"Heavy Things\" at the festival was broadcast live as part of ABC's \"2000 Today\" millennium coverage, giving the band their biggest television audience up to that point. 75,000 people attended the sold-out two-day festival. In 2017, \"Rolling Stone\" named the Big Cypress festival one of the \"50 Greatest Concerts of the Last 50 Years\".\n\"Farmhouse\" and hiatus: 2000\u20132002.\nFollowing the Big Cypress festival, the band issued their ninth studio album \"Farmhouse\" in May 2000. \"Heavy Things\", which was released as the album's first single, became the band's only song to appear on a mainstream pop radio format, reaching No. 29 on \"Billboard\"'s Adult Top 40 chart that July. The song also became the band's biggest hit to date on the Adult Alternative Songs chart, reaching No. 2 there. In June 2000, the band embarked on a seven-date headlining tour of Japan. In July, they taped an appearance on the PBS music show \"Austin City Limits\", which was aired in October.\nIn the summer of 2000, the band announced that they would take their first \"extended time-out\" following their upcoming fall tour. Anastasio officially announced the impending hiatus to the band's fans during their September 30 concert at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center in Paradise, Nevada. During the tour's last concert on October 7, at the Shoreline Amphitheatre in Mountain View, California, the band made no reference to the hiatus, and left the stage without saying a word following their encore performance of \"You Enjoy Myself\", as The Beatles' \"Let It Be\" played over the venue's sound system.\n\"Bittersweet Motel\", a documentary film about the band directed by Todd Phillips, was released in August 2000, shortly before the hiatus began. The documentary captures the band's 1997 and 1998 tours, the Great Went festival and the recording of \"The Story of the Ghost\". Phish were nominated in two categories at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards in 2001: Best Boxed Recording Package for \"Hampton Comes Alive\" and Best Instrumental Rock Performance for \"First Tube\" from \"Farmhouse\".\nDuring Phish's hiatus, Elektra Records continued to issue archival releases of the band's concerts on compact disc. Between September 2001 and May 2003, the label released 20 entries in the Live Phish Series. These multi-disc sets featured complete soundboard recordings of concerts that were particularly popular with the band and their fanbase, similar to the Grateful Dead's Dick's Picks archival series. In November 2002, the label released the band's first concert DVD, \"\", which featured the entirety of the September 2000 concert at which Anastasio announced the hiatus.\nIn April 2002, Phish guest starred on the episode \"Weekend at Burnsie's\" of the animated series \"The Simpsons\". The episode marked the band's first appearance together, albeit as animated characters, since the hiatus began. Phish provided their own voices for the episode and performed a snippet of \"Run Like an Antelope\".\nReturn, \"Round Room\", \"Undermind\", and disbandment: 2002\u20132004.\nIn August 2002, Phish's manager John Paluska announced the band planned to end their hiatus that December with a New Year's Eve concert at Madison Square Garden. They also recorded \"Round Room\" over the course of four days in October and released it on December 10. The band had initially planned to record the new album live at the Madison Square Garden concert, but instead felt that demos they had recorded of the material were strong enough to merit release as a studio album. Four days after the release of \"Round Room\", the band appeared as a musical guest on the December 14 episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", hosted by former Vice President of the United States Al Gore. During the episode, the band debuted the song \"46 Days\", appeared in a comedy sketch, and their song \"You Enjoy Myself\" was featured in a \"TV Funhouse\" cartoon segment. During their return concert on December 31, McConnell's brother was introduced as actor Tom Hanks. The impostor sang a line of the song \"Wilson\", prompting some media outlets to report that the actor had appeared at the concert.\nAt the end of the 2003 summer tour, Phish returned to Limestone, Maine for It, their first festival since Big Cypress. The event drew crowds of over 60,000 fans, and was the band's final festival to be held at Loring Air Force Base. Highlights from the festival were released on a DVD set, also called \"It\", in October 2004. In November and December 2003, the band celebrated its 20th anniversary with a four-show mini-tour of shows in New York, Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts. The December 1 show at Pepsi Arena featured a guest appearance by former member Jeff Holdsworth, who sat in with the band on five songs, including his compositions \"Possum\" and \"Camel Walk\".\nOn May 25, 2004, Anastasio announced on the Phish website that the band would disband at the end of their 2004 summer tour. He wrote that he had met with the other members earlier that month to discuss the \"Strong feelings I've been having that Phish has run its course, and that we should end it now while it's still on a high note.\" By the end of the meeting, he said, \"We realized that after almost twenty-one years together, we were faced with the opportunity to graciously step away in unison, as a group, united in our friendship and our feelings of gratitude.\" The band's eleventh \u2013 and at the time final \u2013 studio album \"Undermind\" was released in June 2004. The band's summer 2004 began with two concerts at Keyspan Park in Brooklyn, New York. The first concert was recorded for the live album and concert documentary \"\", while the second featured a guest appearance by rapper Jay-Z, who performed two songs with the band. Later that summer, the band appeared on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\" and performed a seven-song set from atop the marquee of the Ed Sullivan Theater for fans who had gathered on the street.\nThe 2004 tour finished with the band's seventh summer festival on August 14 and 15, which were billed as their final performances. The Coventry festival was named for the town in Vermont that hosted the event, which was held at the nearby Newport State Airport. \nThe concerts were simulcast in movie theaters and on XM Satellite Radio. \"The Curtain With\" was the final song the band performed at their then-final concert on August 15. After Coventry, the members of the band admitted they were disappointed with their performance at the festival; In the official book \"Phish: The Biography\", Anastasio expressed that \"Coventry itself was a nightmare. It was emotional, but it was not like we were at our finest. I certainly wasn't\". The festival weekend was beset by logistical issues, including heavy rain, muddy conditions in the festival area and a traffic jam on Interstate 91.\nPost-disbandment and interim: 2004\u20132008.\nFollowing the breakup, the band's members remained in amicable communication with one another. The members also occasionally appeared on each other's solo albums and collaborated on side-projects.\nIn 2005, Phish formed their own record label, JEMP Records, to release archival CD and DVD sets. The label's first release was \"\", which was released in conjunction with Rhino Records in December 2005. The album was named the 42nd greatest live album of all time by \"Rolling Stone\" in April 2015. The label subsequently released several other archival live box sets, including \"Colorado '88\" (2006), \"Vegas 96\" (2007), \"At the Roxy\" (2008) and \"The Clifford Ball\" (2009).\nIn December 2006, Anastasio was arrested in Whitehall, New York for drug possession and driving while intoxicated, and was sentenced to 14 months in a drug court program. In 2007, while Anastasio was undergoing rehabilitation, the other members of Phish surprised him on his birthday with an instrumental recording they had made for him to play along with on guitar. During his rehabilitation, Anastasio said he \"spent 24 hours a day thinking about nothing but Phish\" and began discussing a reunion with the other members of the band.\nPhish received the Jammys Lifetime Achievement Award on May 7, 2008, at The Theater at Madison Square Garden. All four members attended the ceremony and gave a speech, and both McConnell and Anastasio performed, although not together.\nIn response to a June 2008 rumor that Phish had reunited to record a new album, McConnell wrote a letter on the band's website updating fans on the current relations between the band's members. McConnell wrote that while the members remained friends, they were currently busy with other projects and the reunion rumors were premature. He added, \"Later this year we hope to spend some time together and take a look at what possible futures we might enjoy.\" That September, the band played three songs at the wedding of their former tour manager Brad Sands. Later in 2008, the band reconvened at The Barn, Anastasio's farmhouse studio in Burlington, Vermont, for jamming sessions and rehearsals.\nReunion and \"Joy\": 2008\u20132011.\nOn October 1, 2008, the band announced on their website that they had officially reunited, and would play their first shows in five years in March 2009 at the Hampton Coliseum in Hampton, Virginia. The three reunion concerts were held on March 6, 7 and 8, 2009, with \"Fluffhead\" being the first song the band played onstage at the first show. Approximately 14,000 people attended the concerts over the course of three days, and the band made the shows available for free download on their LivePhish website for a limited time, to accommodate fans who were unable to attend.\nWhen the band decided to reunite, the members agreed to limit their touring schedule, and they have typically performed about 50 concerts a year since. Following the reunion weekend, Phish embarked on a summer tour which began in May with a concert at Fenway Park in Boston. The Fenway show was followed by a 25-date tour which included performances at the 2009 edition of the Bonnaroo Music Festival in Tennessee and a four date stand at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Colorado. At Bonnaroo, Phish was joined by Bruce Springsteen on guitar for three songs.\nPhish's fourteenth studio album, \"Joy\", produced by Steve Lillywhite, was released September 8, 2009. \"Backwards Down the Number Line\", a single from the \"Joy\" album, reached number 9 on the \"Billboard\" Adult Alternative Songs chart in October. In October, the band held Festival 8, their first multi-day festival event since Coventry in 2004, at the Empire Polo Club in Indio, California. \nIn March 2010, Anastasio inducted Genesis, one of his favorite bands, into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame at the museum's annual ceremony in New York City. In addition to Anastasio's speech, Phish performed the Genesis songs \"Watcher of the Skies\" and \"No Reply at All\" at the event. Phish toured in the summer and fall of 2010, and their concerts at Alpine Valley Music Theatre in East Troy, Wisconsin and the Utica Memorial Auditorium in Utica, New York were issued as CD/DVD sets in 2010 and 2011 respectively.\n\"Fuego\" and \"Big Boat\": 2011\u20132016.\nPhish's ninth festival, Super Ball IX, took place at the Watkins Glen International race track in Watkins Glen, New York on July 1\u20133, 2011. It was the first concert to take place at Watkins Glen International since Summer Jam at Watkins Glen in 1973. In September, the band played a benefit concert in Essex Junction, Vermont which raised $1.2\u00a0million for Vermont flood victim relief in the aftermath of Hurricane Irene.\nIn June 2012, Phish headlined Bonnaroo 2012 with the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Radiohead. During their 2013 Halloween concert at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City, New Jersey, the band played twelve new songs from their upcoming album, which at the time had the working title \"Wingsuit\" and would later be renamed \"Fuego\". During the concert, the band was joined onstage by actor Abe Vigoda, who is mentioned by name in the song \"Wombat\", dressed in a wombat costume.\nPhish ended 2013 with a New Year's Eve concert at Madison Square Garden that also celebrated their 30th anniversary, as they had played their first concert in December 1983. The concert featured a nine-minute montage film celebrating the band's career, and the band performed an entire set in the middle of the arena from atop an equipment truck.\nPhish released \"Fuego\", their first studio album in five years, on June 24, 2014. The album peaked at number 7 on the \"Billboard 200\" album chart, and became their highest charting album since \"Billy Breathes\" reached the same position in 1996. During their Halloween 2014 concert at MGM Grand Las Vegas, the band performed a set consisting of ten original songs inspired by the 1964 Walt Disney Records sound effects album \"Chilling, Thrilling Sounds of the Haunted House.\"\nIn 2015, Phish performed both a summer tour and their tenth multi-day festival event, Magnaball, was held at the Watkins International Speedway in New York in August. Phish's fourteenth studio album, \"Big Boat\", was released on October 7, 2016.\nThe Baker's Dozen and Kasvot V\u00e4xt: 2017\u20132019.\nPhish played a 13-night concert residency at New York City's Madison Square Garden from July 21 to August 6, 2017, dubbed \"The Baker's Dozen\". Each concert featured a loose theme with performances of unique cover songs and a special doughnut served each night to the audience by Federal Donuts of Philadelphia. No songs were repeated during the Baker's Dozen run, with a total of 237 individual songs performed across the 13 concerts. The complete Baker's Dozen residency was released as a limited edition 36-disc box set in November 2018. A scaled-down triple CD set featuring 13 song performances, titled \"\", was issued simultaneously with the box set.\nPhish planned to hold an eleventh summer festival, Curveball, in Watkins Glen, New York in 2018, but the festival was canceled by New York Department of Health officials, one day before it was scheduled to begin, due to water quality issues from flooding in the area. At their Halloween concert that October at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, the band performed a set of all-new original material that they promoted as a \"cover\" of \"\u00ed rokk\" by Kasvot V\u00e4xt, a fictional 1980s Scandinavian progressive rock band they had created. The Kasvot V\u00e4xt set was released as a on Spotify on November 10, 2018. All four concerts in the 2018 Halloween run were livestreamed in 4K resolution, which marked the first time that a major musical act had ever offered a 4K livestreaming option.\n\"Between Me and My Mind\", a documentary film directed by Steven Cantor about Anastasio's life, his Ghosts of the Forest side-project and Phish's 2017 New Year's Eve concert, was screened at the Tribeca Film Festival in April 2019. In June 2019, SiriusXM launched Phish Radio, a satellite radio station dedicated to the band's music.\n\"Sigma Oasis\" and \"Evolve\": 2020\u2013present.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic, Phish postponed their 2020 summer tour until 2021. Before 2020, Phish had embarked on a summer tour every year since their 2009 reunion. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Phish hosted free weekly \"Dinner and a Movie\" webcasts of archival performances on Tuesday evenings until Labor Day weekend, after which they were hosted monthly.\nPhish released their fifteenth studio album \"Sigma Oasis\" on April 2, 2020. The album was premiered through a listening party on their LivePhish app, SiriusXM radio station and Facebook page. The album consists entirely of material the band had been performing in concert over the course of the previous decade, but had yet to appear on a studio release.\nIn January 2021, Anastasio told \"Pollstar\" that the band was unable to perform or rehearse together due to COVID-19 restrictions and quarantine rules currently in place in the New England states, but said \"As soon as it's feasible, we'll be back.\"\nPhish performed their first concert since the start of the pandemic on July 28, 2021, at the Walmart AMP in Rogers, Arkansas, having not performed since February 23, 2020. Beginning with their concerts at The Gorge Amphitheatre in late August, the band began requiring attendees to show proof of vaccination or a negative test for COVID-19. During their 2021 Halloween concert, Phish debuted a set of new original science fiction-themed material under the guise of the fictional band Sci-Fi Soldier. According to \"Pollstar\", Phish were the ninth highest grossing concert act in the world in 2021, with a $44.4\u00a0million gross from 35 concerts. Phish also had the fifth highest concert ticket sales in the world in 2021, with 572,626 tickets sold. \nDue to an increase of cases of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 in New York City, Phish postponed their 2021 New Year's Eve concerts at Madison Square Garden from December 2021 to April 2022. In lieu of the traditional New Year's Eve concert, Phish instead performed a three set New Year's Eve concert on December 31, 2021, from a soundstage they dubbed \"The Ninth Cube\". \nPhish released \"Get More Down\", a studio version of their Sci-Fi Soldier material, on October 31, 2022. In August 2023, Phish performed two benefit concerts at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, New York for recovery efforts following a flood in Vermont and upstate New York earlier that summer. The band raised $3.5\u00a0million for the relief efforts through their two concerts and merchandise sales. The band performed a version of their Gamehendge song cycle at their 2023 New Year's Eve concert at Madison Square Garden, which featured actors portraying the story's characters, and an appearance by actress and musician Annie Golden during the song \"Harpua\".\nPhish performed four concerts at Sphere in Paradise, Nevada in April 2024, and were the second music act, after U2, to perform at the venue. The concerts featured visual effects created by the Montreal studio Moment Factory. The four shows grossed $13.4\u00a0million from 65,665 tickets sold.\n\"Evolve\", Phish's sixteenth studio album, was released on July 12, 2024. Mondegreen, a four-day Phish festival at the Woodlands of Dover Motor Speedway in Dover, Delaware, was held in August 2024. 45,000 people attended the four-day Mondegreen festival.\nPhish were nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame for the first time in 2025, but were not among that year's inductees. The members of Phish appeared in a \"Seinfeld\" parody sketch on an episode of \"Everybody's Live with John Mulaney\" in April 2025.\nReception and legacy.\nPhish were part of the jam band scene that gained prominence in the mid 1990s. Following the death of Jerry Garcia in 1995, the \"Los Angeles Times\" named Phish as among the scene's most prominent bands, alongside Blues Traveler, the Dave Matthews Band, Spin Doctors, and Widespread Panic. Phish's popularity grew in the 1990s due to fans sharing concert recordings that had been taped by audience members and distributed online for free. Phish were among the first musical acts to use the internet to grow their fanbase, with fans using file-sharing websites such as etree and BitTorrent to share concerts.\nIn 1998, \"Rolling Stone\" described Phish as \"the most important band of the '90s\". Phish have been named as an influence by other acts in the jam band scene, including Umphrey's McGee and the Disco Biscuits Other musicians have also counted Phish as an influence, including Adam Levine and James Valentine of Maroon 5, Ed O'Brien of Radiohead, Brandon Boyd of Incubus, and reggae musician Matisyahu.\nPhish's festival events in the 1990s inspired the foundation of the Bonnaroo Music Festival in Tennessee, which was first held in 2002. Co-founder Rick Farman, a Phish fan, consulted Phish managers Richard Glasgow and John Paluska about festival infrastructure during the early stages of planning. The festivals also inspired other jam band-oriented concert events, such as the Disco Biscuits' Camp Bisco, Electric Forest Festival, and the Big Ears Festival.\nPhish are well known to their loyal fans, called Phishheads, but the group's music and fan culture are otherwise polarizing to general audiences. The tribal nature of Phish supporters has encouraged comparisons of Phishheads to the Juggalos, followers of the hip-hop duo Insane Clown Posse. Phish heavily contributes to music-based tourism with their \"traveling communities\" of fans, and they have been simultaneously hailed and criticized for their near-constant tour dates, which bring with them the capital value of tourism and necessitates the increased security and community planning that come with any music festival. Jordan Hoffman of Thrillist explains \"the solace many find in attending religious services is somewhat mirrored for me in seeing Phish,\" and even though Phish fans are generally considered welcoming and friendly, the reception of the group from the outside is often one of unease and confusion. The BBC listed Phish as one of \"Eight smash US acts that Britain never understood\" along with fellow jam bands Dave Matthews Band and Blues Traveler. In describing the band to a British audience, BBC journalist Stephen Dowling wrote \"Attending a Phish gig has become a rite of summer passage for American teens in the same way that attending Glastonbury has for British teenagers.\"\nThe band has a number of celebrity fans, including: Sean Avery, Rocco Baldelli, Drew Carey, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Abbi Jacobson, Katy Tur, Aron Ralston, and Bill Walton. Bernie Sanders, who was the mayor of Burlington when Phish formed, described them as \"One of the great bands in this country\" in 2016.\nPhish has performed 87 concerts at Madison Square Garden since their debut performance there in 1994. In August 2023, Phish surpassed Elton John as the musical act with the second most concerts performed at Madison Square Garden, behind only record-holder Billy Joel.\nIn 2019, \"Billboard\" ranked Phish as the 33rd highest-grossing concert touring act of the 2010s. In 2022, \"Pollstar\" listed Phish as the 33rd highest grossing touring act from 1980 to 2022, with a cumulative gross of $595.8\u00a0million. \"Pollstar\" also listed Phish as the act with the ninth most tickets sold in that same time frame, with 13.3\u00a0million tickets sold.\nMusical style and influences.\nAccording to \"The New Rolling Stone Album Guide\", the music of Phish is \"oriented around group improvisation and super-extended grooves\". Their songs draw on a range of rock-oriented influences, including funk, jazz fusion, progressive rock, bluegrass, and psychedelic rock. Some Phish songs use different vocal approaches, such as a cappella (unaccompanied) sections of barbershop quartet-style vocal harmonies. The band began to include barbershop segments in their concerts in 1993, when the four members began taking lessons from McConnell's landlord, who was a judge at barbershop competitions. In the 1997 official biography, \"The Phish Book\", Anastasio coined the term \"cow-funk\" to describe the band's late 1990s funk and jazz-funk-influenced playing style, observing that \"What we're doing now is really more about groove than funk. Good funk, real funk, is not played by four white guys from Vermont.\"\nPhish were often compared to the Grateful Dead during the 1990s, a comparison that the band members often resisted or distanced themselves from. The two bands were compared due to their emphasis on live performances, improvisational jamming style, musical similarities, and traveling fanbase. In November 1995, Anastasio told \"The Baltimore Sun\", \"When we first came into the awareness of the media, it would always be the Dead or Zappa they'd compare us to. All of these bands I love, you know? But I got very sensitive about it.\" Early in their career, Phish would occasionally cover Grateful Dead songs in concert, but the band stopped doing so by the late 1980s. In \"Phish: The Biography\", Parke Puterbaugh observed \"The bottom line is while it's impossible to imagine Phish without the Grateful Dead as forebears, many other musicians figured as influences upon them. Some of them \u2013 such as Carlos Santana and Frank Zappa \u2013 were arguably at least as significant as the Grateful Dead. In reality, the media certainly overplayed the Grateful Dead connection and Phish probably underplayed it, at least in their first decade.\" Anastasio has also cited progressive rock artists such as King Crimson and Genesis as significant influences on Phish's early material. In a 2019 \"New York Times\" interview, he observed, \"If you listen to the first couple of Phish albums, they don't sound anything like the Grateful Dead. I was more interested in Yes.\"\nIn his 2018 book \"Twilight of the Gods\", music critic Steven Hyden wrote that he found the Grateful Dead and Phish to have \"significantly different reference points\" in terms of influence and style. The Grateful Dead, Hyden explained, were \"informed by the totality of American music from the first sixty years of the twentieth century: Blues, country, folk, jazz, and early rock 'n' roll,\" while Phish's music contains elements of \"hopped-up bluegrass, jazzy disco, porno-movie funk, Broadway theatricality, and shockingly sincere barbershop harmonies. But it all stems from classic rock.\" Hyden observed that \"If the Dead encompasses American music from roughly 1900 to 1967, Phish picks up the story right through the AOR era, from '68 to around the time \"Stop Making Sense\" debuted in theaters in the mid-eighties.\"\nLive performances.\nThe driving force behind Phish is the popularity of their concerts and the fan culture surrounding the event. Each a production unto itself, the band is known to consistently change set lists and details, as well as the addition of their own antics to ensure that no two shows are ever the same. With fans flocking to venues hours before they open, the concert is the centerpiece of an event that includes a temporary community in the parking lot similar to the \"Shakedown Street\" bazaar held outside Grateful Dead concerts.\nSimilar to the Grateful Dead, Phish concerts typically feature two sets, with an intermission in between. During concerts, songs often segue into one another, or produce improvisational jams that can last 10 minutes or more depending on the song. Several regularly performed songs in Phish's repertoire have never appeared on one of their studio albums; these include \"Possum\", \"Mike's Song\", \"I Am Hydrogen\", \"Weekapaug Groove\", \"Harry Hood\", \"Runaway Jim\", \"Suzy Greenberg\", \"AC/DC Bag\" and \"The Lizards\", all of which date to 1990 or earlier and have been played by Phish over 300 times in concert.\nChris Kuroda, who has been Phish's lighting director since 1989, creates elaborate light displays during the band's concerts that are sometimes improvised in a similar fashion to their music. Justin Taylor of \"The Baffler\" wrote, \"You could hate this music with every fiber of your being and still be ready to give Chris Kuroda a MacArthur \"genius\" grant for what he achieves with his light rig.\" Kuroda is often referred to by fans as the unofficial fifth member of the band, and has been given the nickname \"CK5\".\nSince Phish fans began to discuss the band's live performances on the internet in the late 1990s, they have developed a widely used framework for analyzing the varied forms of improvisation that would regularly occur during a given show. A January 1997 post by Phish fan John Flynn on the rec.music.phish Usenet group first defined the two \"types\" of jamming that Phish performs in concert. Flynn wrote: \"I think Phish jamming falls into two types of jamming: 1) Jamming that is based around a fixed chord progression 2) Jamming that improvises chord progressions, rhythms, and the whole structure of the music.\" Since then, Phish fans have used the terms \"Type 1\" and \"Type 2\" and Flynn's definitions to contextualize the structure of Phish's shows and songs.\nBecause Phish's reputation is so grounded in their live performances, concert recordings are commonly traded commodities. In December 2002, the band launched the LivePhish website, from which official soundboard recordings can be purchased. Legal field recordings produced by tapers with boom microphones from the audience in compliance with Phish's tape trading policy are frequently traded on any number of music message boards. Although technically not allowed, live videos of Phish shows are also traded by fans and are tolerated as long as they are for non-profit, personal use. Phish fans have been noted for their extensive collections of fan-taped concert recordings; owning recordings of entire tours and years is widespread.\nFans' recordings are generally sourced from the officially designated tapers' section at each show, by fans with devoted sound recording rigs. Tickets for the tapers' section are acquired separately from regular audience tickets, and directly from the band's website, instead of the venue or a service like Ticketmaster. However, tapers are also required to purchase a general admission ticket for concerts. Recordings patched from Paul Languedoc's soundboard were also made until 1994 and circulated among fans.\nIn 2014, the band launched their own on-demand streaming service, LivePhish+. The platform features hundreds of soundboard recordings of the band's concerts for streaming, including all of their shows from 2002 onwards, as well as all of their studio albums. Phish continues to allow fans to tape and distribute audience recordings of their concerts after the launch of the LivePhish storefront and streaming services.\nBooks and podcasts.\nSeveral books on Phish have been published, including two official publications: \"The Phish Book\", a 1998 coffee table book credited to the band members and journalist Richard Gehr which focused on the band's activities during 1996 and 1997, and \"Phish: The Biography\", a semi-official biographical book written by music journalist and Phish fan Parke Puterbaugh, was published in 2009 and was based on interviews with the four band members, their friends and crew. An installment of the 33\u2153 book series on \"A Live One\", written by Walter Holland, was published in 2015. The 2013 book \"You Don't Know Me but You Don't Like Me: Phish, Insane Clown Posse, and My Misadventures with Two of Music's Most Maligned Tribes\", written by music critic Nathan Rabin, compares and contrasts the fanbases of Phish and Insane Clown Posse.\nIn addition to books, there have been multiple podcasts which have focused on Phish, its music and fanbase as their central topics of discussion. Among the first was \"Analyze Phish\", which was hosted by comedians Harris Wittels and Scott Aukerman for the Earwolf podcast network, and ran for ten episodes posted between 2011 and 2014. The podcast followed Wittels, a devoted fan of the band, in his humorous attempts to get Aukerman to enjoy their music. Despite its truncated run, \"Analyze Phish\" inspired Phish lyricist Tom Marshall to start his own Phish podcast, \"Under the Scales\", in 2016. In 2018, Marshall co-founded the Osiris Podcasting Network, which hosts \"Under the Scales\" and other music podcasts, many of which are devoted to Phish or other jam bands. In September 2019, C13Originals debuted \"Long May They Run\", a music documentary podcast series; The first season, consisting of 10 episodes, focused on Phish's history and influence on the live music scene. In November 2019, the Osiris Podcasting Network premiered \"After Midnight,\" a five-episode documentary series exploring the creation, execution, and aftermath of Phish's 1999 Big Cypress festival.\nOther appearances.\nSeattle Seahawks fans began mimicking Phish's song \"Wilson\" by chanting the song's opening line when quarterback Russell Wilson took the field during games. The new tradition started after Anastasio made the suggestion at shows in Seattle. The story behind the \"Wilson\" chant was featured in a 2014 documentary short by NFL Films.\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24970", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24970", "title": "PA-RISC", "text": "Instruction set architecture by Hewlett-Packard\nPrecision Architecture RISC (PA-RISC) or Hewlett Packard Precision Architecture (HP/PA or simply HPPA), is a general purpose computer instruction set architecture (ISA) developed by Hewlett-Packard from the 1980s until the 2000s.\nThe architecture was introduced on 26 February 1986, when the HP 3000 Series 930 and HP 9000 Model 840 computers were launched featuring the first implementation, the TS1. HP stopped selling PA-RISC-based HP 9000 systems at the end of 2008 but supported servers running PA-RISC chips until 2013. PA-RISC was succeeded by the Itanium (originally IA-64) ISA, jointly developed by HP and Intel.\nHistory.\nIn the late 1980s, HP was building four series of computers, all based on CISC CPUs. One line was the IBM PC compatible Intel i286-based Vectra Series, started in 1986. All others were non-Intel systems. One of them was the HP Series 300 of Motorola 68000-based workstations, another Series 200 line of technical workstations based on a custom silicon on sapphire (SOS) chip design, the SOS based 16-bit HP 3000 classic series, and finally the HP 9000 Series 500 minicomputers, based on their own (16- and 32-bit) FOCUS microprocessor.\nThe Precision Architecture is the result of what was known inside Hewlett-Packard as the Spectrum program. HP planned to use Spectrum to move all of their non-PC compatible machines to a single RISC CPU family.\nIn early 1982, work on the Precision Architecture began at HP Laboratories, defining the instruction set and virtual memory system. Development of the first TTL implementation started in April 1983. With simulation of the processor having completed in 1983, a final processor design was delivered to software developers in July 1984. Systems prototyping followed, with \"lab prototypes\" being produced in 1985 and product prototypes in 1986.\nThe first processors were introduced in products during 1986, with the first HP 9000 Series 840 units shipping in November of that year. They were also used in a new series of HP 3000 machines in the late 1980s: the 930 and 950, commonly known at the time as Spectrum systems, the name given to them in the development labs. These machines ran MPE-XL, whereas HP 9000 machines employing the PA-RISC processor ran the HP-UX version of Unix. The first implementation of the Precision Architecture was the TS1, a central processing unit built from discrete transistor\u2013transistor logic (74F TTL) devices. Later implementations were multi-chip VLSI designs fabricated in NMOS processes (NS1 and NS2) and CMOS (CS1 and PCX), beginning with the HP 3000 Series 950, HP 9000 Model 850S and HP 9000 Model 825, introduced in late 1987.\nThe HP Precision Architecture has thirty-two 32-bit integer registers, sixteen 64-bit floating-point registers, and has a single branch delay slot. This means that the instruction immediately following a branch instruction is executed before the program's control flow is transferred to the target instruction of the branch.10 An HP Precision processor also includes a Processor Status Word (PSW) register. The PSW register contains various flags that enable virtual addressing, protection, interruptions, and other status information.6 The number of floating-point registers was doubled in the 1.1 version to 32 once it became apparent that 16 were inadequate and restricted performance. The architects included Allen Baum, Hans Jeans, Michael J. Mahon, Ruby Bei-Loh Lee, Russel Kao, Steve Muchnick, Terrence C. Miller, David Fotland, and William S. Worley.\nOther operating systems ported to the PA-RISC architecture include Linux, OpenBSD, NetBSD, OSF/1, NeXTSTEP, and ChorusOS.\nAn interesting aspect of the PA-RISC line is that most of its generations have no level 2 cache. Instead large level 1 caches are used, initially as separate chips connected by a bus, and later integrated on-chip. Only the PA-7100LC and PA-7300LC have L2 caches. Another innovation of the PA-RISC is the addition of vector instructions (SIMD) in the form of MAX, which were first introduced on the PA-7100LC.\nPrecision RISC Organization, an industry group led by HP, was founded in 1992, to promote the PA-RISC architecture. Members included Convex, Hitachi, Hughes Aircraft, Mitsubishi, NEC, OKI, Prime, Stratus, Yokogawa, Red Brick Software, and Allegro Consultants, Inc.\nThe ISA was extended in 1996 to 64\u00a0bits, with this revision named PA-RISC 2.0. PA-RISC 2.0 also added fused multiply\u2013add instructions, which help certain floating-point intensive algorithms, and the MAX-2 SIMD extension, which provides instructions for accelerating multimedia applications. The first PA-RISC 2.0 implementation was the PA-8000, which was introduced in January 1996.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24971", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24971", "title": "Preacher (comics)", "text": "Comic book series\nPreacher is an American comic book series published from 1995 to 2000 by Vertigo, an imprint of DC Comics. The series was created by writer Garth Ennis and artist Steve Dillon, with painted covers by Glenn Fabry. It won the Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series in 1999.\nThe series consists of 75 issues in total \u2013 66 regular, monthly issues, five one-shot specials, and a four-issue \"Preacher: Saint of Killers\" limited series. The final monthly issue, number 66, was published in October 2000, with an epilogue published in Ennis' subsequent series \"The Boys\" in February 2009. The entire run has been collected in four series of collected editions: an original nine volume run of trade paperbacks, a second run of six trade paperbacks/hardcovers, three extra oversized \"Absolute Preacher\" volumes, and two oversized omnibus volumes.\nA television series adaptation, \"Preacher\", aired for 43 episodes over four seasons on AMC, from 2016 to 2019.\nPlot.\n\"Preacher\" tells the story of Jesse Custer, a preacher in the small Texas town of Annville. Custer is accidentally possessed by the supernatural creature named Genesis, the infant of the unauthorized, unnatural coupling of an angel and a demon.\nGenesis has no sense of individual will, but since it is composed of both pure goodness and pure evil, its power might rival that of God Himself, making Jesse Custer, bonded to Genesis, potentially the most powerful being in the universe.\nDriven by a strong sense of right and wrong, Custer journeys across the United States attempting to literally find God, who abandoned Heaven the moment Genesis was born. He also begins to discover the truth about his new powers, allowing him, when he wills it, to command the obedience of those who hear and comprehend his words. He is joined by old girlfriend Tulip O'Hare, as well as a hard-drinking Irish vampire named Cassidy.\nDuring the course of their journeys, the three encounter enemies and obstacles both sacred and profane, including The Saint of Killers, an invincible, quick-drawing, perfect-aiming, come-lately Angel of Death answering only to \"He Who Sits On The Throne\"; a disfigured suicide attempt survivor turned rock-star named Arseface; a serial-killer called the 'Reaver-Cleaver'; The Grail, a secret organization controlling the governments of the world and protecting the bloodline of Jesus; Herr Starr, primary enforcer for The Grail, a megalomaniac with a penchant for prostitutes, who wishes to use Custer for his own ends; several fallen angels; and Jesse's own redneck family \u2014 particularly his nasty Cajun grandmother, her mighty bodyguard Jody, and the Zoophilic T.C.\nCollected editions.\nAdditionally, the book \"Preacher: Dead or Alive\" () collects Fabry's covers to the series.\nAdaptations.\nAdaptation attempts.\nGarth Ennis, feeling \"Preacher\" would translate perfectly as a film, sold the film rights to Electric Entertainment. Rachel Talalay was hired to direct, with Ennis writing the script. Rupert Harvey and Tom Astor were set as producers. By May 1998, Ennis completed three drafts of the script, based largely on the \"Gone to Texas\" story arc. The filmmakers found it difficult financing \"Preacher\" because investors found the idea religiously controversial. Ennis approached Kevin Smith and Scott Mosier to help finance the film under their View Askew Productions banner. Ennis, Smith and Mosier pitched \"Preacher\" to Bob Weinstein at Miramax Films.\nWeinstein was confused by the characterization of Jesse Custer. Miramax also did not want to share the box office gross with Electric Entertainment, ultimately dropping the pitch. By May 2000, Smith and Mosier were still attached to produce with Talalay directing, but Smith did not know the status of \"Preacher\", feeling it would languish in development hell. By then, Storm Entertainment, a UK-based production company known for their work on independent films, joined the production with Electric Entertainment. In September 2001, the two companies announced \"Preacher\" had been greenlighted to commence pre-production, with filming to begin in November and Talalay still directing Ennis' script. The production and start dates were pushed back because of financial issues of the $25 million projected budget.\nJames Marsden was cast in the lead role as Jesse Custer sometime in 2002. He explained, \"It was something I never knew anything about, but once I got my hands on the comic books, I was blown away by it.\" In a March 2004 interview, Marsden said the filmmakers were hoping for filming to start the following August. With the full-length film adaptation eventually abandoned with budgetary concerns, HBO announced in November 2006 that they commissioned Mark Steven Johnson and Howard Deutch to produce a television pilot. Johnson was to write with Deutch directing. Impressed with Johnson's pilot script, HBO had him write the series bible for the first season. Johnson first planned \"to turn each comic book issue into a single episode\" on a shot-for-shot basis. \"I gave [HBO] the comics, and I said, 'Every issue is an hour'. Ennis said 'You don't have to be so beholden to the comic'. And I'm like, 'No, no, no. It's got to be like the comic'.\"\nJohnson also wanted to make sure that one-shots were included as well. Johnson changed his position, citing new storylines conceived by Ennis. \"Well, there would be nothing new to add if we did that, so Garth [Ennis] and I have been creating new stories for the series,\" he said. \"I love the book so much and I was telling Garth that he has to make the stories we are coming up with as comics because I want to see them.\" By August 2008, new studio executives at HBO decided to abandon the idea, finding it too stylistically dark and religiously controversial. Columbia Pictures then purchased the film rights in October 2008 with Sam Mendes planned to direct. Neal H. Moritz and Jason Netter would have produced the film. The previous scripts written by Ennis would not have been used.\nAMC television series.\nOn November 16, 2013, it was announced that AMC would be shooting a pilot for \"Preacher\". On November 18, 2013, \"Bleeding Cool\" confirmed that Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg had developed the series pilot with Sam Catlin, and that it would be distributed by Sony Pictures Television. On February 7, 2014, it was made public that AMC was officially developing the series to television based on the pilot written by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg. Rogen had no plans to co-star in the series. On May 9, 2014, AMC announced that \"Preacher\" was picked up to series. \"Preacher\" was slated to premiere mid to late 2015, as announced by Seth Rogen, with the script for the series complete and the pilot ordered by the studio. Comic creators Steve Dillon and Garth Ennis were to work on this project as co-executive producer. On April 17, 2015, Seth Rogen tweeted that Dominic Cooper was cast in the role of Jesse Custer, Joseph Gilgun as Cassidy, Ruth Negga as Tulip O'Hare, Ian Colletti as Arseface, and W. Earl Brown as Sheriff Hugo Root. On September 9, 2015, Seth Rogen announced via Twitter that the series ordered to a ten-episode first season and was due to premiere in mid-2016. The series premiered on AMC on Sunday, May 22, 2016, and concluded July 31. A second season, with thirteen episodes, aired from June 25 to September 11, 2017. From June 24 to August 26, 2018, a ten-episode third season aired. In November 2018, the series was renewed for a fourth and final ten-episode season, with production relocating to Australia, and the season airing from August 4 to September 29, 2019.\nGraphicAudio audiobook series.\nIn May 2020, all 98 issues of Garth Ennis' \"The Boys\" comic book series and the 8-issue epilogue series \"Dear Becky\" were adapted into seven full cast audiobooks produced by GraphicAudio, with all volumes numbering a combined 31 hours in length. In the second audiobook, the \"Preacher\" epilogue from \"We Gotta Go Now\" is adapted, with Michael John Casey voicing Proinsias Cassidy.\nLegacy.\nStephen King has said that his comic book series ', based on his \"The Dark Tower\" series of novels, was influenced by \"Preacher\".\nThe character Yorick from \"\", has a Zippo lighter with the words \"Fuck Communism\" engraved, identical to the one owned by Jesse Custer in \"Preacher\". When asked about it he says it is \"from this book I read once... a graphic novel. You know, like a comic book.\" The phrase originated as a 1963 satirical poster produced by \"The Realist\" magazine's Paul Krassner. This lighter appears later in the series when Yorick and Agent 355 are being held by Russian agents at gunpoint, who find the lighter and take offense to it.\nIn February 2009, an older now-human Proinsias Cassidy appears in a epilogue cameo role in the fourth volume of Garth Ennis' first ongoing comic book series after \"Preacher\", the DC Comics (WildStorm)/Dynamite Entertainment series \"The Boys\" \u2013 \"We Gotta Go Now\" \u2013 in the twenty-seventh issue overall, depicted as a former friend and sponsor of Billy Butcher working as a bartender, clearing out his bar on St. Patrick's Day so that Billy can drink in peace while waiting for Wee Hughie Campbell.\nIGN declared \"Preacher\" the third-greatest Vertigo comic, after \"The Saga of the Swamp Thing\" and \"The Sandman\".\nJesse Custer was ranked the 11th Greatest Comic Book Character by \"Empire\" magazine. The Saint of Killers was ranked at number 42 on the same list.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24972", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24972", "title": "Preacher", "text": "Person who talks to groups about religious topics\nA preacher is a person who delivers sermons or homilies on religious topics to an assembly of people. Less common are preachers who preach on the street, or those whose message is not necessarily religious, but who preach components such as a moral or social worldview or philosophy.\nHistory.\nPreachers are common throughout most cultures. They can take the form of a Christian minister on a Sunday morning, or an Islamic imam. A Muslim preacher in general is referred to as a \"d\u0101\u2018\u012b\", while one giving sermons on a Friday afternoon is called a \"khatib\".\nThe sermon or homily has been an important part of Christian services since Early Christianity, and remains prominent in both Roman Catholicism and Protestantism. Lay preachers sometimes figure in these traditions of worship, for example the Methodist local preachers, but in general preaching has usually been a function of the clergy. The Catholic Church sees among its ministers \"an unending succession of preachers\" who maintain the preaching of the original apostles \"until the end of time\". The Dominican Order is officially known as the \"Order of Preachers\" ( in Latin); friars of this order were trained to publicly preach in vernacular languages, and the order was created by Saint Dominic to preach to the Cathars of southern France in the early thirteenth century. The Franciscans are another important preaching order; Travelling preachers, usually friars, were an important feature of late medieval Catholicism.\nIn most denominations, modern preaching is kept below about 40 minutes, and Pope Francis recommended a maximum of 8 minutes, but, historically, preachers of all denominations could at times speak for well over an hour, sometimes for two or three hours, and use techniques of rhetoric and theatre that are today somewhat out of fashion in mainline churches.\nIn many churches in the United States, the title \"preacher\" is synonymous with \"pastor\" or \"minister\", and the church's minister is often referred to simply as \"our/the preacher\" or by name such as \"Preacher Smith\".\nOther uses.\n\"Preacher\" is also the supposed author of the Book of Ecclesiastes. Preacher is one translation of the Hebrew word \u05e7\u05d4\u05dc\u05ea (). There is much debate about the identity of this preacher; many believe it is Solomon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24973", "revid": "34218277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24973", "title": "Prime time", "text": "Block of television programming occurring during peak viewing time in the evening\nPrime time (sometimes spelled primetime), or peak time, is the block of broadcast programming taking place during the middle of the evening for television shows. It is mostly targeted towards adults (and sometimes families). It is used by the major television networks to broadcast their season's nightly programming. The term \"prime-time\" is often defined in terms of a fixed time period\u2014for example (in the United States), from 8:00p.m. to 11:00p.m. (Eastern and Pacific Time) or 7:00p.m. to 10:00p.m. (Central and Mountain Time). In India and some Middle Eastern countries, prime time consists of programmes that are aired on television between 8:00p.m. and 10:00p.m. local time.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nIn Bangladesh, the 19:00-to-22:00 time slot is known as prime time. Several national broadcasters, like Maasranga Television, Gazi TV, Channel 9, and Channel i, broadcast their prime-time shows from 20:00 to 23:00 after their primetime news at 19:00.\nDuring Islamic holidays, most of the television stations broadcast their specially-produced shows and world television premieres starting from 15:00 to midnight.\nDuring Ramadan, the broadcasters also air special religious and cooking shows starting from 14:00 to 20:00. affecting the primetime hours. Late-night talk shows are also aired from 01:00 to 04:00, except during Ramadan. Religious shows are also broadcast simultaneously from 01:00, along with talk shows and news analysis.\nChina.\nIn television in China, the 19:00-to-22:00 time slot is known as Golden Time (Traditional Chinese: \u9ec4\u91d1\u6642\u9593; Simplified Chinese: \u9ec4\u91d1\u65f6\u95f4; Pinyin: Hu\u00e1ngj\u012bn sh\u00edji\u0101n). The term also influenced a nickname of a strip of holidays, known as Golden Week.\nHong Kong and Macau.\nPrime time usually takes place from 19:00 until 22:00. After that, programs classified as \"PG\" (Parental Guidance) are allowed to be broadcast. Frontline dramas appear during this time slot in Cantonese, as well as movies in English.\nIndia.\nIn India, prime time occurs between 20:00 and 23:30. Usually, programmes during prime time are domestic dramas, talent shows and reality shows.\nIndonesia.\nPrime time usually takes place from 17:00 to 0:00 in Indonesian time zones, and sinetrons (soap operas) dominate majority of the programming schedules. Before 2018, daily evening newscasts would kick off primetime between 17:00 and 18:00, although some channels, notably SCTV, broadcast their daily evening newscasts earlier, usually at 16:00 or 16:30. The practice of airing news at primetime ended in 2018 in favor of adding more sinetrons to the schedule, except for TVRI, which have kept their newscasts, \"Klik Indonesia Petang\" (at 18:00) on primetime respectively. After prime time, programs classified as Adult, as well as Adult products (generally cigarette) commercials, may be aired.\nLike other Muslim-majority nations, there is also a \"midnight prime time\" during suhur while the month of Ramadan is commencing. It takes place from 02:00 (or 02:30 in some channels) and ends at the Fajr prayer call, which varies in timing between 04:30 and 05:00. The time slot is usually filled with entertainment and religious programming.\nIraq.\nIn Iraq, prime time runs from 20:00 to 23:00. The main news programs are broadcast at 20:00 and the highest-rated television program airs at 21:00.\nJapan.\nIn Japanese television, prime time runs from 19:00 to 23:00. Especially, the 19:00-to-22:00 time slot is also known as . The term also influenced a nickname of a strip of holidays in Japan known as Golden Week.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia prime time starts with the main news from 20:00 to 20:30 (now 20:00 to 21:00) and ends either at 23:00 or 1:00, or possibly later. Usually, programmes during prime time are domestic dramas, foreign drama series (mostly American), films, and entertainment programmes. Programmes classified as 18 are not allowed to be broadcast before 10:00\u00a0p.m., but on Radio Televisyen Malaysia, most programmes on this slot are rated U (U means \"Umum\" in Malay and literally General Viewing or General Audiences in English) throughout the whole day. However, programmes broadcast after 23:00 are still considered prime time. As of 2019, NTV7's prime time continues until 12:00\u00a0a.m. Programmes during prime time may have longer commercial breaks due to the number of viewers.\nSome domestic prime-time productions may be affected because of certain major sporting events such as FIFA World Cup. However, only FIFA World Cup held in the Americas do not affect the domestic prime-time programmes but only during daytime.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, prime time is from 19:00 to 00:00 Pakistan Standard Time. During this time the majority of the local channels broadcast their most popular shows. However, state channels broadcast Khabarnama (New Bulletin) from past many decades.\nLike other Muslim-majority nations, during Ramadan, the broadcasters also air special religious and cooking shows starting from 14:00 to 19:00/19:30 with \"Ramadan\" special programs airing from 19:30/20:00 to 21:30/22:00 affecting the primetime hours for some channels. There is also a \"midnight prime time\" during suhur while the month of Ramadan is commencing. It takes place from 02:00 (or 01:45 in some channels) and ends at the Fajr prayer call, which varies in timing between 04:30 and 05:00. Also, during other Islamic events such as Muharram and Rabi' al-Awwal, some channels broadcast religious shows during day/evening time slots (between 12:00 and 19:00\u2014time varies on channel) or late-night slot (from 22:00).\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, prime-time blocks usually run from 17:00 to 23:00 on weekdays, and 17:30 to 23:30 on weekends. The weekday prime-time blocks usually consists of local Philippine television drama (soap operas) and foreign television series. The network's highest-rated programs are usually aired right after the evening newscast at 18:30 or 20:00, while a foreign series (usually a Korean Drama) usually airs before the evening newscast or precedes the late night newscast. On weekends, non-scripted programming such as comedy series, talent shows, reality shows and current affairs shows air in prime time. \nFor the minor networks, prime time consists of American television series on weekdays, with encores of those shows on weekends. Prime time originally started earlier at around 19:00, but the evening newscasts were lengthened to 90 minutes and now start at 18:30, instead of the original one-hour newscast that starts at 18:00.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, prime time begins at 18:00 on Channel 5, 18:30 on Channel 8 and 19:00 on Channel U, CNA, Suria, Vasantham. which are also the main (Free-to-air) television channels in Singapore.\nOn Channel 8, prime time ends at midnight or 0:15 on weekdays, at 0:30 on Saturday nights, and at 23:30 on Sunday nights. On Channel 5, prime time ends at 0:00 on weekdays, at 1:30 (or later) on Saturday nights, and at 0:30 on Sunday nights. On Suria, prime time ends at 22:30 on Monday to Thursday nights, 23:30 on Friday nights, 23:00 on weekends, and at 00:30 or 01:00 on eve and actual days of public holidays. On Vasantham, prime time ends at 23:00 on Mondays to Thursdays, midnight (or later) on Friday and Saturday nights, and at 23:30 on Sunday nights. On Channel NewsAsia, prime time ends at 23:01, immediately after the news headlines, seven days a week; on Channel U, prime time ends at 23:00 seven days a week. Generally, however, prime time is considered to be from 18:00 to 00:00.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, prime time usually runs from 19:30 to 23:00 during weekdays, while on Saturdays and Sundays, it runs from 18:00 to 23:00. Family-oriented television shows are broadcast before 22:00, and adult-oriented television shows air after 22:00.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, prime time (called \"b\u0101di\u01cen d\u00e0ng\"\u2014\u516b\u9ede\u6a94\u2014in Mandarin Chinese, literally eight o'clock slot) starts at 8 p.m.. Taiwanese drama series played then are called 8 o'clock series and are expected to have high viewer ratings. Also, the evening news usually start from 18:00 or 19:00.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, prime time dramas (\u0e25\u0e30\u0e04\u0e23; lakhon) air from 20:30 to 22:30. Most dramas are soap operas. Prime time dramas are popular and influential to Thai society.\nVietnam.\nIn Vietnam, prime time is also known as Golden Time (Vietnamese: \"Gi\u1edd v\u00e0ng\"). Prime time starts at 18:00 in the evening and ends at 22:00.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nIn Austria, prime time usually starts at 20:15 after the news broadcast of ORF 1. Even though ORF2 has its news from 19:30 to 20:00, they also start broadcasting prime time content at 20:15. The same applies for nearly all channels seated in Austria or Germany that are broadcast in Austria.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina, prime time starts at 20:00 and finishes at 22:00. It is preceded by a daily newscast (\"Dnevnik\") at 19:00 and followed by a late night newscast (\"Vijesti\") at 22:00.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria, prime time starts at 20:00 every day (including weekends). Usually, the programmes aired are Bulgarian or Turkish series and reality shows, followed by a late newscast. The Bulgarian National Television broadcasts \"Po Sveta i u Nas\" at 20:00 and shows cultural and political programmes from 21:00 to 22:00, with series and late-night news following at 23:00.\nCroatia.\nIn Croatia, prime time starts between 20:00 and 20:15. Croatian public broadcaster Hrvatska radiotelevizija broadcasts a daily newscast from 19:00 to 20:00. Also, many private broadcasters have daily newscasts either before or after the HTY newscast, at around 20.05, followed by the start of their own prime time. Many broadcasters without daily newscasts start their prime time at 20:00. Prime time generally ends between 22:00 and 23:00, followed by the late night edition of the network newscast and adult-oriented programming.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, prime time starts at 20:00.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, prime time starts at 21:00. It is preceded by a daily newscast at 20:30.\nFrance.\nIn France prime time starts at 21:10 (20:35 in the 1980s, 20:50 in the 1990s and 2000s, 21:05 in the 2010s).\nGeorgia.\nIn Georgia, prime time starts between 18:45 and 20:00 and generally ends at midnight. However, on Friday night / Saturday morning, prime time usually continues until 1:00.\nGermany.\nAt 20:00 each evening, Das Erste (The First), Germany's oldest public television network, airs the country's most-watched news broadcast, the main edition of the \"Tagesschau\", which is also simulcast on most of its other specialist and regional channels (The Third). The conclusion of the bulletin 15 minutes later marks the beginning of prime time, as it has since the 1950s. In consequence, most other channels\u2014public and private alike\u2014also choose to start their prime time at 20:15. In the 1990s, the commercial channel Sat.1 suffered a significant loss of audience share when it tried moving the start of its prime time to 20:00.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, prime time runs from 21:00 (usually following the news) to midnight.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, prime time on weekdays on the two big commercial stations (RTL and TV2) starts at 19:00 with game shows, tabloid, and docu-reality programmes. At 21:00, two popular soap operas air: \"Bar\u00e1tok k\u00f6zt\" and \"J\u00f3ban Rosszban\", which follows at 21:30. American and other series, movies, talk-shows, and magazines run until 23:30. The prime-time lineup is preceded by daily news programmes at 18:30. At weekends, prime time begins at 19:00, with blockbuster movies and television shows.\nBefore 15 March 2015, the public television station M1 began its prime time with a game show at 18:30, which was followed by the daily news programme \"H\u00edrad\u00f3\" at 19:30. After the news, the channel broadcast American and other series, talk shows, magazines, and news programmes until 22:00, after which came the daily news magazine \"Este\" and the late edition of \"H\u00edrad\u00f3\".\nFrom 15 March 2015, Duna began broadcasting all of the entertainment programming transferred to it from that date from M1, meaning that prime time on Duna now begins at 18:00, starting with the simulcast of the 18:00 edition of H\u00edrad\u00f3 from the newly re-launched news channel, M1.\nIceland.\nIn Iceland, prime time starts at 19:30. It is preceded by a daily newscast at 19:00.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, prime starts at 18:30 and ends at 22:00.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, prime time (called \"prima serata\") starts between 21:00 and 21:45 (main channels, including RTV) and ends between 23:30 and 00:30. On Friday and Saturday night, some shows last until 06:30\u201307:00. It usually follows news and, on some networks (like Rai 1 and Canale 5), a slot called \"access prime time\". Shows, movies, and sport events are usually shown during prime time.\nNetherlands.\nMuch like in Germany, prime time in the Netherlands usually begins at 20:30 in order to not compete with Nederlanse Omroep Stichting's flagship 20:00 newscast.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, prime time starts at 19:45. On the NRK1 channel it is preceded by the daily newscast \"Dagsrevyen\" at 19:00. Locally, prime time is called (lit.\u2009'best time for broadcasting').\nPoland.\nIn Poland, prime time starts around 20:00 (sometimes 20:30). On TVP1, it is preceded by a daily newscast at 19:30. On TVN, the newscast is aired at 19:00, followed by the newsmagazine \"Uwaga\" at 19:50 (weekdays) or 19:45 (weekends), and then the soap opera \"Na Wsp\u00f3lnej\" at 20:05 (Monday to Thursday) or 20:00 (Friday to Sunday), various movies on Fridays, serials or films (winter and summer) on Saturdays, and programmes or films (winter and summer) on Sundays. On Polsat, the news is aired at 18:50, followed by Go\u015b\u0107 Wydarze\u0144 talk-show at 19:15, sports news and weather forecast.\nPortugal.\nMuch like in Spain, prime time in Portugal usually begins later at 21:30 and ends at 0:00 in order to not compete with R\u00e1dio e Televis\u00e3o de Portugal's flagship 20:00 newscast. Similarly, Portugal also has a second prime time, running from 13:30\u201316:00 which coincides with the extended Portuguese lunch break.\nRussia.\nIn Russia television prime time is between 19:00 and 23:00 on working days and from 15:00 to 01:00 on holidays.\nOn radio stations there are morning, day and evening prime times. The most common division:\nmorning\u20146:30 to 10:00;\nday\u2014~12:00 to 14:00;\nevening\u201416:00 to 21:00.\nSlovakia.\nPublic television in Slovakia consists of two channels; on the main channel (Jednotka) prime time starts at 20:10, and on the second one (Dvojka) prime-time programming starts at 20:00. The two biggest private broadcasters set the start of prime-time programming at 20:20 (Mark\u00edza) and 20:30 (TV JOJ). Generally, however, prime time is considered to be from 20:00 to 23:00.\nSlovenia.\nIn Slovenia, prime time, the period in which the most-watched shows are broadcast, is from 8:00pm to 11:00pm. It is preceded by daily newscasts; Dnevnik RTV SLO (7:00pm \u2013 8:00pm) on TV SLO 1, 24ur (6:55pm \u2013 8:00pm) on POP TV, Svet na Kanalu A (6:00pm \u2013 7:00pm; 7:50pm\u20138:0pm), and Danes (7:30pm \u2013 8:00pm) on Planet TV.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, prime time refers to the time period in which the most-watched shows are broadcast. Prime time in Spain starts quite late when compared to most nations as it runs from 22:30 till 01:00. Most news programmes in Spain air at 21:00 for an hour and prime time follows. However, due to fierce competition, especially among the private stations prime time has even been delayed until 23:00. Most channels are delaying prime time in order to protect their top shows from sporting events.\nIn the 1990s, prime time in Spain began at 21:00, moving to 21:30 in the latter half of the 1990s and 22:00 in the early 2000s. Commercial broadcaster LaSexta and the second channel from the Public broadcasting La 2 have attempted to shift prime time back to 21:30 in 2006 and Spring 2007, but these attempts have been unsuccessful. Fellow public channel La 1 also tried to pull prime time back to 21:00 in early 2015, to no avail.\nThe lateness in the start of prime time in Spain is also due to Spanish culture. Spanish people generally work from 09:00\u201314:00 and then from 17:00\u201320:00 as opposed to the 09:00\u201317:00 which is common in other countries. The popular late-night show \"Cr\u00f3nicas marcianas\" during the late 1990s\u20132000 also helped to extend prime time well into the early hours with the show being watched by a share of 40%, despite finishing at 02:00.\nSpain might also be unique in that it has a second prime time, running from 14:30\u201317:00 which coincides with the extended Spanish lunch break. Shows airing in the secondary prime time period on many occasions beat those prime-time shows at night on a daily basis. The second prime time occurs only on weekdays, though and the slot is usually filled with \"The Simpsons\", news, soap operas and talk shows.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, prime time starts at 20:00. It is preceded by a daily newscast at 19:30 and local news at 19:50.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, prime time () runs from 18:30 to 21:30 on working days and from 15:00 to 01:00 on holidays.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, prime time (also known as peak time) runs from 19:00 to 23:00.\nNorth America.\nIn North America, television networks feed their prime-time programming in two blocks: one for the Eastern and Central time zones, and the other, on a three-hour tape delay, for the Pacific Time Zone, to their local network affiliates. In Atlantic Canada (including Newfoundland and Labrador), as well as Alaska and Hawaii, there is no change in the interpretation or usage of \"prime time\", as the concept is not attached to time zones in any way. Affiliates in the Mountain, Alaskan, and Hawaiian zones are either on their own to delay broadcast by an hour or two, or collectively form a small, regional network feed with others in the same time zone.\nPrime time is commonly defined as 8:00\u201311:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern/Pacific and 7:00\u201310:00\u00a0p.m. Central/Mountain on Monday through Saturday. On Sundays, the five major broadcast television networks traditionally begin their primetime programming one hour early at 7:00\u00a0p.m. (Eastern/Pacific, 6:00\u00a0p.m. Central/Mountain), and still air through 11:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific /10:00 p.m. Central. Some networks, such as Fox and The CW only broadcast a time period from 7:00\u201310:00 p.m. on Sundays and 8:00\u201310:00 p.m. on other days, a time period known as \"Common Prime\".\nMyNetworkTV takes it a step further and broadcast only from 8:00\u201310:00\u00a0p.m. and only on weekdays (due to it not being a TV network and instead as a programming service, forming its programming like a TV block). \nThe CW returned to Sunday broadcasting in 2019, followed by the addition of Saturday for the first time in 2021 and then the Sunday prime access hour in 2023. In Canada, CTV and Global both follow the same model as the larger American networks (although both may occasionally air programming in the 7:00\u00a0p.m. hour in the event of scheduling conflicts with other U.S. imports), while CBC Television, Citytv, and CTV 2 schedule prime-time programs only within the common prime period (with the 10:00p.m. hour dedicated to syndicated programming on Citytv and CTV 2, and CBC airing its news program \"The National\"). The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) has alternatively defined prime time as ranging from https:// to https://.\nSince the early 2000s, the major networks have come to consider Saturday prime time as a graveyard slot and have largely abandoned scheduling of new scripted programming on that night. The major networks still maintain a prime-time programming schedule on Saturdays, with a mix of live sporting events (most commonly college football in the United States and ice hockey in Canada), encores of programs aired earlier in the week, films, non-scripted reality programs, true crime programs produced by their news divisions, and, occasionally, burning off episodes of low-rated or cancelled series.\nPrime time can be extended or truncated if coverage of sporting events run past their allotted end time. Since the \"Heidi Game\" incident in 1968, in which NBC cut away from coverage of a New York Jets/Oakland Raiders football game on the east coast in order to show a movie (and, in the process, causing viewers to miss an unexpected comeback by the Raiders to win the game), the present-day National Football League (NFL) mandates that all games be broadcast in their entirety in the markets of the teams involved. Due to this rule, game telecasts may sometimes overrun into the 7:00\u00a0p.m. ET hour. Fox previously scheduled repeats of its animated series in the 7:00 hour, allowing themselves to simply pre-empt the reruns if a game ran long. This was later replaced by a half-hour-long wrap-up show, \"The OT\". In contrast, CBS does not, as its weekly newsmagazine \"60 Minutes\" has traditionally aired as close to 7:00\u00a0p.m. ET as possible. Even if a game runs past that hour, CBS shows \"60 Minutes\" in its entirety after the conclusion of coverage, and the rest of the prime-time schedule on the East Coast is shifted to compensate. For example, if game coverage were to end at 7:30\u00a0p.m., prime time would end at 11:30\u00a0p.m.\nHowever, in the rare case where the NFL game runs excessively late (8p.m. or later), the series scheduled to air at 10p.m. is preempted, with the West Coast and eastern markets airing only an early afternoon game usually receiving a repeat of the 10p.m. series instead. In an extreme case, CBS's prime time can be extended past midnight during broadcasts of the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament. This does not necessarily apply universally; in 2001, after an XFL game went into double overtime, causing a 45-minute delay of a highly promoted episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", NBC made a decision to cut off all future XFL broadcasts at 11:00\u00a0p.m. ET. Since the launch of NBCSN, NBC has occasionally invoked this curfew by moving sports overruns to that channel if necessary.\nUntil the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulated time slots prior to prime time with the now-defunct Prime Time Access Rule in the 1971\u20131972 season, networks began programming at 7:30\u00a0p.m. Eastern and Pacific/6:30\u00a0p.m. Central and Mountain on weeknights. The change helped instigate what is colloquially known as the \"rural purge\"\u2014a long-term trend away from programs appealing to older and rural audiences in favor of programs catering towards younger, \"urban\" viewers. As a result, the prime access hour became a lucrative timeslot for syndicated programming in the years that followed, with game shows and variety shows, as well as syndicated reruns, becoming popular.\nThe vast majority of prime-time programming in English-speaking North America comes from the United States, with only a limited amount produced in Canada. The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission mandates quotas for Canadian content in prime time; these quotas indicate at least half of Canadian prime-time programs must be Canadian in origin, but the majority of this is served by national and local news or localized entertainment gossip shows such as Global Television Network's \"Entertainment Tonight Canada\" and CTV Television Network's \"ETalk\".\nLikewise, the vast majority of Spanish-language programming in North America comes from Mexico. Televisa, a Mexican network, provides the majority of programming to the dominant American-based Spanish broadcaster, Univision. Univision does produce a fairly large amount of unscripted Spanish-language programming, the best-known having been the long-running variety show \"S\u00e1bado Gigante\", hosted and created by Chilean national Don Francisco, until September 2015. Today, Univision is televising Liga MX soccer matches on Saturdays. Univision's distant second-place competitor, Telemundo, produces a much greater share of in-house content, including a long line of telenovelas.\nIn Quebec, the largest Francophone area of North America, French-language programming consists of originally produced programs (most of which are produced in Montreal, with a few produced in Quebec City) and a few French-language dubs of English language programs. On all of the Quebec networks, entertainment programming is scheduled only between 8 and 10p.m., with the 10\u201311p.m. hour given over to a network newscast or a nightly talk show.\nUnited States.\nPrime time is the daypart (a block of a day's programming schedule) with the most viewers and is generally where television networks and local stations reap much of their advertising revenues. In recent years, television advertising expenditure in the US has been highest during prime-time drama shows.\nThe Nielsen ratings system is explicitly designed for the optimum measurement of audience viewership by dayparts, with prime time being of most interest. Television viewership is, in general, highest on weekday evenings, as most Americans are at work during daytime, asleep during the overnights, and out taking part in social events on weekends; thus, television has its highest audience at times when people are unlikely to be away from home.\nPrime time for radio is called drive time and, in Eastern and Pacific Time, is 6\u201310a.m. and 3\u20137p.m. and, for Mountain and Central Time, is 5\u20139a.m. and 2\u20136p.m. The difference between peak radio listenership and television viewership times is due to the fact that people listen to their radios most often while driving to and from work (hence the name \"drive time\").\nA survey by Nielsen revealed that viewers watched almost two hours' worth of TV during prime time.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, central time normally starts at 7:30 p.m. and periodically ends at 10:30 p.m. The main networks, such as Las Estrellas, Azteca Uno, and Imagen Televisi\u00f3n, broadcast telenovelas produced by themselves or productions acquired from other countries such as Turkey and Brazil, among others.\nSouth America.\nIn many Latin American countries, prime time (known in most countries as \"horario central\" or \"Central Time\", \"horario estelar\" (\"Stellar Time\") or \"hor\u00e1rio nobre\" (\"noble time\") in Brazil) is considered to be from Monday to Friday from 6:00 or 7:00\u00a0p.m. to 10:00 or 11:00\u00a0p.m. The time slot is usually used for news, telenovelas and television shows, and special time slots are used for reality television, with great popularity, especially in Mexico and Brazil. In Brazil, the three most famous telenovelas in the country are shown each weekday and on Saturdays on prime time. There are also news programs, reality shows, and sitcoms.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, prime time is considered to be from 8:00p.m. until 12:00a.m., including the most successful series and telenovelas in the country (such as \"Los Rold\u00e1n\" and \"Valientes\") and entertainment shows, like CQC (Caiga Quien Caiga) or Showmatch (Showmatch).\nChile.\nIn Chile, prime time is considered to be from 10:30p.m. until 1:00a.m., including the most successful series and telenovelas in the country (such as \"Socias\" and \"Las Vega's\"). Investigation entertainment shows (like \"Informe Especial\", \"Contacto\", and \"Apuesto por ti\") also air.\nParaguay.\nIn Paraguay, prime time occurs between 19:00 and 23:00. Usually, programmes during prime time are newscasts and entertainment shows.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nPrime time in Australia is officially from 6:00\u00a0p.m. to midnight, following Australian Eastern Standard Time, with the highest ratings normally achieved between 6:00\u00a0p.m. and 9:00\u00a0p.m.\nNew Zealand.\nTraditionally, prime time in New Zealand is considered to be 7:30pm to 10:30pm, but it can be extended to cover the entire evening of television (5:00pm to 11:00pm).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24974", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24974", "title": "Pelton wheel", "text": "Type of turbine\nThe Pelton wheel or Pelton Turbine is an impulse-type water turbine invented by American inventor Lester Allan Pelton in the 1870s. The Pelton wheel extracts energy from the impulse of moving water, as opposed to water's dead weight like the traditional overshot water wheel. Many earlier variations of impulse turbines existed, but they were less efficient than Pelton's design. Water leaving those wheels typically still had high speed, carrying away much of the dynamic energy brought to the wheels. Pelton's paddle geometry was designed so that when the rim ran at half the speed of the water jet, the water left the wheel with very little speed; thus his design extracted almost all of the water's impulse energy\u2014which made for a very efficient turbine.\nHistory.\nLester Allan Pelton was born in Vermillion, Ohio in 1829. In 1850, he traveled overland to take part in the California Gold Rush. Pelton worked by selling fish he caught in the Sacramento River. In 1860, he moved to Camptonville, a center of placer mining activity. At this time many mining operations were powered by steam engines which consumed vast amounts of wood as their fuel. Some water wheels were used in the larger rivers, but they were ineffective in the smaller streams that were found near the mines. Pelton worked on a design for a water wheel that would work with the relatively small flow found in these streams.\nBy the mid 1870s, Pelton had developed a wooden prototype of his new wheel. In 1876, he approached the Miners Foundry in Nevada City, California to build the first commercial models in iron. The first Pelton Wheel was installed at the Mayflower Mine in Nevada City in 1878. The efficiency advantages of Pelton's invention were quickly recognized and his product was soon in high demand. He patented his invention on 26 October 1880. By the mid-1880s, the Miners Foundry could not meet the demand, and in 1888, Pelton sold the rights to his name and the patents to his invention to the Pelton Water Wheel Company in San Francisco. The company established a factory at 121/123 Main Street in San Francisco.\nThe Pelton Water Wheel Company manufactured a large number of Pelton Wheels in San Francisco which were shipped around the world. In 1892, the Company added a branch on the east coast at 143 Liberty Street in New York City. By 1900, over 11,000 turbines were in use. In 1914, the company moved manufacturing to new, larger premises at 612 Alabama Street in San Francisco. In 1956, the company was acquired by the Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton Company, which ended manufacture of Pelton Wheels.\nIn New Zealand, A &amp; G Price in Thames, New Zealand produced Pelton waterwheels for the local market. One of these is on outdoor display at the Thames Goldmine Experience.\nDesign.\nNozzles direct forceful, high-speed streams of water against a series of spoon-shaped buckets, also known as impulse blades, which are mounted around the outer rim of a drive wheel (also called a \"runner\"). As the water jet hits the blades, the direction of water velocity is changed to follow the contours of the blades. The impulse energy of the water jet exerts torque on the bucket-and-wheel system, spinning the wheel; the water jet does a \"u-turn\" and exits at the outer sides of the bucket, decelerated to a low velocity. In the process, the water jet's momentum is transferred to the wheel and hence to a turbine. Thus, \"impulse\" energy does work on the turbine.\nMaximum power and efficiency are achieved when the velocity of the water jet is twice the velocity of the rotating buckets, which, assuming that water jet collides elastically with the bucket, would mean the water leaves the bucket with zero velocity, thus imparting all kinetic energy to the wheel. In practice, a very small percentage of the water jet's original kinetic energy will remain in the water, which causes the bucket to be emptied at the same rate it is filled, and thereby allows the high-pressure input flow to continue uninterrupted and without waste of energy.\nTypically two buckets are mounted side-by-side on the wheel, with the water jet split into two equal streams; this balances the side-load forces on the wheel and helps to ensure smooth, efficient transfer of momentum from the water jet to the turbine wheel.\nBecause water is nearly incompressible, almost all of the available energy is extracted in the first stage of the hydraulic turbine. \"Therefore, Pelton wheels have only one turbine stage, unlike gas turbines that operate with compressible fluid.\"\nApplications.\nPelton wheels are the preferred turbine for hydro-power where the available water source has relatively high hydraulic head at low flow rates. Pelton wheels are made in all sizes. There exist multi-ton Pelton wheels mounted on vertical oil pad bearings in hydroelectric plants. The largest units \u2013 the Bieudron Hydroelectric Power Station at the Grande Dixence Dam complex in Switzerland \u2013 are over 400 megawatts.\nThe smallest Pelton wheels are only a few inches across, and can be used to tap power from mountain streams having flows of a few gallons per minute. Some of these systems use household plumbing fixtures for water delivery. These small units are recommended for use with or more of head, in order to generate significant power levels. Depending on water flow and design, Pelton wheels operate best with heads from , although there is no theoretical limit. Such \"peltric sets\", consisting of a Pelton wheel, an induction generator and a control mechanism, are used in Nepal.\nDesign rules.\nThe specific speed formula_1 parameter is independent of a particular turbine's size.\nCompared to other turbine designs, the relatively low specific speed of the Pelton wheel implies that the geometry is inherently a \"low gear\" design. Thus it is most suitable to being fed by a hydro source with a low ratio of flow to pressure (meaning relatively low flow and/or relatively high pressure).\nThe specific speed is the main criterion for matching a specific hydro-electric site with the optimal turbine type. It also allows a new turbine design to be scaled from an existing design of known performance.\nformula_2 (dimensionless parameter), \nwhere:\nThe formula implies that the Pelton turbine is \"geared\" most suitably for applications with relatively high hydraulic head \"H\", due to the 5/4 exponent being greater than unity, and given the characteristically low specific speed of the Pelton.\nTurbine physics and derivation.\nEnergy and initial jet velocity.\nIn the ideal (frictionless) case, all of the hydraulic potential energy (\"E\"\"p\"\u00a0= \"mgh\") is converted into kinetic energy (\"E\"\"k\"\u00a0= \"mv\"2/2) (see Bernoulli's principle). Equating these two equations and solving for the initial jet velocity (\"V\"\"i\") indicates that the theoretical (maximum) jet velocity is \"V\"\"i\"\u00a0= \u221a2\"gh\". For simplicity, assume that all of the velocity vectors are parallel to each other. Defining the velocity of the wheel runner as: (\"u\"), then as the jet approaches the runner, the initial jet velocity relative to the runner is: (\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"u\").\nThe initial velocity of jet is \"V\"\"i\".\nFinal jet velocity.\nAssuming that the jet velocity is higher than the runner velocity, if the water is not to become backed-up in runner, then due to conservation of mass, the mass entering the runner must equal the mass leaving the runner. The fluid is assumed to be incompressible (an accurate assumption for most liquids). Also, it is assumed that the cross-sectional area of the jet is constant. The fluid impacts the runner, slowing down and transferring momentum from the jet to the wheel. Assuming no losses, the fluid leaving the runner's velocity is reduced by the velocity difference between the jet and the runner. The jet \"speed\" remains constant relative to the runner. So as the jet recedes from the runner, the jet velocity relative to the runner is: \u2212 (\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0\u2212 \"u\")\u00a0= \u2212\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0+ \"u\". Note the minus sign indicates the reduction in stream velocity from impacting the runner. With the assumption that jet velocity is higher than runner velocity, the result is a \"rebound\" resulting in the jet flowing away from the runner. In the standard reference frame (relative to the earth), the final velocity is then: \"V\"\"f\"\u00a0= (\u2212\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0+ u)\u00a0+ \"u\"\u00a0= \u2212\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0+ 2\"u\".\nThe value \"V\"\"f\" is bounded by two cases: a stationary runner and a runner moving at the velocity of the stream, \"V\"\"i\". For the stationary runner case, the stream velocity is -Vf, indicating the fluid fully reversed direction. In this case the force on the wheel is the highest (due to the largest possible velocity change), but power delivered is zero, since there is no movement. For the case where the runner is moving at the speed of the stream, the velocity of the wheel is the highest, but power delivered is also zero, since there is no torque or force imparted on the wheel (due to no change is stream velocity). \nOptimal wheel speed.\nThe ideal runner speed will cause all of the kinetic energy in the jet to be transferred to the wheel. In this case the final jet velocity must be zero. If \u2212\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0+ 2\"u\"\u00a0= 0, then the optimal runner speed will be \"u\"\u00a0= \"V\"\"i\" /2, or half the initial jet velocity.\nTorque.\nBy Newton's second and third laws, the force \"F\" imposed by the jet on the runner is equal but opposite to the rate of momentum change of the fluid, so\n \"F\" = \u2212\"m\"(\"V\"f \u2212 \"V\"i)/\"t\" = \u2212\"\u03c1Q\"[(\u2212\"V\"i + 2\"u\") \u2212 \"V\"i] = \u2212\"\u03c1Q\"(\u22122\"V\"i + 2\"u\") = 2\"\u03c1Q\"(\"V\"i \u2212 \"u\"),\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the density, and \"Q\" is the volume rate of flow of fluid. If \"D\" is the wheel diameter, the torque on the runner is.\n \"T\" = \"F\"(\"D\"/2) = \"\u03c1QD\"(\"V\"i \u2212 \"u\").\nThe torque is maximal when the runner is stopped (i.e. when \"u\"\u00a0= 0, \"T\"\u00a0= \"\u03c1QDV\"i). When the speed of the runner is equal to the initial jet velocity, the torque is zero (i.e., when \"u\"\u00a0= \"V\"i, then \"T\"\u00a0=\u00a00). On a plot of torque versus runner speed, the torque curve is a straight line between these two points: (0, \"pQDV\"i) and (\"V\"i, 0).\nNozzle efficiency is the ratio of the jet power to the waterpower at the base of the nozzle.\nPower.\nThe power \"P\"\u00a0= \"Fu\"\u00a0= \"T\u03c9\", where \"\u03c9\" is the angular velocity of the wheel. Substituting for \"F\", we have \"P\"\u00a0= 2\"\u03c1Q\"(\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0\u2212 \"u\")\"u\". To find the runner speed at maximum power, take the derivative of \"P\" with respect to \"u\" and set it equal to zero, [\"dP\"/\"du\"\u00a0= 2\"\u03c1Q\"(\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0\u2212 2\"u\")]. Maximum power occurs when \"u\"\u00a0= \"V\"\"i\" /2. \"P\"max = \"\u03c1QV\"\"i\"2/2. Substituting the initial jet power \"V\"\"i\"\u00a0= \u221a2\"gh\", this simplifies to \"P\"max\u00a0= \"\u03c1ghQ\". This quantity exactly equals the kinetic power of the jet, so in this ideal case, the efficiency is 100%, since all the energy in the jet is converted to shaft output.\nEfficiency.\nA wheel power divided by the initial jet power, is the turbine efficiency, \"\u03b7\"\u00a0= 4\"u\"(\"V\"\"i\"\u00a0\u2212 \"u\")/\"V\"\"i\"2. It is zero for \"u\"\u00a0=\u00a00 and for \"u\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"V\"\"i\". As the equations indicate, when a real Pelton wheel is working close to maximum efficiency, the fluid flows off the wheel with very little residual velocity. In theory, the energy efficiency varies only with the efficiency of the nozzle and wheel, and does not vary with hydraulic head.\nThe term \"efficiency\" can refer to: Hydraulic, Mechanical, Volumetric, Wheel, or overall efficiency.\nSystem components.\nThe conduit bringing high-pressure water to the impulse wheel is called the penstock. Originally the penstock was the name of the valve, but the term has been extended to include all of the fluid supply hydraulics. Penstock is now used as a general term for a water passage and control that is under pressure, whether it supplies an impulse turbine or not.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24975", "revid": "19675780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24975", "title": "Piezoelectricity", "text": "Electric charge generated in certain solids due to mechanical stress\nPiezoelectricity (, ) is the electric charge that accumulates in certain solid materials\u2014such as crystals, certain ceramics, and biological matter such as bone, DNA, and various proteins\u2014in response to applied mechanical stress.\nThe piezoelectric effect results from the linear electromechanical interaction between the mechanical and electrical states in crystalline materials with no inversion symmetry. The piezoelectric effect is a reversible process: materials exhibiting the piezoelectric effect also exhibit the reverse piezoelectric effect, the internal generation of a mechanical strain resulting from an applied electric field. For example, lead zirconate titanate crystals will generate measurable piezoelectricity when their static structure is deformed by about 0.1% of the original dimension. Conversely, those same crystals will change about 0.1% of their static dimension when an external electric field is applied. The inverse piezoelectric effect is used in the production of ultrasound waves.\nFrench physicists Jacques and Pierre Curie discovered piezoelectricity in 1880. The piezoelectric effect has been exploited in many useful applications, including the production and detection of sound, piezoelectric inkjet printing, generation of high voltage electricity, as a clock generator in electronic devices, in microbalances, to drive an ultrasonic nozzle, and in ultrafine focusing of optical assemblies. It forms the basis for scanning probe microscopes that resolve images at the scale of atoms. It is used in the pickups of some electronically amplified guitars and as triggers in most modern electronic drums. The piezoelectric effect also finds everyday uses, such as generating sparks to ignite gas cooking and heating devices, torches, and cigarette lighters.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"piezoelectricity\" means electricity resulting from pressure. It is derived from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to squeeze or press' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'amber' (an ancient source of static electricity). The German form of the word () was coined in 1881 by the German physicist Wilhelm Gottlieb Hankel; the English word was derived from German in 1883.\nHistory.\nDiscovery and early research.\nThe pyroelectric effect, by which a material generates an electric potential in response to a temperature change, was studied by Carl Linnaeus and Franz Aepinus in the mid-18th century. Drawing on this knowledge, both Ren\u00e9 Just Ha\u00fcy and Antoine C\u00e9sar Becquerel posited a relationship between mechanical stress and electric charge; however, experiments by both proved inconclusive.\nThe first demonstration of the direct piezoelectric effect was in 1880 by the brothers Pierre Curie and Jacques Curie. They combined their knowledge of pyroelectricity with their understanding of the underlying crystal structures that gave rise to pyroelectricity to predict crystal behavior, and demonstrated the effect using crystals of tourmaline, quartz, topaz, cane sugar, and Rochelle salt (sodium potassium tartrate tetrahydrate). Quartz and Rochelle salt exhibited the most piezoelectricity.\nThe Curies, however, did not predict the converse piezoelectric effect. The converse effect was mathematically deduced from fundamental thermodynamic principles by Gabriel Lippmann in 1881. The Curies immediately confirmed the existence of the converse effect, and went on to obtain quantitative proof of the complete reversibility of electro-elasto-mechanical deformations in piezoelectric crystals.\nFor the next few decades, piezoelectricity remained something of a laboratory curiosity, though it was a vital tool in the discovery of polonium and radium by Pierre and Marie Curie in 1898. More work was done to explore and define the crystal structures that exhibited piezoelectricity. This culminated in 1910 with the publication of Woldemar Voigt's \"Lehrbuch der Kristallphysik\" (\"Textbook on Crystal Physics\"), which described the 20 natural crystal classes capable of piezoelectricity, and rigorously defined the piezoelectric constants using tensor analysis.\nWorld War I and inter-war years.\nThe first practical application for piezoelectric devices was sonar, first developed during World War I. The superior performance of piezoelectric devices, operating at ultrasonic frequencies, superseded the earlier Fessenden oscillator. In France in 1917, Paul Langevin and his coworkers developed an ultrasonic submarine detector. The detector consisted of a transducer, made of thin quartz crystals carefully glued between two steel plates, and a hydrophone to detect the returned echo. By emitting a high-frequency pulse from the transducer, and measuring the amount of time it takes to hear an echo from the sound waves bouncing off an object, one can calculate the distance to that object.\nPiezoelectric devices found homes in many fields. Ceramic phonograph cartridges simplified player design, were cheap and accurate, and made record players cheaper to maintain and easier to build. The development of the ultrasonic transducer allowed for easy measurement of viscosity and elasticity in fluids and solids, resulting in huge advances in materials research. Ultrasonic time-domain reflectometers (which send an ultrasonic pulse through a material and measure reflections from discontinuities) could find flaws inside cast metal and stone objects, improving structural safety.\nWorld War II and post-war.\nDuring World War II, independent research groups in the United States, USSR, and Japan discovered a new class of synthetic materials, called ferroelectrics, which exhibited piezoelectric constants many times higher than natural materials. This led to intense research to develop barium titanate and later lead zirconate titanate materials with specific properties for particular applications.\nOne significant example of the use of piezoelectric crystals was developed by Bell Telephone Laboratories. Following World War I, Frederick R. Lack, working in radio telephony in the engineering department, developed the \"AT cut\" crystal, a crystal that operated through a wide range of temperatures. Lack's crystal did not need the heavy accessories previous crystal used, facilitating its use on the aircraft. This development allowed Allied air forces to engage in coordinated mass attacks through the use of aviation radio.\nDevelopment of piezoelectric devices and materials in the United States was kept within the companies doing the development, mostly due to the wartime beginnings of the field, and in the interests of securing profitable patents. New materials were the first to be developed\u2014quartz crystals were the first commercially exploited piezoelectric material, but scientists searched for higher-performance materials. Despite the advances in materials and the maturation of manufacturing processes, the United States market did not grow as quickly as Japan's did. Without many new applications, the growth of the United States' piezoelectric industry suffered.\nIn contrast, Japanese manufacturers shared their information, quickly overcoming technical and manufacturing challenges and creating new markets. In Japan, a temperature stable crystal cut was developed by Issac Koga. Japanese efforts in materials research created piezoceramic materials competitive to the United States materials but free of expensive patent restrictions. Major Japanese piezoelectric developments included new designs of piezoceramic filters for radios and televisions, piezo buzzers and audio transducers that can connect directly to electronic circuits, and the piezoelectric igniter, which generates sparks for small engine ignition systems and gas-grill lighters, by compressing a ceramic disc. Ultrasonic transducers that transmit sound waves through air had existed for quite some time but first saw major commercial use in early television remote controls. These transducers now are mounted on several car models as an echolocation device, helping the driver determine the distance from the car to any objects that may be in its path.\nMechanism.\nThe nature of the piezoelectric effect is closely related to the occurrence of electric dipole moments in solids. The latter may either be induced for ions on crystal lattice sites with asymmetric charge surroundings (as in BaTiO3 and PZTs) or may directly be carried by molecular groups (as in cane sugar). The dipole density or polarization (dimensionality [C\u00b7m/m3] ) may easily be calculated for crystals by summing up the dipole moments per volume of the crystallographic unit cell. As every dipole is a vector, the dipole density P is a vector field. Dipoles near each other tend to be aligned in regions called Weiss domains. The domains are usually randomly oriented, but can be aligned using the process of \"poling\" (not the same as magnetic poling), a process by which a strong electric field is applied across the material, usually at elevated temperatures. Not all piezoelectric materials can be poled.\nOf decisive importance for the piezoelectric effect is the change of polarization P when applying a mechanical stress. This might either be caused by a reconfiguration of the dipole-inducing surrounding or by re-orientation of molecular dipole moments under the influence of the external stress. Piezoelectricity may then manifest in a variation of the polarization strength, its direction or both, with the details depending on: 1. the orientation of P within the crystal; 2. crystal symmetry; and 3. the applied mechanical stress. The change in P appears as a variation of surface charge density upon the crystal faces, i.e. as a variation of the electric field extending between the faces caused by a change in dipole density in the bulk. For example, a 1\u00a0cm3 cube of quartz with 2\u00a0kN (500\u00a0lbf) of correctly applied force can produce a voltage of 12500 V.\nPiezoelectric materials also show the opposite effect, called the converse piezoelectric effect, where the application of an electrical field creates mechanical deformation in the crystal.\nPhysical states of a unit Piezoelectric body:\nAn unpoled piezo body has unit dimensions of (1,1,1) with dimension are (x,y,z) units.\nPiezoelectric bodies can be electrically poled in either a positive or negative reference across each axis using an electric field. Once the unit body with dimensions (x, y, z) is poled, it will either expand or contract depending on the amplitude and direction of poling along each axis.\nThe results will give a new unit dimension of (+1,+1,+1) or (-1,-1-1) depending on which axis has the electric field applied. Poled PZT will maintain volume when the electric field is applied and each axis with deform positively or negatively as the molecules align. Only the axis with aligned molecules is important when considering poling.\nMathematical description.\nLinear piezoelectricity is the combined effect of\n formula_1 formula_2\n where D is the electric flux density (electric displacement), \u03b5 is the permittivity (free-body dielectric constant), E is the electric field strength, and formula_3 , formula_4.\nformula_5\n where S is the linearized strain, s is compliance under short-circuit conditions, T is stress, and\nformula_6\n where u is the \"displacement vector\".\nThese may be combined into so-called \"coupled equations\", of which the strain-charge form is:\nformula_7\nwhere formula_8 is the piezoelectric tensor and the superscript t stands for its transpose. Due to the symmetry of formula_8, formula_10.\nIn matrix form,\nformula_11\nwhere [\"d\"] is the matrix for the direct piezoelectric effect and [\"d\"t] is the matrix for the converse piezoelectric effect. The superscript \"E\" indicates a zero, or constant, electric field; the superscript \"T\" indicates a zero, or constant, stress field; and the superscript t stands for transposition of a matrix.\nNotice that the third order tensor formula_8 maps vectors into symmetric matrices. There are no non-trivial rotation-invariant tensors that have this property, which is why there are no isotropic piezoelectric materials.\nThe strain-charge for a material of the 4mm (C4v) crystal class (such as a poled piezoelectric ceramic such as tetragonal PZT or BaTiO3) as well as the 6mm crystal class may also be written as (ANSI IEEE 176):\nformula_13\nwhere the first equation represents the relationship for the converse piezoelectric effect and the latter for the direct piezoelectric effect.\nAlthough the above equations are the most used form in literature, some comments about the notation are necessary. Generally, \"D\" and \"E\" are vectors, that is, Cartesian tensors of rank 1; and permittivity \"\u03b5\" is a Cartesian tensor of rank 2. Strain and stress are, in principle, also rank-2 tensors. But conventionally, because strain and stress are all symmetric tensors, the subscript of strain and stress can be relabeled in the following fashion: 11\u00a0\u2192\u00a01; 22\u00a0\u2192\u00a02; 33\u00a0\u2192\u00a03; 23\u00a0\u2192\u00a04; 13\u00a0\u2192\u00a05; 12\u00a0\u2192\u00a06. (Different conventions may be used by different authors in literature. For example, some use 12\u00a0\u2192\u00a04; 23\u00a0\u2192\u00a05; 31\u00a0\u2192\u00a06 instead.) That is why \"S\" and \"T\" appear to have the \"vector form\" of six components. Consequently, \"s\" appears to be a 6-by-6 matrix instead of a rank-3 tensor. Such a relabeled notation is often called Voigt notation. Whether the shear strain components \"S\"4, \"S\"5, \"S\"6 are tensor components or engineering strains is another question. In the equation above, they must be engineering strains for the 6,6 coefficient of the compliance matrix to be written as shown, i.e., 2(\"s\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"s\"). Engineering shear strains are double the value of the corresponding tensor shear, such as \"S\"6\u00a0=\u00a02\"S\"12 and so on. This also means that \"s\"66\u00a0=\u00a0, where \"G\"12 is the shear modulus.\nIn total, there are four piezoelectric coefficients, \"dij\", \"eij\", \"gij\", and \"hij\" defined as follows:\nformula_14\nwhere the first set of four terms corresponds to the direct piezoelectric effect and the second set of four terms corresponds to the converse piezoelectric effect. The equality between the direct piezoelectric tensor and the transpose of the converse piezoelectric tensor originates from the Maxwell relations of thermodynamics. For those piezoelectric crystals for which the polarization is of the crystal-field induced type, a formalism has been worked out that allows for the calculation of piezoelectrical coefficients \"dij\" from electrostatic lattice constants or higher-order Madelung constants.\nCrystal classes.\nOf the 32 crystal classes, 21 are non-centrosymmetric (not having a centre of symmetry), and of these, 20 exhibit direct piezoelectricity (the 21st is the cubic class 432). Ten of these represent the polar crystal classes, which show a spontaneous polarization without mechanical stress due to a non-vanishing electric dipole moment associated with their unit cell, and which exhibit pyroelectricity. If the dipole moment can be reversed by applying an external electric field, the material is said to be ferroelectric.\nFor polar crystals, for which P\u00a0\u2260\u00a00 holds without applying a mechanical load, the piezoelectric effect manifests itself by changing the magnitude or the direction of P or both.\nFor the nonpolar but piezoelectric crystals, on the other hand, a polarization P different from zero is only elicited by applying a mechanical load. For them the stress can be imagined to transform the material from a nonpolar crystal class (P\u00a0=\u00a00) to a polar one, having P\u00a0\u2260\u00a00.\nMaterials.\nMany materials exhibit piezoelectricity. Examples include:\nCeramics.\nCeramics with randomly oriented grains must be ferroelectric to exhibit piezoelectricity. The occurrence of abnormal grain growth (AGG) in sintered polycrystalline piezoelectric ceramics has detrimental effects on the piezoelectric performance in such systems and should be avoided, as the microstructure in piezoceramics exhibiting AGG tends to consist of few abnormally large elongated grains in a matrix of randomly oriented finer grains. Macroscopic piezoelectricity is possible in textured polycrystalline non-ferroelectric piezoelectric materials, such as AlN and ZnO.\nThe families of ceramics with perovskite, tungsten-bronze, and related structures exhibit piezoelectricity:\nLead-free piezoceramics.\nThe fabrication of lead-free piezoceramics pose multiple challenges, from an environmental standpoint and their ability to replicate the properties of their lead-based counterparts. By removing the lead component of the piezoceramic, the risk of toxicity to humans decreases, but the mining and extraction of the materials can be harmful to the environment. Analysis of the environmental profile of PZT versus sodium potassium niobate (NKN or KNN) shows that across the four indicators considered (primary energy consumption, toxicological footprint, eco-indicator 99, and input-output upstream greenhouse gas emissions), KNN is actually more harmful to the environment. Most of the concerns with KNN, specifically its Nb2O5 component, are in the early phase of its life cycle before it reaches manufacturers. Since the harmful impacts are focused on these early phases, some actions can be taken to minimize the effects. Returning the land as close to its original form after Nb2O5 mining via dam deconstruction or replacing a stockpile of utilizable soil are known aids for any extraction event. For minimizing air quality effects, modeling and simulation still needs to occur to fully understand what mitigation methods are required. The extraction of lead-free piezoceramic components has not grown to a significant scale at this time, but from early analysis, experts encourage caution when it comes to environmental effects.\nFabricating lead-free piezoceramics faces the challenge of maintaining the performance and stability of their lead-based counterparts. In general, the main fabrication challenge is creating the \"morphotropic phase boundaries (MPBs)\" that provide the materials with their stable piezoelectric properties without introducing the \"polymorphic phase boundaries (PPBs)\" that decrease the temperature stability of the material. New phase boundaries are created by varying additive concentrations so that the phase transition temperatures converge at room temperature. The introduction of the MPB improves piezoelectric properties, but if a PPB is introduced, the material becomes negatively affected by temperature. Research is ongoing to control the type of phase boundaries that are introduced through phase engineering, diffusing phase transitions, domain engineering, and chemical modification.\nIII\u2013V and II\u2013VI semiconductors.\nA piezoelectric potential can be created in any bulk or nanostructured semiconductor crystal having non central symmetry, such as the Group III\u2013V and II\u2013VI materials, due to polarization of ions under applied stress and strain. This property is common to both the zincblende and wurtzite crystal structures. To first order, there is only one independent piezoelectric coefficient in zincblende, called e14, coupled to shear components of the strain. In wurtzite, there are instead three independent piezoelectric coefficients: \"e\"31, \"e\"33 and \"e\"15.\nThe semiconductors where the strongest piezoelectricity is observed are those commonly found in the wurtzite structure, i.e. GaN, InN, AlN and ZnO (see piezotronics).\nSince 2006, there have also been a number of reports of strong non linear piezoelectric effects in polar semiconductors.\nSuch effects are generally recognized to be at least important if not of the same order of magnitude as the first order approximation.\nPolymers.\nThe piezo-response of polymers is not as high as the response for ceramics; however, polymers hold properties that ceramics do not. Over the last few decades, non-toxic, piezoelectric polymers have been studied and applied due to their flexibility and smaller acoustical impedance. Other properties that make these materials significant include their biocompatibility, biodegradability, low cost, and low power consumption compared to other piezo-materials (ceramics, etc.).\nPiezoelectric polymers can be classified by bulk polymers, voided charged polymers (\"piezoelectrets\"), and polymer composites. A piezo-response observed by bulk polymers is mostly due to its molecular structure. There are two types of bulk polymers: amorphous and semi-crystalline. Examples of semi-crystalline polymers are polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and its copolymers, polyamides, and parylene-C. Non-crystalline polymers, such as polyimide and polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC), fall under amorphous bulk polymers. Voided charged polymers exhibit the piezoelectric effect due to charge induced by poling of a porous polymeric film. Under an electric field, charges form on the surface of the voids forming dipoles. Electric responses can be caused by any deformation of these voids. The piezoelectric effect can also be observed in polymer composites by integrating piezoelectric ceramic particles into a polymer film. A polymer does not have to be piezo-active to be an effective material for a polymer composite. In this case, a material could be made up of an inert matrix with a separate piezo-active component.\nPVDF exhibits piezoelectricity several times greater than quartz. The piezo-response observed from PVDF is about 20\u201330 pC/N. That is an order of 5\u201350 times less than that of piezoelectric ceramic lead zirconate titanate (PZT). The thermal stability of the piezoelectric effect of polymers in the PVDF family (i.e. vinylidene fluoride co-poly trifluoroethylene) goes up to 125\u00a0\u00b0C. Some applications of PVDF are pressure sensors, hydrophones, and shock wave sensors.\nDue to their flexibility, piezoelectric composites have been proposed as energy harvesters and nanogenerators. In 2018, it was reported by Zhu et al. that a piezoelectric response of about 17\u00a0pC/N could be obtained from PDMS/PZT nanocomposite at 60% porosity. Another PDMS nanocomposite was reported in 2017, in which BaTiO3 was integrated into PDMS to make a stretchable, transparent nanogenerator for self-powered physiological monitoring. In 2016, polar molecules were introduced into a polyurethane foam in which high responses of up to 244\u00a0pC/N were reported.\nOther materials.\nMost materials exhibit at least weak piezoelectric responses. Trivial examples include sucrose (table sugar), DNA, and viral proteins, including those from bacteriophage. An actuator based on wood fibers (cellulose fibers) has been reported. D33 responses for cellular polypropylene are around 200 pC/N. Some applications of cellular polypropylene are musical key pads, microphones, and ultrasound-based echolocation systems. Recently, a single amino acid, \u03b2-glycine, displayed a high piezoelectric response of 178 pm V\u22121 compared with other biological materials.\nIonic liquids were recently identified as the first piezoelectric liquid.\nApplication.\nHigh voltage and power sources.\nDirect piezoelectricity of some substances, like quartz, can generate potential differences of thousands of volts.\nSensors.\nThe principle of operation of a piezoelectric sensor is that a physical dimension, transformed into a force, acts on two opposing faces of the sensing element. Depending on the design of a sensor, different \"modes\" to load the piezoelectric element can be used: longitudinal, transversal and shear.\nDetection of pressure variations in the form of sound is the most common sensor application, e.g. piezoelectric microphones (sound waves bend the piezoelectric material, creating a changing voltage) and piezoelectric pickups for acoustic-electric guitars. A piezo sensor attached to the body of an instrument is known as a contact microphone.\nPiezoelectric sensors especially are used with high frequency sound in ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging and also industrial nondestructive testing (NDT).\nFor many sensing techniques, the sensor can act as both a sensor and an actuator\u2014often the term \"transducer\" is preferred when the device acts in this dual capacity, but most piezo devices have this property of reversibility whether it is used or not. Ultrasonic transducers, for example, can inject ultrasound waves into the body, receive the returned wave, and convert it to an electrical signal (a voltage). Most medical ultrasound transducers are piezoelectric.\nIn addition to those mentioned above, various sensor and transducer applications include:\nActuators.\nAs very high electric fields correspond to only tiny changes in the width of the crystal, this width can be changed with better-than-\u03bcm precision, making piezo crystals the most important tool for positioning objects with extreme accuracy\u2014thus their use in actuators.\nMultilayer ceramics, using layers thinner than 100 \u03bcm, allow reaching high electric fields with voltage lower than 150 V. These ceramics are used within two kinds of actuators: direct piezo actuators and amplified piezoelectric actuators. While direct actuator's stroke is generally lower than 100 \u03bcm, amplified piezo actuators can reach millimeter strokes.\nFrequency standard.\nThe piezoelectrical properties of quartz are useful as a standard of frequency.\nPiezoelectric motors.\nTypes of piezoelectric motor include:\nAside from the stepping stick-slip motor, all these motors work on the same principle. Driven by dual orthogonal vibration modes with a phase difference of 90\u00b0, the contact point between two surfaces vibrates in an elliptical path, producing a frictional force between the surfaces. Usually, one surface is fixed, causing the other to move. In most piezoelectric motors, the piezoelectric crystal is excited by a sine wave signal at the resonant frequency of the motor. Using the resonance effect, a much lower voltage can be used to produce a high vibration amplitude.\nA stick-slip motor works using the inertia of a mass and the friction of a clamp. Such motors can be very small. Some are used for camera sensor displacement, thus allowing an anti-shake function.\nReduction of vibrations and noise.\nDifferent teams of researchers have been investigating ways to reduce vibrations in materials by attaching piezo elements to the material. When the material is bent by a vibration in one direction, the vibration-reduction system responds to the bend and sends electric power to the piezo element to bend in the other direction. Future applications of this technology are expected in cars and houses to reduce noise. Further applications to flexible structures, such as shells and plates, have also been studied for nearly three decades.\nIn a demonstration at the Material Vision Fair in Frankfurt in November 2005, a team from TU Darmstadt in Germany showed several panels that were hit with a rubber mallet, and the panel with the piezo element immediately stopped swinging.\nPiezoelectric ceramic fiber technology is being used as an electronic damping system on some HEAD tennis rackets.\nAll piezo transducers have a fundamental resonant frequency and many harmonic frequencies. Piezo driven Drop-On-Demand fluid systems are sensitive to extra vibrations in the piezo structure that must be reduced or eliminated. One inkjet company, Howtek, Inc solved this problem by replacing glass(rigid) inkjet nozzles with Tefzel (soft) inkjet nozzles. This novel idea popularized single nozzle inkjets and they are now used in 3D Inkjet printers that run for years if kept clean inside and not overheated (Tefzel creeps under pressure at very high temperatures)\nInfertility treatment.\nIn people with previous total fertilization failure, piezoelectric activation of oocytes together with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) seems to improve fertilization outcomes.\nSurgery.\nPiezosurgery is a minimally invasive technique that aims to cut a target tissue with little damage to neighboring tissues. For example, Hoigne \"et al.\" uses frequencies in the range 25\u201329\u00a0kHz, causing microvibrations of 60\u2013210\u00a0\u03bcm. It has the ability to cut mineralized tissue without cutting neurovascular tissue and other soft tissue, thereby maintaining a blood-free operating area, better visibility and greater precision.\nImpact Energy Absorption and Smart Sensing Devices.\nRecent advancements in piezoelectric materials have led to the development of multifunctional composites that integrate mechanical protection with sensing capabilities.\nOne notable innovation involves the growth of Rochelle salt (RS) crystals within 3D-printed, bioinspired structures. Researchers have used cuttlefish bone as a model for designing porous frameworks, which provide high stiffness and impact absorption due to their chambered microstructure. By growing RS crystals within these structures, the resulting composite achieves enhanced piezoelectric properties while maintaining significant mechanical strength.\nThese RS-based composites demonstrate remarkable impact energy absorption and real-time sensing capabilities. Under cyclic impacts, they maintain stable piezoelectric output for thousands of cycles, with peak output voltages reaching approximately 8 V and a measured piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of around 30 pC/N. Such performance enables the detection of both the magnitude and location of impacts, making the material suitable for applications in wearable protective gear, including smart armor for athletes and fall detection devices for elderly individuals.\nA distinguishing feature of these composites is their sustainability and recyclability. Rochelle salt crystals can be dissolved and regrown within the structure, allowing damaged materials to be repaired. Recycled samples retain up to 95% of their original performance, significantly extending the material's lifespan and promoting eco-friendly usage.\nApplications extend beyond sports and medical devices, with potential use in aerospace, military armor, and structural health monitoring systems. These advancements highlight the evolving versatility of piezoelectric materials in modern technology.\nPiezoelectric metamaterials with electro-momentum couplings.\nIn 2019, Pernas-Salom\u00f3n and Shmuel developed a dynamic homogenization method by which they were the first to show that piezoelectric composites exhibit an effective coupling between linear momentum and the electric field, which they termed electro-momentum coupling. Because homogeneous piezoelectric materials do not exhibit this coupling, such composites belong to the class of metamaterials\u2014artificial media engineered to display extraordinary effective properties, in magnitude or in kind. Electro-momentum coupling is analogous to Willis coupling in elastic composites, which couples linear momentum to strain and was discovered by J. R. Willis. The local part of these couplings\u2014like piezoelectric coupling\u2014emerges from broken symmetries. Piezoelectric metamaterials with electro-momentum coupling offer a mechanism for wave manipulation akin to Willis coupling: they impart a direction-dependent phase shift that enables wavefront shaping, with the added advantage of electrical tunability.\nPotential applications.\nIn 2015, Cambridge University researchers working in conjunction with researchers from the National Physical Laboratory and Cambridge-based dielectric antenna company Antenova Ltd, using thin films of piezoelectric materials found that at a certain frequency, these materials become not only efficient resonators, but efficient radiators as well, meaning that they can potentially be used as antennas. The researchers found that by subjecting the piezoelectric thin films to an asymmetric excitation, the symmetry of the system is similarly broken, resulting in a corresponding symmetry breaking of the electric field, and the generation of electromagnetic radiation.\nSeveral attempts at the macro-scale application of the piezoelectric technology have emerged to harvest kinetic energy from walking pedestrians.\nIn this case, locating high traffic areas is critical for optimization of the energy harvesting efficiency, as well as the orientation of the tile pavement significantly affects the total amount of the harvested energy. A density flow evaluation is recommended to qualitatively evaluate the piezoelectric power harvesting potential of the considered area based on the number of pedestrian crossings per unit time. In X. Li's study, the potential application of a commercial piezoelectric energy harvester in a central hub building at Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia is examined and discussed. Optimization of the piezoelectric tile deployment is presented according to the frequency of pedestrian mobility and a model is developed where 3.1% of the total floor area with the highest pedestrian mobility is paved with piezoelectric tiles. The modelling results indicate that the total annual energy harvesting potential for the proposed optimized tile pavement model is estimated at 1.1\u00a0MWh/year, which would be sufficient to meet close to 0.5% of the annual energy needs of the building. In Israel, there is a company which has installed piezoelectric materials under a busy highway. The energy generated is enough to power street lights, billboards, and signs.\nTire company Goodyear has plans to develop an electricity generating tire which has piezoelectric material lined inside it. As the tire moves, it deforms and thus electricity is generated.\nThe efficiency of a hybrid photovoltaic cell that contains piezoelectric materials can be increased simply by placing it near a source of ambient noise or vibration. The effect was demonstrated with organic cells using zinc oxide nanotubes. The electricity generated by the piezoelectric effect itself is a negligible percentage of the overall output. Sound levels as low as 75 decibels improved efficiency by up to 50%. Efficiency peaked at 10\u00a0kHz, the resonant frequency of the nanotubes. The electrical field set up by the vibrating nanotubes interacts with electrons migrating from the organic polymer layer. This process decreases the likelihood of recombination, in which electrons are energized but settle back into a hole instead of migrating to the electron-accepting ZnO layer.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24977", "revid": "166386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24977", "title": "Product (mathematics)", "text": "Mathematical form\n\\\\[1ex]\\scriptstyle\\frac{\\scriptstyle\\text{numerator}}{\\scriptstyle\\text{denominator}}\\end{matrix}\\right\\}\\,=\\,&lt;/math&gt;\nIn mathematics, a product is the result of multiplication, or an expression that identifies objects (numbers or variables) to be multiplied, called \"factors\". For example, 21 is the product of 3 and 7 (the result of multiplication), and formula_8 is the product of formula_9 and formula_10 (indicating that the two factors should be multiplied together).\nWhen one factor is an integer, the product is called a \"multiple\".\nThe order in which real or complex numbers are multiplied has no bearing on the product; this is known as the \"commutative law\" of multiplication. When matrices or members of various other associative algebras are multiplied, the product usually depends on the order of the factors. Matrix multiplication, for example, is non-commutative, and so is multiplication in other algebras in general as well.\nThere are many different kinds of products in mathematics: besides being able to multiply just numbers, polynomials or matrices, one can also define products on many different algebraic structures.\nProduct of two numbers.\nOriginally, a product was and is still the result of the multiplication of two or more numbers. For example, 15 is the product of 3 and 5. The fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that every composite number is a product of prime numbers, that is unique up to the order of the factors.\nWith the introduction of mathematical notation and variables at the end of the 15th century, it became common to consider the multiplication of numbers that are either unspecified (coefficients and parameters), or to be found (unknowns). These multiplications that cannot be effectively performed are called \"products\". For example, in the linear equation formula_11 the term formula_12 denotes the \"product\" of the coefficient formula_13 and the unknown formula_14\nLater and essentially from the 19th century on, new binary operations have been introduced, which do not involve numbers at all, and have been called \"products\"; for example, the dot product. Most of this article is devoted to such non-numerical products.\nProduct of a sequence.\nThe product operator for the product of a sequence is denoted by the capital Greek letter pi \u03a0 (in analogy to the use of the capital Sigma \u03a3 as summation symbol). For example, the expression formula_15 is another way of writing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe product of a sequence consisting of only one number is just that number itself; the product of no factors at all is known as the empty product, and is equal to 1.\nCommutative rings.\nCommutative rings have a product operation.\nResidue classes of integers.\nResidue classes in the rings formula_16 can be added:\nformula_17\nand multiplied:\nformula_18\nConvolution.\nTwo functions from the reals to itself can be multiplied in another way, called the convolution.\nIf\nformula_19\nthen the integral\nformula_20\nis well defined and is called the convolution.\nUnder the Fourier transform, convolution becomes point-wise function multiplication.\nPolynomial rings.\nThe product of two polynomials is given by the following:\nformula_21\nwith\nformula_22\nProducts in linear algebra.\nThere are many different kinds of products in linear algebra. Some of these have confusingly similar names (outer product, exterior product) with very different meanings, while others have very different names (outer product, tensor product, Kronecker product) and yet convey essentially the same idea. A brief overview of these is given in the following sections.\nScalar multiplication.\nBy the very definition of a vector space, one can form the product of any scalar with any vector, giving a map formula_23.\nScalar product.\nA scalar product is a bi-linear map:\nformula_24\nwith the following conditions, that formula_25 for all formula_26.\nFrom the scalar product, one can define a norm by letting formula_27.\nThe scalar product also allows one to define an angle between two vectors:\nformula_28\nIn formula_29-dimensional Euclidean space, the standard scalar product (called the dot product) is given by:\nformula_30\nCross product in 3-dimensional space.\nThe cross product of two vectors in 3-dimensions is a vector perpendicular to the two factors, with length equal to the area of the parallelogram spanned by the two factors.\nThe cross product can also be expressed as the formal determinant:\nformula_31\nComposition of linear mappings.\nA linear mapping can be defined as a function \"f\" between two vector spaces \"V\" and \"W\" with underlying field F, satisfying\nformula_32\nIf one only considers finite dimensional vector spaces, then\nformula_33\nin which bV and bW denote the bases of \"V\" and \"W\", and \"vi\" denotes the component of v on bV\"i\", and Einstein summation convention is applied.\nNow we consider the composition of two linear mappings between finite dimensional vector spaces. Let the linear mapping \"f\" map \"V\" to \"W\", and let the linear mapping \"g\" map \"W\" to \"U\". Then one can get\nformula_34\nOr in matrix form:\nformula_35\nin which the \"i\"-row, \"j\"-column element of F, denoted by \"Fij\", is \"fji\", and \"Gij=gji\".\nThe composition of more than two linear mappings can be similarly represented by a chain of matrix multiplication.\nProduct of two matrices.\nGiven two matrices with real-valued entries, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; (the number of columns of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; must match the number of rows of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), their product is a matrix &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; whose entries are given by a sum of pairwise products of the entries in the corresponding row of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and column of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_36\nComposition of linear functions as matrix product.\nThere is a relationship between the composition of linear functions and the product of two matrices. To see this, let r = dim(U), s = dim(V) and t = dim(W) be the (finite) dimensions of vector spaces U, V and W. Let \nformula_37 be a basis of U, \nformula_38 be a basis of V and \nformula_39 be a basis of W. In terms of this basis, let\nformula_40\nbe the matrix representing f : U \u2192 V and \nformula_41 \nbe the matrix representing g : V \u2192 W. Then\nformula_42\nis the matrix representing formula_43.\nIn other words: the matrix product is the description in coordinates of the composition of linear functions.\nTensor product of vector spaces.\nGiven two finite dimensional vector spaces \"V\" and \"W\", the tensor product of them can be defined as a (2,0)-tensor satisfying:\nformula_44\nwhere \"V*\" and \"W*\" denote the dual spaces of \"V\" and \"W\".\nFor infinite-dimensional vector spaces, one also has the:\nThe tensor product, outer product and Kronecker product all convey the same general idea. The differences between these are that the Kronecker product is just a tensor product of matrices, with respect to a previously-fixed basis, whereas the tensor product is usually given in its intrinsic definition. The outer product is simply the Kronecker product, limited to vectors (instead of matrices).\nThe class of all objects with a tensor product.\nIn general, whenever one has two mathematical objects that can be combined in a way that behaves like a linear algebra tensor product, then this can be most generally understood as the internal product of a monoidal category. That is, the monoidal category captures precisely the meaning of a tensor product; it captures exactly the notion of why it is that tensor products behave the way they do. More precisely, a monoidal category is the class of all things (of a given type) that have a tensor product.\nOther products in linear algebra.\nOther kinds of products in linear algebra include:\nCartesian product.\nIn set theory, a Cartesian product is a mathematical operation which returns a set (or product set) from multiple sets. That is, for sets \"A\" and \"B\", the Cartesian product \"A\" \u00d7 \"B\" is the set of all ordered pairs (a, b)\u2014where a \u2208 \"A\" and b \u2208 \"B\".\nThe class of all things (of a given type) that have Cartesian products is called a Cartesian category. Many of these are Cartesian closed categories. Sets are an example of such objects.\nEmpty product.\nThe empty product on numbers and most algebraic structures has the value of 1 (the identity element of multiplication), just like the empty sum has the value of 0 (the identity element of addition). However, the concept of the empty product is more general, and requires special treatment in logic, set theory, computer programming and category theory.\nProducts over other algebraic structures.\nProducts over other kinds of algebraic structures include:\nA few of the above products are examples of the general notion of an internal product in a monoidal category; the rest are describable by the general notion of a product in category theory.\nProducts in category theory.\nAll of the previous examples are special cases or examples of the general notion of a product. For the general treatment of the concept of a product, see product (category theory), which describes how to combine two objects of some kind to create an object, possibly of a different kind. But also, in category theory, one has:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24979", "revid": "1301624234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24979", "title": "4-polytope", "text": "Four-dimensional geometric object with flat sides\nIn geometry, a 4-polytope (sometimes also called a polychoron, polycell, or polyhedroid) is a four-dimensional polytope. It is a connected and closed figure, composed of lower-dimensional polytopal elements: vertices, edges, faces (polygons), and cells (polyhedra). Each face is shared by exactly two cells. The 4-polytopes were discovered by the Swiss mathematician Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli before 1853. \nThe two-dimensional analogue of a 4-polytope is a polygon, and the three-dimensional analogue is a polyhedron.\nTopologically 4-polytopes are closely related to the uniform honeycombs, such as the cubic honeycomb, which tessellate 3-space; similarly the 3D cube is related to the infinite 2D square tiling. Convex 4-polytopes can be \"cut and unfolded\" as nets in 3-space.\nDefinition.\nA 4-polytope is a closed four-dimensional figure. It comprises vertices (corner points), edges, faces and cells. A cell is the three-dimensional analogue of a face, and is therefore a polyhedron. Each face must join exactly two cells, analogous to the way in which each edge of a polyhedron joins just two faces. Like any polytope, the elements of a 4-polytope cannot be subdivided into two or more sets which are also 4-polytopes, i.e. it is not a compound.\nGeometry.\nThe convex regular 4-polytopes are the four-dimensional analogues of the Platonic solids. The most familiar 4-polytope is the tesseract or hypercube, the 4D analogue of the cube.\nThe convex regular 4-polytopes can be ordered by size as a measure of 4-dimensional content (hypervolume) for the same radius. Each greater polytope in the sequence is \"rounder\" than its predecessor, enclosing more content within the same radius. The 4-simplex (5-cell) is the limit smallest case, and the 120-cell is the largest. Complexity (as measured by comparing configuration matrices or simply the number of vertices) follows the same ordering.\n!style=\"vertical-align:top;text-align:right;\"|Short radius\n!style=\"vertical-align:top;text-align:right;\"|Area\n!style=\"vertical-align:top;text-align:right;\"|Volume\n!style=\"vertical-align:top;text-align:right;\"|4-Content\nVisualisation.\n4-polytopes cannot be seen in three-dimensional space due to their extra dimension. Several techniques are used to help visualise them.\nOrthogonal projections can be used to show various symmetry orientations of a 4-polytope. They can be drawn in 2D as vertex-edge graphs, and can be shown in 3D with solid faces as visible projective envelopes.\nJust as a 3D shape can be projected onto a flat sheet, so a 4-D shape can be projected onto 3-space or even onto a flat sheet. One common projection is a Schlegel diagram which uses stereographic projection of points on the surface of a 3-sphere into three dimensions, connected by straight edges, faces, and cells drawn in 3-space.\nJust as a slice through a polyhedron reveals a cut surface, so a slice through a 4-polytope reveals a cut \"hypersurface\" in three dimensions. A sequence of such sections can be used to build up an understanding of the overall shape. The extra dimension can be equated with time to produce a smooth animation of these cross sections.\nA net of a 4-polytope is composed of polyhedral cells that are connected by their faces and all occupy the same three-dimensional space, just as the polygon faces of a net of a polyhedron are connected by their edges and all occupy the same plane.\nTopological characteristics.\nThe topology of any given 4-polytope is defined by its Betti numbers and torsion coefficients.\nThe value of the Euler characteristic used to characterise polyhedra does not generalize usefully to higher dimensions, and is zero for all 4-polytopes, whatever their underlying topology. This inadequacy of the Euler characteristic to reliably distinguish between different topologies in higher dimensions led to the discovery of the more sophisticated Betti numbers.\nSimilarly, the notion of orientability of a polyhedron is insufficient to characterise the surface twistings of toroidal 4-polytopes, and this led to the use of torsion coefficients.\nClassification.\nCriteria.\nLike all polytopes, 4-polytopes may be classified based on properties like \"convexity\" and \"symmetry\".\nClasses.\nThe following lists the various categories of 4-polytopes classified according to the criteria above:\nUniform 4-polytope (vertex-transitive):\nOther convex 4-polytopes:\nInfinite uniform 4-polytopes of Euclidean 3-space (uniform tessellations of convex uniform cells)\nInfinite uniform 4-polytopes of hyperbolic 3-space (uniform tessellations of convex uniform cells)\nDual uniform 4-polytope (cell-transitive):\nOthers:\nAbstract regular 4-polytopes:\nThese categories include only the 4-polytopes that exhibit a high degree of symmetry. Many other 4-polytopes are possible, but they have not been studied as extensively as the ones included in these categories.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24980", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24980", "title": "Punctuated equilibrium", "text": "Theory in evolutionary biology\nIn evolutionary biology, punctuated equilibrium (also called punctuated equilibria) is a theory that proposes that once a species appears in the fossil record, the population will become stable, showing little evolutionary change for most of its geological history. This state of little or no morphological change is called \"stasis\". When significant evolutionary change occurs, the theory proposes that it is generally restricted to rare and geologically rapid events of branching speciation called cladogenesis. Cladogenesis is the process by which a species splits into two distinct species, rather than one species gradually transforming into another.\nPunctuated equilibrium is commonly contrasted with phyletic gradualism, the idea that evolution generally occurs uniformly by the steady and gradual transformation of whole lineages (anagenesis).\nIn 1972, paleontologists Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould published a landmark paper developing their theory and called it \"punctuated equilibria\". Their paper built upon Ernst Mayr's model of geographic speciation, I. M. Lerner's theories of developmental and genetic homeostasis,\nand their own empirical research. Eldredge and Gould proposed that the degree of gradualism commonly attributed to Charles Darwin\nis virtually nonexistent in the fossil record, and that stasis dominates the history of most fossil species.\nHistory.\nPunctuated equilibrium originated as a logical consequence of Ernst Mayr's concept of genetic revolutions by allopatric and especially peripatric speciation as applied to the fossil record. Although the sudden appearance of species and its relationship to speciation was proposed and identified by Mayr in 1954, historians of science generally recognize the 1972 Eldredge and Gould paper as the basis of the new paleobiological research program. Punctuated equilibrium differs from Mayr's ideas mainly in that Eldredge and Gould placed considerably greater emphasis on stasis, whereas Mayr was concerned with explaining the morphological discontinuity (or \"sudden jumps\") found in the fossil record. Mayr later complimented Eldredge and Gould's paper, stating that evolutionary stasis had been \"unexpected by most evolutionary biologists\" and that punctuated equilibrium \"had a major impact on paleontology and evolutionary biology.\"\nA year before their 1972 Eldredge and Gould paper, Niles Eldredge published a paper in the journal \"Evolution\" which suggested that gradual evolution was seldom seen in the fossil record and argued that Ernst Mayr's standard mechanism of allopatric speciation might suggest a possible resolution.\nThe Eldredge and Gould paper was presented at the Annual Meeting of the Geological Society of America in 1971. The symposium focused its attention on how modern microevolutionary studies could revitalize various aspects of paleontology and macroevolution. Tom Schopf, who organized that year's meeting, assigned Gould the topic of speciation. Gould recalls that \"Eldredge's 1971 publication [on Paleozoic trilobites] had presented the only new and interesting ideas on the paleontological implications of the subject\u2014so I asked Schopf if we could present the paper jointly.\" According to Gould \"the ideas came mostly from Niles, with yours truly acting as a sounding board and eventual scribe. I coined the term \"punctuated equilibrium\" and wrote most of our 1972 paper, but Niles is the proper first author in our pairing of Eldredge and Gould.\" In his book \"Time Frames\" Eldredge recalls that after much discussion the pair \"each wrote roughly half. Some of the parts that would seem obviously the work of one of us were actually first penned by the other\u2014I remember for example, writing the section on Gould's snails. Other parts are harder to reconstruct. Gould edited the entire manuscript for better consistency. We sent it in, and Schopf reacted strongly against it\u2014thus signaling the tenor of the reaction it has engendered, though for shifting reasons, down to the present day.\"\nJohn Wilkins and Gareth Nelson have argued that French architect Pierre Tr\u00e9maux proposed an \"anticipation of the theory of punctuated equilibrium of Gould and Eldredge.\"\nEvidence from the fossil record.\nThe fossil record includes well documented examples of both phyletic gradualism and punctuational evolution. As such, much debate persists over the prominence of stasis in the fossil record. Before punctuated equilibrium, most evolution biologists considered stasis to be rare or unimportant. The paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson, for example, believed that phyletic gradual evolution (called \"horotely\" in his terminology) comprised 90% of evolution. More modern studies, including a meta-analysis examining 58 published studies on speciation patterns in the fossil record showed that 71% of species exhibited stasis, and 63% were associated with punctuated patterns of evolutionary change. According to Michael Benton, \"it seems clear then that stasis is common, and that had not been predicted from modern genetic studies.\" A paramount example of evolutionary stasis is the fern \"Osmunda claytoniana\". Based on paleontological evidence it has remained unchanged, even at the level of fossilized nuclei and chromosomes, for at least 180 million years.\nTheoretical mechanisms.\nPunctuational change.\nWhen Eldredge and Gould published their 1972 paper, allopatric speciation was considered the \"standard\" model of speciation. This model was popularized by Ernst Mayr in his 1954 paper \"Change of genetic environment and evolution,\" and his classic volume \"Animal Species and Evolution\" (1963).\nAllopatric speciation suggests that species with large central populations are stabilized by their large volume and the process of gene flow. New and even beneficial mutations are diluted by the population's large size and are unable to reach fixation, due to such factors as constantly changing environments. If this is the case, then the transformation of whole lineages should be rare, as the fossil record indicates. Smaller populations on the other hand, which are isolated from the parental stock, are decoupled from the homogenizing effects of gene flow. In addition, pressure from natural selection is especially intense, as peripheral isolated populations exist at the outer edges of ecological tolerance. If most evolution happens in these rare instances of allopatric speciation then evidence of gradual evolution in the fossil record should be rare. This hypothesis was alluded to by Mayr in the closing paragraph of his 1954 paper:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough punctuated equilibrium generally applies to sexually reproducing organisms, some biologists have applied the model to non-sexual species like viruses, which cannot be stabilized by conventional gene flow. As time went on biologists like Gould moved away from wedding punctuated equilibrium to allopatric speciation, particularly as evidence accumulated in support of other modes of speciation. Gould, for example, was particularly attracted to Douglas Futuyma's work on the importance of reproductive isolating mechanisms.\nStasis.\nMany hypotheses have been proposed to explain the putative causes of stasis. Gould was initially attracted to I. Michael Lerner's theories of developmental and genetic homeostasis. However this hypothesis was rejected over time, as evidence accumulated against it. Other plausible mechanisms which have been suggested include: habitat tracking, stabilizing selection, the Stenseth-Maynard Smith stability hypothesis, constraints imposed by the nature of subdivided populations, normalizing clade selection, and koinophilia.\nEvidence for stasis has also been corroborated from the genetics of sibling species, species which are morphologically indistinguishable, but whose proteins have diverged sufficiently to suggest they have been separated for millions of years. Fossil evidence of reproductively isolated extant species of sympatric Olive Shells (\"Amalda\" sp.) also confirm morphological stasis in multiple lineages over three million years.\nAccording to Gould, \"stasis may emerge as the theory's most important contribution to evolutionary science.\" Philosopher Kim Sterelny in clarifying the meaning of stasis adds, \"In claiming that species typically undergo no further evolutionary change once speciation is complete, they are not claiming that there is no change at all between one generation and the next. Lineages do change. But the change between generations does not accumulate. Instead, over time, the species wobbles about its phenotypic mean. Jonathan Weiner's \"The Beak of the Finch\" describes this very process.\"\nHierarchical evolution.\nPunctuated equilibrium has also been cited as contributing to the hypothesis that species are Darwinian individuals, and not just classes, thereby providing a stronger framework for a hierarchical theory of evolution.\nCommon misconceptions.\nMuch confusion has arisen over what proponents of punctuated equilibrium actually argued, what mechanisms they advocated, how fast the punctuations were, what taxonomic scale their theory applied to, how revolutionary their claims were intended to be, and how punctuated equilibrium related to other ideas like saltationism, quantum evolution, and mass extinction.\nSaltationism.\nThe punctuational nature of punctuated equilibrium has engendered perhaps the most confusion over Eldredge and Gould's theory. Gould's sympathetic treatment of Richard Goldschmidt, the controversial geneticist who advocated the idea of \"hopeful monsters,\" led some biologists to conclude that Gould's punctuations were occurring in single-generation jumps. This interpretation has frequently been used by creationists to characterize the weakness of the paleontological record, and to portray contemporary evolutionary biology as advancing neo-saltationism.\nIn an often quoted remark, Gould stated,\n \"Since we proposed punctuated equilibria to explain trends, it is infuriating to be quoted again and again by creationists \u2013 whether through design or stupidity, I do not know \u2013 as admitting that the fossil record includes no transitional forms. Transitional forms are generally lacking at the species level, but they are abundant between larger groups.\"\nAlthough there exist some debate over how long the punctuations last, supporters of punctuated equilibrium generally place the figure between 50,000 and 100,000\u00a0years.\nQuantum evolution.\nQuantum evolution was a controversial hypothesis advanced by Columbia University paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson, regarded by Gould as \"the greatest and most biologically astute paleontologist of the twentieth century.\" Simpson's conjecture was that according to the geological record, on very rare occasions evolution would proceed very rapidly to form entirely new families, orders, and classes of organisms. This hypothesis differs from punctuated equilibrium in several respects. First, punctuated equilibrium was more modest in scope, in that it was addressing evolution specifically at the species level. Simpson's idea was principally concerned with evolution at higher taxonomic groups. Second, Eldredge and Gould relied upon a different mechanism. Where Simpson relied upon a synergistic interaction between genetic drift and a shift in the adaptive fitness landscape, Eldredge and Gould relied upon ordinary speciation, particularly Ernst Mayr's concept of allopatric speciation. Lastly, and perhaps most significantly, quantum evolution took no position on the issue of stasis. Although Simpson acknowledged the existence of stasis in what he called the bradytelic mode, he considered it (along with rapid evolution) to be unimportant in the larger scope of evolution. In his \"Major Features of Evolution\" Simpson stated, \"Evolutionary change is so nearly the universal rule that a state of motion is, figuratively, normal in evolving populations. The state of rest, as in bradytely, is the exception and it seems that some restraint or force must be required to maintain it.\" Despite such differences between the two models, earlier critiques\u2014from such eminent commentators as Sewall Wright as well as Simpson himself\u2014have argued that punctuated equilibrium is little more than quantum evolution relabeled.\nMultiple meanings of gradualism.\nPunctuated equilibrium is often portrayed to oppose the concept of gradualism, when it is actually a form of gradualism. This is because even though evolutionary change appears instantaneous between geological sedimentary layers, change is still occurring incrementally, with no great change from one generation to the next. To this end, Gould later commented that \"Most of our paleontological colleagues missed this insight because they had not studied evolutionary theory and either did not know about allopatric speciation or had not considered its translation to geological time. Our evolutionary colleagues also failed to grasp the implication(s), primarily because they did not think at geological scales\".\nRichard Dawkins dedicates a chapter in \"The Blind Watchmaker\" to correcting, in his view, the wide confusion regarding \"rates of change\". His first point is to argue that phyletic gradualism\u2014understood in the sense that evolution proceeds at a single uniform speed, called \"constant speedism\" by Dawkins\u2014is a \"caricature of Darwinism\" and \"does not really exist\". His second argument, which follows from the first, is that once the caricature of \"constant speedism\" is dismissed, we are left with one logical alternative, which Dawkins terms \"variable speedism\". Variable speedism may also be distinguished one of two ways: \"\"discrete variable\" speedism\" and \"\"continuously variable\" speedism\". Eldredge and Gould, proposing that evolution jumps between stability and relative rapidity, are described as \"discrete variable speedists\", and \"in this respect they are genuinely radical.\" They assert that evolution generally proceeds in bursts, or not at all. \"Continuously variable speedists\", on the other hand, advance that \"evolutionary rates fluctuate continuously from very fast to very slow and stop, with all intermediates. They see no particular reason to emphasize certain speeds more than others. In particular, stasis, to them, is just an extreme case of ultra-slow evolution. To a punctuationist, there is something very special about stasis.\"\nCriticism.\nRichard Dawkins regards the apparent gaps represented in the fossil record as documenting migratory events rather than evolutionary events. According to Dawkins, evolution certainly occurred but \"probably gradually\" elsewhere. However, the punctuational equilibrium model may still be inferred from both the observation of stasis and examples of rapid and episodic speciation events documented in the fossil record.\nDawkins also emphasizes that punctuated equilibrium has been \"oversold by some journalists\", but partly due to Eldredge and Gould's \"later writings\". Dawkins contends that the hypothesis \"does not deserve a particularly large measure of publicity\". It is a \"minor gloss,\" an \"interesting but minor wrinkle on the surface of neo-Darwinian theory,\" and \"lies firmly within the neo-Darwinian synthesis\".\nIn his book \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", philosopher Daniel Dennett is especially critical of Gould's presentation of punctuated equilibrium. Dennett argues that Gould alternated between revolutionary and conservative claims, and that each time Gould made a revolutionary statement\u2014or appeared to do so\u2014he was criticized, and thus retreated to a traditional neo-Darwinian position. Gould responded to Dennett's claims in \"The New York Review of Books\", and in his technical volume \"The Structure of Evolutionary Theory\".\nEnglish professor Heidi Scott argues that Gould's talent for writing vivid prose, his use of metaphor, and his success in building a popular audience of nonspecialist readers altered the \"climate of specialized scientific discourse\" favorably in his promotion of punctuated equilibrium. While Gould is celebrated for the color and energy of his prose, as well as his interdisciplinary knowledge, critics such as Scott, Richard Dawkins, and Daniel Dennett have concerns that the theory has gained undeserved credence among non-scientists because of Gould's rhetorical skills. Philosopher John Lyne and biologist Henry Howe believed punctuated equilibrium's success has much more to do with the nature of the geological record than the nature of Gould's rhetoric. They state, a \"re-analysis of existing fossil data has shown, to the increasing satisfaction of the paleontological community, that Eldredge and Gould were correct in identifying periods of evolutionary stasis which are interrupted by much shorter periods of evolutionary change.\"\nEvolutionary biologist Robert Trivers accused Gould of being \"something of an intellectual fraud\" for using claims that were \"well known from the time of Darwin\" (that evolution displayed \"periods of long stasis interspersed with periods of rapid change\") to support distinct but more \"grandiose\" claims regarding species selection, despite the \"rate of species turnover [having] nothing to do with the traits within species\u2014only with the relative frequency of species showing these traits\".\nSome critics jokingly referred to the theory of punctuated equilibrium as \"evolution by jerks\", which reportedly prompted punctuationists to describe phyletic gradualism as \"evolution by creeps.\"\nDarwin's theory.\nThe sudden appearance of most species in the geologic record and the lack of evidence of substantial gradual change in most species\u2014from their initial appearance until their extinction\u2014has , including by Charles Darwin, who appealed to the imperfection of the record as the favored explanation. When presenting his ideas against the prevailing influences of catastrophism and progressive creationism, which envisaged species being supernaturally created at intervals, Darwin needed to forcefully stress the gradual nature of evolution in accordance with the gradualism promoted by his friend Charles Lyell. He privately expressed concern, noting in the margin of his 1844 \"Essay\", \"Better begin with this: If species really, after catastrophes, created in showers world over, my theory false.\"\nIt is often incorrectly assumed that he insisted that the rate of change must be constant, or nearly so, but even the first edition of \"On the Origin of Species\" states that \"Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms... The Silurian \"Lingula\" differs but little from the living species of this genus\". \"Lingula\" is among the few brachiopods surviving today but also known from fossils over 500 million years old. In the fourth edition (1866) of \"On the Origin of Species\" Darwin wrote that \"the periods during which species have undergone modification, though long as measured in years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which they retain the same form.\" Thus punctuationism in general is consistent with Darwin's conception of evolution.\nAccording to early versions of punctuated equilibrium, \"peripheral isolates\" are considered to be of critical importance for speciation. However, Darwin wrote, \"\"I can by no means agree\" ... that immigration and isolation are necessary elements. ... Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new species, on the whole I am inclined to believe that largeness of area is still more important, especially for the production of species which shall prove capable of enduring for a long period, and of spreading widely.\"\nThe importance of isolation in forming species had played a significant part in Darwin's early thinking, as shown in his \"Essay\" of 1844. But by the time he wrote the \"Origin\" he had downplayed its importance. He explained the reasons for his revised view as follows:\nThroughout a great and open area, not only will there be a greater chance of favourable variations, arising from the large number of individuals of the same species there supported, but the conditions of life are much more complex from the large number of already existing species; and if some of these species become modified and improved, others will have to be improved in a corresponding degree, or they will be exterminated. Each new form, also, as soon as it has been improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous area, and will thus come into competition with many other forms\u00a0... the new forms produced on large areas, which have already been victorious over many competitors, will be those that will spread most widely, and will give rise to the greatest number of new varieties and species. They will thus play a more important role in the changing history of the organic world.\nThus punctuated equilibrium is incongruous with some of Darwin's ideas regarding the specific mechanisms of evolution, but generally accords with Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection.\nSupplemental modes of rapid evolution.\nRecent work in developmental biology has identified dynamical and physical mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis that may underlie abrupt morphological transitions during evolution. Consequently, consideration of mechanisms of phylogenetic change that have been found in reality to be non-gradual is increasingly common in the field of evolutionary developmental biology, particularly in studies of the origin of morphological novelty. A description of such mechanisms can be found in the multi-authored volume \"Origination of Organismal Form\" (MIT Press; 2003).\nLanguage change.\nIn linguistics, R. M. W. Dixon has proposed a punctuated equilibrium model for language histories, with reference particularly to the prehistory of the indigenous languages of Australia and his objections to the proposed Pama\u2013Nyungan language family there. Although his model has raised considerable interest, it does not command majority support within linguistics.\nSeparately, recent work using computational phylogenetic methods claims to show that punctuational bursts play an important factor when languages split from one another, accounting for anywhere from 10 to 33% of the total divergence in vocabulary, and around 24% of divergence among cognates in the Indo-European language family.\nMythology.\nPunctuational evolution has been argued to explain changes in folktales and mythology over time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24981", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24981", "title": "Pioneer 11", "text": "First spacecraft to visit Saturn (1973\u20131995)\nPioneer 11 (also known as Pioneer G) is a NASA robotic space probe launched on April 5, 1973, to study the asteroid belt, the environment around Jupiter and Saturn, the solar wind, and cosmic rays. It was the first probe to encounter Saturn, the second to fly through the asteroid belt, and the second to fly by Jupiter. Later, \"Pioneer 11\" became the second of five artificial objects to achieve an escape velocity allowing it to leave the Solar System. Due to power constraints and the vast distance to the probe, the last routine contact with the spacecraft was on September 30, 1995, and the last good engineering data was received on November 24, 1995.\nMission background.\nHistory.\nApproved in February 1969, \"Pioneer 11\" and its twin probe, \"Pioneer 10\", were the first to be designed for exploring the outer Solar System. Yielding to multiple proposals throughout the 1960s, early mission objectives were defined as:\nSubsequent planning for an encounter with Saturn added many more goals:\n\"Pioneer 11\" was built by TRW and managed as part of the Pioneer program by NASA Ames Research Center. A backup unit, Pioneer H, is currently on display in the \"Milestones of Flight\" exhibit at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. Many elements of the mission proved to be critical in the planning of the \"Voyager\" program.\nSpacecraft design.\nThe \"Pioneer 11\" bus measures deep and with six panels forming the hexagonal structure. The bus houses propellant to control the orientation of the probe and eight of the twelve scientific instruments. The spacecraft has a mass of 259\u00a0kilograms.\nOrientation of the spacecraft was maintained with six 4.5-N, hydrazine monopropellant thrusters: pair one maintains a constant spin-rate of 4.8 rpm, pair two controls the forward thrust, pair three controls attitude. Information for the orientation is provided by performing conical scanning maneuvers to track Earth in its orbit, a star sensor able to reference Canopus, and two Sun sensors.\nThe space probe includes a redundant system transceivers, one attached to the high-gain antenna, the other to an omni-antenna and medium-gain antenna. Each transceiver is 8 watts and transmits data across the S-band using 2110 MHz for the uplink from Earth and 2292 MHz for the downlink to Earth with the Deep Space Network tracking the signal. Prior to transmitting data, the probe uses a convolutional encoder to allow correction of errors in the received data on Earth.\n\"Pioneer 11\" uses four SNAP-19 radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) (). They are positioned on two three-rod trusses, each in length and 120 degrees apart. This was expected to be a safe distance from the sensitive scientific experiments carried on board. Combined, the RTGs provided 155 watts at launch, and decayed to 140 W in transit to Jupiter. The spacecraft requires 100 W to power all systems.\nMuch of the computation for the mission was performed on Earth and transmitted to the probe, where it is able to retain in memory, up to five commands of the 222 possible entries by ground controllers. The spacecraft includes two command decoders and a command distribution unit, a very limited form of a processor, to direct operations on the spacecraft. This system requires that mission operators prepare commands long in advance of transmitting them to the probe. A data storage unit is included to record up to 6,144 bytes of information gathered by the instruments. The digital telemetry unit is then used to prepare the collected data in one of the thirteen possible formats before transmitting it back to Earth.\nScientific instruments.\n\"Pioneer 11\" has one additional instrument more than \"Pioneer 10\", a flux-gate magnetometer.\nMission profile.\nLaunch and trajectory.\nThe \"Pioneer 11\" probe was launched on April 6, 1973, at 02:11:00\u00a0UTC, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration from Space Launch Complex 36A at Cape Canaveral, Florida aboard an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle, with a Star-37E propulsion module. Its twin probe, \"Pioneer 10\", had been launched on March 3, 1972.\n\"Pioneer\u00a011\" was launched on a trajectory directly aimed at Jupiter without any prior gravitational assists. In May 1974, Pioneer was retargeted to fly past Jupiter on a north\u2013south trajectory, enabling a Saturn flyby in 1979. The maneuver used of propellant, lasted 42 minutes and 36 seconds, and increased \"Pioneer\u00a011\"'s speed by 230\u00a0km/h. It also made two mid-course corrections, on April 11, 1973 and November 7, 1974.\nEncounter with Jupiter.\n\"Pioneer 11\" flew past Jupiter in November and December 1974. During its closest approach, on December 2, it passed above the cloud tops. The probe obtained detailed images of the Great Red Spot, transmitted the first images of the immense polar regions, and determined the mass of Jupiter's moon Callisto. Using the gravitational pull of Jupiter, a gravity assist was used to alter the trajectory of the probe towards Saturn and gain velocity. On April 16, 1975, following the Jupiter encounter, the micrometeoroid detector was turned off.\nEncounter with Saturn.\n\"Pioneer 11\" passed by Saturn on September 1, 1979, at a distance of from Saturn's cloud tops.\nBy this time, \"Voyager 1\" and \"Voyager 2\" had already passed Jupiter and were en route to Saturn, so it was decided \"Pioneer 11\" would pass through the Saturn ring plane at the same position Voyager 2 would later have to fly through in order to reach Uranus and Neptune. If there were faint ring particles capable of damaging a probe in that area, mission planners felt it was better to learn about it via Pioneer. Thus, \"Pioneer 11\" was acting as a \"pioneer\" in a true sense of the word; if danger were detected, then Voyager 2 could be redirected further away from the rings but miss the opportunity to visit the ice giants in the process.\n\"Pioneer 11\" imaged\u2014and nearly collided with\u2014one of Saturn's small moons, passing at a distance of no more than . The object was tentatively identified as Epimetheus, a moon discovered the previous day from \"Pioneer\"'s imaging, and suspected from earlier observations by Earth-based telescopes. After the Voyager flybys, it became known that there are two similarly sized moons (Epimetheus and Janus) in the same orbit, so there is some uncertainty about which one was the object of Pioneer's near-miss. \"Pioneer 11\" encountered Janus on September 1, 1979, at 14:52\u00a0UTC, at a distance of . At 16:20\u00a0UTC the same day, \"Pioneer\u00a011\" encountered Mimas at a distance of .\nBesides Epimetheus, instruments located another previously undiscovered small moon and an additional ring, charted Saturn's magnetosphere and magnetic field, and found its planet-sized moon, Titan, to be too cold for life. Hurtling underneath the ring plane, the probe sent back pictures of Saturn's rings. The rings, which normally seem bright when observed from Earth, appeared dark in the Pioneer pictures, and the dark gaps in the rings seen from Earth appeared as bright rings.\nInterstellar mission.\nOn February 25, 1990, \"Pioneer 11\" became the fourth human-made object to pass beyond the orbit of the planets.\nBy 1995, \"Pioneer 11\" could no longer power any of its detectors, so the decision was made to shut it down. On September 29, 1995, NASA's Ames Research Center, responsible for managing the project, issued a press release that began, \"After nearly 22 years of exploration out to the farthest reaches of the Solar System, one of the most durable and productive space missions in history will come to a close.\" It indicated NASA would use its Deep Space Network antennas to listen \"once or twice a month\" for the spacecraft's signal, until \"some time in late 1996\" when \"its transmitter will fall silent altogether.\" NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin characterized \"Pioneer 11\" as \"the little spacecraft that could, a venerable explorer that has taught us a great deal about the Solar System and, in the end, about our own innate drive to learn. \"Pioneer 11\" is what NASA is all about \u2013 exploration beyond the frontier.\" Besides announcing the end of operations, the dispatch provided a historical list of \"Pioneer 11\" mission achievements.\nNASA terminated routine contact with the spacecraft on September 30, 1995, but continued to make contact for about two hours every two to four weeks. Scientists received a few minutes of good engineering data on November 24, 1995, but then lost final contact once Earth moved out of view of the spacecraft's antenna.\nCurrent status.\nDue to power constraints and the vast distance to the probe, the last routine contact with the spacecraft was on September 30, 1995, and the last good engineering data was received on November 24, 1995.\nAs of June 24, 2024, \"Pioneer 11\" is estimated to be from the Earth and from the Sun. It was traveling at relative to the Sun and traveling outward at about 2.35\u00a0AU per year. The spacecraft is heading in the direction of the constellation Scutum near the current position (June 2024) RA 18h 54m dec -8\u00b0 46' (J2000.0), close to Messier 26. In 928,000 years, it will pass within of the K dwarf TYC 992-192-1 and will pass near the star Lambda Aquilae in about four million years.\n\"Pioneer 11\" has been overtaken by the two Voyager probes launched in 1977. \"Voyager 1\" has become the most distant object built by humans and will remain so for the foreseeable future, as no probe launched since Voyager has the speed to overtake it.\nPioneer anomaly.\nAnalysis of the radio tracking data from the \"Pioneer 10\" and \"11\" spacecraft at distances between 20 and 70\u00a0AU from the Sun had consistently indicated the presence of a small but anomalous Doppler frequency drift. The drift can be interpreted as due to a constant acceleration of (8.74 \u00b1 1.33) \u00d7 10\u221210 m/s2 directed towards the Sun. Although it was suspected that there was a systematic origin to the effect, none was found. As a result, there has been sustained interest in the nature of this so-called \"Pioneer anomaly\". Extended analysis of mission data by Slava Turyshev and colleagues determined the source of the anomaly to be asymmetric thermal radiation and the resulting thermal recoil force acting on the face of the \"Pioneer\"s away from the Sun.\nPioneer plaque.\n\"Pioneer 10\" and \"11\" both carry a gold-anodized aluminum plaque in the event that either spacecraft is ever found by intelligent lifeforms from other planetary systems. The plaques feature the nude figures of a human male and female along with several symbols that are designed to provide information about the origin of the spacecraft.\nCommemoration.\nIn 1991, \"Pioneer 11\" was honored on one of 10 United States Postage Service stamps commemorating uncrewed spacecraft exploring each of the then nine planets and the Moon. \"Pioneer 11\" was the spacecraft featured with Jupiter. Pluto was listed as \"Not yet explored\"."}
{"id": "24982", "revid": "1357713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24982", "title": "Psychometrics", "text": "Theory and technique of psychological measurement\nPsychometrics is a field of study within psychology concerned with the theory and technique of measurement. Psychometrics generally covers specialized fields within psychology and education devoted to testing, measurement, assessment, and related activities. Psychometrics is concerned with the objective measurement of latent constructs that cannot be directly observed. Examples of latent constructs include intelligence, personality factors (e.g., introversion), mental disorders, and educational achievement. The levels of individuals on nonobservable latent variables are inferred through mathematical modeling based on what is observed from individuals' responses to items on tests and scales. \nPractitioners are described as psychometricians, although not all who engage in psychometric research go by this title. Most psychometricians are psychologists with advanced graduate training in psychometrics and measurement theory. According to the \"Dictionary of Psychology\" a psychometrician \"is an individual with a theoretical knowledge of measurement techniques who is qualified to develop, evaluate, and improve psychological tests.\" In addition to traditional academic institutions, psychometricians also work for organizations, such as Pearson and the Educational Testing Service as well as independent consultants. Some psychometric researchers focus on the construction and validation of assessment instruments, including surveys, scales, and open- or close-ended questionnaires. Others focus on research relating to measurement theory (e.g., item response theory, intraclass correlation) or specialize as learning and development professionals.\nEtymology.\nThe word psychometry derives from Greek: \u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae, \"psukh\u0113\", \"spirit, soul\" and \u03bc\u03ad\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd, \"metron\", \"measure\"). The American academic Joseph Rodes Buchanan is credited as having first coined the word \"psychometry\" in 1842 but in connection with his investigation of the paranormal illusion rather than the rational quantification of psychological criteria.\nHistorical foundation.\nRational psychological testing has come from two streams of thought: the first, from Darwin, Galton, and Cattell, on the measurement of individual differences and the second, from Herbart, Weber, Fechner, and Wundt and their psychophysical measurements of a similar construct. The second set of individuals and their research is what has led to the development of experimental psychology and standardized testing.\nVictorian stream.\nCharles Darwin was the inspiration behind Francis Galton, a scientist who advanced the development of psychometrics. In 1859, Darwin published his book \"On the Origin of Species\". Darwin described the role of natural selection in the emergence, over time, of different populations of species of plants and animals. The book showed how individual members of a species differ among themselves and how they possess characteristics that are more or less adaptive to their environment. Those with more adaptive characteristics are more likely to survive to procreate and give rise to another generation. Those with less adaptive characteristics are less likely. These ideas stimulated Galton's interest in the study of human beings and how they differ one from another and how to measure those differences.\nGalton wrote a book entitled \"Hereditary Genius\" which was first published in 1869. The book described different characteristics that people possess and how those characteristics make some more \"fit\" than others. Today these differences, such as sensory and motor functioning (reaction time, visual acuity, and physical strength), are important domains of scientific psychology. Much of the early theoretical and applied work in psychometrics was undertaken in an attempt to measure intelligence. Galton often referred to as \"the father of psychometrics,\" devised and included mental tests among his anthropometric measures. James McKeen Cattell, a pioneer in the field of psychometrics, went on to extend Galton's work. Cattell coined the term \"mental test\", and is responsible for research and knowledge that ultimately led to the development of modern tests.\nGerman stream.\nThe origin of psychometrics also has connections to the related field of psychophysics. Around the same time that Darwin, Galton, and Cattell were making their discoveries, Herbart was also interested in \"unlocking the mysteries of human consciousness\" through the scientific method. Herbart was responsible for creating mathematical models of the mind, which were influential in educational practices for years to come.\nE.H. Weber built upon Herbart's work and tried to prove the existence of a psychological threshold, saying that a minimum stimulus was necessary to activate a sensory system. After Weber, G.T. Fechner expanded upon the knowledge he gleaned from Herbart and Weber, to devise the law that the strength of a sensation grows as the logarithm of the stimulus intensity. A follower of Weber and Fechner, Wilhelm Wundt is credited with founding the science of psychology. It is Wundt's influence that paved the way for others to develop psychological testing.\n20th century.\nIn 1936, the psychometrician L. L. Thurstone, founder and first president of the Psychometric Society, developed and applied a theoretical approach to measurement referred to as the law of comparative judgment, an approach that has close connections to the psychophysical theory of Ernst Heinrich Weber and Gustav Fechner. In addition, Spearman and Thurstone both made important contributions to the theory and application of factor analysis, a statistical method developed and used extensively in psychometrics. In the late 1950s, Leopold Szondi made a historical and epistemological assessment of the impact of statistical thinking on psychology during previous few decades: \"in the last decades, the specifically psychological thinking has been almost completely suppressed and removed, and replaced by a statistical thinking. Precisely here we see the cancer of testology and testomania of today.\"\nMore recently, psychometric theory has been applied in the measurement of personality, attitudes and beliefs, and academic achievement. These latent constructs cannot truly be measured, and much of the research and science in this discipline has been developed in an attempt to measure these constructs as close to the true score as possible. \nFigures who made significant contributions to psychometrics include Karl Pearson, Henry F. Kaiser, Carl Brigham, L. L. Thurstone, E. L. Thorndike, Georg Rasch, Eugene Galanter, Johnson O'Connor, Frederic M. Lord, Ledyard R Tucker, Louis Guttman, and Jane Loevinger.\nDefinition of measurement in the social sciences.\nThe definition of measurement in the social sciences has a long history. A current widespread definition, proposed by Stanley Smith Stevens, is that measurement is \"the assignment of numerals to objects or events according to some rule.\" This definition was introduced in a 1946 \"Science\" article in which Stevens proposed four levels of measurement. Although widely adopted, this definition differs in important respects from the more classical definition of measurement adopted in the physical sciences, namely that scientific measurement entails \"the estimation or discovery of the ratio of some magnitude of a quantitative attribute to a unit of the same attribute\" (p.\u00a0358)\nIndeed, Stevens's definition of measurement was put forward in response to the British Ferguson Committee, whose chair, A. Ferguson, was a physicist. The committee was appointed in 1932 by the British Association for the Advancement of Science to investigate the possibility of quantitatively estimating sensory events. Although its chair and other members were physicists, the committee also included several psychologists. The committee's report highlighted the importance of the definition of measurement. While Stevens's response was to propose a new definition, which has had considerable influence in the field, this was by no means the only response to the report. Another, notably different, response was to accept the classical definition, as reflected in the following statement:\nMeasurement in psychology and physics are in no sense different. Physicists can measure when they can find the operations by which they may meet the necessary criteria; psychologists have to do the same. They need not worry about the mysterious differences between the meaning of measurement in the two sciences (Reese, 1943, p. 49).\nThese divergent responses are reflected in alternative approaches to measurement. For example, methods based on covariance matrices are typically employed on the premise that numbers, such as raw scores derived from assessments, are measurements. Such approaches implicitly entail Stevens's definition of measurement, which requires only that numbers are \"assigned\" according to some rule. The main research task, then, is generally considered to be the discovery of associations between scores, and of factors posited to underlie such associations.\nOn the other hand, when measurement models such as the Rasch model are employed, numbers are not assigned based on a rule. Instead, in keeping with Reese's statement above, specific criteria for measurement are stated, and the goal is to construct procedures or operations that provide data that meet the relevant criteria. Measurements are estimated based on the models, and tests are conducted to ascertain whether the relevant criteria have been met.\nInstruments and procedures.\nThe first psychometric instruments were designed to measure intelligence. One early approach to measuring intelligence was the test developed in France by Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon. That test was known as the Test Binet-Simon.The French test was adapted for use in the U. S. by Lewis Terman of Stanford University, and named the Stanford-Binet IQ test.\nAnother major focus in psychometrics has been on personality testing. There has been a range of theoretical approaches to conceptualizing and measuring personality, though there is no widely agreed upon theory. Some of the better-known instruments include the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, the Five-Factor Model (or \"Big 5\") and tools such as Personality and Preference Inventory and the Myers\u2013Briggs Type Indicator. Attitudes have also been studied extensively using psychometric approaches. An alternative method involves the application of unfolding measurement models, the most general being the Hyperbolic Cosine Model (Andrich &amp; Luo, 1993).\nTheoretical approaches.\nPsychometricians have developed a number of different measurement theories. These include classical test theory (CTT) and item response theory (IRT). An approach that seems mathematically to be similar to IRT but also quite distinctive, in terms of its origins and features, is represented by the Rasch model for measurement. The development of the Rasch model, and the broader class of models to which it belongs, was explicitly founded on requirements of measurement in the physical sciences.\nPsychometricians have also developed methods for working with large matrices of correlations and covariances. Techniques in this general tradition include: factor analysis, a method of determining the underlying dimensions of data. One of the main challenges faced by users of factor analysis is a lack of consensus on appropriate procedures for determining the number of latent factors. A usual procedure is to stop factoring when eigenvalues drop below one because the original sphere shrinks. The lack of the cutting points concerns other multivariate methods, also.\nMultidimensional scaling is a method for finding a simple representation for data with a large number of latent dimensions. Cluster analysis is an approach to finding objects that are like each other. Factor analysis, multidimensional scaling, and cluster analysis are all multivariate descriptive methods used to distill from large amounts of data simpler structures.\nMore recently, structural equation modeling and path analysis represent more sophisticated approaches to working with large covariance matrices. These methods allow statistically sophisticated models to be fitted to data and tested to determine if they are adequate fits. Because at a granular level psychometric research is concerned with the extent and nature of multidimensionality in each of the items of interest, a relatively new procedure known as bi-factor analysis can be helpful. Bi-factor analysis can decompose \"an item's systematic variance in terms of, ideally, two sources, a general factor and one source of additional systematic variance.\"\nKey concepts.\nKey concepts in classical test theory are reliability and validity. A reliable measure is one that measures a construct consistently across time, individuals, and situations. A valid measure is one that measures what it is intended to measure. Reliability is necessary, but not sufficient, for validity.\nBoth reliability and validity can be assessed statistically. Consistency over repeated measures of the same test can be assessed with the Pearson correlation coefficient, and is often called \"test-retest reliability.\" Similarly, the equivalence of different versions of the same measure can be indexed by a Pearson correlation, and is called \"equivalent forms reliability\" or a similar term.\nInternal consistency, which addresses the homogeneity of a single test form, may be assessed by correlating performance on two halves of a test, which is termed \"split-half reliability\"; the value of this Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient for two half-tests is adjusted with the Spearman\u2013Brown prediction formula to correspond to the correlation between two full-length tests. Perhaps the most commonly used index of reliability is Cronbach's \u03b1, which is equivalent to the mean of all possible split-half coefficients. Other approaches include the intra-class correlation, which is the ratio of variance of measurements of a given target to the variance of all targets.\nThere are a number of different forms of validity. Criterion-related validity refers to the extent to which a test or scale predicts a sample of behavior, i.e., the criterion, that is \"external to the measuring instrument itself.\" That external sample of behavior can be many things including another test; college grade point average as when the high school SAT is used to predict performance in college; and even behavior that occurred in the past, for example, when a test of current psychological symptoms is used to predict the occurrence of past victimization (which would accurately represent postdiction). When the criterion measure is collected at the same time as the measure being validated the goal is to establish \"concurrent validity\"; when the criterion is collected later the goal is to establish \"predictive validity\". A measure has \"construct validity\" if it is related to measures of other constructs as required by theory. \"Content validity\" is a demonstration that the items of a test do an adequate job of covering the domain being measured. In a personnel selection example, test content is based on a defined statement or set of statements of knowledge, skill, ability, or other characteristics obtained from a \"job analysis\".\nItem response theory models the relationship between latent traits and responses to test items. Among other advantages, IRT provides a basis for obtaining an estimate of the location of a test-taker on a given latent trait as well as the standard error of measurement of that location. For example, a university student's knowledge of history can be deduced from his or her score on a university test and then be compared reliably with a high school student's knowledge deduced from a less difficult test. Scores derived by classical test theory do not have this characteristic, and assessment of actual ability (rather than ability relative to other test-takers) must be assessed by comparing scores to those of a \"norm group\" randomly selected from the population. In fact, all measures derived from classical test theory are dependent on the sample tested, while, in principle, those derived from item response theory are not.\nStandards of quality.\nThe considerations of validity and reliability typically are viewed as essential elements for determining the quality of any test. However, professional and practitioner associations frequently have placed these concerns within broader contexts when developing standards and making overall judgments about the quality of any test as a whole within a given context. A consideration of concern in many applied research settings is whether or not the metric of a given psychological inventory is meaningful or arbitrary.\nTesting standards.\nIn 2014, the American Educational Research Association (AERA), American Psychological Association (APA), and National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) published a revision of the \"Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing\", which describes standards for test development, evaluation, and use. The \"Standards\" cover essential topics in testing including validity, reliability/errors of measurement, and fairness in testing. The book also establishes standards related to testing operations\u2014including test design and development, scores, scales, norms, score linking, cut scores, test administration, scoring, reporting, score interpretation, test documentation, and rights and responsibilities of test takers and test users. Finally, the \"Standards\" cover topics related to testing applications, including psychological testing and assessment, workplace testing and credentialing, educational testing and assessment, and testing in program evaluation and public policy.\nEvaluation standards.\nIn the field of evaluation, and in particular educational evaluation, the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation has published three sets of standards for evaluations. \"The Personnel Evaluation Standards\" was published in 1988, \"The Program Evaluation Standards\" (2nd edition) was published in 1994, and \"The Student Evaluation Standards\" was published in 2003.\nEach publication presents and elaborates a set of standards for use in a variety of educational settings. The standards provide guidelines for designing, implementing, assessing, and improving the identified form of evaluation. Each of the standards has been placed in one of four fundamental categories to promote educational evaluations that are proper, useful, feasible, and accurate. In these sets of standards, validity and reliability considerations are covered under the accuracy topic. For example, the student accuracy standards help ensure that student evaluations will provide sound, accurate, and credible information about student learning and performance.\nControversy and criticism.\nBecause psychometrics is based on latent psychological processes measured through correlations, there has been controversy about some psychometric measures. Critics, including practitioners in the physical sciences, have argued that such definition and quantification is difficult, and that such measurements are often misused by laymen, such as with personality tests used in employment procedures. The Standards for Educational and Psychological Measurement gives the following statement on test validity: \"validity refers to the degree to which evidence and theory support the interpretations of test scores entailed by proposed uses of tests\". Simply put, a test is not valid unless it is used and interpreted in the way it is intended. \nTwo types of tools used to measure personality traits are objective tests and projective measures. Examples of such tests are the: Big Five Inventory (BFI), Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2), Rorschach Inkblot test, Neurotic Personality Questionnaire KON-2006, or Eysenck Personality Questionnaire. Some of these tests are helpful because they have adequate reliability and validity, two factors that make tests consistent and accurate reflections of the underlying construct. The Myers\u2013Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), however, has questionable validity and has been the subject of much criticism. Psychometric specialist Robert Hogan wrote of the measure: \"Most personality psychologists regard the MBTI as little more than an elaborate Chinese fortune cookie.\"\nLee Cronbach noted in \"American Psychologist\" (1957) that, \"correlational psychology, though fully as old as experimentation, was slower to mature. It qualifies equally as a discipline, however, because it asks a distinctive type of question and has technical methods of examining whether the question has been properly put and the data properly interpreted.\" He would go on to say, \"The correlation method, for its part, can study what man has not learned to control or can never hope to control\u00a0... A true federation of the disciplines is required. Kept independent, they can give only wrong answers or no answers at all regarding certain important problems.\"\nNon-human: animals and machines.\nPsychometrics addresses \"human\" abilities, attitudes, traits, and educational evolution. Notably, the study of behavior, mental processes, and abilities of non-human \"animals\" is usually addressed by comparative psychology, or with a continuum between non-human animals and the rest of animals by evolutionary psychology. Nonetheless, there are some advocators for a more gradual transition between the approach taken for humans and the approach taken for (non-human) animals.\nThe evaluation of abilities, traits and learning evolution of \"machines\" has been mostly unrelated to the case of humans and non-human animals, with specific approaches in the area of artificial intelligence. A more integrated approach, under the name of universal psychometrics, has also been proposed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24983", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24983", "title": "Philosophy of education", "text": "Study of nature and aims of education\nThe philosophy of education is the branch of applied philosophy that investigates the nature of education as well as its aims and problems. It also examines the concepts and presuppositions of education theories. It is an interdisciplinary field that draws inspiration from various disciplines both within and outside philosophy, like ethics, political philosophy, psychology, and sociology. Many of its theories focus specifically on education in schools but it also encompasses other forms of education. Its theories are often divided into descriptive theories, which provide a value-neutral description of what education is, and normative theories, which investigate how education should be practiced.\nA great variety of topics is discussed in the philosophy of education. Some studies provide a conceptual analysis of the fundamental concepts of education. Others center around the aims or purpose of education, like passing on knowledge and the development of the abilities of good reasoning, judging, and acting. An influential discussion concerning the epistemic aims of education is whether education should focus mainly on the transmission of true beliefs or rather on the abilities to reason and arrive at new knowledge. In this context, many theorists emphasize the importance of critical thinking in contrast to indoctrination. Another debate about the aims of education is whether the primary beneficiary is the student or the society to which the student belongs.\nMany of the more specific discussions in the philosophy of education concern the contents of the curriculum. This involves the questions of whether, when, and in what detail a certain topic, like sex education or religion, should be taught. Other debates focus on the specific contents and methods used in moral, art, and science education. Some philosophers investigate the relation between education and power, often specifically regarding the power used by modern states to compel children to attend school. A different issue is the problem of the equality of education and factors threatening it, like discrimination and unequal distribution of wealth. Some philosophers of education promote a quantitative approach to educational research, which follows the example of the natural sciences by using wide experimental studies. Others prefer a qualitative approach, which is closer to the methodology of the social sciences and tends to give more prominence to individual case studies.\nVarious schools of philosophy have developed their own perspective on the main issues of education. Existentialists emphasize the role of authenticity while pragmatists give particular prominence to active learning and discovery. Feminists and postmodernists often try to uncover and challenge biases and forms of discrimination present in current educational practices. Other philosophical movements include perennialism, classical education, essentialism, critical pedagogy, and progressivism. The history of the philosophy of education started in ancient philosophy but only emerged as a systematic branch of philosophy in the latter half of the 20th century.\nDefinition.\nThe philosophy of education is the branch of philosophy that examines the nature, aims, and problems of education. As the philosophical study of education, it investigates its topic similar to how other discipline-specific branches of philosophy, like the philosophy of science or the philosophy of law, study their topics. A central task for the philosophy of education is to make explicit the various fundamental assumptions and disagreements at work in its field and to evaluate the arguments raised for and against the different positions. The issue of education has a great many manifestations in various fields. Because of this, both the breadth and the influence of the philosophy of education are significant and wide-ranging, touching many other branches of philosophy, such as ethics, political philosophy, epistemology, metaphysics, and philosophy of mind. Its theories are often formulated from the perspective of these other philosophical disciplines. But due to its interdisciplinary nature, it also attracts contributions from scholars belonging to fields outside the domain of philosophy.\nWhile there is wide agreement on the general topics discussed in the philosophy of education, it has proven difficult to give a precise definition of it. The philosophy of education belongs mainly to applied philosophy. According to some definitions, it can be characterized as an offshoot of ethics. But not everyone agrees with this characterization since the philosophy of education has a more theoretical side as well, which includes the examination of the fundamental concepts and theories of education as well as their philosophical implications. These two sides are sometimes referred to as the outward and the inward looking nature of the philosophy of education. Its topics can range from very general questions, like the nature of the knowledge worth teaching, to more specific issues, like how to teach art or whether public schools should implement standardized curricula and testing.\nThe problem of education was already an important topic in ancient philosophy and has remained so to the present day. But it only emerged as a distinct branch of philosophy in the latter half of the 20th century, when it became the subject of a systematic study and analysis. The term \"education\" can refer either to the process of educating or to the field of study investigating education as this process. This ambiguity is also reflected on the level of the philosophy of education, which encompasses the study of the philosophical presuppositions and issues both of education as a process and as a discipline. Many works in the philosophy of education focus explicitly or implicitly on the education happening in schools. But in its widest sense, education takes place in various other fields as well, such as at home, in libraries, in museums, or in the public media. Different types of education can be distinguished, such as formal and informal education or private and public education.\nSubdivisions.\nDifferent subdivisions of the philosophy of education have been suggested. One categorization distinguishes between descriptive and normative issues. Descriptive theories aim to describe what education is and how to understand its related concepts. This includes also epistemological questions, which ask not whether a theory about education is true or false, but how one can arrive at the knowledge to answer such questions. Normative theories, on the other hand, try to give an account of how education should be practiced or what is the right form of education. Some normative theories are built on a wider ethical framework of what is right or good and then arrive at their educational normative theories by applying this framework to the practice of education. But the descriptive and the normative approaches are intertwined and cannot always be clearly separated since descriptive findings often directly imply various normative attitudes.\nAnother categorization divides topics in the philosophy of education into the nature and aims of education on the one hand, and the methods and circumstances of education on the other hand. The latter section may again be divided into concrete normative theories and the study of the conceptual and methodological presuppositions of these theories. Other classifications additionally include areas for topics such as the role of reasoning and morality as well as issues pertaining to social and political topics and the curriculum.\nThe theories within the philosophy of education can also be subdivided based on the school of philosophy they belong to. Various schools of philosophy, such as existentialism, pragmatism, Marxism, postmodernism, and feminism, have developed their own perspective on the main issues of education. They often include normative theories about how education should or should not be practiced and are in most cases controversial.\nAnother approach is to simply list all topics discussed in the philosophy of education. Among them are the issues and presuppositions concerning sex education, science education, aesthetic education, religious education, moral education, multicultural education, professional education, theories of teaching and learning, the measurement of learning, knowledge and its value, cultivating reason, epistemic and moral aims of education, authority, fallibilism, and fallibility.\nFinally, yet another way that philosophy of education is often tacitly divided is in terms of \"western\" versus non-western and \"global south\" perspectives. For many generations, philosophy of education has maintained a relatively ethnocentric orientation, with little attention paid to ideas from outside Europe and North America, but this is starting to change in the 21st century due to decolonization and related movements.\nMain topics.\nFundamental concepts of education.\nThe starting point of many philosophical inquiries into a field is the examination and clarification of the fundamental concepts used in this field, often in the form of conceptual analysis. This approach is particularly prominent in the analytic tradition. It aims to make ambiguities explicit and to uncover various implicit and potentially false assumptions associated with these terms.\nTheorists in this field often emphasize the importance of this form of investigation since all subsequent work on more specific issues already has to assume at least implicitly what their central terms mean to demarcate their field. For example, in order to study what constitutes good education, one has to have a notion of what the term \"education\" means and how to achieve, measure, and evaluate it. Definitions of education can be divided into thin and thick definitions. Thin definitions are neutral and descriptive. They usually emphasize the role of the transmission of knowledge and understanding in education. Thick definitions include additional normative components, for example, by stating that the process in question has to have certain positive results to be called education. According to one thick definition, education means that the person educated has acquired knowledge and intellectual skills, values these factors, and has thus changed for the better. These characteristics can then be used to distinguish education from other closely related terms, such as \"indoctrination\". Other fundamental notions in the philosophy of education include the concepts of teaching, learning, student, schooling, and rearing.\nAims of education.\nA central question in the philosophy of education concerns the aims of education: why people should be educated and what goals should be pursued. This question is relevant for evaluating educational practices and curricula by assessing how well they achieve these aims. Theories about the aims of education vary, reflecting different philosophical, social, and cultural perspectives. Some suggest that education should foster knowledge, curiosity, creativity, rationality, critical thinking, and moral development. Others emphasize the development of social and civic qualities, including community, solidarity, and responsible participation in society. Certain approaches focus on individual development, such as self-actualization and the realization of personal potential, while other perspectives stress conformity, obedience to authority, or adherence to specific ideological or religious principles. Discussions of these aims often draw on other disciplines, including ethics, psychology, anthropology, and sociology.\nThere is wide consensus concerning certain general aims of education, like that it should foster all students, help them in the development of their ability to reason, and guide them in how to judge and act. But these general characteristics are usually too vague to be of much help and there are many disagreements about the more specific suggestions of what education should aim for. Some attempts have been made to provide an overarching framework of these different aims. According to one approach, education should at its core help the individual lead a good life. All the different more specific goals are aims of education to the extent that they serve this ultimate purpose. On this view, it may be argued that fostering rationality and autonomy in the students are aims of education to the extent that increased rationality and autonomy will result in the student leading a better life.\nThe different theories of the aims of education are sometimes divided into \"goods-based\", \"skills-based\", and \"character-based\" accounts. \"Goods-based\" accounts hold that the ultimate aim of education is to produce some form of epistemic good, such as truth, knowledge, and understanding. \"Skills-based\" accounts, on the other hand, see the development of certain skills, like rationality as well as critical and independent thinking as the goal of education. For \"character-based\" accounts, the character traits or virtues of the learner play the central role, often with an emphasis on moral and civic traits like kindness, justice, and honesty.\nEpistemic.\nMany theories emphasize the epistemic aims of education. According to the epistemic approach, the central aim of education has to do with knowledge, for example, to pass on knowledge accumulated in the societal effort from one generation to the next. This process may be seen both as the development of the student's mind as well as the transmission of a valuable heritage. Such an approach is sometimes rejected by pragmatists, who emphasize experimentation and critical thinking over the transmission of knowledge. Others have argued that this constitutes a false dichotomy: that the transmission of knowledge and the development of a rational and critical mind are intertwined aims of education that depend on and support each other. In this sense, education aims also at fostering the ability to acquire new knowledge. This includes both instilling true beliefs in the students as well as teaching the methods and forms of evidence responsible for verifying existing beliefs and arriving at new knowledge. It promotes the epistemic autonomy of students and may help them challenge unwarranted claims by epistemic authorities. In its widest sense, the epistemic approach includes various related goals, such as imparting true beliefs or knowledge to the students as well as teaching dispositions and abilities, such as rationality, critical thinking, understanding, and other intellectual virtues.\nCritical thinking and indoctrination.\nCritical thinking is often cited as one of the central aims of education. There is no generally accepted definition of critical thinking. But there is wide agreement that it is reasonable, reflective, careful, and focused on determining what to believe or how to act. It has clarity and rationality as its standards and includes a metacognitive component monitoring not just the solution of the problem at hand but also ensuring that it complies with its own standards in the process. In this sense, education is not just about conveying many true beliefs to the students. Instead, the students' ability to arrive at conclusions by themselves and the disposition to question pre-existing beliefs should also be fostered, often with the goal of benefitting not just the student but society at large. But not everyone agrees with the positive role ascribed to critical thinking in education. Objections are often based on disagreements about what it means to reason well. Some critics argue that there is no universally correct form of reasoning. According to them, education should focus more on teaching subject-specific skills and less on imparting a universal method of thinking. Other objections focus on the allegation that critical thinking is not as neutral, universal, and presuppositionless as some of its proponents claim. On this view, it involves various implicit biases, like egocentrism or distanced objectivity, and culture-specific values arising from its roots in the philosophical movement of the European Enlightenment.\nThe problem of critical thinking is closely connected to that of indoctrination. Many theorists hold that indoctrination is in important ways different from education and should be avoided in education. But others contend that indoctrination should be part of education or even that there is no difference between the two. These different positions depend a lot on how \"indoctrination\" is to be defined. Most definitions of indoctrination agree that its goal is to get the student to accept and embrace certain beliefs. It has this in common with most forms of education but differs from it in other ways. According to one definition, the belief acquisition in indoctrination happens without regard for the evidential support of these beliefs, i.e. without presenting proper arguments and reasons for adopting them. According to another, the beliefs are instilled in such a way as to discourage the student to question or assess for themselves the believed contents. In this sense, the goals of indoctrination are exactly opposite to other aims of education, such as rationality and critical thinking. In this sense, education tries to impart not just beliefs but also make the students more open-minded and conscious of human fallibility. An intimately related issue is whether the aim of education is to mold the mind of the pupil or to liberate it by strengthening its capacity for critical and independent inquiry.\nAn important consequence of this debate concerns the problem of testimony, i.e to what extent students should trust the claims of teachers and books. It has been argued that this issue depends a lot on the age and the intellectual development of the student. In the earlier stages of education, a high level of trust on the side of the students may be necessary. But the more their intellectual capacities develop, the more they should use them when trying to assess the plausibility of claims and the reasons for and against them. In this regard, it has been argued that, especially for young children, weaker forms of indoctrination may be necessary while they still lack the intellectual capacities to evaluate the reasons for and against certain claims and thus to critically assess them. In this sense, one can distinguish unavoidable or acceptable forms of indoctrination from their avoidable or unacceptable counterparts. But this distinction is not always affirmed and some theorists contend that all forms of indoctrination are bad or unacceptable.\nIndividual and society.\nA recurrent source of disagreement about the aims of education concerns the question of who is the primary beneficiary of education: the individual educated or the society having this individual as its member. In many cases, the interests of both are aligned. On the one hand, many new opportunities in life open to the individual through education, especially concerning their career. On the other hand, education makes it more likely that the person becomes a good, law-abiding, and productive member of society. But this issue becomes more problematic in cases where the interests of the individual and society conflict with each other. This poses the question of whether individual autonomy should take precedence over communal welfare. According to \"comprehensive liberals\", for example, education should emphasize the self-directedness of the students. On this view, it is up to the student to choose their own path in life. The role of education is to provide them with the necessary resources but it does not direct the student with respect to what constitutes an ethically good path in life. This position is usually rejected by communitarians, who stress the importance of social cohesion by being part of the community and sharing a common good.\nCurriculum.\nAn important and controversial issue in the philosophy of education concerns the contents of the curriculum, i.e. the question of what should be taught to students. This includes both the selection of subjects to be taught and the consideration of arguments for and against the inclusion of a particular topic. This issue is intimately tied to the aims of education: one may argue that a certain subject should be included in the curriculum because it serves one of the aims of education.\nWhile many positions about what subjects to include in the curriculum are controversial, some particular issues stand out where these controversies go beyond the academic discourse to a wide public discourse, like questions about sexual and religious education. Controversies in sex education involve both biological aspects, such as the functioning of sex organs, and social aspects, such as sexual practices and gender identities. Disagreements in this area concern which aspects are taught and in which detail as well as to which age groups these teachings should be directed. Debates on religious education include questions like whether religion should be taught as a distinct subject and, if so, whether it should be compulsory. Other questions include which religion or religions should be taught and to what degree religious views should influence other topics, such as ethics or sex education.\nAnother prominent topic in this field concerns the subject of moral education. This field is sometimes referred to as \"educational ethics\". Disagreements in this field concern which moral beliefs and values should be taught to the students. This way, many of the disagreements in moral philosophy are reflected in the field of moral education. Some theorists in the Kantian tradition emphasize the importance of moral reasoning and enabling children to become morally autonomous agents who can tell right from wrong. Theorists in the Aristotelian tradition, on the other hand, focus more on moral habituation through the development of virtues that concern both perception, affect, and judgment in regard to moral situations. A related issue, heavily discussed in ancient philosophy, is the extent to which morality can be taught at all instead of just being an inborn disposition.\nVarious discussions also concern the role of art and aesthetics in public education. It has been argued that the creativity learned in these areas can be applied to various other fields and may thereby benefit the student in various ways. It has been argued that aesthetic education also has indirect effects on various other issues, such as shaping the student's sensibilities in the fields of morality and politics as well as heightening their awareness of self and others.\nSome researchers reject the possibility of objectivity in general. They use this claim to argue against universal forms of education, which they see as hiding particular worldviews, beliefs, and interests under a false cover. This is sometimes utilized to advance an approach focused on more diversity, for example, by giving more prominence in education to the great variety of cultures, customs, languages, and lifestyles without giving preference to any of them.\nDifferent approaches to solving these disputes are employed. In some cases, psychology in the field of child development, learning, and motivation can provide important general insights. More specific questions about the curriculum of a particular subject, such as mathematics, are often strongly influenced by the philosophy of this specific discipline, such as the philosophy of mathematics.\nPower.\nThe problem of power is another issue in the philosophy of education. Of specific interest on this topic is that the modern states compel children to attend school, so-called compulsory education. The modern system of compulsory education in many countries has historical roots in the 18th- and 19th-century Prussian education system, which emphasized uniformity, obedience, and preparation for industrial and military needs. Gatto argues that this system was designed not primarily for the intellectual or moral development of children, but to produce compliant citizens and efficient workers, embedding social hierarchies and state authority into the educational process. This historical perspective informs contemporary critiques of compulsory education, including those associated with deschooling and unschooling movements. The children and their parents usually have few to no ways of opting out or changing the established curriculum. An important question in this respect is why or whether modern states are justified to use this form of power. For example, various liberationist movements belonging to the fields of deschooling and unschooling reject this power and argue that the children's welfare is best served in the absence of compulsory schooling in general. This is sometimes based on the idea that the best form of learning does not happen while studying but instead occurs as a side-effect while doing something else. This position is often rejected by pointing out that it is based on overly optimistic presuppositions about the children's natural and unguided development of rationality. While some objections focus on compulsory education in general, a less radical and more common criticism concerns specific compulsory topics in the curriculum, for example, in relation to sexuality or religion. Another contemporary debate in the United States concerns the practice of standardized testing: it has been argued that this discriminates against certain racial, cultural, or religious minorities since the standardized test may implicitly assume various presuppositions not shared by these minorities. Other issues in relation to power concern the authority and responsibility teachers have towards their students.\nPostmodern theorists often see established educational practices as instruments of power used by elites in society to further their own interests. Important aspects in this regard are the unequal power relation between the state and its institutions in contrast to the individual as well as the control that can thus be employed due to the close connection between power and knowledge, specifically the knowledge passed on through education.\nEquality.\nA recurrent demand on public education is that all students should be treated equally and in a fair manner. One reason for this demand is that education plays a central role for the child's path and prospects in life, which should not be limited by unfair or arbitrary external circumstances. But there are various disagreements about how this demand is best understood and whether it is applicable in all cases. An initial problem concerns what is meant by \"equality\". In the field of education, it is often understood as equality of opportunity. In this sense, the demand for equality implies that education should open the same opportunities to everyone. This means, among other things, that students from higher social classes should not enjoy a competitive advantage over others. One difficulty with this demand, when understood in a wide sense, is that there are many sources of educational inequality and it is not always in the best interest to eliminate all of them. For example, parents who are concerned with their young children's education may read them bedtime stories early on and thereby provide them with a certain advantage over other children who do not enjoy this privilege. But disallowing such practices to level the field would have serious negative side-effects. A weaker position on this issue does not demand full equality but holds instead that educational policies should ensure that certain factors, like race, native language, and disabilities, do not pose obstacles to the equality of opportunity.\nA closely related topic is whether all students, both high and low performers, should be treated equally. According to some, more resources should be dedicated to low performers, to help them get to an average level, while others recommend a preferential treatment for high performers in order to help them fully develop their exceptional abilities and thereby benefit society at large. A similar problem is the issue of specialization. It concerns the question of whether all students should follow the same curriculum or to what extent they should specialize early on in specific fields according to their interests and skills.\nMarxist critiques of the school systems in capitalist societies often focus on the inequality they cause by sorting students for different economic positions. While overtly this process happens based on individual effort and desert, they argue that this just masks and reinforces the underlying influence of the preexisting social class structure. This is sometimes integrated into a wider Marxist perspective on society which holds that education in capitalist societies plays the role of upholding this inequality and thereby reproduces the capitalist relations of production.\nOther criticisms of the dominant paradigms in education are often voiced by feminist and postmodern theorists. They usually point to alleged biases and forms of discrimination present in current practices that should be eliminated. Feminists often hold that traditional education is overly man-oriented and thereby oppresses women in some form. This bias was present to severe degrees in earlier forms of education and a lot of progress has been made towards more gender-equal forms of education. Nonetheless, feminists often contend that certain problems still persist in contemporary education. Some argue, for example, that this manifests itself in the prominence given to cognitive development in education, which is said to be associated primarily with masculinity in contrast to a more feminine approach based on emotion and intuition. A related criticism holds that there is an overemphasis on abilities belonging to the public sphere, like reason and objectivity, in contrast to equally important characteristics belonging to the private sphere, like compassion and empathy.\nEpistemology.\nThe philosophy of education is also interested in the \"epistemology of education\". This term is often used to talk about the epistemic aims of education, i.e. questions like whether educators should aim at transmitting justified true beliefs rather than merely true beliefs or should additionally foster other epistemic virtues like critical thinking. In a different sense, the epistemology of education concerns the issue of how we arrive at knowledge on educational matters. This is especially relevant in the field of educational research, which is an active field of investigation with many studies being published on a regular basis. It is also quite influential in regard to educational policy and practice. Epistemological questions in this field concern the objectivity of its insights.\nAn important methodological divide in this area, often referred to as the \"paradigm wars\", is between the \"quantitative\" or \"statistical approach\" in contrast to the \"qualitative\" or \"ethnographical approach\". The quantitative approach usually focuses on wide experimental studies and employs statistical methods to uncover the general causal factors responsible for educational phenomena. It has been criticized based on the claim that its method, which is inspired by the natural sciences, is inappropriate for understanding the complex cultural and motivational patterns investigated by the social sciences. The qualitative approach, on the other hand, gives more weight to particular case studies for reaching its conclusions. Its opponents hold that this approach lacks the methodological rigor to arrive at well-warranted knowledge. The \"mixed-method research\" is a recent contemporary approach in which the methods of both camps are combined. The question of the most promising approach is relevant to how funding budgets are spent on research, which in its turn has important implications for policymaking.\nOthers.\nOne question concerns how the learners are to be conceptualized. John Locke sees the mind as a blank slate or a tabula rasa that passively absorbs information and is filled with contents through experience. This view contrasts with a more pragmatist perspective, which in its emphasis on practice sees students not as passive absorbers but as active learners that should be encouraged to discover and learn things by themselves.\nAnother disputed topic is the role of testing in public education. Some theorists have argued that it is counterproductive since it puts undue pressure on the students. But testing also plays various critical roles, such as providing feedback on the learning progress both to the student, their parents, and their teachers. Concrete discussions on the role of testing often focus less on whether it should be done at all and more on how much importance should be ascribed to the test results. This also includes questions about the form of testing, for example, whether it should be standardized. Standardized tests present the same questions and scoring system to all students taking the test and are often motivated by a desire for objective and fair evaluations both of students and schools. Opponents have argued that this approach tends to favor certain social groups over others and severely limits the creativity and effectiveness of teachers.\nPhilosophical movements.\nExistentialist.\nThe existentialist sees the world as one's personal subjectivity, where goodness, truth, and reality are individually defined. Reality is a world of existing, truth subjectively chosen, and goodness a matter of freedom. The subject matter of existentialist classrooms should be a matter of personal choice. Teachers view the individual as an entity within a social context in which the learner must confront others' views to clarify his or her own. Character development emphasizes individual responsibility for decisions. Real answers come from within the individual, not from outside authority. Examining life through authentic thinking involves students in genuine learning experiences. Existentialists are opposed to thinking about students as objects to be measured, tracked, or standardized. Such educators want the educational experience to focus on creating opportunities for self-direction and self-actualization. They start with the student, rather than on curriculum content.\nPerennialism.\nPerennialists believe that one should teach the things that one deems to be of everlasting importance to all people everywhere. They believe that the most important topics develop a person. Since details of fact change constantly, these cannot be the most important. Therefore, one should teach principles, not facts. Since people are human, one should teach first about humans, not machines or techniques. Since people are people first, and workers second if at all, one should teach liberal topics first, not vocational topics. The focus is primarily on teaching reasoning and wisdom rather than facts, the liberal arts rather than vocational training.\nClassical education.\nThe Classical education movement advocates a form of education based in the traditions of Western culture, with a particular focus on education as understood and taught in the Middle Ages. The term \"classical education\" has been used in English for several centuries, with each era modifying the definition and adding its own selection of topics. By the end of the 18th century, in addition to the trivium and quadrivium of the Middle Ages, the definition of a classical education embraced study of literature, poetry, drama, philosophy, history, art, and languages. In the 20th and 21st centuries it is used to refer to a broad-based study of the liberal arts and sciences, as opposed to a practical or pre-professional program. Classical Education can be described as rigorous and systematic, separating children and their learning into three rigid categories, Grammar, Dialectic, and Rhetoric.\nEssentialism.\nAccording to educational essentialism, there are certain essential facts about the world that every student needs to learn and master. It is a form of traditional education that relies on long-standing and established subjects and teaching methods. Essentialists usually focus on subjects like reading, writing, mathematics, and science, usually starting with very basic skills while progressively increasing complexity. They prefer a teacher-centered approach, meaning that the teacher acts as the authority figure guiding the learning activity while students are expected to follow their lead.\nSocial reconstructionism and critical pedagogy.\nCritical pedagogy is an \"educational movement, guided by passion and principle, to help students develop consciousness of freedom, recognize authoritarian tendencies, and connect knowledge to power and the ability to take constructive action.\" Based in Marxist theory, critical pedagogy draws on radical democracy, anarchism, feminism, and other movements for social justice.\nDemocratic education.\nDemocratic education is a theory of learning and school governance in which students and staff participate freely and equally in a school democracy. In a democratic school, there is typically shared decision-making among students and staff on matters concerning living, working, and learning together.\nProgressivism.\nEducational progressivism is the belief that education must be based on the principle that humans are social animals who learn best in real-life activities with other people. Progressivists, like proponents of most educational theories, claim to rely on the best available scientific theories of learning. Most progressive educators believe that children learn as if they were scientists, following a process similar to John Dewey's model of learning known as \"the pattern of inquiry\": 1) Become aware of the problem. 2) Define the problem. 3) Propose hypotheses to solve it. 4) Evaluate the consequences of the hypotheses from one's past experience. 5) Test the likeliest solution.\nUnschooling.\nUnschooling is a range of educational philosophies and practices centered on allowing children to learn through their natural life experiences, including child directed play, game play, household responsibilities, work experience, and social interaction, rather than through a more traditional school curriculum. Unschooling encourages exploration of activities led by the children themselves, facilitated by the adults. Unschooling differs from conventional schooling principally in the thesis that standard curricula and conventional grading methods, as well as other features of traditional schooling, are counterproductive to the goal of maximizing the education of each child.\nContemplative education.\nContemplative education focuses on bringing introspective practices such as mindfulness and yoga into curricular and pedagogical processes for diverse aims grounded in secular, spiritual, religious and post-secular perspectives. Contemplative approaches may be used in the classroom, especially in tertiary or (often in modified form) in secondary education. Parker Palmer is a recent pioneer in contemplative methods. The Center for Contemplative Mind in Society founded a branch focusing on education, The Association for Contemplative Mind in Higher Education.\nContemplative methods may also be used by teachers in their preparation; Waldorf education was one of the pioneers of the latter approach. In this case, inspiration for enriching the content, format, or teaching methods may be sought through various practices, such as consciously reviewing the previous day's activities; actively holding the students in consciousness; and contemplating inspiring pedagogical texts. Zigler suggested that only through focusing on their own spiritual development could teachers positively impact the spiritual development of students.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nPlato.\nPlato's educational philosophy was grounded in a vision of an ideal \"Republic\" wherein the individual was best served by being subordinated to a just society due to a shift in emphasis that departed from his predecessors. The mind and body were to be considered separate entities. In the dialogues of Phaedo, written in his \"middle period\" (360 BCE), Plato expressed his distinctive views about the nature of knowledge, reality, and the soul:When the soul and body are united, then nature orders the soul to rule and govern, and the body to obey and serve. Now which of these two functions is akin to the divine? and which to the mortal? Does not the divine appear\u00a0... to be that which naturally orders and rules, and the mortal to be that which is subject and servant?On this premise, Plato advocated removing children from their mothers' care and raising them as wards of the state, with great care being taken to differentiate children suitable to the various castes, the highest receiving the most education, so that they could act as guardians of the city and care for the less able. Education would be holistic, including facts, skills, physical discipline, and music and art, which he considered the highest form of endeavor.\nPlato believed that talent was distributed non-genetically and thus must be found in children born in any social class. He built on this by insisting that those suitably gifted were to be trained by the state so that they might be qualified to assume the role of a ruling class. What this established was essentially a system of selective public education premised on the assumption that an educated minority of the population were, by virtue of their education (and inborn educability), sufficient for healthy governance.\nPlato's writings contain some of the following ideas:\nElementary education would be confined to the guardian class till the age of 18, followed by two years of compulsory military training and then by higher education for those who qualified. While elementary education made the soul responsive to the environment, higher education helped the soul to search for truth which illuminated it. Both boys and girls receive the same kind of education. Elementary education consisted of music and gymnastics, designed to train and blend gentle and fierce qualities in the individual and create a harmonious person.\nAt the age of 20, a selection was made. The best students would take an advanced course in mathematics, geometry, astronomy and harmonics. The first course in the scheme of higher education would last for ten years. It would be for those who had a flair for science. At the age of 30 there would be another selection; those who qualified would study dialectics and metaphysics, logic and philosophy for the next five years. After accepting junior positions in the army for 15 years, a man would have completed his theoretical and practical education by the age of 50.\nAristotle.\nOnly fragments of Aristotle's treatise \"On Education\" are still in existence. We thus know of his philosophy of education primarily through brief passages in other works. Aristotle considered human nature, habit and reason to be equally important forces to be cultivated in education.http:// Thus, for example, he considered repetition to be a key tool to develop good habits. The teacher was to lead the student systematically; this differs, for example, from Socrates' emphasis on questioning his listeners to bring out their own ideas (though the comparison is perhaps incongruous since Socrates was dealing with adults).\nAristotle placed great emphasis on balancing the theoretical and practical aspects of subjects taught. Subjects he explicitly mentions as being important included reading, writing and mathematics; music; physical education; literature and history; and a wide range of sciences. He also mentioned the importance of play.\nOne of education's primary missions for Aristotle, perhaps its most important, was to produce good and virtuous citizens for the polis. \"All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind have been convinced that the fate of empires depends on the education of youth.\"\nMedieval.\nIbn Sina.\nIn the medieval Islamic world, an elementary school was known as a \"maktab\", which dates back to at least the 10th century. Like madrasahs (which referred to higher education), a maktab was often attached to a mosque. In the 11th century, Ibn Sina (known as \"Avicenna\" in the West), wrote a chapter dealing with the \"maktab\" entitled \"The Role of the Teacher in the Training and Upbringing of Children\", as a guide to teachers working at \"maktab\" schools. He wrote that children can learn better if taught in classes instead of individual tuition from private tutors, and he gave a number of reasons for why this is the case, citing the value of competition and emulation among pupils as well as the usefulness of group discussions and debates. Ibn Sina described the curriculum of a \"maktab\" school in some detail, describing the curricula for two stages of education in a \"maktab\" school.\nIbn Sina wrote that children should be sent to a \"maktab\" school from the age of 6 and be taught primary education until they reach the age of 14. During which time, he wrote that they should be taught the Qur'an, Islamic metaphysics, language, literature, Islamic ethics, and manual skills (which could refer to a variety of practical skills).\nIbn Sina refers to the secondary education stage of \"maktab\" schooling as the period of specialization, when pupils should begin to acquire manual skills, regardless of their social status. He writes that children after the age of 14 should be given a choice to choose and specialize in subjects they have an interest in, whether it was reading, manual skills, literature, preaching, medicine, geometry, trade and commerce, craftsmanship, or any other subject or profession they would be interested in pursuing for a future career. He wrote that this was a transitional stage and that there needs to be flexibility regarding the age in which pupils graduate, as the student's emotional development and chosen subjects need to be taken into account.\nThe empiricist theory of \"tabula rasa\" was also developed by Ibn Sina. He argued that the \"human intellect at birth is rather like a \"tabula rasa\", a pure potentiality that is actualized through education and comes to know\" and that knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" which is developed through a \"syllogistic method of reasoning; observations lead to prepositional statements, which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts.\" He further argued that the intellect itself \"possesses levels of development from the material intellect (\"al-'aql al-hayulani\"), that potentiality that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect (\"al-'aql al-fa'il\"), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\".\nIbn Tufail.\nIn the 12th century, the Andalusian-Arabian philosopher and novelist Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebn Tophail\" in the West) demonstrated the empiricist theory of 'tabula rasa' as a thought experiment through his Arabic philosophical novel, \"Hayy ibn Yaqzan\", in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a tabula rasa to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island, through experience alone. Some scholars have argued that the Latin translation of his philosophical novel, \"Philosophus Autodidactus\", published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke's formulation of tabula rasa in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\".\nModern.\nMichel de Montaigne.\nChild education was among the psychological topics that Michel de Montaigne wrote about. His essays \"On the Education of Children\", \"On Pedantry\", and \"On Experience\" explain the views he had on child education. Some of his views on child education are still relevant today.\nMontaigne's views on the education of children were opposed to the common educational practices of his day. He found fault both with what was taught and how it was taught. Much of the education during Montaigne's time was focused on the reading of the classics and learning through books.Montaigne disagreed with learning strictly through books. He believed it was necessary to educate children in a variety of ways. He also disagreed with the way information was being presented to students. It was being presented in a way that encouraged students to take the information that was taught to them as absolute truth. Students were denied the chance to question the information. Therefore, students could not truly learn. Montaigne believed that, to learn truly, a student had to take the information and make it their own.\nAt the foundation Montaigne believed that the selection of a good tutor was important for the student to become well educated. Education by a tutor was to be conducted at the pace of the student.He believed that a tutor should be in dialogue with the student, letting the student speak first. The tutor also should allow for discussions and debates to be had. Such a dialogue was intended to create an environment in which students would teach themselves. They would be able to realize their mistakes and make corrections to them as necessary.\nIndividualized learning was integral to his theory of child education. He argued that the student combines information already known with what is learned and forms a unique perspective on the newly learned information. Montaigne also thought that tutors should encourage the natural curiosity of students and allow them to question things.He postulated that successful students were those who were encouraged to question new information and study it for themselves, rather than simply accepting what they had heard from the authorities on any given topic. Montaigne believed that a child's curiosity could serve as an important teaching tool when the child is allowed to explore the things that the child is curious about.\nExperience also was a key element to learning for Montaigne. Tutors needed to teach students through experience rather than through the mere memorization of information often practised in book learning.He argued that students would become passive adults, blindly obeying and lacking the ability to think on their own. Nothing of importance would be retained and no abilities would be learned. He believed that learning through experience was superior to learning through the use of books. For this reason he encouraged tutors to educate their students through practice, travel, and human interaction. In doing so, he argued that students would become active learners, who could claim knowledge for themselves.\nMontaigne's views on child education continue to have an influence in the present. Variations of Montaigne's ideas on education are incorporated into modern learning in some ways. He argued against the popular way of teaching in his day, encouraging individualized learning. He believed in the importance of experience, over book learning and memorization. Ultimately, Montaigne postulated that the point of education was to teach a student how to have a successful life by practicing an active and socially interactive lifestyle.\nJohn Locke.\nIn \"Some Thoughts Concerning Education\" and \"Of the Conduct of the Understanding\" John Locke composed an outline on how to educate this mind in order to increase its powers and activity:\n\"The business of education is not, as I think, to make them perfect in any one of the sciences, but so to open and dispose their minds as may best make them capable of any, when they shall apply themselves to it.\"\n\"If men are for a long time accustomed only to one sort or method of thoughts, their minds grow stiff in it, and do not readily turn to another. It is therefore to give them this freedom, that I think they should be made to look into all sorts of knowledge, and exercise their understandings in so wide a variety and stock of knowledge. But I do not propose it as a variety and stock of knowledge, but a variety and freedom of thinking, as an increase of the powers and activity of the mind, not as an enlargement of its possessions.\" \nLocke expressed the belief that education maketh the man, or, more fundamentally, that the mind is an \"empty cabinet\", with the statement, \"I think I may say that of all the men we meet with, nine parts of ten are what they are, good or evil, useful or not, by their education.\"\nLocke also wrote that \"the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancies have very important and lasting consequences.\" He argued that the \"associations of ideas\" that one makes when young are more important than those made later because they are the foundation of the self: they are, put differently, what first mark the \"tabula rasa\". In his \"Essay\", in which is introduced both of these concepts, Locke warns against, for example, letting \"a foolish maid\" convince a child that \"goblins and sprites\" are associated with the night for \"darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the other.\"\n\"Associationism\", as this theory would come to be called, exerted a powerful influence over eighteenth-century thought, particularly educational theory, as nearly every educational writer warned parents not to allow their children to develop negative associations. It also led to the development of psychology and other new disciplines with David Hartley's attempt to discover a biological mechanism for associationism in his \"Observations on Man\" (1749).\nJean-Jacques Rousseau.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau, though he paid his respects to Plato's philosophy, rejected it as impractical due to the decayed state of society. Rousseau also had a different theory of human development; where Plato held that people are born with skills appropriate to different castes (though he did not regard these skills as being inherited), Rousseau held that there was one developmental process common to all humans. This was an intrinsic, natural process, of which the primary behavioral manifestation was curiosity. This differed from Locke's 'tabula rasa' in that it was an active process deriving from the child's nature, which drove the child to learn and adapt to its surroundings.\nRousseau wrote in his book \"\" that all children are perfectly designed organisms, ready to learn from their surroundings so as to grow into virtuous adults, but due to the malign influence of corrupt society, they often fail to do so. Rousseau advocated an educational method which consisted of removing the child from society\u2014for example, to a country home\u2014and alternately conditioning him through changes to his environment and setting traps and puzzles for him to solve or overcome.\nRousseau was unusual in that he recognized and addressed the potential of a problem of legitimation for teaching. He advocated that adults always be truthful with children, and in particular that they never hide the fact that the basis for their authority in teaching was purely one of physical coercion: \"I'm bigger than you.\" Once children reached the age of reason, at about 12, they would be engaged as free individuals in the ongoing process of their own.\nHe once said that a child should grow up without adult interference and that the child must be guided to suffer from the experience of the natural consequences of his own acts or behaviour. When he experiences the consequences of his own acts, he advises himself.\n\"Rousseau divides development into five stages (a book is devoted to each). Education in the first two stages seeks to the senses: only when \u00c9mile is about 12 does the tutor begin to work to develop his mind. Later, in Book 5, Rousseau examines the education of Sophie (whom \u00c9mile is to marry). Here he sets out what he sees as the essential differences that flow from sex. 'The man should be strong and active; the woman should be weak and passive' (Everyman edn: 322). From this difference comes a contrasting education. They are not to be brought up in ignorance and kept to housework: Nature means them to think, to will, to love to cultivate their minds as well as their persons; she puts these weapons in their hands to make up for their lack of strength and to enable them to direct the strength of men. They should learn many things, but only such things as suitable' (Everyman edn.: 327).\"\nhttp://\nImmanuel Kant.\nImmanuel Kant believed that education differs from training in that the former involves thinking whereas the latter does not. In addition to educating reason, of central importance to him was the development of character and teaching of moral maxims. Kant was a proponent of public education and of learning by doing.\nCharlotte Mason.\nCharlotte Mason was a British educator who invested her life in improving the quality of children's education. Her ideas led to a method used by some homeschoolers. Mason's philosophy of education is probably best summarized by the principles given at the beginning of each of her books. Two key mottos taken from those principles are \"Education is an atmosphere, a discipline, a life\" and \"Education is the science of relations.\" She believed that children were born persons and should be respected as such; they should also be taught the Way of the Will and the Way of Reason. Her motto for students was \"I am, I can, I ought, I will.\" Charlotte Mason believed that children should be introduced to subjects through living books, not through the use of \"compendiums, abstracts, or selections.\" She used abridged books only when the content was deemed inappropriate for children. She preferred that parents or teachers read aloud those texts (such as Plutarch and the Old Testament), making omissions only where necessary.\n20th and 21st century.\nRudolf Steiner (Waldorf education).\nWaldorf education (also known as Steiner or Steiner-Waldorf education) is a humanistic approach to pedagogy based upon the educational philosophy of the Austrian philosopher Rudolf Steiner, the founder of anthroposophy. Now known as Waldorf or Steiner education, his pedagogy emphasizes a balanced development of cognitive, affective/artistic, and practical skills (head, heart, and hands). Schools are normally self-administered by faculty; emphasis is placed upon giving individual teachers the freedom to develop creative methods.\nSteiner's theory of child development divides education into three discrete developmental stages predating but with close similarities to the stages of development described by Piaget. Early childhood education occurs through imitation; teachers provide practical activities and a healthy environment. Steiner believed that young children should meet only goodness. Elementary education is strongly arts-based, centered on the teacher's creative authority; the elementary school-age child should meet beauty. Secondary education seeks to develop the judgment, intellect, and practical idealism; the adolescent should meet truth.\nLearning is interdisciplinary, integrating practical, artistic, and conceptual elements. The approach emphasizes the role of the imagination in learning, developing thinking that includes a creative as well as an analytic component. The educational philosophy's overarching goals are to provide young people the basis on which to develop into free, morally responsible and integrated individuals, and to help every child fulfill his or her unique destiny, the existence of which anthroposophy posits. Schools and teachers are given considerable freedom to define curricula within collegial structures.\nJohn Dewey.\nIn \"Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education\", John Dewey stated that education, in its broadest sense, is the means of the \"social continuity of life\" given the \"primary ineluctable facts of the birth and death of each one of the constituent members in a social group\". Education is therefore a necessity, for \"the life of the group goes on.\" Dewey was a proponent of Educational Progressivism and was a relentless campaigner for reform of education, pointing out that the authoritarian, strict, pre-ordained knowledge approach of modern traditional education was too concerned with delivering knowledge, and not enough with understanding students' actual experiences.\nIn 1896, Dewey opened the Laboratory School at the University of Chicago in an institutional effort to pursue together rather than apart \"utility and culture, absorption and expression, theory and practice, [which] are [indispensable] elements in any educational scheme. As the unified head of the departments of Philosophy, Psychology and Pedagogy, John Dewey articulated a desire to organize an educational experience where children could be more creative than the best of progressive models of his day. Transactionalism as a pragmatic philosophy grew out of the work he did in the Laboratory School. The two most influential works that stemmed from his research and study were \"The Child and the Curriculum\" (1902) and \"Democracy and Education\" (1916). Dewey wrote of the dualisms that plagued educational philosophy in the latter book: \"Instead of seeing the educative process steadily and as a whole, we see conflicting terms. We get the case of the child vs. the curriculum; of the individual nature vs. social culture.\" Dewey found that the preoccupation with facts as knowledge in the educative process led students to memorize \"ill-understood rules and principles\" and while second-hand knowledge learned in mere words is a beginning in study, mere words can never replace the ability to organize knowledge into both useful and valuable experience.\nMaria Montessori.\nThe Montessori method arose from Dr. Maria Montessori's discovery of what she referred to as \"the child's true normal nature\" in 1907, which happened in the process of her experimental observation of young children given freedom in an environment prepared with materials designed for their self-directed learning activity. The method itself aims to duplicate this experimental observation of children to bring about, sustain and support their true natural way of being.\nWilliam Heard Kilpatrick.\nWilliam Heard Kilpatrick was a US American philosopher of education and a colleague and a successor of John Dewey. He was a major figure in the progressive education movement of the early 20th century. Kilpatrick developed the Project Method for early childhood education, which was a form of Progressive Education organized curriculum and classroom activities around a subject's central theme. He believed that the role of a teacher should be that of a \"guide\" as opposed to an authoritarian figure. Kilpatrick believed that children should direct their own learning according to their interests and should be allowed to explore their environment, experiencing their learning through the natural senses. Proponents of Progressive Education and the Project Method reject traditional schooling that focuses on memorization, rote learning, strictly organized classrooms (desks in rows; students always seated), and typical forms of assessment.\nWilliam Chandler Bagley.\nWilliam Chandler Bagley taught in elementary schools before becoming a professor of education at the University of Illinois, where he served as the Director of the School of Education from 1908 until 1917. He was a professor of education at Teachers College, Columbia, from 1917 to 1940. An opponent of pragmatism and progressive education, Bagley insisted on the value of knowledge for its own sake, not merely as an instrument, and he criticized his colleagues for their failure to emphasize systematic study of academic subjects. Bagley was a proponent of educational essentialism.\nA. S. Neill.\nA. S. Neill founded Summerhill School, the oldest existing democratic school in Suffolk, England, in 1921. He wrote a number of books that now define much of contemporary democratic education philosophy. Neill believed that the happiness of the child should be the paramount consideration in decisions about the child's upbringing, and that this happiness grew from a sense of personal freedom. He felt that deprivation of this sense of freedom during childhood, and the consequent unhappiness experienced by the repressed child, was responsible for many of the psychological disorders of adulthood.\nMartin Heidegger.\nMartin Heidegger's philosophizing about education was primarily related to higher education. He believed that teaching and research in the university should be unified and that students should be taught \"to focus on and explicitly investigate the ontological presuppositions which implicitly guide research in each domain of knowledge,\" an approach he believed would \"encourage revolutionary transformation in the sciences and humanities.\"\nJean Piaget.\nJean Piaget was a Swiss developmental psychologist known for his epistemological studies with children. His theory of cognitive development and epistemological view are together called \"genetic epistemology\". Piaget placed great importance on the education of children. As the Director of the International Bureau of Education, he declared in 1934 that \"only education is capable of saving our societies from possible collapse, whether violent, or gradual.\" Piaget created the International Centre for Genetic Epistemology in Geneva in 1955 and directed it until 1980. According to Ernst von Glasersfeld, Jean Piaget is \"the great pioneer of the constructivist theory of knowing.\"\nJean Piaget described himself as an epistemologist, interested in the process of the qualitative development of knowledge. As he says in the introduction of his book \"Genetic Epistemology\" (): \"What the genetic epistemology proposes is discovering the roots of the different varieties of knowledge, since its elementary forms, following to the next levels, including also the scientific knowledge.\"\nMortimer Jerome Adler.\nMortimer Jerome Adler was an American philosopher, educator, and popular author. As a philosopher he worked within the Aristotelian and Thomistic traditions. He lived for the longest stretches in New York City, Chicago, San Francisco, and San Mateo, California. He worked for Columbia University, the University of Chicago, Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, and Adler's own Institute for Philosophical Research. Adler was married twice and had four children. Adler was a proponent of educational perennialism.\nHarry S. Broudy.\nHarry S. Broudy's philosophical views were based on the tradition of classical realism, dealing with truth, goodness, and beauty. However he was also influenced by the modern philosophy existentialism and instrumentalism. In his textbook Building a Philosophy of Education he has two major ideas that are the main points to his philosophical outlook: The first is truth and the second is universal structures to be found in humanity's struggle for education and the good life. Broudy also studied issues on society's demands on school. He thought education would be a link to unify the diverse society and urged the society to put more trust and a commitment to the schools and a good education.\nJerome Bruner.\nAnother important contributor to the inquiry method in education is Jerome Bruner. His books \"The Process of Education\" and \"Toward a Theory of Instruction\" are landmarks in conceptualizing learning and curriculum development. He argued that any subject can be taught in some intellectually honest form to any child at any stage of development. This notion was an underpinning for his concept of the \"spiral\" (helical) curriculum which posited the idea that a curriculum should revisit basic ideas, building on them until the student had grasped the full formal concept. He emphasized intuition as a neglected but essential feature of productive thinking. He felt that interest in the material being learned was the best stimulus for learning rather than external motivation such as grades. Bruner developed the concept of discovery learning which promoted learning as a process of constructing new ideas based on current or past knowledge. Students are encouraged to discover facts and relationships and continually build on what they already know.\nPaulo Freire.\nA Brazilian philosopher and educator committed to the cause of educating the impoverished peasants of his nation and collaborating with them in the pursuit of their liberation from what he regarded as \"oppression\", Paulo Freire is best known for his attack on what he called the \"banking concept of education\", in which the student was viewed as an empty account to be filled by the teacher. Freire also suggests that a deep reciprocity be inserted into our notions of teacher and student; he comes close to suggesting that the teacher-student dichotomy be completely abolished, instead promoting the roles of the participants in the classroom as the teacher-student (a teacher who learns) and the student-teacher (a learner who teaches). In its early, strong form this kind of classroom has sometimes been criticized on the grounds that it can mask rather than overcome the teacher's authority.\nAspects of the Freirian philosophy have been highly influential in academic debates over \"participatory development\" and development more generally. Freire's emphasis on what he describes as \"emancipation\" through interactive participation has been used as a rationale for the participatory focus of development, as it is held that 'participation' in any form can lead to empowerment of poor or marginalised groups. Freire was a proponent of critical pedagogy.\n\"He participated in the import of European doctrines and ideas into Brazil,\nassimilated them to the needs of a specific socio-economic situation, and thus expanded and refocused them in a thought-provoking way\"http://\nJohn Holt.\nIn 1964 John Holt published his first book, \"How Children Fail\", asserting that the academic failure of schoolchildren was not \"despite\" the efforts of the schools, but actually \"because\" of the schools. \"How Children Fail\" ignited a firestorm of controversy. Holt was catapulted into the American national consciousness to the extent that he made appearances on major TV talk shows, wrote book reviews for \"Life\" magazine, and was a guest on the \"To Tell The Truth\" TV game show. In his follow-up work, \"How Children Learn\", published in 1967, Holt tried to elucidate the learning process of children and why he believed school short circuits that process.\nNel Noddings.\nNel Noddings' first sole-authored book \"Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education\" (1984) followed close on the 1982 publication of Carol Gilligan's ground-breaking work in the ethics of care \"In a Different Voice\". While her work on ethics continued, with the publication of \"Women and Evil\" (1989) and later works on moral education, most of her later publications have been on the philosophy of education and educational theory. Her most significant works in these areas have been \"Educating for Intelligent Belief or Unbelief\" (1993) and \"Philosophy of Education\" (1995).\nNoddings' contribution to education philosophy centers around the ethic of care. Her belief was that a caring teacher-student relationship will result in the teacher designing a differentiated curriculum for each student, and that this curriculum would be based around the students' particular interests and needs. The teacher's claim to care must not be based on a one time virtuous decision but an ongoing interest in the students' welfare.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24984", "revid": "48991765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24984", "title": "Personality psychology", "text": "Branch of psychology focused on personality\nPersonality psychology is a branch of psychology that examines personality and its variation among individuals. It aims to show how people are individually different due to psychological forces. Its areas of focus include:\n\"Personality\" is a dynamic and organized set of characteristics possessed by an individual that uniquely influences their environment, cognition, emotions, motivations, and behaviors in various situations. The word \"personality\" originates from the Latin \"persona\", which means \"mask\".\nPersonality also pertains to the pattern of thoughts, feelings, social adjustments, and behaviors persistently exhibited over time that strongly influences one's expectations, self-perceptions, values, and attitudes. Environmental and situational effects on behaviour are influenced by psychological mechanisms within a person. Personality also predicts human reactions to other people, problems, and stress. Gordon Allport (1937) described two major ways to study personality: the nomothetic and the idiographic. \"Nomothetic psychology\" seeks general laws that can be applied to many different people, such as the principle of self-actualization or the trait of extraversion. \"Idiographic psychology\" is an attempt to understand the unique aspects of a particular individual.\nThe study of personality has a broad and varied history in psychology, with an abundance of theoretical traditions. The major theories include dispositional (trait) perspective, psychodynamic, humanistic, biological, behaviorist, evolutionary, and social learning perspective. Many researchers and psychologists do not explicitly identify themselves with a certain perspective and instead take an eclectic approach. Research in this area is empirically driven \u2013 such as dimensional models, based on multivariate statistics like factor analysis \u2013 or emphasizes theory development, such as that of the psychodynamic theory. There is also a substantial emphasis on the applied field of personality testing. \nPhilosophical assumptions.\nMany of the ideas conceptualized by historical and modern personality theorists stem from the basic philosophical assumptions they hold. The study of personality is not a purely empirical discipline, as it brings in elements of art, science, and philosophy to draw general conclusions. The following five categories are some of the most fundamental philosophical assumptions on which theorists disagree:\nPersonality theories.\nType and trait theories.\nPersonality type refers to the psychological classification of people into different classes. Personality types are distinguished from personality traits, which come in different degrees. For example, according to type theories, there are two types of people, introverts and extroverts. According to trait theories, introversion and extroversion are part of a continuous dimension with many people in the middle.\nPersonality is complex; a typical theory of personality contains several propositions or sub-theories, often growing over time as more psychologists explore the theory.\nThe most widely accepted empirical model of durable, universal personality descriptors is the system of Big Five personality traits: conscientiousness, agreeableness, neuroticism, openness to experience, and extraversion-introversion. It is based on cluster analysis of verbal descriptions in self-reporting surveys. These traits demonstrate considerable genetic heritability.\nPerhaps the most ancient attempt at personality psychology is the personality typology outlined by the Indian Buddhist Abhidharma schools. This typology mostly focuses on negative personal traits (greed, hatred, and delusion) and the corresponding positive meditation practices used to counter those traits.\nAn influential European tradition of psychological types originated in the theoretical work of Carl Jung, specifically in his 1921 book \"Psychologische Typen\" (\"Psychological Types\") and William Marston.\nBuilding on the writings and observations of Jung during World War II, Isabel Briggs Myers and her mother, Katharine C. Briggs, delineated personality types by constructing the Myers\u2013Briggs Type Indicator. This model was later used by David Keirsey with a different understanding from Jung, Briggs and Myers.\nIn the former Soviet Union, Lithuanian Au\u0161ra Augustinavi\u010di\u016bt\u0117 independently derived a model of personality type from Jung's called socionics. Later on many other tests were developed on this model e.g. Golden, PTI-Pro and JTI.\nTheories could also be considered an \"approach\" to personality or psychology and is generally referred to as a model. The model is an older and more theoretical approach to personality, accepting extroversion and introversion as basic psychological orientations in connection with two pairs of psychological functions:\nBriggs and Myers also added another personality dimension to their type indicator to measure whether a person prefers to use a judging or perceiving function when interacting with the external world. Therefore, they included questions designed to indicate whether someone wishes to come to conclusions (judgement) or to keep options open (perception).\nThis personality typology has some aspects of a trait theory: it explains people's behavior in terms of opposite fixed characteristics. In these more traditional models, the sensing/intuition preference is considered the most basic, dividing people into \"N\" (intuitive) or \"S\" (sensing) personality types. An \"N\" is further assumed to be guided either by thinking or feeling and divided into the \"NT\" (scientist, engineer) or \"NF\" (author, humanitarian) temperament. An \"S\", in contrast, is assumed to be guided more by the judgment/perception axis and thus divided into the \"SJ\" (guardian, traditionalist) or \"SP\" (performer, artisan) temperament. These four are considered basic, with the other two factors in each case (including always extraversion/introversion) less important. Critics of this traditional view have observed that the types can be quite strongly stereotyped by professions (although neither Myers nor Keirsey engaged in such stereotyping in their type descriptions), and thus may arise more from the need to categorize people for purposes of guiding their career choice. This among other objections led to the emergence of the five-factor view, which is less concerned with behavior under work conditions and more concerned with behavior in personal and emotional circumstances. (The MBTI is not designed to measure the \"work self\", but rather what Myers and McCaulley called the \"shoes-off self.\")\nType A and Type B personality theory: During the 1950s, Meyer Friedman and his co-workers defined what they called Type A and Type B behavior patterns. They theorized that intense, hard-driving Type A personalities had a higher risk of coronary disease because they are \"stress junkies.\" Type B people, on the other hand, tended to be relaxed, less competitive, and lower in risk. There was also a Type AB mixed profile.\nHealth Psychology, a field of study, has been influenced by the Type A and Type B personality theories, which reveal how personality traits can impact cardiovascular health. Type A individuals, known for their competitiveness and urgency, may increase the risk of conditions like high blood pressure and coronary heart disease.\nDay and Jreige (2002) investigate the Type A behavior pattern as a mediator in the relationship between job stressors and psychosocial outcomes. Their study, published in the Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, demonstrates that individuals exhibiting Type A characteristics are more susceptible to adverse psychosocial effects, such as increased stress and lower job satisfaction, when exposed to workplace stressors. This research highlights the importance of considering personality traits in managing occupational health.\nEduard Spranger's personality-model, consisting of six (or, by some revisions, 6 +1) basic types of \"value attitudes\", described in his book \"Types of Men\" (\"Lebensformen\"; Halle (Saale): Niemeyer, 1914; English translation by P. J. W. Pigors - New York: G. E. Stechert Company, 1928).\nThe Enneagram of Personality, a model of human personality which is principally used as a typology of nine interconnected personality types. It has been criticized as being subject to interpretation, making it difficult to test or validate scientifically.\nJohn L. Holland's \"RIASEC\" vocational model, commonly referred to as the \"Holland Codes\", focuses specifically on choice of occupation. It proposes that six personality types lead people to choose their career paths. In this circumplex model, the six types are represented as a hexagon, with adjacent types more closely related than those more distant. The model is widely used in vocational counseling.\nPsychoanalytical theories.\nPsychoanalytic theories explain human behavior in terms of the interaction of various components of personality. Sigmund Freud was the founder of this school of thought. He drew on the physics of his day (thermodynamics) to coin the term psychodynamics. Based on the idea of converting heat into mechanical energy, Freud proposed psychic energy could be converted into behavior. His theory places central importance on dynamic, unconscious psychological conflicts.\nFreud divides human personality into three significant components: the id, ego and super-ego. The id acts according to the \"pleasure principle\", demanding immediate gratification of its needs regardless of external environment; the ego then must emerge in order to realistically meet the wishes and demands of the id in accordance with the outside world, adhering to the \"reality principle\". Finally, the superego (conscience) inculcates moral judgment and societal rules upon the ego, thus forcing the demands of the id to be met not only realistically but morally. The superego is the last function of the personality to develop, and is the embodiment of parental/social ideals established during childhood. According to Freud, personality is based on the dynamic interactions of these three components.\nThe channeling and release of sexual (libidal) and aggressive energies, which ensues from the \"Eros\" (sex; instinctual self-preservation) and \"Thanatos\" (death; instinctual self-annihilation) drives respectively, are major components of his theory. Freud's broad understanding of sexuality included all kinds of pleasurable feelings experienced by the human body.\nFreud proposed five psychosexual stages of personality development. He believed adult personality is dependent upon early childhood experiences and largely determined by age five. Fixations that develop during the infantile stage contribute to adult personality and behavior.\nOne of Sigmund Freud's earlier associates, Alfred Adler, agreed with Freud that early childhood experiences are important to development, and believed birth order may influence personality development. Adler believed that the oldest child was the individual who would set high achievement goals in order to gain attention lost when the younger siblings were born. He believed the middle children were competitive and ambitious. He reasoned that this behavior was motivated by the idea of surpassing the firstborn's achievements. He added, however, that the middle children were often not as concerned about the glory attributed to their behavior. He also believed the youngest would be more dependent and sociable. Adler finished by surmising that an only child loves being the center of attention and matures quickly but in the end fails to become independent.\nHeinz Kohut thought similarly to Freud's idea of transference. He used narcissism as a model of how people develop their sense of self. Narcissism is the exaggerated sense of self in which one is believed to exist in order to protect one's low self-esteem and sense of worthlessness. Kohut had a significant impact on the field by extending Freud's theory of narcissism and introducing what he called the 'self-object transferences' of mirroring and idealization. In other words, children need to idealize and emotionally \"sink into\" and identify with the idealized competence of admired figures such as parents or older siblings. They also need to have their self-worth mirrored by these people. Such experiences allow them to thereby learn the self-soothing and other skills that are necessary for the development of a healthy sense of self.\nAnother important figure in the world of personality theory is Karen Horney. She is credited with the development of \"Feminist Psychology\". She disagrees with Freud on some key points, one being that women's personalities are not just a function of \"Penis Envy\", but that girl children have separate and different psychic lives unrelated to how they feel about their fathers or primary male role models. She talks about three basic Neurotic needs \"Basic Anxiety\", \"Basic Hostility\" and \"Basic Evil\". She posits that to any anxiety an individual experiences they would have one of three approaches, moving toward people, moving away from people or moving against people. It is these three that give us varying personality types and characteristics. She also places a high premium on concepts like Overvaluation of Love and romantic partners.\nBehaviorist theories.\nBehaviorists explain personality in terms of the effects external stimuli have on behavior. The approaches used to evaluate the behavioral aspect of personality are known as behavioral theories or learning-conditioning theories. These approaches were a radical shift away from Freudian philosophy. One of the major tenets of this concentration of personality psychology is a strong emphasis on scientific thinking and experimentation. This school of thought was developed by B. F. Skinner who put forth a model which emphasized the mutual interaction of the person or \"the organism\" with its environment. Skinner believed children do bad things because the behavior obtains attention that serves as a reinforcer. For example: a child cries because the child's crying in the past has led to attention. These are the \"response\", and \"consequences\". The response is the child crying, and the attention that child gets is the reinforcing consequence. According to this theory, people's behavior is formed by processes such as operant conditioning. Skinner put forward a \"three term contingency model\" which helped promote analysis of behavior based on the \"Stimulus - Response - Consequence Model\" in which the critical question is: \"Under which circumstances or antecedent 'stimuli' does the organism engage in a particular behavior or 'response', which in turn produces a particular 'consequence'?\"\nRichard Herrnstein extended this theory by accounting for attitudes and traits. An attitude develops as the response strength (the tendency to respond) in the presences of a group of stimuli become stable. Rather than describing conditionable traits in non-behavioral language, response strength in a given situation accounts for the environmental portion. Herrnstein also saw traits as having a large genetic or biological component, as do most modern behaviorists.\nIvan Pavlov is another notable influence. He is well known for his classical conditioning experiments involving dogs, which led him to discover the foundation of behaviorism.\nSocial cognitive theories.\nIn cognitive theory, behavior is explained as guided by cognitions (e.g. expectations) about the world, especially those about other people. Cognitive theories are theories of personality that emphasize cognitive processes, such as thinking and judging.\nAlbert Bandura, a social learning theorist suggested the forces of memory and emotions worked in conjunction with environmental influences. Bandura was known mostly for his \"Bobo doll experiment\". During these experiments, Bandura video taped a college student kicking and verbally abusing a bobo doll. He then showed this video to a class of kindergarten children who were getting ready to go out to play. When they entered the play room, they saw bobo dolls, and some hammers. The people observing these children at play saw a group of children beating the doll. He called this study and his findings observational learning, or modeling.\nEarly examples of approaches to cognitive style are listed by Baron (1982). These include Witkin's (1965) work on field dependency, Gardner's (1953) discovering people had consistent preference for the number of categories they used to categorize heterogeneous objects, and Block and Petersen's (1955) work on confidence in line discrimination judgments. Baron relates early development of cognitive approaches of personality to ego psychology. More central to this field have been:\nVarious scales have been developed to assess both attributional style and locus of control. Locus of control scales include those used by Rotter and later by Duttweiler, the Nowicki and Strickland (1973) Locus of Control Scale for Children and various locus of control scales specifically in the health domain, most famously that of Kenneth Wallston and his colleagues, The Multidimensional Health Locus of Control Scale. Attributional style has been assessed by the Attributional Style Questionnaire, the Expanded Attributional Style Questionnaire, the Attributions Questionnaire, the Real Events Attributional Style Questionnaire and the Attributional Style Assessment Test.\nRecognition that the tendency to believe that hard work and persistence often results in attainment of life and academic goals has influenced formal educational and counseling efforts with students of various ages and in various settings since the 1970s research about achievement. Counseling aimed toward encouraging individuals to design ambitious goals and work toward them, with recognition that there are external factors that may impact, often results in the incorporation of a more positive achievement style by students and employees, whatever the setting, to include higher education, workplace, or justice programming.\nWalter Mischel (1999) has also defended a cognitive approach to personality. His work refers to \"Cognitive Affective Units\", and considers factors such as encoding of stimuli, affect, goal-setting, and self-regulatory beliefs. The term \"Cognitive Affective Units\" shows how his approach considers affect as well as cognition.\nCognitive-Experiential Self-Theory (CEST) is another cognitive personality theory. Developed by Seymour Epstein, CEST argues that humans operate by way of two independent information processing systems: experiential system and rational system. The experiential system is fast and emotion-driven. The rational system is slow and logic-driven. These two systems interact to determine our goals, thoughts, and behavior.\nPersonal construct psychology (PCP) is a theory of personality developed by the American psychologist George Kelly in the 1950s. Kelly's fundamental view of personality was that people are like naive scientists who see the world through a particular lens, based on their uniquely organized systems of construction, which they use to anticipate events. But because people are naive scientists, they sometimes employ systems for construing the world that are distorted by idiosyncratic experiences not applicable to their current social situation. A system of construction that chronically fails to characterize and/or predict events, and is not appropriately revised to comprehend and predict one's changing social world, is considered to underlie psychopathology (mental disorders.)\nFrom the theory, Kelly derived a psychotherapy approach and also a technique called \"The Repertory Grid Interview\" that helped his patients to uncover their own \"constructs\" with minimal intervention or interpretation by the therapist. The repertory grid was later adapted for various uses within organizations, including decision-making and interpretation of other people's world-views.\nHumanistic theories.\nHumanistic psychology emphasizes that people have free will and that this plays an active role in determining how they behave. Accordingly, humanistic psychology focuses on subjective experiences of persons as opposed to forced, definitive factors that determine behavior. Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers were proponents of this view, which is based on the \"phenomenal field\" theory of Combs and Snygg (1949). Rogers and Maslow were among a group of psychologists that worked together for a decade to produce the \"Journal of Humanistic Psychology\". This journal was primarily focused on viewing individuals as a whole, rather than focusing solely on separate traits and processes within the individual.\nRobert W. White wrote the book \"The Abnormal Personality\" that became a standard text on abnormal psychology. He also investigated the human need to strive for positive goals like competence and influence, to counterbalance the emphasis of Freud on the pathological elements of personality development.\nMaslow spent much of his time studying what he called \"self-actualizing persons\", those who are \"fulfilling themselves and doing the best they are capable of doing\". Maslow believes all who are interested in growth move towards self-actualizing (growth, happiness, satisfaction) views. Many of these people demonstrate a trend in dimensions of their personalities. Characteristics of self-actualizers according to Maslow include the four key dimensions:\nMaslow and Rogers emphasized a view of the person as an active, creative, experiencing human being who lives in the present and subjectively responds to current perceptions, relationships, and encounters. They disagree with the dark, pessimistic outlook of those in the Freudian psychoanalysis ranks, but rather view humanistic theories as positive and optimistic proposals which stress the tendency of the human personality toward growth and self-actualization. This progressing self will remain the center of its constantly changing world; a world that will help mold the self but not necessarily confine it. Rather, the self has opportunity for maturation based on its encounters with this world. This understanding attempts to reduce the acceptance of hopeless redundancy. Humanistic therapy typically relies on the client for information of the past and its effect on the present, therefore the client dictates the type of guidance the therapist may initiate. This allows for an individualized approach to therapy. Rogers found patients differ in how they respond to other people. Rogers tried to model a particular approach to therapy \u2013 he stressed the reflective or empathetic response. This response type takes the client's viewpoint and reflects back their feeling and the context for it. An example of a reflective response would be, \"It seems you are feeling anxious about your upcoming marriage\". This response type seeks to clarify the therapist's understanding while also encouraging the client to think more deeply and seek to fully understand the feelings they have expressed.\nBiopsychological theories.\nBiology plays a very important role in the development of personality. The study of the biological level in personality psychology focuses primarily on identifying the role of genetic determinants and how they mold individual personalities. Some of the earliest thinking about possible biological bases of personality grew out of the case of Phineas Gage. In an 1848 accident, a large iron rod was driven through Gage's head, and his personality apparently changed as a result, although descriptions of these psychological changes are usually exaggerated.\nIn general, patients with brain damage have been difficult to find and study. In the 1990s, researchers began to use electroencephalography (EEG), positron emission tomography (PET), and more recently functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which is now the most widely used imaging technique to help localize personality traits in the brain. This line of research has led to the developing field of personality neuroscience, which uses neuroscientific methods to study the neural underpinnings of personality traits. \nGenetic basis of personality.\nEver since the Human Genome Project allowed for a much more in depth comprehension of genetics, there has been an ongoing controversy involving heritability, personality traits, and environmental vs. genetic influence on personality. The human genome is known to play a role in the development of personality.\nPreviously, genetic personality studies focused on specific genes correlating to specific personality traits. Today's view of the gene-personality relationship focuses primarily on the activation and expression of genes related to personality and forms part of what is referred to as behavioral genetics. Genes provide numerous options for varying cells to be expressed; however, the environment determines which of these are activated. Many studies have noted this relationship in varying ways in which our bodies can develop, but the interaction between genes and the shaping of our minds and personality is also relevant to this biological relationship.\nDNA-environment interactions are important in the development of personality because this relationship determines what part of the DNA code is actually made into proteins that will become part of an individual. While different choices are made available by the genome, in the end, the environment is the ultimate determinant of what becomes activated. Small changes in DNA in individuals are what leads to the uniqueness of every person as well as differences in looks, abilities, brain functioning, and all the factors that culminate to develop a cohesive personality.\nCattell and Eysenck have proposed that genetics have a powerful influence on personality. A large part of the evidence collected linking genetics and the environment to personality have come from twin studies. This \"twin method\" compares levels of similarity in personality using genetically identical twins. One of the first of these twin studies measured 800 pairs of twins, studied numerous personality traits, and determined that identical twins are most similar in their general abilities. Personality similarities were found to be less related for self-concepts, goals, and interests.\nTwin studies have also been important in the creation of the five factor personality model: neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Neuroticism and extraversion are the two most widely studied traits. Individuals scoring high in trait extraversion more often display characteristics such as impulsiveness, sociability, and activeness. Individuals scoring high in trait neuroticism are more likely to be moody, anxious, or irritable. Identical twins, however, have higher correlations in personality traits than fraternal twins. One study measuring genetic influence on twins in five different countries found that the correlations for identical twins were .50, while for fraternal they were about .20. It is suggested that heredity and environment interact to determine one's personality.\nEvolutionary theory.\nCharles Darwin is the founder of the theory of the evolution of the species. The evolutionary approach to personality psychology is based on this theory. This theory examines how individual personality differences are based on natural selection. Through natural selection organisms change over time through adaptation and selection. Traits are developed and certain genes come into expression based on an organism's environment and how these traits aid in an organism's survival and reproduction.\nPolymorphisms, such as sex and blood type, are forms of diversity which evolve to benefit a species as a whole. The theory of evolution has wide-ranging implications on personality psychology. Personality viewed through the lens of evolutionary biology places a great deal of emphasis on specific traits that are most likely to aid in survival and reproduction, such as conscientiousness, sociability, emotional stability, and dominance. The social aspects of personality can be seen through an evolutionary perspective. Specific character traits develop and are selected for because they play an important and complex role in the social hierarchy of organisms. Such characteristics of this social hierarchy include the sharing of important resources, family and mating interactions, and the harm or help organisms can bestow upon one another.\nEvolutionary psychiatry proposes that stable personality differences and psychopathological traits might not be categorically distinct 'disorders' but rather that they form part of a continuum of heritable variation. In \"https://\" (2022), Hunt argues that temperament or personality traits like neuroticism, extraversion, or empathy may in some cases be risk factors for diagnosable conditions, depending on environmental context and degree of variation.\nDrive theories.\nIn the 1930s, John Dollard and Neal Elgar Miller met at Yale University, and began an attempt to integrate drives (see Drive theory), into a theory of personality, basing themselves on the work of Clark Hull. They began with the premise that personality could be equated with the habitual responses exhibited by an individual \u2013 their habits. From there, they determined that these habitual responses were built on secondary, or acquired drives.\nSecondary drives are internal needs directing the behavior of an individual that results from learning. Acquired drives are learned, by and large in the manner described by classical conditioning. When we are in a certain environment and experience a strong response to a stimulus, we internalize cues from the said environment. When we find ourselves in an environment with similar cues, we begin to act in anticipation of a similar stimulus. Thus, we are likely to experience anxiety in an environment with cues similar to one where we have experienced pain or fear \u2013 such as the dentist's office.\nSecondary drives are built on primary drives, which are biologically driven, and motivate us to act with no prior learning process \u2013 such as hunger, thirst or the need for sexual activity. However, secondary drives are thought to represent more specific elaborations of primary drives, behind which the functions of the original primary drive continue to exist. Thus, the primary drives of fear and pain exist behind the acquired drive of anxiety. Secondary drives can be based on multiple primary drives and even in other secondary drives. This is said to give them strength and persistence. Examples include the need for money, which was conceptualized as arising from multiple primary drives such as the drive for food and warmth, as well as from secondary drives such as imitativeness (the drive to do as others do) and anxiety.\nSecondary drives vary based on the social conditions under which they were learned \u2013 such as culture. Dollard and Miller used the example of food, stating that the primary drive of hunger manifested itself behind the learned secondary drive of an appetite for a specific type of food, which was dependent on the culture of the individual.\nSecondary drives are also explicitly social, representing a manner in which we convey our primary drives to others. Indeed, many primary drives are actively repressed by society (such as the sexual drive). Dollard and Miller believed that the acquisition of secondary drives was essential to childhood development. As children develop, they learn not to act on their primary drives, such as hunger but acquire secondary drives through reinforcement. Friedman and Schustack describe an example of such developmental changes, stating that if an infant engaging in an active orientation towards others brings about the fulfillment of primary drives, such as being fed or having their diaper changed, they will develop a secondary drive to pursue similar interactions with others \u2013 perhaps leading to an individual being more gregarious. Dollard and Miller's belief in the importance of acquired drives led them to reconceive Sigmund Freud's theory of psychosexual development. They found themselves to be in agreement with the timing Freud used but believed that these periods corresponded to the successful learning of certain secondary drives.\nDollard and Miller gave many examples of how secondary drives impact our habitual responses \u2013 and by extension our personalities, including anger, social conformity, imitativeness or anxiety, to name a few. In the case of anxiety, Dollard and Miller note that people who generalize the situation in which they experience the anxiety drive will experience anxiety far more than they should. These people are often anxious all the time, and anxiety becomes part of their personality. This example shows how drive theory can have ties with other theories of personality \u2013 many of them look at the trait of neuroticism or emotional stability in people, which is strongly linked to anxiety.\nPersonality tests.\nThere are two major types of personality tests, projective and objective.\n\"Projective tests\" assume personality is primarily unconscious and assess individuals by how they respond to an ambiguous stimulus, such as an ink blot. Projective tests have been in use for about 60 years and continue to be used today. Examples of such tests include the Rorschach test and the Thematic Apperception Test.\nThe Rorschach Test involves showing an individual a series of note cards with ambiguous ink blots on them. The individual being tested is asked to provide interpretations of the blots on the cards by stating everything that the ink blot may resemble based on their personal interpretation. The therapist then analyzes their responses. Rules for scoring the test have been covered in manuals that cover a wide variety of characteristics such as content, originality of response, location of \"perceived images\" and several other factors. Using these specific scoring methods, the therapist will then attempt to relate test responses to attributes of the individual's personality and their unique characteristics. The idea is that unconscious needs will come out in the person's response, e.g. an aggressive person may see images of destruction.\nThe Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) involves presenting individuals with vague pictures/scenes and asking them to tell a story based on what they see. Common examples of these \"scenes\" include images that may suggest family relationships or specific situations, such as a father and son or a man and a woman in a bedroom. Responses are analyzed for common themes. Responses unique to an individual are theoretically meant to indicate underlying thoughts, processes, and potentially conflicts present within the individual. Responses are believed to be directly linked to unconscious motives. There is very little empirical evidence available to support these methods.\n\"Objective tests\" assume personality is consciously accessible and that it can be measured by self-report questionnaires. Research on psychological assessment has generally found objective tests to be more valid and reliable than projective tests. Critics have pointed to the Forer effect to suggest some of these appear to be more accurate and discriminating than they really are. Issues with these tests include false reporting because there is no way to tell if an individual is answering a question honestly or accurately.\nThe Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (also known as the MBTI) is self-reporting questionnaire based on Carl Jung's Psychological Types. However, the MBTI modified Jung's theory into their own by disregarding certain processes held in the unconscious mind and the impact these have on personality.\nPersonality theory assessment criteria.\nPsychology has traditionally defined personality through its behavioral patterns, and more recently with neuroscientific studies of the brain. In recent years, some psychologists have turned to the study of inner experiences for insight into personality as well as individuality. Inner experiences are the thoughts and feelings to an immediate phenomenon. Another term used to define inner experiences is qualia. Being able to understand inner experiences assists in understanding how humans behave, act, and respond. Defining personality using inner experiences has been expanding due to the fact that solely relying on behavioral principles to explain one's character may seem incomplete. Behavioral methods allow the subject to be observed by an observer, whereas with inner experiences the subject is its own observer.\nMethods measuring inner experience.\nDescriptive experience sampling (DES): Developed by psychologist Russel Hurlburt. This is an idiographic method that is used to help examine inner experiences. This method relies on an introspective technique that allows an individual's inner experiences and characteristics to be described and measured. A beep notifies the subject to record their experience at that exact moment and 24 hours later an interview is given based on all the experiences recorded. DES has been used in subjects that have been diagnosed with schizophrenia and depression. It has also been crucial to studying the inner experiences of those who have been diagnosed with common psychiatric diseases.\nArticulated thoughts in stimulated situations (ATSS): ATSS is a paradigm which was created as an alternative to the TA (think aloud) method. This method assumes that people have continuous internal dialogues that can be naturally attended to. ATSS also assesses a person's inner thoughts as they verbalize their cognitions. In this procedure, subjects listen to a scenario via a video or audio player and are asked to imagine that they are in that specific situation. Later, they are asked to articulate their thoughts as they occur in reaction to the playing scenario. This method is useful in studying emotional experience given that the scenarios used can influence specific emotions. Most importantly, the method has contributed to the study of personality. In a study conducted by Rayburn and Davison (2002), subjects' thoughts and empathy toward anti-gay hate crimes were evaluated. The researchers found that participants showed more aggressive intentions towards the offender in scenarios which mimicked hate crimes.\nExperimental method: This method is an experimental paradigm used to study human experiences involved in the studies of sensation and perception, learning and memory, motivation, and biological psychology. The experimental psychologist usually deals with intact organisms although studies are often conducted with organisms modified by surgery, radiation, drug treatment, or long-standing deprivations of various kinds or with organisms that naturally present organic abnormalities or emotional disorders. Economists and psychologists have developed a variety of experimental methodologies to elicit and assess individual attitudes where each emotion differs for each individual. The results are then gathered and quantified to conclude if specific experiences have any common factors. This method is used to seek clarity of the experience and remove any biases to help understand the meaning behind the experience to see if it can be generalized. The experimental method does have some complications though. If researchers are manipulating a variable, it's possible this change will affect a different variable, which in turn will change the measured result (not the original manipulated condition), introducing uncertainty. This method, in personality research, often requires deception, so the ethics of experiments are also brought into question.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24985", "revid": "45397322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24985", "title": "Pronoun", "text": "Word that substitutes for a noun or noun phrase\nIn linguistics and grammar, a pronoun (glossed PRO) is a word or a group of words that one may substitute for a noun or noun phrase.\nPronouns have traditionally been regarded as one of the parts of speech, but some modern theorists would not consider them to form a single class, in view of the variety of functions they perform cross-linguistically. An example of a pronoun is \"you\", which can be either singular or plural. Sub-types include personal and possessive pronouns, reflexive and reciprocal pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, relative and interrogative pronouns, and indefinite pronouns.\nThe use of pronouns often involves anaphora, where the meaning of the pronoun is dependent on an antecedent. For example, in the sentence \"That poor man looks as if he needs a new coat\", the meaning of the pronoun \"he\" is dependent on its antecedent, \"that poor man\".\nThe adjective form of the word \"pronoun\" is \"pronominal\". A pronominal is also a word or phrase that acts as a pronoun. For example, in \"That's not the one I wanted\", the phrase \"the one\" (containing the prop-word \"one\") is a pronominal.\nTheory.\nPronoun versus pro-form.\nPronoun is a category of words. A pro-form is a type of function word or expression that stands in for (expresses the same content as) another word, phrase, clause or sentence where the meaning is recoverable from the context. In English, pronouns mostly function as pro-forms, but there are pronouns that are not pro-forms and pro-forms that are not pronouns.\nExamples [1 &amp; 2] are pronouns and pro-forms. In [1], the pronoun \"it\" \"stands in\" for whatever was mentioned and is a good idea. In [2], the relative pronoun \"who\" stands in for \"the people\".\nExamples [3 &amp; 4] are pronouns but not pro-forms. In [3], the interrogative pronoun \"who\" does not stand in for anything. Similarly, in [4], \"it\" is a dummy pronoun, one that does not stand in for anything. No other word can function there with the same meaning; we do not say \"the sky is raining\" or \"the weather is raining\".\nA prop-word is a word with little or no semantic content used where grammar dictates a certain sentence member, e.g., to provide a \"support\" on which to hang a modifier. The word most commonly considered as a prop-word in English is \"one\" (with the plural form \"ones\"). The prop-word \"one\" takes the place of a countable noun in a noun phrase (or determiner phrase), normally in a context where it is clear which noun it is replacing. For example, in a context in which hats are being talked about, \"the red one\" means \"the red hat\", and \"the ones we bought\" means \"the hats we bought\". The prop-word thus functions somewhat similarly to a pronoun, except that a pronoun usually takes the place of a whole noun (determiner) phrase (for example, \"the red hat\" may be replaced by the pronoun \"it\".)\nFinally, in [5 &amp; 6], there are pro-forms that are not pronouns. In [5], \"did so\" is a verb phrase that stands in for \"helped\" (a \"pro-verb\"), inflected from \"to help\" stated earlier in the sentence. Similarly, in [6], \"others\" is a common noun, not a pronoun, but \"the others\" probably stands in for the names of other people involved (e.g., \"Sho, Alana, and Ali\"), all proper nouns.\nGrammar.\nPronouns () are listed as one of eight parts of speech in \"The Art of Grammar\", a treatise on Greek grammar attributed to Dionysius Thrax and dating from the 2nd century BC. The pronoun is described there as \"a part of speech substitutable for a noun and marked for a person.\" Pronouns continued to be regarded as a part of speech in Latin grammar (the Latin term being , from which the English name\u2014through Middle French\u2014ultimately derives), and thus in the European tradition generally.\nBecause of the many different syntactic roles that they play, pronouns are less likely to be a single word class in more modern approaches to grammar.\nLinguistics.\nLinguists in particular have trouble classifying pronouns in a single category, and some do not agree that pronouns substitute nouns or noun categories. Certain types of pronouns are often identical or similar in form to determiners with related meaning; some English examples are given in the table.\nThis observation has led some linguists, such as Paul Postal, to regard pronouns as determiners that have had their following noun or noun phrase deleted. (Such patterning can even be claimed for certain personal pronouns; for example, \"we\" and \"you\" might be analyzed as determiners in phrases like \"we Brits\" and \"you tennis players\".) Other linguists have taken a similar view, uniting pronouns and determiners into a single class, sometimes called \"determiner-pronoun\", or regarding determiners as a subclass of pronouns or vice versa. The distinction may be considered to be one of subcategorization or valency, rather like the distinction between transitive and intransitive verbs\u2014determiners take a noun phrase complement like transitive verbs do, while pronouns do not. This is consistent with the determiner phrase viewpoint, whereby a determiner, rather than the noun that follows it, is taken to be the head of the phrase. Cross-linguistically, it seems as though pronouns share 3 distinct categories: point of view, person, and number. The breadth of each subcategory however tends to differ among languages.\nBinding theory and antecedents.\nThe use of pronouns often involves anaphora, where the meaning of the pronoun is dependent on another referential element. The referent of the pronoun is often the same as that of a preceding (or sometimes following) noun phrase, called the antecedent of the pronoun. The grammatical behavior of certain types of pronouns, and in particular their possible relationship with their antecedents, has been the focus of studies in binding, notably in the Chomskyan government and binding theory. In this binding context, reflexive and reciprocal pronouns in English (such as \"himself\" and \"each other\") are referred to as anaphors (in a specialized restricted sense) rather than as pronominal elements. Under binding theory, specific principles apply to different sets of pronouns.\nIn English, reflexive and reciprocal pronouns must adhere to Principle A: an anaphor (reflexive or reciprocal, such as \"each other\") must be bound in its governing category (roughly, the clause). Therefore, in syntactic structure it must be lower in structure (it must have an antecedent) and have a direct relationship with its referent. This is called a C-command relationship. For instance, we see that \"John cut himself\" is grammatical, but \"Himself cut John\" is not, despite having identical arguments, since \"himself\", the reflexive, must be lower in structure to John, its referent. Additionally, we see examples like \"John said that Mary cut himself\" are not grammatical because there is an intermediary noun, \"Mary\", that disallows the two referents from having a direct relationship.\nOn the other hand, personal pronouns (such as \"him\" or \"them\") must adhere to Principle B: a pronoun must be free (i.e., not bound) within its governing category (roughly, the clause). This means that although the pronouns can have a referent, they cannot have a direct relationship with the referent where the referent selects the pronoun. For instance, \"John said Mary cut him\" is grammatical because the two co-referents, \"John\" and \"him\" are separated structurally by \"Mary\". This is why a sentence like \"John cut him\" where \"him\" refers to \"John\" is ungrammatical.\nBinding cross-linguistically.\nThe type of binding that applies to subsets of pronouns varies cross-linguistically. For instance, in German linguistics, pronouns can be split into two distinct categories\u2014personal pronouns and d-pronouns. Although personal pronouns act identically to English personal pronouns (i.e. follow Principle B), d-pronouns follow yet another principle, Principle C, and function similarly to nouns in that they cannot have a direct relationship to an antecedent.\nAntecedents.\nThe following sentences give examples of particular types of pronouns used with antecedents:\nSome other types, such as indefinite pronouns, are usually used without antecedents. Relative pronouns are used without antecedents in free relative clauses. Even third-person personal pronouns are sometimes used without antecedents (\"unprecursed\")\u2014this applies to special uses such as dummy pronouns and generic \"they\", as well as cases where the referent is implied by the context.\nEnglish pronouns.\nEnglish pronouns have often traditionally been classified as different from nouns, but at least one modern grammar defines them as a subclass of nouns.\nEnglish personal pronouns have a number of different syntactic contexts (Subject, Object, Possessive, Reflexive) and many features:\n\u2020 Rare.\nEnglish also has other pronoun types, including demonstrative, relative, indefinite, and interrogative pronouns:\nPersonal and possessive.\nPersonal.\nPersonal pronouns may be classified by person, number, gender and case. English has three persons (first, second and third) and two numbers (singular and plural); in the third person singular there are also distinct pronoun forms for male, female and neuter gender. Principal forms are shown in the adjacent table.\nEnglish personal pronouns have two cases, \"subject\" and \"object\". Subject pronouns are used in subject position (I like to eat chips, but she does not\"). Object pronouns are used for the object of a verb or preposition (\"John likes me but not her).\nOther distinct forms found in some languages include:\nPossessive.\nPossessive pronouns are used to indicate possession (in a broad sense). Some occur as independent noun phrases: \"mine\", \"yours\", \"hers\", \"ours\", \"theirs\". An example is: \"Those clothes are mine.\" Others act as a determiner and must accompany a noun: \"my\", \"your\", \"her\", \"our\", \"your\", \"their\", as in: \"I lost my wallet.\" (\"His\" and \"its\" can fall into either category, although \"its\" is nearly always found in the second.) Those of the second type have traditionally also been described as possessive adjectives, and in more modern terminology as possessive determiners. The term \"possessive pronoun\" is sometimes restricted to the first type. Both types replace possessive noun phrases. As an example, Their crusade to capture our attention\" could replace The advertisers' crusade to capture our attention.\"\nReflexive and reciprocal.\nReflexive pronouns are used when a person or thing acts on itself, for example, \"John cut himself.\" In English they all end in \"-self\" or \"-selves\" and must refer to a noun phrase elsewhere in the same clause.\nReciprocal pronouns refer to a reciprocal relationship (\"each other\", \"one another\"). They must refer to a noun phrase in the same clause. An example in English is: \"They do not like each other.\" In some languages, the same forms can be used as both reflexive and reciprocal pronouns.\nDemonstrative.\nDemonstrative pronouns (in English, \"this\", \"that\" and their plurals \"these\", \"those\") often distinguish their targets by pointing or some other indication of position; for example, \"I'll take these.\" They may also be \"anaphoric\", depending on an earlier expression for context, for example, \"A kid actor would try to be all sweet, and who needs that?\"\nIndefinite.\nIndefinite pronouns, the largest group of pronouns, refer to one or more unspecified persons or things. One group in English includes compounds of \"some-\", \"any-\", \"every-\" and \"no-\" with \"-thing\", \"-one\" and \"-body\", for example: \"Anyone can do that.\" Another group, including \"many\", \"more\", \"both\", and \"most\", can appear alone or followed by \"of\". In addition,\nRelative and interrogative.\nRelative.\nRelative pronouns in English include \"who\", \"whom\", \"whose\", \"what\", \"which\" and \"that\". They rely on an antecedent, and refer back to people or things previously mentioned: \"People who smoke should quit now.\" They are used in relative clauses. Relative pronouns can also be used as complementizers.\nInterrogative.\nRelative pronouns can be used in an interrogative setting as interrogative pronouns. Interrogative pronouns ask which person or thing is meant. In reference to a person, one may use \"who\" (subject), \"whom\" (object) or \"whose\" (possessive); for example, \"Who did that?\" In colloquial speech, \"whom\" is generally replaced by \"who\". English non-personal interrogative pronouns (\"which\" and \"what\") have only one form.\nIn English and many other languages (e.g. French and Czech), the sets of relative and interrogative pronouns are nearly identical. Compare English: \"Who is that?\" (interrogative) and \"I know the woman who came\" (relative). In some other languages, interrogative pronouns and indefinite pronouns are frequently identical; for example, Standard Chinese means \"what?\" as well as \"something\" or \"anything\".\nArchaic forms.\nThough the personal pronouns described above are the current English pronouns, Early Modern English (as used by Shakespeare, for example) use a slightly different set of personal pronouns, shown in the table. The difference is entirely in the second person. Though one would rarely find these older forms used in recent literature, they are nevertheless considered part of Modern English.\nKinship.\nIn English, kin terms like \"mother\", \"uncle\", \"cousin\" are a distinct word class from pronouns; however many Australian Aboriginal languages have more elaborated systems of encoding kinship in language including special kin forms of pronouns. In Murrinh-patha, for example, when selecting a nonsingular exclusive pronoun to refer to a group, the speaker will assess whether or not the members of the group belong to a common class of gender or kinship. If all of the members of the referent group are male, the MASCULINE form will be selected; if at least one is female, the FEMININE is selected, but if all the members are in a sibling-like kinship relation, a third SIBLING form is selected. In Arabana-Wangkangurru, the speaker will use entirely different sets of pronouns depending on whether the speaker and the referent are or are not in a common moiety. See the following example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee Australian Aboriginal kinship for more details.\nSpecial uses.\nSome special uses of personal pronouns include:\nSee also.\nRelated topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn other languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24986", "revid": "50996108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24986", "title": "Pelagianism", "text": "Early heterodox Christian theological position\nPelagianism is a Christian theological position that holds that the fall did not taint human nature and that humans by divine grace have free will to achieve human perfection. Pelagius (c.\u2009355\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009420 AD), an ascetic and philosopher from the British Isles, taught that God could not command believers to do the impossible, and therefore it must be possible to satisfy all divine commandments. He also taught that it was unjust to punish one person for the sins of another; therefore, infants are born blameless. Pelagius accepted no excuse for sinful behaviour and taught that all Christians, regardless of their station in life, should live unimpeachable, sinless lives.\nTo a large degree, \"Pelagianism\" was defined by its opponent Augustine, and exact definitions remain elusive. Although Pelagianism had considerable support in the contemporary Christian world, especially among the Roman elite and monks, it was attacked by Augustine and his supporters, who had opposing views on grace, predestination and free will. Augustine proved victorious in the Pelagian controversy; Pelagianism was decisively condemned at the 418 Council of Carthage and is regarded as heretical by the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church. For centuries afterward, \"Pelagianism\" was used in various forms as an accusation of heresy for Christians who hold unorthodox beliefs. However, more recent scholarship in both theology and religious studies has questioned how strongly Pelagius's beliefs differed from those of his opponents and from modern mainstream Christians.\nBackground.\nDuring the fourth and fifth centuries, the Church was experiencing rapid change due to the Constantinian shift to Christianity. Many Romans were converting to Christianity, but they did not necessarily follow the faith strictly. As Christians were no longer persecuted, they faced a new problem: how to avoid backsliding and nominal adherence to the state religion while retaining the sense of urgency originally caused by persecution. For many, the solution was adopting Christian asceticism.\nEarly Christianity was theologically diverse. While Western Christianity taught that the inevitability of death was the result of the fall of man, a Syrian tradition subscribed to by the second-century figures Theophilus and Irenaeus asserted that mortality preceded the fall. Around 400, the doctrine of original sin was just emerging in Western Christianity, deriving from the teaching of Cyprian that infants should be baptized for the sin of Adam. Other Christians followed Origen in the belief that infants are born in sin due to their failings in a previous life. Rufinus the Syrian, who came to Rome in 399 as a delegate for Jerome, followed the Syrian tradition, declaring that man had been created mortal and that each human is only punished for his own sin.\nPelagius (c.\u2009355\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009420) was an ascetic layman, probably from the British Isles, who moved to Rome in the early 380s. Like Jerome, Pelagius criticized what he saw as an increasing laxity among Christians, instead promoting higher moral standards and asceticism. He opposed Manicheanism because of its fatalism and determinism and argued for the possibility of a sinless life. Although Pelagius preached the renunciation of earthly wealth, his ideas became popular among parts of the Roman elite. Historian Peter Brown argued that Pelagianism appealed \"to a powerful centrifugal tendency in the aristocracy of Rome\u2014a tendency to scatter, to form a pattern of little groups, each striving to be an elite, each anxious to rise above their neighbours and rivals\u2014the average upper\u2010class residents of Rome.\" The powerful Roman administrator Paulinus of Nola was close to Pelagius and the Pelagian writer Julian of Eclanum, and the former Roman aristocrat Caelestius was described by Gerald Bonner as \"the real apostle of the so-called Pelagian movement\". Many of the ideas Pelagius promoted were mainstream in contemporary Christianity, advocated by such figures as John Chrysostom, Athanasius of Alexandria, Jerome, and even the early Augustine.\nPelagian controversy.\nIn 410, Pelagius and Caelestius fled Rome for Sicily and then North Africa due to the Sack of Rome by Visigoths. At the 411 Council of Carthage, Caelestius approached the bishop Aurelius for ordination, but instead he was condemned for his belief on sin and original sin. Caelestius defended himself by arguing that this original sin was still being debated and his beliefs were orthodox. His views on grace were not mentioned, although Augustine (who had not been present) later claimed that Caelestius had been condemned because of \"arguments against the grace of Christ.\" Unlike Caelestius, Pelagius refused to answer the question as to whether man had been created mortal, and, outside of Northern Africa, it was Caelestius' teachings which were the main targets of condemnation. In 412, Augustine read Pelagius' \"Commentary on Romans\" and described its author as a \"highly advanced Christian.\" Augustine maintained friendly relations with Pelagius until the next year, initially only condemning Caelestius' teachings, and considering his dispute with Pelagius to be an academic one.\nJerome attacked Pelagianism for saying that humans had the potential to be sinless, and connected it with other recognized heresies, including Origenism, Jovinianism, Manichaeanism, and Priscillianism. Scholar Michael Rackett noted that the linkage of Pelagianism and Origenism was \"dubious\" but influential. Jerome also disagreed with Pelagius' strong view of free will. In 415, he wrote to refute Pelagian statements. Noting that Jerome was also an ascetic and critical of earthly wealth, historian Wolf Liebeschuetz suggested that his motive for opposing Pelagianism was envy of Pelagius' success. In 415, Augustine's emissary Orosius brought charges against Pelagius at a council in Jerusalem, which were referred to Rome for judgement. The same year, the exiled Gallic bishops Heros of Arles and Lazarus of Aix accused Pelagius of heresy, citing passages in Caelestius' . Pelagius defended himself by disavowing Caelestius' teachings, leading to his acquittal at the Synod of Diospolis in Lod, which proved to be a key turning point in the controversy. Following the verdict, Augustine convinced two synods in North Africa to condemn Pelagianism, whose findings were partially confirmed by Pope Innocent I. In January 417, shortly before his death, Innocent excommunicated Pelagius and two of his followers. Innocent's successor, Zosimus, reversed the judgement against Pelagius, but backtracked following pressure from the African bishops. Pelagianism was later condemned at the Council of Carthage in 418, after which Zosimus issued the excommunicating both Pelagius and Caelestius. Concern that Pelagianism undermined the role of the clergy and episcopacy was specifically cited in the judgement.\nAt the time, Pelagius' teachings had considerable support among Christians, especially other ascetics. Considerable parts of the Christian world had never heard of Augustine's doctrine of original sin. Eighteen Italian bishops, including Julian of Eclanum, protested against the condemnation of Pelagius and refused to follow Zosimus' . Many of them later had to seek shelter with the Greek bishops Theodore of Mopsuestia and Nestorius, leading to accusations that Pelagian errors lay beneath the Nestorian controversy over Christology. Both Pelagianism and Nestorianism were condemned at the Council of Ephesus in 431. With its supporters either condemned or forced to move to the East, Pelagianism ceased to be a viable doctrine in the Latin West. Despite repeated attempts to suppress Pelagianism and similar teachings, some followers were still active in the Ostrogothic Kingdom (493\u2013553), most notably in Picenum and Dalmatia during the rule of Theoderic the Great. Pelagianism was also reported to be popular in Britain, as Germanus of Auxerre made at least one visit (in 429) to denounce the heresy. Some scholars, including Nowell Myres and John Morris, have suggested that Pelagianism in Britain was understood as an attack on Roman decadence and corruption, but this idea has not gained general acceptance.\nPelagius' teachings.\nFree will and original sin.\nThe idea that God had created anything or anyone who was evil by nature struck Pelagius as Manichean. Pelagius taught that humans were free of the burden of original sin, because it would be unjust for any person to be blamed for another's actions. According to Pelagianism, humans were created in the image of God and had been granted conscience and reason to determine right from wrong, and the ability to carry out correct actions. If \"sin\" could not be avoided it could not be considered sin. In Pelagius' view, the doctrine of original sin placed too little emphasis on the human capacity for self-improvement, leading either to despair or to reliance on forgiveness without responsibility. He also argued that many young Christians were comforted with false security about their salvation leading them to relax their Christian practice.\nPelagius believed that Adam's transgression had caused humans to become mortal, and given them a bad example, but not corrupted their nature, while Caelestius went even further, arguing that Adam had been created mortal. He did not even accept the idea that original sin had instilled fear of death among humans, as Augustine said. Instead, Pelagius taught that the fear of death could be overcome by devout Christians, and that death could be a release from toil rather than a punishment. Both Pelagius and Caelestius reasoned that it would be unreasonable for God to command the impossible, and therefore each human retained absolute freedom of action and full responsibility for all actions. Pelagius did not accept any limitation on free will, including necessity, compulsion, or limitations of nature. He believed that teaching a strong position on free will was the best motivation for individuals to reform their conduct.\nSin and virtue.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe is a Christian\n who shows compassion to all,\n who is not at all provoked by wrong done to him,\n who does not allow the poor to be oppressed in his presence,\n who helps the wretched,\n who succors the needy,\n who mourns with the mourners,\n who feels another's pain as if it were his own,\n who is moved to tears by the tears of others,\n whose house is common to all,\n whose door is closed to no one,\n whose table no poor man does not know,\n whose food is offered to all,\n whose goodness all know and at whose hands no one experiences injury,\n who serves God all day and night,\n who ponders and meditates upon his commandments unceasingly,\n who is made poor in the eyes of the world so that he may become rich before God.\n\u2014\"On the Christian Life\", a Pelagian treatise\nIn the Pelagian view, by corollary, sin was not an inevitable result of fallen human nature, but instead came about by free choice and bad habits; through repeated sinning, a person could corrupt their own nature and enslave themself to sin. Pelagius believed that God had given man the Old Testament and Mosaic Law in order to counter these ingrained bad habits, and when that wore off over time God revealed the New Testament. However, because Pelagius considered a person to always have the ability to choose the right action in each circumstance, it was therefore theoretically possible (though rare) to live a sinless life. Jesus Christ, held in Christian doctrine to have lived a life without sin, was the ultimate example for Pelagians seeking perfection in their own lives, but there were also other humans who were without sin\u2014including some notable pagans and especially the Hebrew prophets. This view was at odds with that of Augustine and orthodox Christianity, which taught that Jesus was the only man free of sin. Pelagius did teach Jesus' vicarious atonement for the sins of mankind and the cleansing effect of baptism, but placed less emphasis on these aspects.\nPelagius taught that a human's ability to act correctly was a gift of God, as well as divine revelation and the example and teachings of Jesus. Further spiritual development, including faith in Christianity, was up to individual choice, not divine benevolence. Pelagius accepted no excuse for sin, and argued that Christians should be like the church described in Ephesians 5:27, \"without spot or wrinkle\". Instead of accepting the inherent imperfection of man, or arguing that the highest moral standards could only be applied to an elite, Pelagius taught that all Christians should strive for perfection. Like Jovinian, Pelagius taught that married life was not inferior to monasticism, but with the twist that all Christians regardless of life situation were called to a kind of asceticism. Pelagius taught that it was not sufficient for a person to call themselves a Christian and follow the commandments of scripture; it was also essential to actively do good works and cultivate virtue, setting themselves apart from the masses who were \"Christian in name only\", and that Christians ought to be extraordinary and irreproachable in conduct. Specifically, he emphasized the importance of reading scripture, following religious commandments, charity, and taking responsibility for one's actions, and maintaining modesty and moderation. Pelagius taught that true virtue was not reflected externally in social status, but was an internal spiritual state. He explicitly called on wealthy Christians to share their fortunes with the poor. (Augustine criticized Pelagius' call for wealth redistribution.)\nBaptism and judgment.\nBecause sin in the Pelagian view was deliberate, with people responsible only for their own actions, infants were considered without fault in Pelagianism, and unbaptized infants were not thought to be sent to hell. Like early Augustine, Pelagians believed that infants would be sent to purgatory. Although Pelagius rejected that infant baptism was necessary to cleanse original sin, he nevertheless supported the practice because he felt it improved their spirituality through a closer union with Jesus. For adults, baptism was essential because it was the mechanism for obtaining forgiveness of the sins that a person had personally committed and a new beginning in their relationship with God. After death, adults would be judged by their acts and omissions and consigned to everlasting fire if they had failed: \"not because of the evils they have done, but for their failures to do good\". He did not accept purgatory as a possible destination for adults. Although Pelagius taught that the path of righteousness was open to all, in practice only a few would manage to follow it and be saved. Like many medieval theologians, Pelagius believed that instilling in Christians the fear of hell was often necessary to convince them to follow their religion where internal motivation was absent or insufficient.\nComparison.\nSignificant influences on Pelagius included Eastern Christianity, which had a more positive view of human nature, and classical philosophy, from which he drew the ideas of personal autonomy and self-improvement. After having previously credited Cicero's lost \"Hortensius\" for his eventual conversion to Christianity, Augustine accused Pelagius' idea of virtue of being \"Ciceronian\", taking issue with the ideology of the dialogue's author as having overemphasized the role of human intellect and will. Although his teachings on original sin were novel, Pelagius' views on grace, free will and predestination were similar to those of contemporary Greek-speaking theologians such as Origen, John Chrysostom, and Jerome.\nTheologian Carol Harrison commented that Pelagianism is \"a radically different alternative to Western understandings of the human person, human responsibility and freedom, ethics and the nature of salvation\" which might have come about if Augustine had not been victorious in the Pelagian controversy. According to Harrison, \"Pelagianism represents an attempt to safeguard God's justice, to preserve the integrity of human nature as created by God, and of human beings' obligation, responsibility and ability to attain a life of perfect righteousness.\" However, this is at the expense of downplaying human frailty and presenting \"the operation of divine grace as being merely external\". According to scholar Rebecca Weaver, \"what most distinguished Pelagius was his conviction of an unrestricted freedom of choice, given by God and immune to alteration by sin or circumstance.\"\nDefinition.\nWhat Augustine called \"Pelagianism\" was more his own invention than that of Pelagius. According to Thomas Scheck, Pelagianism is the heresy of denying Catholic Church teaching on original sin, or more specifically the beliefs condemned as heretical in 417 and 418. In her study, Ali Bonner (a lecturer at the University of Cambridge) found that there was no one individual who held all the doctrines of \"Pelagianism\", nor was there a coherent Pelagian movement, although these findings are disputed. Bonner argued that the two core ideas promoted by Pelagius were \"the goodness of human nature and effective free will\" although both were advocated by other Christian authors from the 360s. Because Pelagius did not invent these ideas, she recommended attributing them to the ascetic movement rather than using the word \"Pelagian\". Later Christians used \"Pelagianism\" as an insult for theologically orthodox Christians who held positions that they disagreed with. Historian Eric Nelson defined genuine Pelagianism as rejection of original sin or denial of original sin's effect on man's ability to avoid sin. Even in recent scholarly literature, the term \"Pelagianism\" is not clearly or consistently defined.\nPelagianism and Augustinianism.\nPelagius' teachings on human nature, divine grace, and sin were opposed to those of Augustine, who declared Pelagius \"the enemy of the grace of God\". Augustine distilled what he called Pelagianism into three heretical tenets: \"to think that God redeems according to some scale of human merit; to imagine that some human beings are actually capable of a sinless life; to suppose that the descendants of the first human beings to sin are themselves born innocent\". In Augustine's writings, Pelagius is a symbol of humanism who excluded God from human salvation. Pelagianism shaped Augustine's ideas in opposition to his own on free will, grace, and original sin, and much of \"The City of God\" is devoted to countering Pelagian arguments. Another major difference in the two thinkers was that Pelagius emphasized obedience to God for fear of hell, which Augustine considered servile. In contrast, Augustine argued that Christians should be motivated by the delight and blessings of the Holy Spirit and believed that it was treason \"to do the right deed for the wrong reason\". According to Augustine, credit for all virtue and good works is due to God alone, and to say otherwise caused arrogance, which is the foundation of sin.\nAccording to Peter Brown, \"For a sensitive man of the fifth century, Manichaeism, Pelagianism, and the views of Augustine were not as widely separated as we would now see them: they would have appeared to him as points along the great circle of problems raised by the Christian religion\". John Cassian argued for a middle way between Pelagianism and Augustinianism, in which the human will is not negated but presented as intermittent, sick, and weak, and Jerome held a middle position on sinlessness. In Gaul, the so-called \"semi-Pelagians\" disagreed with Augustine on predestination (but recognized the three Pelagian doctrines as heretical) and were accused by Augustine of being seduced by Pelagian ideas. According to Ali Bonner, the crusade against Pelagianism and other heresies narrowed the range of acceptable opinions and reduced the intellectual freedom of classical Rome. When it came to grace and especially predestination, it was Augustine's ideas, not Pelagius', which were novel.\nAccording to Nelson, Pelagianism is a solution to the problem of evil that invokes libertarian free will as both the cause of human suffering and a sufficient good to justify it. By positing that man could choose between good and evil without divine intercession, Pelagianism brought into question Christianity's core doctrine of Jesus' act of substitutionary atonement to expiate the sins of mankind. For this reason, Pelagianism became associated with nontrinitarian interpretations of Christianity which rejected the divinity of Jesus, as well as other heresies such as Arianism, Socinianism, and mortalism (which rejected the existence of hell). Augustine argued that if man \"could have become just by the law of nature and free will ... amounts to rendering the cross of Christ void\". He argued that no suffering was truly undeserved, and that grace was equally undeserved but bestowed by God's benevolence. Augustine's solution, while it was faithful to orthodox Christology, worsened the problem of evil because according to Augustinian interpretations, God punishes sinners who by their very nature are unable not to sin. The Augustinian defense of God's grace against accusations of arbitrariness is that God's ways are incomprehensible to mere mortals. Yet, as later critics such as Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz asserted, asking \"it is good and just because God wills it or whether God wills it because it is good and just?\", this defense (although accepted by many Catholic and Reformed theologians) creates a God-centered morality, which, in Leibniz' view \"would destroy the justice of God\" and make him into a tyrant.\nPelagianism and Judaism.\nOne of the most important distinctions between Christianity and Judaism is that the former conventionally teaches justification by faith, while the latter teaches that man has the choice to follow divine law. By teaching the absence of original sin and the idea that humans can choose between good and evil, Pelagianism advocated a position close to that of Judaism. Pelagius wrote positively of Jews and Judaism, recommending that Christians study Old Testament (i.e., the Tanakh) law \u2014 a sympathy not commonly encountered in Christianity after Paul. Augustine was the first to accuse Pelagianism of \"Judaizing\", which became a commonly heard criticism of it. However, although contemporary rabbinic literature tends to take a Pelagian perspective on the major questions, and it could be argued that the rabbis shared a worldview with Pelagius, there were minority opinions within Judaism (such as the Essenes) which argued for ideas more similar to Augustine's. Overall, Jewish discourse did not discuss free will and emphasized God's goodness in his revelation of the Torah.\nLater responses.\nSemi-Pelagian controversy.\nThe resolution of the Pelagian controversy gave rise to a new controversy in southern Gaul in the fifth and sixth centuries, retrospectively called by the misnomer \"semi-Pelagianism\". The \"semi-Pelagians\" all accepted the condemnation of Pelagius, believed grace was necessary for salvation, and were followers of Augustine. The controversy centered on differing interpretations of the verse : \"For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.\" Augustine and Prosper of Aquitaine assumed that God's will is always effective and that some are not saved (i.e., opposing universal reconciliation). Their opponents, based on the tradition of Eastern Christianity, argued that Augustinian predestination contradicted the biblical passage. John Cassian, whose writings survived, argued for prevenient grace that individuals could accept or reject. Other semi-Pelagians were said to undermine the essential role of God's grace in salvation and argue for a median between Augustinianism and Pelagianism, although these alleged writings are no longer extant. At the Council of Orange in 529, called and presided over by Caesarius of Arles, semi-Pelagianism was condemned and the canons of Carthage which anathematizes the denial of inheritance of Original sin and its remission by infant baptism: the synod advocated synergism, the idea that human freedom and divine grace work together for salvation.\nChristians often used \"Pelagianism\" as a criticism to imply that the target denied God's grace and strayed into heresy..\nPelagian manuscripts.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Pelagius' writings were popular but usually attributed to other authors, especially Augustine and Jerome. Pelagius' \"Commentary on Romans\" circulated under two pseudonymous versions, \"Pseudo-Jerome\" (copied before 432) and \"Pseudo-Primasius\", revised by Cassiodorus in the sixth century to remove the \"Pelagian errors\" that Cassiodorus found in it. During the Middle Ages, it passed as a work by Jerome. Erasmus of Rotterdam printed the commentary in 1516, in a volume of works by Jerome. Erasmus recognized that the work was not really Jerome's, writing that he did not know who the author was. Erasmus admired the commentary because it followed the consensus interpretation of Paul in the Greek tradition. The nineteenth-century theologian Jacques Paul Migne suspected that Pelagius was the author, and William Ince recognized Pelagius' authorship as early as 1887. The original version of the commentary was found and published by Alexander Souter in 1926. According to French scholar Yves-Marie Duval, the Pelagian treatise \"On the Christian Life\" was the second-most copied work during the Middle Ages (behind Augustine's \"The City of God\") outside of the Bible and liturgical texts.\nEarly modern era.\nDuring the modern era, Pelagianism continued to be used as an epithet against orthodox Christians. However, there were also some authors who had essentially Pelagian views according to Nelson's definition. Nelson argued that many of those considered the predecessors to modern liberalism took Pelagian or Pelagian-adjacent positions on the problem of evil. For instance, Leibniz, who coined the word theodicy in 1710, rejected Pelagianism but nevertheless proved to be \"a crucial conduit for Pelagian ideas\". He argued that \"Freedom is deemed necessary in order that man may be deemed guilty and open to punishment.\" In , John Milton argued that \"if, because of God's decree, man could not help but fall ... then God's restoration of fallen man was a matter of justice not grace\". Milton also argued for other positions that could be considered Pelagian, such as that \"The knowledge and survey of vice, is in this world ... necessary to the constituting of human virtue.\" Jean-Jacques Rousseau made nearly identical arguments for that point. John Locke argued that the idea that \"all \"Adam\"'s Posterity [are] doomed to Eternal Infinite Punishment, for the Transgression of \"Adam\"\" was \"little consistent with the Justice or Goodness of the Great and Infinite God\". He did not accept that original sin corrupted human nature, and argued that man could live a Christian life (although not \"void of slips and falls\") and be entitled to justification.\nNelson argues that the drive for rational justification of religion, rather than a symptom of secularization, was actually \"a Pelagian response to the theodicy problem\" because \"the conviction that everything\nnecessary for salvation must be accessible to human reason was yet another inference from God's justice\". In Pelagianism, libertarian free will is necessary but not sufficient for God's punishment of humans to be justified, because man must also understand God's commands. As a result, thinkers such as Locke, Rousseau and Immanuel Kant argued that following natural law without revealed religion must be sufficient for the salvation of those who were never exposed to Christianity because, as Locke pointed out, access to revelation is a matter of moral luck. Early modern proto-liberals such as Milton, Locke, Leibniz, and Rousseau advocated religious toleration and freedom of private action (eventually codified as human rights), as only freely chosen actions could merit salvation.\n19th-century philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard dealt with the same problems (nature, grace, freedom, and sin) as Augustine and Pelagius, which he believed were opposites in a Hegelian dialectic. He rarely mentioned Pelagius explicitly even though he inclined towards a Pelagian viewpoint. However, Kierkegaard rejected the idea that man could perfect himself.\nContemporary responses.\nJohn Rawls was a critic of Pelagianism, an attitude that he retained even after becoming an atheist. His anti-Pelagian ideas influenced his book \"A Theory of Justice\", in which he argued that differences in productivity between humans are a result of \"moral arbitrariness\" and therefore unequal wealth is undeserved. In contrast, the Pelagian position would be that human sufferings are largely the result of sin and are therefore deserved. According to Nelson, many contemporary social liberals follow Rawls rather than the older liberal-Pelagian tradition.\nThe conflict between Pelagius and the teachings of Augustine was a constant theme throughout the works of Anthony Burgess, in books including \"A Clockwork Orange\", \"Earthly Powers\", \"A Vision of Battlements\" and \"The Wanting Seed\".\nMateusz Morawiecki, the prime minister of Poland between 2017 and 2023, declared his support for Pelagianism.\nScholarly reassessment.\nDuring the 20th century, Pelagius and his teachings underwent a reassessment. In 1956, John Ferguson wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a heretic is one who emphasizes one truth to the exclusion of others, it would at any rate appear that [Pelagius] was no more a heretic than Augustine. His fault was in exaggerated emphasis, but in the final form his philosophy took, after necessary and proper modifications as a result of criticism, it is not certain that any statement of his is totally irreconcilable with the Christian faith or indefensible in terms of the New Testament. It is by no means so clear that the same may be said of Augustine.\nThomas Scheck writes that although Pelagius' views on original sin are still considered \"one-sided and defective\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An important result of the modern reappraisal of Pelagius's theology has been a more sympathetic assessment of his theology and doctrine of grace and the recognition of its deep rootedness in the antecedent Greek theologians... Pelagius's doctrine of grace, free will and predestination, as represented in his \"Commentary on Romans\", has very strong links with Eastern (Greek) theology and, for the most part, these doctrines are no more reproachable than those of orthodox Greek theologians such as Origen and John Chrysostom, and of St. Jerome.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24987", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24987", "title": "Patripassianism", "text": "Christian theological position\nIn Christian theology, historically patripassianism (as it is referred to in the Western church) is a version of Sabellianism in the Eastern church (and a version of modalism, modalistic monarchianism, or modal monarchism). Modalism is the belief that God the Father, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit are three different \"modes\" or \"emanations\" of one monadic God, as perceived by the believer, rather than three distinct persons within the Godhead and that there are no real or substantial differences between the three, such that the identity of the Spirit or the Son is that of the Father.\nIn the West, a version of this belief was known pejoratively as \"patripassianism\" by its critics (from Latin , \"father\", and , \"suffering\") because they alleged that the teaching required that since God the Father had become directly incarnate in Jesus, the Father literally sacrificed himself on the cross.\nTrinitarian perspective.\nFrom the standpoint of the doctrine of the Trinity, with one divine being existing in three persons, patripassianism is considered heretical by some Christian churches since \"it simply cannot make sense of the New Testament's teaching on the interpersonal relationship of Father, Son, and Spirit.\" In this, patripassianism asserts that God the Father\u2014rather than God the Son\u2014became incarnate and suffered on the cross for humanity's redemption. This amplifies the personhood of Jesus as the personality of the Father, but is seen by trinitarians as distorting the \"spiritual transaction\" of atonement that was taking place at the cross, which the Apostle Paul described in 2 Corinthians 5:19:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God [the Trinity] was reconciling the world to himself in Christ [the Son], not counting people's sins against them. [...] God [the Trinity] made him who had no sin [Jesus of Nazareth] to be sin for us, so that in him [the Son] we might become the righteousness of God [the Trinity].\nIt is possible, however, to modify patripassianism to acknowledge God as having feelings toward and sharing in the experiences of both Jesus, whom trinitarian Christians regard as both human and divine, and of other human beings. Full-orbed patripassianism denies trinitarian distinctions, yet it does not contradict Christianity as defined in the Nicene Creed to say that God feels or experiences things, including nonphysical forms of suffering. About the crucifixion of Jesus, patripassians claim it is consistent with scripture to say that God the Father suffered\u2014that is, felt emotional and spiritual pain\u2014as he watched his Son (i.e., Jesus) suffer on the cross:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God [...] no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God [...] What we have received is [...] the Spirit who is from God.\nHistory.\nPatripassianism is attested as early as the 2nd century; theologians such as Praxeas speak of God as unipersonal. Patripassianism was referred to as a belief ascribed to those following Sabellianism, after a chief proponent, Sabellius, especially by the chief opponent Tertullian, who also opposed Praexas. Sabellius, considered a founder of an early movement, was a priest who was excommunicated from the Church by Pope Callixtus I in 220 and lived in Rome. Sabellius advanced the doctrine of one God sometimes referred to as the \"economic Trinity\" and he opposed the orthodox doctrine of the \"essential Trinity\". Praxeas and Noetus were some major followers.\nBecause the writings of Sabellius were destroyed, it is difficult to know if he actually believed in Patripassianism, but one early version of the Apostles' Creed, recorded by Rufinus, explicitly states that the Father is 'impassible.' This reading dates to about 390 AD. This addition was made in response to patripassianism, which Rufinus evidently regarded as a heresy, and Ignatius believed the incarnate one is the impassible: \"being impassible, He was in a passible body, being immortal, He was in a mortal body\".\nCyprian and Tertullian famously accused the Modalistic Monarchians of patripassianism. The Monarchians taught the unity of the Godhead in Christ and that as the Son suffered the Father also experienced the sufferings. They did not teach that the Father died on the cross though they were sometimes accused of that.\nThe term has been used by others such as F. L. Cross and E. A. Livingstone to describe other Oneness religions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24988", "revid": "27983612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24988", "title": "Denial of the virgin birth of Jesus", "text": "Rejection of the belief that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit\nDenial of the virgin birth of Jesus is found among various groups and individuals throughout the history of Christianity. These groups and individuals often took an approach to Christology that understands Jesus to be human, the literal son of human parents.\nIn the 19th century, the view was sometimes called psilanthropism, a term that derives from the combination of the Greek (\"psil\u00f3s\"), \"plain\", \"mere\" or \"bare\", and (\"\u00e1nthr\u014dpos\") \"human\". Psilanthropists then generally denied both the virgin birth of Jesus and his divinity. Denial of the virgin birth is distinct from adoptionism and may or may not be present in beliefs described as adoptionist.\nEarly Christianity.\nThe group most closely associated with denial of the virgin birth were the Ebionites. However, Jerome does not say that all Ebionites denied the virgin birth, but only contrasts their view with the acceptance of the doctrine on the part of a related group, the Nazarenes.\nThe view was rejected by the ecumenical councils, especially in the First Council of Nicaea, which was convened to deal directly with the nature of Christ's divinity.\nPagan and Jewish accounts.\nIn the 2nd century, the Greek philosopher Celsus claimed that Jesus was the illegitimate son of a soldier named Panthera. The same claim is made by the medieval Jewish text Toledot Yeshu.\nReformation.\nThe turmoil of the Reformation gave rise to many radical groups and individuals, some of whom were accused of denying, or actually did deny, the virgin birth. For example, during the trial of Lorenzo Tizzano before the Inquisition at Venice in 1550, it was charged that the circle of the late Juan de Vald\u00e9s (died 1541) at Naples had included such individuals. Early Unitarians, often called Socinians, after Laelio Sozzini who first published the first unitarian analysis of John's \"Logos\" in 1550, were sometimes accused of denying the virgin birth, but mainly only denied the pre-existence of Christ in heaven. For Sozzini's better known nephew Fausto Sozzini the miraculous virgin birth was the element in their belief which removed the need for the pre-existence to which they objected. The Socinians in fact excommunicated from their number the translator of the first Bible in Belarusian, Symon Budny, for his denial of the virgin birth.\nA large scale change among Unitarians to acceptance of a human father for Jesus took place only in the time of Joseph Priestley. The young Samuel Taylor Coleridge was an example of what he called \"a psilanthropist, one of those who believe our Lord to have been the real son of Joseph\" but later in life Coleridge decisively rejected this idea and accepted traditional Christian belief in the virgin birth.\n19th\u201321st centuries.\nBiblical scholars, churchmen, and theologians who have notably rejected the virgin birth include:\nSects and denominations.\nThe \"Divine Principle\", the textbook of the Unification movement (also called the Unification Church), a new religious movement founded in South Korea, does not include the teaching that Zechariah was the father of Jesus; however some of its members hold that belief. Notably, this view is advanced by Young Oon Kim, citing the work of British liberal theologian Leslie Weatherhead in her book \"Unification Theology\" (1980).\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite), founded by James Jesse Strang, rejects the virgin birth and believes that Jesus' father was Joseph, husband of Mary.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24989", "revid": "51020803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24989", "title": "Pendulum clock", "text": "Clock regulated by a pendulum\nA pendulum clock is a clock that uses a pendulum, a swinging weight, as its timekeeping element. The advantage of a pendulum for timekeeping is that it is an approximate harmonic oscillator: It swings back and forth in a precise time interval dependent on its length, and resists swinging at other rates. From its invention in 1656 by Christiaan Huygens, inspired by Galileo Galilei, until the 1930s, the pendulum clock was the world's most precise timekeeper, accounting for its widespread use. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, pendulum clocks in homes, factories, offices, and railroad stations served as primary time standards for scheduling daily life activities, work shifts, and public transportation. Their greater accuracy allowed for a faster pace of life which was necessary for the Industrial Revolution. The home pendulum clock was replaced by less-expensive synchronous electric clocks in the 1930s and 1940s. Pendulum clocks are now kept mostly for their decorative and antique value.\nPendulum clocks must be stationary to operate. Any motion or accelerations will affect the motion of the pendulum, causing inaccuracies, so other mechanisms must be used in portable timepieces.\nHistory.\nThe pendulum clock was invented on 25 December 1656 by Dutch scientist and inventor Christiaan Huygens, and patented the following year. He described it in his manuscript \"Horologium\" published in 1658. Huygens contracted the construction of his clock designs to the Dutch clockmaker Salomon Coster, who actually built the clock. Huygens was inspired by investigations of pendulums by Galileo Galilei beginning around 1602. Galileo discovered the key property that makes pendulums useful timekeepers: they are isochronic, which means that the period of swing of a pendulum is approximately the same for different sized swings. Galileo in 1637 described to his son, Vincenzo, a mechanism which could keep a pendulum swinging, which has been called the first pendulum clock design \"(picture at top)\". It was partly constructed by his son in 1649, but neither lived to finish it. The introduction of the pendulum, the first harmonic oscillator used in timekeeping, increased the accuracy of clocks enormously, from about 15 minutes per day to 15 seconds per day leading to their rapid spread as existing 'verge and foliot' clocks were retrofitted with pendulums. By 1659 pendulum clocks were being manufactured in France by clockmaker Nicolaus Hanet, and in England by Ahasuerus Fromanteel.\nThese early clocks, due to their verge escapements, had wide pendulum swings of 80\u2013100\u00b0. In his 1673 analysis of pendulums, \"Horologium Oscillatorium\", Huygens showed that wide swings made the pendulum inaccurate, causing its period, and thus the rate of the clock, to vary with unavoidable variations in the driving force provided by the movement. Clockmakers' realization that only pendulums with small swings of a few degrees are isochronous motivated the invention of the anchor escapement by Robert Hooke around 1658, which reduced the pendulum's swing to 4\u20136\u00b0. The anchor became the standard escapement used in pendulum clocks. In addition to increased accuracy, the anchor's narrow pendulum swing allowed the clock's case to accommodate longer, slower pendulums, which needed less power and caused less wear on the movement. The seconds pendulum (also called the Royal pendulum), long, in which the time period is two seconds, became widely used in quality clocks. The long narrow freestanding clocks built around these pendulums, first made by William Clement around 1680, who also claimed invention of the anchor escapement, became known as grandfather clocks. The increased accuracy resulting from these developments caused the minute hand, previously rare, to be added to clock faces beginning around 1690.\nThe 18th and 19th century wave of horological innovation that followed the invention of the pendulum brought many improvements to pendulum clocks. The deadbeat escapement invented in 1675 by Richard Towneley and popularized by George Graham around 1715 in his precision \"regulator\" clocks gradually replaced the anchor escapement and is now used in most modern pendulum clocks. Observation that pendulum clocks slowed down in summer brought the realization that thermal expansion and contraction of the pendulum rod with changes in temperature was a source of error. This was solved by the invention of temperature-compensated pendulums; the mercury pendulum by Graham in 1721 and the gridiron pendulum by John Harrison in 1726. With these improvements, by the mid-18th century precision pendulum clocks achieved accuracies of a few seconds per week.\nUntil the 19th century, clocks were handmade by individual craftsmen and were very expensive. The rich ornamentation of pendulum clocks of this period indicates their value as status symbols of the wealthy. The clockmakers of each country and region in Europe developed their own distinctive styles. By the 19th century, factory production of clock parts gradually made pendulum clocks affordable by middle-class families.\nDuring the Industrial Revolution, the faster pace of life and scheduling of shifts and public transportation like trains depended on the more accurate timekeeping made possible by the pendulum. Daily life was organized around the home pendulum clock. More accurate pendulum clocks, called \"regulators\", were installed in places of business and railroad stations and used to schedule work and set other clocks. The need for extremely accurate timekeeping in celestial navigation to determine longitude on ships during long sea voyages drove the development of the most accurate pendulum clocks, called \"astronomical regulators\". These precision instruments, installed in clock vaults in naval observatories and kept accurate within a fraction of a second by observation of star transits overhead, were used to set marine chronometers on naval and commercial vessels. Beginning in the 19th century, astronomical regulators in naval observatories served as primary standards for national time distribution services that distributed time signals over telegraph wires. From 1909, US National Bureau of Standards (now NIST) based the US time standard on Riefler pendulum clocks, accurate to about 10 milliseconds per day. In 1929 it switched to the Shortt-Synchronome free pendulum clock before phasing in quartz standards in the 1930s.\n With an error of less than one second per year, the Shortt was the most accurate commercially produced pendulum clock at the time of its creation.\nPendulum clocks remained the world standard for accurate timekeeping for 270 years, until the invention of the quartz clock in 1927, and were used as time standards through World War II. The French Time Service included pendulum clocks in their ensemble of standard clocks until 1954. The home pendulum clock began to be replaced as domestic timekeeper during the 1930s and 1940s by the synchronous electric clock, which kept more accurate time because it was synchronized to the oscillation of the electric power grid. Behind the Iron Curtain, where quartz technology was unavailable, experiments with pendulum clocks continued for much longer, with corresponding developments in accuracy: the AChF-3 isochronous pendulum clock developed by physicist Feodosii Fedchenko in 1955 has an accuracy in the range of quartz clocks and is the most accurate pendulum clock ever to have gone into production. The most accurate experimental pendulum clock ever made may be the Littlemore Clock built by Edward T. Hall in the 1990s\n(donated in 2003 to the National Watch and Clock Museum, Columbia, Pennsylvania, USA). The largest pendulum clocks, exceeding , were built in Geneva (1972) and Gda\u0144sk (2016).\nMechanism.\nThe mechanism which runs a mechanical clock is called the movement. The movements of all mechanical pendulum clocks have these five parts:\nAdditional functions in clocks besides basic timekeeping are called complications. More elaborate pendulum clocks may include these complications:\nIn \"electromechanical pendulum clocks\" such as used in mechanical Master clocks the power source is replaced by an electrically powered solenoid that provides the impulses to the pendulum by magnetic force, and the escapement is replaced by a switch or photodetector that senses when the pendulum is in the right position to receive the impulse. These should not be confused with more recent quartz pendulum clocks in which an electronic quartz clock module swings a pendulum. These are not true pendulum clocks because the timekeeping is controlled by a quartz crystal in the module, and the swinging pendulum is merely a decorative simulation.\nGravity-swing pendulum.\nThe pendulum in most clocks \"(see diagram)\" consists of a wood or metal rod \"(a)\" with a metal weight called the bob \"(b)\" on the end. The bob is traditionally lens-shaped to reduce air drag. Wooden rods were often used in quality clocks because wood had a lower coefficient of thermal expansion than metal. The rod is usually suspended from the clock frame with a short straight spring of metal ribbon \"(d)\"; this avoids instabilities that were introduced by a conventional pivot. In the most accurate regulator clocks the pendulum is suspended by metal knife edges resting on flat agate (a hard mineral that will retain a highly polished surface).\nThe pendulum is driven by an arm hanging behind it attached to the anchor piece \"(h)\" of the escapement, called the \"crutch\" \"(e)\", ending in a \"fork\" \"(f)\" which embraces the pendulum rod. Each swing of the pendulum releases the escape wheel, and a tooth of the wheel presses against one of the pallets, exerting a brief push through the crutch and fork on the pendulum rod to keep it swinging.\nMost quality clocks, including all grandfather clocks, have a \"seconds pendulum\", in which each swing of the pendulum takes one second (a complete cycle takes two seconds), which is approximately long from pivot to center of bob. Mantel clocks often have a half-second pendulum, which is approximately long. Only a few tower clocks use longer pendulums, the 1.5 second pendulum, long, or occasionally the two-second pendulum, which is used in the Great Clock of Westminster which houses Big Ben.\nThe pendulum swings with a period that varies with the square root of its effective length. For small swings the period \"T\", the time for one complete cycle (two swings), is\nformula_1\nwhere \"L\" is the length of the pendulum and \"g\" is the local acceleration of gravity. All pendulum clocks have a means of adjusting the rate. This is usually an adjustment nut \"(c)\" under the pendulum bob which moves the bob up or down on its rod. Moving the bob up reduces the length of the pendulum, reducing the pendulum's period so the clock gains time. In some pendulum clocks, fine adjustment is done with an auxiliary adjustment, which may be a small weight that is moved up or down the pendulum rod. In some master clocks and tower clocks, adjustment is accomplished by a small tray mounted on the rod where small weights are placed or removed to change the effective length, so the rate can be adjusted without stopping the clock.\nThe period of a pendulum increases slightly with the width (amplitude) of its swing; this is called \"circular error\". The \"rate\" of error increases with amplitude, so when limited to small swings of a few degrees the pendulum is nearly \"isochronous\"; its period is independent of changes in amplitude. Therefore, the swing of the pendulum in clocks is limited to 2\u00b0 to 4\u00b0.\nSmall swing angles tend toward isochronous behavior due to the mathematical fact that the approximation formula_2 becomes valid as the angle approaches zero. With that substitution made, the pendulum equation becomes the equation of a harmonic oscillator, which has a fixed period in all cases. As the swing angle becomes larger, the approximation gradually fails and the period is no longer fixed.\nTemperature compensation.\nA major source of error in pendulum clocks is thermal expansion; the pendulum rod changes in length slightly with changes in temperature, causing changes in the rate of the clock. An increase in temperature causes the rod to expand, making the pendulum longer, so its period increases and the clock loses time. Many older quality clocks used wooden pendulum rods to reduce this error, as wood expands less than metal.\nThe first pendulum to correct for this error was the \"mercury pendulum\" invented by Graham in 1721, which was used in precision regulator clocks into the 20th century. These had a bob consisting of a container of the liquid metal mercury. An increase in temperature would cause the pendulum rod to expand, but the mercury in the container would also expand and its level would rise slightly in the container, moving the center of gravity of the pendulum up toward the pivot. By using the correct amount of mercury, the centre of gravity of the pendulum remained at a constant height, and thus its period remained constant, despite changes in temperature.\nThe most widely used temperature-compensated pendulum was the gridiron pendulum invented by John Harrison around 1726. This consisted of a \"grid\" of parallel rods of high-thermal-expansion metal such as zinc or brass and low-thermal-expansion metal such as steel. If properly combined, the length change of the high-expansion rods compensated for the length change of the low-expansion rods, again achieving a constant period of the pendulum with temperature changes.\nThis type of pendulum became so associated with quality that decorative \"fake\" gridirons are often seen on pendulum clocks, that have no actual temperature compensation function.\nBeginning around 1900, some of the highest precision scientific clocks had pendulums made of ultra-low-expansion materials such as the nickel steel alloy Invar or fused silica, which required very little compensation for the effects of temperature.\nAtmospheric drag.\nThe viscosity of the air through which the pendulum swings will vary with atmospheric pressure, humidity, and temperature. This drag also requires power that could otherwise be applied to extending the time between windings. Traditionally the pendulum bob is made with a narrow streamlined lens shape to reduce air drag, which is where most of the driving power goes in a quality clock. In the late 19th century and early 20th century, pendulums for precision regulator clocks in astronomical observatories were often operated in a chamber that had been pumped to a low pressure to reduce drag and make the pendulum's operation even more accurate by avoiding changes in atmospheric pressure. Fine adjustment of the rate of the clock could be made by slight changes to the internal pressure in the sealed housing.\nLeveling and \"beat\".\nTo keep time accurately, pendulum clocks must be level. If they are not, the pendulum swings more to one side than the other, upsetting the symmetrical operation of the escapement. This condition can often be heard audibly in the ticking sound of the clock. The ticks or \"beats\" should be at precisely equally spaced intervals to give a sound of, \"tick...tock...tick...tock\"; if they are not, and have the sound \"tick-tock...tick-tock...\" the clock is \"out of beat\" and needs to be leveled. This problem can easily cause the clock to stop working, and is one of the most common reasons for service calls. A spirit level or watch timing machine can achieve a higher accuracy than relying on the sound of the beat; precision regulators often have a built-in spirit level for the task. Older freestanding clocks often have feet with adjustable screws to level them, more recent ones have a leveling adjustment in the movement. Some modern pendulum clocks have 'auto-beat' or 'self-regulating beat adjustment' devices, and do not need this adjustment.\nLocal gravity.\nSince the pendulum rate will increase with an increase in gravity, and local gravitational acceleration formula_3 varies with latitude and elevation on Earth, the highest precision pendulum clocks must be readjusted to keep time after a move. For example, a pendulum clock moved from sea level to will lose 16 seconds per day. With the most accurate pendulum clocks, even moving the clock to the top of a tall building would cause it to lose measurable time due to lower gravity. The local gravity also varies by about 0.5% with latitude between the equator and the poles, with gravity increasing at higher latitudes due to the oblate shape of the Earth. Thus precision regulator clocks used for celestial navigation in the early 20th century had to be recalibrated when moved to a different latitude.\nTorsion pendulum.\nAlso called torsion-spring pendulum, this is a wheel-like mass (most often four spheres on cross spokes) suspended from a vertical strip (ribbon) of spring steel, used as the regulating mechanism in torsion pendulum clocks. Rotation of the mass winds and unwinds the suspension spring, with the energy impulse applied to the top of the spring. The main advantage of this type of pendulum is its low energy use; with a period of 12\u201315 seconds, compared to the gravity swing pendulum's period of 0.5\u20142s, it is possible to make clocks that need to be wound only every 30 days, or even only once a year or more. Since the restoring force is provided by the elasticity of the spring, which varies with temperature, it is more affected by temperature changes than a gravity-swing pendulum. The most accurate torsion clocks use a spring of elinvar which has low temperature coefficient of elasticity.\nA torsion pendulum clock requiring only annual winding is sometimes called a \"400-Day clock\" or \"anniversary clock\", sometimes given as a wedding gift. Torsion pendulums are also used in \"perpetual\" clocks which do not need winding, as their mainspring is kept wound by changes in atmospheric temperature and pressure with a bellows arrangement. The Atmos clock, one example, uses a torsion pendulum with a long oscillation period of 60 seconds.\nEscapement.\nThe escapement is a mechanical linkage that converts the force from the clock's wheel train into impulses that keep the pendulum swinging back and forth. It is the part that makes the \"ticking\" sound in a working pendulum clock. Most escapements consist of a wheel with pointed teeth called the \"escape wheel\" which is turned by the clock's wheel train, and surfaces the teeth push against, called \"pallets\". During most of the pendulum's swing the wheel is prevented from turning because a tooth is resting against one of the pallets; this is called the \"locked\" state. Each swing of the pendulum a pallet releases a tooth of the escape wheel. The wheel rotates forward a fixed amount until a tooth catches on the other pallet. These releases allow the clock's wheel train to advance a fixed amount with each swing, moving the hands forward at a constant rate, controlled by the pendulum.\nAlthough the escapement is necessary, its force disturbs the natural motion of the pendulum, and in precision pendulum clocks this was often the limiting factor on the accuracy of the clock. Different escapements have been used in pendulum clocks over the years to try to solve this problem. In the 18th and 19th centuries, escapement design was at the forefront of timekeeping advances. The anchor escapement (see animation) was the standard escapement used until the 1800s when an improved version, the deadbeat escapement, took over in precision clocks. It is used in almost all pendulum clocks today. The remontoire, a small spring mechanism rewound at intervals which serves to isolate the escapement from the varying force of the wheel train, was used in a few precision clocks. In tower clocks the wheel train must turn the large hands on the clock face on the outside of the building, and the weight of these hands, varying with snow and ice buildup, put a varying load on the wheel train. Gravity escapements were used in tower clocks.\nBy the end of the 19th century specialized escapements were used in the most accurate clocks, called \"astronomical regulators\", which were employed in naval observatories and for scientific research. The Riefler escapement, used in Clemens-Riefler regulator clocks was accurate to 10 milliseconds per day. Electromagnetic escapements, which used a switch or phototube to turn on a solenoid electromagnet to give the pendulum an impulse without requiring a mechanical linkage, were developed. The most accurate pendulum clock was the Shortt-Synchronome clock, a complicated electromechanical clock with two pendulums developed in 1923 by W.H. Shortt and Frank Hope-Jones, which was accurate to better than one second per year. A slave pendulum in a separate clock was linked by an electric circuit and electromagnets to a master pendulum in a vacuum tank. The slave pendulum performed the timekeeping functions, leaving the master pendulum to swing virtually undisturbed by outside influences. In the 1920s the Shortt-Synchronome briefly became the highest standard for timekeeping in observatories before quartz clocks superseded pendulum clocks as precision time standards.\nTime indication.\nThe indicating system is almost always the traditional dial with moving hour and minute hands. Many clocks have a small third hand indicating seconds on a subsidiary dial. Pendulum clocks are usually designed to be set by opening the glass face cover and manually pushing the minute hand around the dial to the correct time. The minute hand is mounted on a slipping friction sleeve which allows it to be turned on its arbor. The hour hand is driven not from the wheel train but from the minute hand's shaft through a small set of gears, so rotating the minute hand manually also sets the hour hand.\nMaintenance and Repair.\nPendulum clocks are long lived and don't require a lot of maintenance, which is one reason for their popularity.\nAs in any mechanism with moving parts, regular cleaning and lubrication is required. Specific low viscosity lubricants have been developed for clocks, one of the most widely used being a polyalcanoate synthetic oil.\nSprings and pins may wear out or break over time and will need to be replaced.\nStyles.\nPendulum clocks were more than simply utilitarian timekeepers; due to their high cost they were status symbols that expressed the wealth and culture of their owners. They evolved in a number of traditional styles, specific to different countries and times as well as their intended use. Case styles somewhat reflect the furniture styles popular during the period. Experts can often pinpoint when an antique clock was made within a few decades by subtle differences in their cases and faces. These are some of the different styles of pendulum clocks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24990", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24990", "title": "Proto-World Language", "text": ""}
