{"id": "23767", "revid": "50572360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23767", "title": "Paul Keating", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia from 1991 to 1996\nPaul John Keating (born 18 January 1944) is an Australian former politician and trade unionist who served as the 24th prime minister of Australia from 1991 to 1996. He held office as the leader of the Labor Party (ALP), having previously served as treasurer under Bob Hawke from 1983 to 1991 and as the seventh deputy prime minister from 1990 to 1991.\nKeating was born in Sydney and left school at the age of 14. He joined the Labor Party at the same age, serving a term as State president of Young Labor and working as a research assistant for a trade union. He was elected to the Australian House of Representatives at the age of 25, winning the division of Blaxland at the 1969 election. He was briefly minister for Northern Australia from October to November 1975, in the final weeks of the Whitlam government - along with Doug McClelland, he is the last surviving minister who served under Gough Whitlam. After the Dismissal removed Labor from power, he held senior portfolios in the Shadow Cabinets of Whitlam and Bill Hayden. During this time he came to be seen as the leader of the Labor Right faction, and developed a reputation as a talented and fierce parliamentary performer.\nAfter Labor's landslide victory at the 1983 election, Keating was appointed treasurer by prime minister Bob Hawke. The pair developed a powerful political partnership, overseeing significant reforms intended to liberalise and strengthen the Australian economy. These included the Prices and Incomes Accord, the float of the Australian dollar, the elimination of tariffs, the deregulation of the financial sector, achieving the first federal budget surplus in Australian history, and reform of the taxation system, including the introduction of capital gains tax, fringe benefits tax, and dividend imputation. He also became recognised for his sardonic rhetoric, as a controversial but deeply skilled orator. Keating became deputy prime minister in 1990, but in June 1991 he resigned from the ministry to unsuccessfully challenge Hawke for the leadership, believing he had reneged on the Kirribilli Agreement. He mounted a second successful challenge six months later, and became prime minister.\nKeating was appointed prime minister in the aftermath of the early 1990s economic downturn, which he had famously described as \"the recession that Australia had to have\". This, combined with poor opinion polling, led many to predict Labor was certain to lose the 1993 election, but Keating's government was re-elected in an upset victory. In its second term, the Keating government enacted the landmark \"Native Title Act\" to enshrine Indigenous land rights, introduced compulsory superannuation and enterprise bargaining, created a national infrastructure development program, privatised Qantas, Commonwealth Serum Laboratories and the Commonwealth Bank, established the APEC leaders' meeting, and promoted republicanism by establishing the Republic Advisory Committee.\nAt the 1996 election, after 13 years in office, Keating\u2019s government suffered a landslide defeat to the Liberal\u2013National Coalition, led by John Howard. Keating resigned as leader of the Labor Party and retired from Parliament shortly after the election, with his deputy Kim Beazley being elected unopposed to replace him. Keating has since remained active as a political commentator, whilst maintaining a broad series of business interests, including serving on the international board of the China Development Bank from 2005 to 2018.\nAs prime minister, Keating performed poorly in opinion polls, and in August 1993, received the lowest approval rating for any Australian prime minister since modern political polling began. Since leaving office, Keating received broad praise from historians and commentators for his role in modernising the Australian economy as treasurer, although ratings of his premiership have been mixed. Keating has been recognised across the political spectrum for his charisma, debating skills, and his willingness to boldly confront social norms, including his famous Redfern Park Speech on the impact of colonisation in Australia and Aboriginal reconciliation.\nEarly life and education.\nKeating was born at St Margaret's Hospital in Darlinghurst, Sydney, on 18 January 1944. He was the first of four children born to Minnie (n\u00e9e Chapman) and Matthew John Keating. His father worked as a boilermaker for the New South Wales Government Railways. All of Keating's grandparents were born in Australia. On his father's side, he was descended from Irish immigrants born in counties Galway, Roscommon, and Tipperary. On his mother's side, he was of mixed English and Irish descent. His maternal grandfather, Fred Chapman, was the son of two convicts, John Chapman and Sarah Gallagher, both of whom had been transported for theft in the 1830s.\nKeating grew up in Bankstown, a working-class suburb in western Sydney, the family home from 1942 to 1966 being a modest fibro-and-brick bungalow at 3 Marshall Street (demolished for flat development in 2014). The suburb was nicknamed \"Irishtown\" during Keating's childhood, and sectarian antagonisms between Protestants and Roman Catholics were commonplace. Keating's upbringing was Catholic, with his father being involved with anti-Communist workers' organisations and Catholic social teaching having a significant impact on Keating's social perspective. His siblings include Anne Keating, a company director and businesswoman. \nLeaving De La Salle College \u2014 now known as LaSalle Catholic College \u2014 at the age of 14, Keating left high school rather than pursuing higher education, instead working as a pay clerk at the Sydney County Council's electricity distributor. Keating also attended Belmore Technical High School to further his education. He then worked as research assistant for a trade union, having joined the Labor Party as soon as he was eligible. In 1966, he became president of New South Wales Young Labor. During the 1960s, Keating also managed a rock band named The Ramrods.\nEarly political career.\nThrough his contacts in the unions and Young Labor, then known as Youth Council, Keating met future senior Labor figures such as Laurie Brereton, Graham Richardson and Bob Carr. He also developed a friendship with former New South Wales Premier Jack Lang, who Keating took on as a political mentor. In 1971, he succeeded in having Lang re-admitted to the Labor Party. Keating successfully gained the Labor nomination for the seat of Blaxland in the western suburbs of Sydney, and was elected to the House of Representatives in 1969 when he was just 25 years old.\nKeating was initially more socially conservative; in his maiden speech he declared that the Liberal government had \"boasted about the increasing number of women in the workforce. Rather than something to be proud of, I feel it is something of which we should be ashamed\". He later voted against former prime minister John Gorton's motion to decriminalise homosexuality in 1973. According to Tom Uren he was originally a \"very narrow-minded young man\", who later \"matured\" and became far less socially conservative.\nAfter Labor's victory at the 1972 election, Keating narrowly failed to be elected to serve in the Cabinet, instead being a backbencher for most of the Whitlam government. He was eventually appointed Minister for Northern Australia in October 1975, but served in the role only until the Government was controversially dismissed by Governor-General John Kerr the following month. In a 2013 interview with Kerry O'Brien, Keating called the dismissal a \"coup\" and raised the idea to \"arrest [Kerr]\" and \"lock him up\", adding that he would not have \"[taken] it lying down\" if he was prime minister.\nAfter Labor's defeat in the 1975 election, Keating was quickly added to the Shadow Cabinet, serving as Shadow Minister for Minerals, Resources and Energy until January 1983. During this time he achieved a reputation as a flamboyant and fierce parliamentary performer, adopting the style of an aggressive debater. In 1981, he was elected president of the New South Wales Labor Party, thus becoming the leader of the influential Labor Right faction. At this time, he initially supported the former treasurer Bill Hayden for Labor Leader over the former ACTU President Bob Hawke as leadership tensions between the two men began to mount; he later explained that part of his reasoning was that he privately hoped to succeed Hayden himself in the near future. However, by 1982, the members of his faction had swung behind Hawke, and Keating endorsed his challenge. The formal announcement of Keating's support for Hawke was written by a fellow Labor politician, Gareth Evans.\nAlthough Hayden survived the challenge, pressure continued to mount on him. In an attempt to shore up his position, Hayden promoted Keating to the role of Shadow Treasurer in January 1983. However this did not prove sufficient and Hayden resigned a month later, after a poor by-election result in the federal electorate of Flinders in Victoria. Hawke was elected unopposed to replace him and Hawke subsequently led Labor to a landslide victory in the 1983 election just six weeks later.\nTreasurer of Australia.\nEarly days.\nFollowing Labor's victory in the 1983 election, Keating was appointed Treasurer of Australia by Prime Minister Bob Hawke; he succeeded John Howard in the position. He and Hawke were able to use the size of the budget deficit that the Hawke government had inherited from the Fraser government to question the economic credibility of the Liberal-National Coalition over the coming years. According to Hawke, the historically large $9.6\u00a0billion budget deficit left by the Coalition \"became a stick with which we were justifiably able to beat the Opposition\". Although Howard was widely regarded at this time as being \"discredited\" by the hidden deficit, he had in fact argued unsuccessfully against Fraser that the revised figures should be disclosed before the election.\nIn the ensuing years, Hawke and Keating developed an extremely powerful partnership, which proved to be essential to Labor's success in government; multiple Labor figures in years since have cited the partnership between the two as the party's greatest ever. The two men proved a study in contrasts: Hawke was a Rhodes Scholar; Keating left high school early. Hawke's enthusiasms were cigars, betting and most forms of sport; Keating preferred classical architecture, Mahler symphonies and collecting British Regency and French Empire antiques. Despite not knowing one another before Hawke assumed the leadership in 1983, the two formed a personal as well as political relationship which enabled the Government to pursue a significant number of reforms, although there were occasional points of tension between the two.\nKeating, along with Hawke, oversaw a \"National Economic Summit\" in their first month in office, with Keating leading several sessions outlining the Government's economic agenda. The Summit, which brought together a significant number of senior business and industrial figures alongside trade union leaders and politicians, led to a unanimous adoption of a national economic strategy, generating sufficient political capital for the Government to begin a wide-ranging programme of economic reform previously resisted by much of the Labor Party.\nMacroeconomic reforms.\nKeating used the authority and relative autonomy provided to him by Hawke to become one of the major driving forces behind the various extensive macroeconomic reforms of the Government. In December 1983, Hawke and Keating approved the floating of the Australian dollar, disregarding advice from the Treasury Secretary John Stone to retain the fixed currency framework. The success of the move, which was lauded by economic and media commentators, gave confidence to Keating to pursue even more reforms. Over the Hawke government's first and second terms, Keating oversaw the gradual elimination of tariffs on imports, the privatisation of several state-owned companies such as Qantas, CSL Limited, and the Commonwealth Bank, the deregulation of significant sections of the banking system (including allowing for numerous foreign-owned banks to begin operating in Australia for the first time) and the granting of autonomy on decision-making to the Reserve Bank of Australia.\nKeating was also instrumental in establishing the Hawke government's signature industrial relations and wages policy, the Prices and Incomes Accord. This was an agreement directly between the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) and the Government to guarantee a reduction in demands for wage increases, in exchange for the Government providing a significant increase in social programmes, including the introduction of Medicare and the Family Assistance Scheme; in so doing, the Government was able to reduce inflation and unemployment over the decade. Keating's management of the Accord, and the close working relationship he developed with ACTU Secretary Bill Kelty, became a source of significant political power for Keating, who negotiated multiple versions of the Accord with Kelty throughout the Hawke government. Through the power given to him, Keating was often able to bypass the Cabinet altogether, notably in exercising monetary policy, and he was regularly referred to as \"the most powerful Treasurer in modern times\".\nIn the wake of the raft of macroeconomic reforms introduced by Keating throughout the first term of the Hawke government in particular, in 1984 he was awarded the Euromoney Finance Minister of the Year, an award which became colloquially known in Australia as the \"World's Greatest Treasurer\", becoming the first Australian treasurer to be presented with the award.\nMicroeconomic reforms.\nThroughout the second and third terms of the Hawke government, Keating led a significant overhaul of the long-stagnant Australian taxation system. In 1985, he became a passionate advocate within the Cabinet for the introduction of a broad-based consumption tax, similar in nature to the goods and services tax that was later introduced by the Howard government, as a means of addressing Australia's chronic balance of payments issue. In the build-up to the 1984 election, Hawke promised a policy paper on taxation reform to be discussed with all stakeholders at a \"National Taxation Summit\". Three options\u00a0\u2013 A, B and C\u00a0\u2013 were presented in the paper, with Keating and his Treasury colleagues fiercely advocating for C, which included a consumption tax of 15% on goods and services along with reductions in personal and company income tax, a fringe benefits tax and a capital gains tax. Although Keating was able to win the support of a reluctant Cabinet, Hawke believed that the opposition from the public, the ACTU, and the business community would be too great. He therefore decided to abandon any plans for a consumption tax, although the remainder of the reforms were adopted in the tax reform package. The loss of the consumption tax was seen a defeat for Keating; he later joked about it at a press conference, saying, \"It's a bit like \"Ben Hur\". We've crossed the line with one wheel off, but we have crossed the line.\"\nWhilst the remainder of the package represented the biggest overhaul of the Australian taxation system for decades, Keating continued to agitate for further changes to address the balance of payments problems faced by Australia. On 14 May 1986, frustrated at the slow pace of dealing with the issue, he caused considerable public comment and a degree of controversy when he declared on a radio programme that if Australia did not address the problem, it risked degenerating to the status of a \"banana republic\". Although the remark was quickly disowned by Hawke in public, the Government increased efforts to deal with the growing balance of payments crisis. With no consumption tax to generate a significant increase in incomings, Keating and his ministerial colleagues led a process to significantly reduce Government outlays instead, resulting in some criticism from the grassroots of the Labor Party, who opposed cuts to spending. Despite the criticism, the Government was able to produce a national budget surplus for the years 1988, 1989 and 1990, with the surplus of 1988 proving to be the largest budget surplus in Australian history.\nDuring the campaign for the 1987 election, Keating was credited as dealing a \"fatal\" blow to the Liberal-National Coalition's hopes for victory, after giving a press conference in which he exposed a significant accounting error in the costings the Liberal Party had released to demonstrate how its economic policies would be paid for. Then-Opposition Leader John Howard accepted the error, and subsequent opinion polling reported that the mistake greatly contributed to Labor's vote in what proved to be a landslide victory.\nKeating's later tenure as treasurer was heavily criticised by some for consistently high interest rates, which he argued was necessary to reduce economic growth gradually so that demand for imports did not grow out of control. Throughout the 1980s, both the global and Australian economies grew quickly, and by the late 1980s, inflation had grown to around 9%. By 1988, the Reserve Bank of Australia began tightening monetary policy, and household interest rates peaked at 18%. It is often said that the bank was too slow in easing monetary policy, and that this ultimately led to a recession. In private, Keating had argued for rates to rise earlier than they did, and fall sooner, although his view was at odds with the Reserve Bank and his Treasury colleagues. Publicly, Hawke and Keating had said there would be no recession\u00a0\u2013 or that there would be a \"soft landing\"\u00a0\u2013 but this changed when Keating announced the country was indeed in recession in 1990, several months after the Hawke government had won an unprecedented fourth consecutive term in office. Announcing the recession, Keating described it as a \"recession Australia had to have\". The remark was referred to by political journalist Paul Kelly as \"perhaps the most stupid remark of Keating's career, and it nearly cost him the Prime Ministership,\" though he said that, \"...however, it is largely true that the boom begat the recession.\"\nThe economic reform package throughout the 1980s has been claimed by numerous economic commentators and journalists to have been the basis for an unprecedentedly long period of economic growth, with Australia's gross domestic product increasing every year for 30 years, and the end of chronic inflation and balance of payments difficulties, along with the increasingly globalised domestic economy, enabling long periods of stability and growth.\nLeadership challenges.\nAt the end of 1988, Keating, who had long believed that he would succeed Hawke as prime minister, began to put pressure on Hawke to retire in the new year. Hawke rejected this advice, but reached a secret agreement with Keating that he would remain as leader through to the 1990 election, and that he would resign in Keating's favour shortly after the election, which he convinced Keating he could win. Hawke subsequently won that election, albeit narrowly, and appointed Keating his deputy prime minister to replace the retiring Lionel Bowen. However, by the end of 1990, frustrated at the lack of any indication from Hawke as to when he might retire, Keating delivered a provocative speech questioning the direction of the government. As a result, Hawke told Keating he would renege on the deal on the basis that Keating had been publicly disloyal.\nAlthough tensions between the two remained private for some time, Keating eventually resigned from the Cabinet in June 1991 and challenged for the leadership. Hawke won the ballot by 66 votes to 44, and in a press statement afterwards Keating declared that he had fired his \"one shot\" as regards the leadership. Publicly, at least, this seemed to spell the end of his leadership ambitions. Having failed to defeat Hawke, he realised that events would have to move very much in his favour for a second challenge to be even possible, and he strongly considered retiring from politics altogether. However, Hawke's leadership was regarded by many as being \"wounded\" as a result of losing his long-term political partner and the growing confidence of the Liberal-National Coalition under the new leadership of John Hewson. After Hawke was forced to sack John Kerin, the man appointed to replace Keating as treasurer, for a public gaffe in attempting to combat the Coalition's new 'Fightback!' policy, Keating took the opportunity to challenge a second time in December 1991, this time emerging victorious by 56 votes to 51. He paid tribute to Hawke's nine years as prime minister, and stated that he would provide a robust challenge to Hewson.\nPrime Minister of Australia (1991\u20131996).\nOn 20 December 1991, Keating was sworn in as prime minister by the Governor-General Bill Hayden. \nOn becoming prime minister, he thought of becoming treasurer again, noting that state premiers had often been their own treasurers, but decided against it.\nJohn Dawkins was appointed treasurer instead.\nKeating entered office with an extensive legislative agenda, including pursuing reconciliation with Australia's Indigenous population, deepening Australia's economic and cultural ties with Asia, and making Australia a republic. The addressing of these issues came to be known as his \"big picture\".\nIndigenous land rights and domestic policy.\nShortly after Keating became prime minister, the High Court of Australia handed down a judgement in Mabo v Queensland, a long-running case on Indigenous land rights; the judgement would come to be known as \"Mabo\", and declared that a right to native title did exist in Australia, overturning terra nullius, but not clarifying exactly who had the right to access the title. Keating led the Government's response to the ruling, beginning a high-profile public campaign on raising awareness of the issue, and advocating repeatedly in favour of the judgment and for an expansion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander land rights. On 10 December 1992, he delivered a major address which came to be known as the Redfern Park Speech on Aboriginal reconciliation. The speech, in which he explicitly noted the responsibility of settler Australians for destroying much of Indigenous society, has since regularly been cited as among the greatest in Australian political history.\nThis work culminated in the passage of the Native Title Act in 1993, which \"provide(d) a national system for the recognition and protection of native title and for its co-existence with the national land management system\". As well as creating the legal field of native title, the act established an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner, who was required to prepare an annual report to the attorney-general on the operation of the Native Title Act and its effect on the exercise and enjoyment of human rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and to report, when requested by the attorney-general, on any other matter relating to the rights of Indigenous people under the act.\nElsewhere in domestic policy, Keating established and promoted the first Commonwealth cultural policy, known as 'Creative Nation'. The policy allocated AU$250 million over four years to promote the cultural and creative arts sectors in Australia. He had frequently espoused the benefits of the arts in public, and used the policy as an opportunity to develop the Australian cultural sector. During the Keating government, mandatory detention for asylum seekers was also introduced for the first time.\nSuperannuation and economic policy.\nAmong Keating's most far-reaching achievements as prime minister was the full introduction of the National Superannuation Scheme, implemented to address Australia's long-term problem of chronically low national savings. This initiative built on policies that Keating had pursued whilst treasurer, and was aimed at ensuring that most Australians would have enough money to retire. In 1992, the compulsory employer contribution scheme became a part of a wider reform package addressing this retirement income dilemma. It had been demonstrated that Australia, along with many other Western nations, would experience a major demographic shift in the coming decades, due to ageing population, and it was claimed that this would result in increased pension payments that would place an unaffordable strain on the Australian economy.\nKeating's solution was a \"three pillars\" approach to retirement income, requiring compulsory employer contributions to superannuation funds, permitting further contributions to superannuation funds and other investments, and introducing, where this was insufficient, a safety net consisting of a means-tested government-funded age pension. The compulsory employer contributions were branded \"Superannuation Guarantee\" (SG) contributions. As a result of this policy, along with the gradual increases in the minimum contribution amount, Australia grew to become the fourth largest holder of pension fund assets in the world, with a balance of AU$3.3 trillion in superannuation assets at the end of the June 2022 quarter.\nIn the aftermath of the 1990 recession, Keating appointed his close ally John Dawkins as treasurer, and together the two developed an economic package to counter the Liberal-National Coalition's 'Fightback!' proposals; this package came to be known as 'One Nation', and involved using funding from the budget surplus to produce new welfare-to-work programmes, as well as introducing a new degree of competition within the telecommunications and communications industries and creating the Australian National Training Authority (ANTA). 'One Nation' also proposed a series of further tax cuts for middle-income workers coming in two tranches, in 1993 and 1995, although these would later be deferred to 1995 and 1998, a move which cost the Government considerable political support among the public. A further major economic policy development was the introduction of an enterprise bargaining scheme as part of the final stage of the Prices and Incomes Accord, intended to allow for greater flexibility and economies of scale within industrial wage arbitration, although much of this was curtailed by the Howard government after 1996.\nForeign policy.\nThroughout his time as prime minister, Keating took a number of steps to strengthen and develop bilateral links with Australia's closest neighbours; he frequently said that there was no country in the world that was more important to Australia than Indonesia, and undertook his first overseas visit to the country, becoming the first Australian prime minister to do so. Keating made a conscious effort to develop a personal relationship with Indonesian President Suharto, and to include Indonesia in multilateral forums attended by Australia. Keating's friendship with Suharto was criticised by human rights activists supportive of East Timorese independence, and by Nobel Peace Prize winner Jos\u00e9 Ramos-Horta. The Keating government's cooperation with the Indonesian military, and the signing of the Timor Gap Treaty, were also strongly criticised by these same groups. It was alleged by some that Keating was overlooking alleged human rights abuses by the Indonesian government as part of his effort to dramatically increase Australia's cultural, diplomatic and economic ties with Asia.\nFollowing the creation of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Economic Forum by Bob Hawke, Keating developed the idea further, winning the support in 1993 of recently elected US President Bill Clinton and Chinese Premier Li Peng to expand APEC to a full Leaders' Meeting. This led to APEC becoming one of the most significant high-level international summits, and at the 1994 APEC Leaders' Meeting, hosted by Indonesia, members agreed to the Keating government's proposals for what became known as the Bogor Declaration, which set targets for a significant increase in free trade and investment between industrialised APEC countries by 2010 and between developing APEC countries by 2020. In December 1993, Keating became involved in a diplomatic incident with Malaysia when he described Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad as \"recalcitrant\". The incident occurred after Mahathir refused to attend the 1993 APEC summit. Keating said \"APEC is bigger than all of us\u00a0\u2013 Australia, the U.S. and Malaysia, and Dr. Mahathir and any other recalcitrants.\" The translation of the word \"recalcitrant\" into Malaysian rendered the word a more egregious insult, and Mahathir demanded an apology from Keating, threatening to reduce diplomatic ties and trade drastically with Australia, which became an enormous concern to Australian exporters. Some Malaysian officials talked of launching a \"Buy Australian Last\" campaign; Keating subsequently apologised to Mahathir over the remark.\n1993 and 1996 elections.\nAs prime minister, Keating maintained his aggressive debating style. When asked by Opposition Leader John Hewson why he would not call an early election, Keating replied, \"because I want to do you slowly.\" He referred to the Liberal Party as \"a motley, dishonest crew\", and the National Party as \"dummies and dimwits; desperadoes\". During an opposition debate that sought to censure Keating, he described being attacked by Peter Costello as \"like being flogged with warm lettuce\". Despite this renewed attack on the Opposition, and a busy legislative agenda, many commentators predicted that the 1993 election was \"unwinnable\" for Labor.\nDuring the campaign, Keating focused a great amount of effort on attacking the Coalition's proposed goods and services tax (GST), arguing that it would prove \"a dead weight\" on the economy, and stating that \"every time you put your hand in your pocket, Dr. Hewson's will be in there with you\". He was helped by Hewson struggling towards the end of the campaign to explain exactly which products would have the GST levied on them, and which would not. Having begun the campaign far behind the Coalition in opinion polls, on 13 March Keating led Labor to an unexpected and record-breaking fifth consecutive election victory, picking up a two-seat swing. The speech Keating delivered at the victory celebration has been described as one of the great Labor speeches. Opening with \"This is a victory for the true believers; the men and women of Australia who, in difficult times, have kept the faith\", the speech has been described as providing a source of inspiration for Labor Party faithful to the present day.\nLike Hawke before him, Keating was able to benefit from disunity in the Liberal Party. Fourteen months after the March 1993 election, John Hewson was replaced as Liberal Leader by Alexander Downer, whose leadership was quickly marred by gaffes and controversies within months. Keating routinely succeeded in outwitting Downer within Parliament, and in early 1995, Downer resigned to be replaced by John Howard, who had previously led the Liberals from 1985 to 1989. Howard was able to give the Coalition renewed momentum after Labor lost the seat of Canberra in a by-election. In contrast to Hewson, Howard adopted a \"small target\" campaign strategy for the 1996 election, publicly committing to keep numerous Labor reforms such as Medicare, and defusing the republic issue by promising to hold a constitutional convention. This combined with a narrative of \"time for a change\" led to a heavy defeat for the Keating government on 2 March 1996, suffering a five percent two party preferred swing and losing 29 seats, making it the second-worst defeat of a sitting government in Australian history. Keating announced he would retire as Labor Leader and from Parliament, and tendered his resignation as prime minister on 11 March, 13 years to the day after Bob Hawke had first taken office.\nPost-political career.\nAfter leaving Parliament in 1996, Keating moved to the affluent eastern Sydney suburb of Woollahra. He accepted appointment as a director for various companies, and also became a senior adviser to Lazard, an investment banking firm. Keating was appointed to the advisory council to the Chinese Government Development Bank. He was also appointed a visiting professor of public policy at the University of New South Wales and was awarded honorary doctorates in law from Keio University in Tokyo (1995), the National University of Singapore (1999), the University of New South Wales (2003) and Macquarie University (2012). In 1997, Keating declined appointment in the Australia Day Honours as a Companion of the Order of Australia, an honour which has been offered to all former prime ministers since the modern Australian Honours System was introduced in 1975. On his refusal, Keating expressed that he had long believed honours should be reserved for those whose work in the community went unrecognised and that having been prime minister was sufficient public recognition.\nIn 2000, Keating published his first book since leaving office, \"Engagement: Australia Faces the Asia-Pacific\", which focused on foreign policy during his time as prime minister. In 2002, Keating's former speechwriter and adviser, Don Watson, published \"\". The book first drew criticism from Keating's by then-estranged wife, Annita Keating, who said that it understated her contribution, a complaint Watson rejected. Keating himself was so unhappy with the book that it brought the two men's friendship to an abrupt end.\nKeating initially avoided public political comment during the Howard government, although made occasional speeches criticising his successor's social policies. Ahead of the 2007 election, Keating joined former Labor Prime Ministers Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke to campaign against Howard, describing Howard as a \"desiccated coconut\" who was \"Araldited to the seat\", as an \"...old antediluvian 19th century person who wanted to stomp forever...on ordinary people's rights to organise themselves at work...he's a pre-Copernican obscurantist\". He also described Howard's deputy, Peter Costello, as being \"all tip and no iceberg\" when referring to an alleged pact made by Howard to hand the leadership over to Costello after two terms.\nIn February 2008, after Labor's victory in the 2007 election, Keating joined former prime ministers Whitlam, Fraser and Hawke in Parliament House to witness new prime minister Kevin Rudd deliver the National Apology to the Stolen Generations. In August 2008, he spoke at the book launch of \"Unfinished Business: Paul Keating's Interrupted Revolution\", authored by economist David Love. Among the topics discussed during the launch were the need to increase compulsory superannuation contributions, as well as to restore incentives for people to receive their superannuation payments in annuities.\nIn 2013, Keating took part in a series of four-hour-long interviews with Kerry O'Brien which were broadcast on the ABC in November of that year. The series covered Keating's early life, his entry into Parliament, his years as treasurer and prime minister, and canvassing his academic, musical and artistic interests, economic and cultural vision for Australia, and commitment to Australia's integration into Asia. O'Brien used these conversations as the basis for a 2014 book \"Keating: The Interviews\". Keating repeatedly declared he would not write a memoir, so his cooperation with O'Brien was perceived as the closest he would come to producing an autobiography.\nIn 2016, Troy Bramston, a journalist for \"The Australian\" and a political historian, wrote an unauthorised biography that Keating cooperated with titled \"Paul Keating: The Big-Picture Leader\". Bramston was given full access to Keating's personal papers, was granted a series of interviews with Keating and also interviewed more than 100 other people. It was described as the \"authoritative\" and \"definitive\" Keating biography written by a \"first class\" political historian.\nDuring the 2015 New South Wales state election, Keating gave his support for the privatisation agenda of the Liberal government and slammed the Labor Party for its anti-privatisation position.\nIn 2019, during campaigning for that year's federal election, Keating spoke out against the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation by calling them \"nutters\". His remarks attracted media criticism, and Labor leader Bill Shorten distanced himself from Keating's views. Keating later issued a joint statement with Bob Hawke endorsing Labor's economic plan as part of the election campaign, and condemning the Liberal Party for \"completely [giving] up the economic reform agenda\". They stated that \"Shorten's Labor is the only party of government focused on the need to modernise the economy to deal with the major challenge of our time: human induced climate change\"; it was the first joint press statement released by the two since 1991. After Hawke's death in the same month, Keating gave an address at Hawke's state memorial service at Sydney Opera House on 14 June, where he reflected on the \"great friendship and partnership\" the two had enjoyed.\nIn September 2021, following the announcement of the AUKUS trilateral military alliance between the United States, United Kingdom and Australia, Keating criticised the alliance, saying that \"Australia turns its back on the 21st century, the century of Asia, for the jaded and faded Anglosphere\" and the deal would be \"locking the country and its military forces into the force structure of the United States by acquiring US submarines\". Keating went on to criticise Labor's opposition foreign affairs spokesperson Penny Wong, accusing the Labor opposition of being complicit with the Liberal government in \"false representation of China's foreign policy\". His comments were criticised by Labor MPs Anthony Byrne and Peter Khalil.\nIn January 2022, Keating accused British foreign secretary Liz Truss of making \"demented\" comments about Chinese military aggression in the Pacific, saying that \"Britain suffers delusions of grandeur and relevance deprivation.\" In 2023, Keating went on to call the AUKUS pact \"the worst deal in all history\" and lambasting the Labor government for being \"incompetent\" and stating that the decision was the worst by a Labor government since Billy Hughes attempted to introduce conscription during World War I.\nIn 2024, Keating criticized AUKUS, claimed Taiwan is \"Chinese real estate\", and that Taiwan is comparable to Tasmania. In December 2024, Keating sold his shareholding in Boost Mobile for $40 million, having co-founded the business in 2000 with an investment of $500,000.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1972 Keating announced his engagement to fashion consultant Kristine Kennedy, but they did not marry. \nOn 17 January 1975, Keating married Annita van Iersel, a Dutch-born flight attendant for Alitalia. They had four children, who spent some of their teenage years in The Lodge, the prime minister's official residence in Canberra. The couple separated in November 1998. While they did not formally divorce until 2008, Annita had resumed her maiden name long before then. \nIn the early 1970s, Keating moved from the family home in Bankstown when he purchased a new brick-veneer house at 12 Gerard Avenue, Condell Park, two doors up from his parents' new home at No. 8 Gerard Avenue. This became the family home after his marriage in 1975 until 1983, when the Keatings sold the property for $123,000 and moved to a one-storey rental house in the Canberra suburb of Red Hill, to be closer to work. \nSince 1999 and as of 2013[ [update]], Keating's partner was the actress Julieanne Newbould. \nKeating is a Catholic, having been raised in a Catholic family and has been described as a \"conventional Christian\". Catholic social teaching and egalitarianism featured in many of his political views, including his support for an Australian republic.\nKeating's interests include the music of Gustav Mahler and collecting French antique clocks. He currently resides in Potts Point, in inner-city Sydney, and has a holiday home on the Hawkesbury River.\nKeating was formerly the patron of the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs in the National Rugby League.\nKeating's daughter, Katherine Keating, is a former adviser to former New South Wales Minister Craig Knowles as well as former New South Wales Premier Bob Carr. In 2019 she attracted press attention over her friendship with Ghislaine Maxwell, former partner of American financier and child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.\nPopular culture.\nIn 2005, \"Keating!\", a musical based on Keating's life and career, premiered at the Melbourne International Comedy Festival. It went on to run until 2010, winning a number of awards and being broadcast on ABC2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23769", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23769", "title": "Paolo Agostino", "text": "Italian composer and organist\nPaolo Agostino (or Agostini; Augustinus in Latin; c. 1583 \u2013 1629) was an Italian composer and organist of the early Baroque era. He was born perhaps at Vallerano, near Viterbo. He studied under Giovanni Bernardino Nanino, according to the dedication in the third and fourth books of his masses. Subsequently, he married Nanino's daughter.\nHe held a series of positions as organist and \"maestro di cappella\" (choirmaster) between 1607 and 1626 when he succeeded Vincenzo Ugolini as \"maestro\" of the Cappella Giulia's choir in St. Peter's Basilica.\nAll of his surviving works are sacred music, and most are written in the \"prima pratica\", the conservative polyphonic style of the late 16th century, although some of his motets use some of the new \"stile concertato\". He was a highly sophisticated contrapuntist, often using strict canonic techniques; in addition, he used colorful sonorities, changes of meter between sections, and colorful chromaticism, showing an acquaintanceship with contemporary secular practice as well as the work of the Venetian School. An \"Agnus Dei\" for eight voices is especially admired and was used as an example in Padre Martini's \"Saggio di contrappunto\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23770", "revid": "38005489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23770", "title": "Pavel Urysohn", "text": "Russian mathematician\nPavel Samuilovich Urysohn (in Russian: ; 3 February 1898 \u2013 17 August 1924) was a Soviet mathematician who is best known for his contributions in dimension theory, and for developing Urysohn's metrization theorem and Urysohn's lemma, both of which are fundamental results in topology. He also constructed what is now called the Urysohn universal space and his name is also commemorated in the terms Fr\u00e9chet\u2013Urysohn space, Menger\u2013Urysohn dimension and Urysohn integral equation. He and Pavel Alexandrov formulated the modern definition of compactness in 1923.\nBiography.\nPavel Urysohn was born in Odesa in 1898. His mother died when he was little, and he entered the care of his father and sister. The family moved to Moscow in 1912, where Urysohn completed his secondary education. While still at school, he worked at Shanyavsky University on an experimental project on X-ray radiation and was supervised by Petr Lazarev.\nAt that time, Urysohn's interests lay predominantly in physics. Urysohn enrolled at the Moscow State University in 1915 and earned his Bachelor of Science in 1919. There he attended the lectures of Nikolai Luzin and Dimitri Egorov, which made him turn his attention to mathematics. Between 1919 and 1921, Urysohn completed a doctorate on integral equations under the supervision of Luzin. He then became an assistant professor at Moscow University, and Egorov prompted him to start working in topology.\u00a0\nBy 1922, Urysohn had given topological definitions to curve, surface, and dimension, and his work attracted the attention of many prominent European mathematicians. In the summers of 1923 and 1924, Urysohn and his friend and fellow mathematician, Pavel Aleksandrov, traveled through France, Holland, and Germany, where they met David Hilbert, Felix Hausdorff, and L. E. J. Brouwer. The three European mathematicians were impressed by Urysohn's work and expressed their hopes that he would visit them again in subsequent years.\u00a0\nUrysohn and Aleksandrov were staying in a cottage in Brittany, France, when Urysohn drowned at the age of 26 while swimming off the coast nearby Batz-sur-Mer.\nUrysohn's sister, Lina Neiman, wrote a memoir about his life and childhood. Not being a mathematician, she included in the book memorial articles about his mathematical works by Pavel Alexandrov, Vadim Efremovich, Andrei Kolmogorov, Lazar Lyusternik, and Mark Krasnosel'skii.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23771", "revid": "5977441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23771", "title": "Program", "text": "Program (American English; also Commonwealth English in terms of computer programming and related activities) or programme (Commonwealth English in all other meanings), programmer, or programming may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23772", "revid": "1307746440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23772", "title": "Pluot", "text": "Hybrid fruit\nPluots, apriums, apriplums, plumcots, plumpicots, or pluclots are some of the hybrids between different \"Prunus\" species that are also called interspecific plums. Whereas plumcots and apriplums are first-generation hybrids between a plum parent (\"P. salicina\") and an apricot (\"P. armeniaca\"), pluots and apriums are later-generations. Both names \"plumcot\" and \"apriplum\" have been used for trees derived from a plum seed parent, and are therefore equivalent.\nPlumcots and apriplums.\nNatural plumcots (also called apriplums) have been known for hundreds of years from regions of the world that grow both plums and apricots from seed. The name \"plumcot\" was coined by Luther Burbank. The plumcot (apriplum) tree is propagated asexually, primarily by grafting or budding.\nPluots.\nPluots are later generations of complex hybrid between the Japanese plum, \"Prunus salicina\" (providing the greater amount of parentage), and the apricot, \"Prunus armeniaca\". The fruit's exterior has smooth skin closely resembling that of a plum. Pluots were developed in the late 20th century by Floyd Zaiger.\nPluot varieties include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApriums.\nFloyd Zaiger created the aprium, a hybrid cross between apricots and plums but more similar to apricots. Apriums are complex plum-apricot hybrids that show primarily apricot traits and flavor. Apriums resemble apricots on the outside. The flesh is usually dense and notable for its sweet taste due to a high content of fructose and other sugars. Apriums are usually only available early in the fruit season, like apricots and unlike pluots, which include some very late-ripening varieties. Aprium trees grow quickly and are smaller compared to other common home-grown apricots. The fruit is gold, with red coloration. Semi-mature fruit is hard and does not ripen if picked before completely mature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23773", "revid": "448944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23773", "title": "Pascal (programming language)", "text": "Programming language\nPascal is an imperative and procedural programming language, designed by Niklaus Wirth as a small, efficient language intended to encourage good programming practices using structured programming and data structuring. It is named after French mathematician, philosopher and physicist Blaise Pascal.\nPascal was developed on the pattern of the ALGOL 60 language. Wirth was involved in the process to improve the language as part of the ALGOL X efforts and proposed a version named ALGOL W. This was not accepted, and the ALGOL X process bogged down. In 1968, Wirth decided to abandon the ALGOL X process and further improve ALGOL W, releasing this as Pascal in 1970.\nOn top of ALGOL's scalars and arrays, Pascal enables defining complex datatypes and building dynamic and recursive data structures such as lists, trees and graphs. Pascal has strong typing on all objects, which means that one type of data cannot be converted to or interpreted as another without explicit conversions. Unlike C (and also unlike most other languages in the C-family), Pascal allows nested procedure definitions to any level of depth, and also allows most kinds of definitions and declarations inside subroutines (procedures and functions). A program is thus syntactically similar to a single procedure or function. This is similar to the block structure of ALGOL 60, but restricted from arbitrary block statements to just procedures and functions.\nPascal became very successful in the 1970s, notably on the burgeoning minicomputer market. Compilers were also available for many microcomputers as the field emerged in the late 1970s. It was widely used as a teaching language in university-level programming courses in the 1980s, and also used in production settings for writing commercial software during the same period. It was displaced by the C programming language during the late 1980s and early 1990s as UNIX-based systems became popular, and especially with the release of C++.\nA derivative named Object Pascal designed for object-oriented programming was developed in 1985. This was used by Apple Computer (for the Lisa and Macintosh machines) and Borland in the late 1980s and later developed into Delphi on the Microsoft Windows platform. Extensions to the Pascal concepts led to the languages Modula-2 and Oberon, both developed by Wirth.\nHistory.\nEarlier efforts.\nMuch of the history of computer language design during the 1960s can be traced to the ALGOL 60 language. ALGOL was developed during the 1950s with the explicit goal of being able to clearly describe algorithms. It included a number of features for structured programming that remain common in languages to this day.\nShortly after its introduction, in 1962 Wirth began working on his dissertation with Helmut Weber on the Euler programming language. Euler was based on ALGOL's syntax and many concepts but was not a derivative. Its primary goal was to add dynamic lists and types, allowing it to be used in roles similar to Lisp. The language was published in 1965.\nBy this time, a number of problems in ALGOL had been identified, notably the lack of a standardized string system. The group tasked with maintaining the language had begun the ALGOL X process to identify improvements, calling for submissions. Wirth and Tony Hoare submitted a conservative set of modifications to add strings and clean up some of the syntax. These were considered too minor to be worth using as the new standard ALGOL, so Wirth wrote a compiler for the language, which became named ALGOL W.\nThe ALGOL X efforts would go on to choose a much more complex language, ALGOL 68. The complexity of this language led to considerable difficulty producing high-performance compilers, and it was not widely used in the industry. This left an opening for newer languages.\nPascal.\nPascal was influenced by the ALGOL W efforts, with the explicit goals of teaching programming in a structured fashion and for the development of system software. A generation of students used Pascal as an introductory language in undergraduate courses. Other goals included providing a reliable and efficient tool for writing large programs, and bridging the canyon between scientific and commercial programming, as represented by the then-widespread languages Fortran and COBOL, with a general-purpose language.\nOne of the early successes for the language was the introduction of UCSD Pascal, a version that ran on a custom operating system that could be ported to different platforms. A key platform was the Apple II, where it saw widespread use as Apple Pascal. This led to Pascal becoming the primary high-level language used for development in the Apple Lisa, and later, the Macintosh. Parts of the original Macintosh operating system were hand-translated into Motorola 68000 assembly language from the Pascal source code.\nThe typesetting system TeX by Donald Knuth was written in WEB, the original literate programming system, based on DEC PDP-10 Pascal. Successful commercial applications like Adobe Photoshop were written in Macintosh Programmer's Workshop Pascal, while applications like Total Commander, Skype and Macromedia Captivate were written in Delphi (Object Pascal). Apollo Computer used Pascal as the systems programming language for its operating systems beginning in 1980.\nVariants of Pascal have also been used for everything from research projects to PC games and embedded systems. Newer Pascal compilers exist which are widely used.\nDialects.\nWirth's example compiler meant to propagate the language, the Pascal-P system, used a subset of the language designed to be the minimal subset of the language that could compile itself. The idea was that this could allow bootstrapping the compiler, which would then be extended to full Pascal language status. This was done with several compilers, but one notable exception was UCSD Pascal, which was based on Pascal-P2. It kept the subset status of the language based on the idea that this would run better on the new (then) microprocessors with limited memory. UCSD also converted the Pascal-P2 interpreter into a \"byte machine\", again, because it would be a better fit for byte oriented microprocessors.\nUCSD Pascal formed the basis of many systems, including Apple Pascal. Borland Pascal was not based on the UCSD codebase, but arrived during the popular period of UCSD and matched many of its features. This started the line that ended with Delphi Pascal and the compatible Open Source compiler FPC/Lazarus.\nThe ISO standard for Pascal, ISO 7185, was published in 1983 and was widely implemented and used on mainframes, minicomputers and IBM-PCs and compatibles from 16 bits to 32 bits. The two dialects of Pascal most in use towards the end of the 20th century and up until today are the ISO 7185 standard version and the Delphi/Turbo Pascal versions (of which the two Borland versions are mostly compatible with each other).\nThe source for much of the early history on Pascal can be found in the Pascal User's Group newsletters at:\nhttps://.\nObject Pascal.\nDuring work on the Lisa, Larry Tesler began corresponding with Wirth on the idea of adding object-oriented extensions to the language, to make Pascal a multi-paradigm programming language. This led initially to Clascal, introduced in 1983. As the Lisa program faded and was replaced by the Macintosh, a further version was created and named Object Pascal. This was introduced on the Mac in 1985 as part of the MacApp application framework, and became Apple's main development language into the early 1990s.\nThe Object Pascal extensions were added to Turbo Pascal with the release of version 5.5 in 1989. Over the years, Object Pascal became the basis of the Delphi system for Microsoft Windows, which is still used for developing Windows applications, and can cross-compile code to other systems. Free Pascal is an open source, cross-platform alternative with its own graphical IDE called Lazarus.\nImplementations.\nEarly compilers.\nThe first Pascal compiler was designed in Z\u00fcrich for the CDC 6000 series mainframe computer family. Niklaus Wirth reports that a first attempt to implement it in FORTRAN 66 in 1969 was unsuccessful due to FORTRAN 66's inadequacy to express complex data structures. The second attempt was implemented in a C-like language (Scallop by Max Engeli) and then translated by hand (by R. Schild) to Pascal itself for boot-strapping. It was operational by mid-1970. Many Pascal compilers since have been similarly self-hosting, that is, the compiler is itself written in Pascal, and the compiler is usually capable of recompiling itself when new features are added to the language, or when the compiler is to be ported to a new environment. The GNU Pascal compiler is one notable exception, being written in C.\nThe first successful port of the CDC Pascal compiler to another mainframe was completed by Welsh and Quinn at the Queen's University of Belfast (QUB) in 1972. The target was the International Computers Limited (ICL) 1900 series. This compiler, in turn, was the parent of the Pascal compiler for the Information Computer Systems (ICS) Multum minicomputer. The Multum port was developed \u2013 with a view to using Pascal as a systems programming language \u2013 by Findlay, Cupples, Cavouras and Davis, working at the Department of Computing Science in Glasgow University. It is thought that Multum Pascal, which was completed in the summer of 1973, may have been the first 16-bit implementation.\nA completely new compiler was completed by Welsh et al. at QUB in 1977. It offered a source-language diagnostic feature (incorporating profiling, tracing and type-aware formatted postmortem dumps) that was implemented by Findlay and Watt at Glasgow University. This implementation was ported in 1980 to the ICL 2900 series by a team based at Southampton University and Glasgow University. The Standard Pascal Model Implementation was also based on this compiler, having been adapted, by Welsh and Hay at Manchester University in 1984, to check rigorously for conformity to the BSI 6192/ISO 7185 Standard and to generate code for a portable abstract machine.\nThe first Pascal compiler written in North America was constructed at the University of Illinois under Donald B. Gillies for the PDP-11 and generated native machine code. Microsoft had Pascal compilers for IBM PCs, see Microsoft Pascal.\nThe Pascal-P system.\nTo propagate the language rapidly, a compiler \"porting kit\" was created in Z\u00fcrich that included a compiler that generated so called p-code for a \"virtual\" stack machine, i.e., code that lends itself to reasonably efficient interpretation, along with an interpreter for that code \u2013 the \"Pascal-P\" system. The P-system compilers were named Pascal-P1, Pascal-P2, Pascal-P3, and Pascal-P4. Pascal-P1 was the first version, and Pascal-P4 was the last to come from Z\u00fcrich. The version termed Pascal-P1 was coined after the fact for the many different sources for Pascal-P that existed. The compiler was redesigned to enhance portability, and issued as Pascal-P2. This code was later enhanced to become Pascal-P3, with an intermediate code backward compatible with Pascal-P2, and Pascal-P4, which was not backward compatible.\nThe Pascal-P4 compiler\u2013interpreter can still be run and compiled on systems compatible with original Pascal (as can Pascal-P2). However, it only accepts a subset of the Pascal language.\nPascal-P5, created outside the Z\u00fcrich group, accepts the full Pascal language and includes ISO 7185 compatibility.\nPascal-P6 is a follow on to Pascal-P5 that along with other features, aims to be a compiler for specific CPUs, including AMD64.\nUCSD Pascal branched off Pascal-P2, where Kenneth Bowles used it to create the interpretive UCSD p-System. It was one of three operating systems available at the launch of the original IBM Personal Computer. UCSD Pascal used an intermediate code based on byte values, and thus was one of the earliest \"bytecode compilers\". Apple Pascal was released in 1979 for the Apple II and Apple III computer systems. It was an implementation of, or largely based on, UCSD Pascal. Pascal-P1 through Pascal-P4 were not, but rather based on the CDC 6600 60-bit word length.\nA compiler based on the Pascal-P4 compiler, which created native binary object files, was released for the IBM System/370 mainframe computer by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission; it was named the \"AAEC Pascal 8000 Compiler\" after the abbreviation of the name of the commission.\nObject Pascal and Turbo Pascal.\nApple Computer created its own Lisa Pascal for the Lisa Workshop in 1982, and ported the compiler to the Apple Macintosh and MPW in 1985. In 1985 Larry Tesler, in consultation with Niklaus Wirth, defined Object Pascal and these extensions were incorporated in both the Lisa Pascal and Mac Pascal compilers.\nIn the 1980s, Anders Hejlsberg wrote the Blue Label Pascal compiler for the Nascom-2. A reimplementation of this compiler for the IBM PC was marketed under the names Compas Pascal and PolyPascal before it was acquired by Borland and renamed \"Turbo Pascal\".\nTurbo Pascal became hugely popular, thanks to an aggressive pricing strategy, having one of the first full-screen IDEs, and very fast turnaround time (just seconds to compile, link, and run). It was written and highly optimized entirely in assembly language, making it smaller and faster than much of the competition.\nIn 1986, Anders ported Turbo Pascal to the Macintosh and incorporated Apple's Object Pascal extensions into Turbo Pascal. These extensions were then added back into the PC version of Turbo Pascal for version 5.5. At the same time Microsoft also implemented the Object Pascal compiler. Turbo Pascal 5.5 had a large influence on the Pascal community, which began concentrating mainly on the IBM PC in the late 1980s. Many PC hobbyists in search of a structured replacement for BASIC used this product. It also began to be adopted by professional developers. Around the same time a number of concepts were imported from C to let Pascal programmers use the C-based application programming interface (API) of Microsoft Windows directly. These extensions included null-terminated strings, pointer arithmetic, function pointers, an address-of operator, and unsafe typecasts.\nTurbo Pascal and other derivatives with \"unit\" or \"module\" structures are modular programming languages. However, it does not provide a nested module concept or qualified import and export of specific symbols.\nOther variants.\nSuper Pascal adds non-numeric labels, a return statement and expressions as names of types.\nTMT Pascal was the first Borland-compatible compiler for 32-bit MS-DOS compatible protected mode, OS/2, and Win32. It extends the language with function and operator overloading.\nThe universities of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, Z\u00fcrich, Karlsruhe, and Wuppertal developed the \"Pascal-SC\" and \"Pascal-XSC\" (\"Extensions for Scientific Computation\") compilers, aimed at programming numerical computations. Development for Pascal-SC started in 1978 supporting ISO 7185 Pascal level 0, but level 2 support was added at a later stage. Pascal-SC originally targeted the Z80 processor, but was later rewritten for DOS (x86) and 68000. Pascal-XSC has at various times been ported to Unix (Linux, SunOS, HP-UX, AIX) and Microsoft/IBM (DOS with EMX, OS/2, Windows) operating systems. It operates by generating intermediate C source code which is then compiled to a native executable. Some of the Pascal-SC language extensions have been adopted by GNU Pascal.\nPascal Sol was designed around 1983 by a French team to implement a Unix-like system named Sol. It was standard Pascal level-1 (with parameterized array bounds) but the definition allowed alternative keywords and predefined identifiers in French and the language included a few extensions to ease system programming (e.g. an equivalent to lseek). The Sol team later on moved to the ChorusOS project to design a distributed operating system.\nIP Pascal is an implementation of the Pascal programming language using Micropolis DOS, but was moved rapidly to CP/M-80 running on the Z80. It was moved to the 80386 machine types in 1994, and exists today as Windows XP and Linux implementations. In 2008, the system was brought up to a new level and the resulting language termed \"Pascaline\" (after Pascal's calculator). It includes objects, namespace controls, dynamic arrays, and many other extensions, and generally features the same functionality and type protection as C#. It is the only such implementation that is also compatible with the original Pascal implementation, which is standardized as ISO 7185.\nLanguage constructs.\nPascal, in its original form, is a purely procedural language and includes the traditional array of ALGOL-like control structures with reserved words such as codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, and codice_6, ranging on a single statement or a codice_7-codice_8 statements block. Pascal also has data structuring constructs not included in the original ALGOL 60 types, like records, variants, pointers, enumerations, and sets and procedure pointers. Such constructs were in part inherited or inspired from Simula 67, ALGOL 68, Niklaus Wirth's own ALGOL W and suggestions by C. A. R. Hoare.\nPascal programs start with the codice_9 keyword with a list of external file descriptors as parameters&lt;ref name=\"iso/iec 7185:1990 6.10\"&gt;http:// 6.10&lt;/ref&gt; (not required in Turbo Pascal etc.); then follows the main block bracketed by the codice_7 and codice_8 keywords. Semicolons separate statements, and the full stop (i.e., a period) ends the whole program (or \"unit\"). Letter case is ignored in Pascal source.\nHere is an example of the source code in use for a very simple \"Hello, World!\" program:\nprogram HelloWorld(output);\nbegin\n WriteLn('Hello, World!')\n {No \";\" is required after the last statement of a block -\nend.\nData types.\nA Type Declaration in Pascal is used to define a range of values which a variable of that type is capable of storing. It also defines a set of operations that are permissible to be performed on variables of that type. The predefined types are:\nThe range of values allowed for the basic types (except Boolean) is implementation defined. Functions are provided for some data conversions. For conversion of codice_12 to codice_13, the following functions are available: codice_14 (using rounding half away from zero) and codice_15 (rounds towards zero).\nThe programmer has the freedom to define other commonly used data types (e.g. byte, string, etc.) in terms of the predefined types using Pascal's type declaration facility, for example\ntype\n byte = 0..255;\n signed_byte = -128..127;\n string = packed array[1..255] of char;\nOften-used types like byte and string are already defined in many implementations.\nNormally the system will use a word to store the data. For instance, the type may be stored in a machine integer - 32 bits perhaps - rather than an 8-bit value. Pascal does not contain language elements that allow the basic storage types to be defined more granularly. This capability was included in a number of Pascal extensions and follow-on languages, while others, like Modula-2, expanded the built-in set to cover most machine data types like 16-bit integers.\nThe keyword tells the compiler to use the most efficient method of storage for the structured data types: sets, arrays and records, rather than using one word for each element. Packing may slow access on machines that do not offer easy access to parts of a word.\nSubrange types.\nSubranges of any ordinal data type (any simple type except real) can also be made:\nvar\n x : 1..10;\n y : 'a'..'z';\nSet types.\nIn contrast with other programming languages from its time, Pascal supports a set type:\nvar\n Set1 : set of 1..10;\n Set2 : set of 'a'..'z';\nA set is a fundamental concept for modern mathematics, and they may be used in many algorithms. Such a feature is useful and may be faster than an equivalent construct in a language that does not support sets. For example, for many Pascal compilers:\nif i in [5..10] then ...\nexecutes faster than:\nif (i &gt; 4) and (i &lt; 11) then ...\nSets of non-contiguous values can be particularly useful, in terms of both performance and readability:\nif i in [0..3, 7, 9, 12..15] then ...\nFor these examples, which involve sets over small domains, the improved performance is usually achieved by the compiler representing set variables as bit vectors. The set operators can then be implemented efficiently as bitwise machine code operations.\nRecord types.\nAn example of a Pascal record type:\ntype\n car = record\n length: integer;\n width: integer\n end;\nAn example of a variant record type:\ntype\n Shape = (Circle, Square, Triangle);\n Dimensions = record\n case Figure: Shape of \n Circle: (Diameter: real);\n Square: (Width: real);\n Triangle: (Side: real; Angle1, Angle2: 0..360)\n end;\nVariant records allow several fields of the record to overlap each other to save space.\nType declarations.\nTypes can be defined from other types using type declarations:\ntype\n x = integer;\n y = x;\nFurther, complex types can be constructed from simple types:\ntype\n a = array[1..10] of integer;\n b = record\n x : integer;\n end;\n c = file of a;\nFurther, complex types can be constructed from other complex types recursively:\nconst\n Jack = 11;\n Queen = 12;\n King = 13;\n Ace = 14;\ntype \n valueType = 2..Ace; \n suitType = club, diamond, heart, spade;\n cardType = record\n suit: suitType; \n value: valueType;\n end;\n deckType = array [1..52] of cardType;\n person = record\n surname: packed array [1..20] of char; \n age: integer;\n end;\n table = record \n hands: array [1..3] of deckType;\n players: array [1..4] of person;\n end;\nFile type.\ntype\n a = file of integer;\n b = record\n x : integer;\n y : char\n end;\n c = file of b;\nAs shown in the example above, Pascal files are sequences of components. Every file has a buffer variable which is denoted by \"f^\". The procedures \"get\" (for reading) and \"put\" (for writing) move the buffer variable to the next element. Read is introduced such that \"read(f, x)\" is the same as \"x := f^; get(f);\". Write is introduced such that \"write(f, x)\" is the same as \"f^ := x; put(f);\" The type is predefined as file of char. While the buffer variable could be used for inspecting the next character to be used (check for a digit before reading an integer), this leads to serious problems with interactive programs in early implementations, but was solved later with the \"lazy I/O\" concept, which waits until the file buffer variable is actually accessed before performing file operations.\nPointer types.\nPascal supports the use of pointers:\ntype\n pNode = ^Node;\n Node = record\n a : integer;\n b : char;\n c : pNode \n end;\nvar\n NodePtr : pNode;\n IntPtr : ^integer;\nHere the variable \"NodePtr\" is a pointer to the data type \"Node\", a record. Pointers can be used before they are declared. This is a forward declaration, an exception to the rule that things must be declared before they are used.\nTo create a new record and assign the value \"10\" and character \"A\" to the fields \"a\" and \"b\" in the record, and to initialise the pointer \"c\" to the null pointer (\"NIL\" in Pascal), the statements would be:\nnew(NodePtr);\nNodePtr^.a := 10;\nNodePtr^.b := 'A';\nNodePtr^.c := nil;\nThis could also be done using the codice_16 statement, as follows:\nnew(NodePtr);\nwith NodePtr^ do\nbegin\n a := 10;\n b := 'A';\n c := nil\nend;\nInside of the scope of the \"with\" statement, a and b refer to the subfields of the record pointer \"NodePtr\" and not to the record Node or the pointer type pNode.\nLinked lists, stacks and queues can be created by including a pointer type field (c) in the record.\nUnlike many languages that feature pointers, Pascal only allows pointers to reference dynamically created variables that are anonymous, and does not allow them to reference standard static or local variables. Pointers also must have an associated type, and a pointer to one type is not compatible with a pointer to another type (e.g. a pointer to a char is not compatible with a pointer to an integer). This helps eliminate the type security issues inherent with other pointer implementations, particularly those used for PL/I or C. It also removes some risks caused by dangling pointers, but the ability to dynamically deallocate referenced space by using the \"dispose\" function (which has the same effect as the \"free\" library function found in C) means that the risk of dangling pointers has not been eliminated as it has in languages such as Java and C#, which provide automatic garbage collection (but which do not eliminate the related problem of memory leaks).\nSome of these restrictions can be lifted in newer dialects.\nControl structures.\nPascal is a structured programming language, meaning that the flow of control is structured into standard statements, usually without 'goto' commands.\nwhile a &lt;&gt; b do WriteLn('Waiting');\n else WriteLn('Condition not met');\n WriteLn('Iteration: ', i);\nrepeat\n a := a + 1\nuntil a = 10;\ncase i of\n 0 : Write('zero');\n 1 : Write('one');\n 2 : Write('two');\n 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10: Write('?')\nend;\nProcedures and functions.\nPascal structures programs into procedures and functions. Generally, a procedure is used for its side effects, whereas a function is used for its return value.\nprogram Printing(output);\nvar i : integer;\nprocedure PrintAnInteger(j : integer);\nbegin\nend;\nfunction triple(x: integer): integer;\nbegin\n triple := x * 3\nend;\n PrintAnInteger(i);\n PrintAnInteger(triple(i))\nend.\nProcedures and functions can be nested to any depth, and the 'program' construct is the logical outermost block.\nBy default, parameters are passed by value. If 'var' precedes a parameter's name, it is passed by reference.\nEach procedure or function can have its own declarations of goto labels, constants, types, variables, and other procedures and functions, which must all be in that order.\nThis ordering requirement was originally intended to allow efficient single-pass compilation. However, in some dialects (such as Delphi) the strict ordering requirement of declaration sections has been relaxed.\nSemicolons as statement separators.\nPascal adopted many language syntax features from the ALGOL language, including the use of a semicolon as a statement separator. This is in contrast to other languages, such as PL/I and C, which use the semicolon as a statement terminator. No semicolon is needed before the codice_8 keyword of a record type declaration, a block, or a \"case\" statement; before the codice_18 keyword of a repeat statement; and before the codice_3 keyword of an \"if\" statement.\nThe presence of an extra semicolon was not permitted in early versions of Pascal. However, the addition of ALGOL-like empty statements in the 1973 \"Revised Report\" and later changes to the language in ISO 7185:1983 now allow for optional semicolons in most of these cases. A semicolon is still not permitted immediately before the codice_3 keyword in an \"if\" statement, because the codice_3 follows a single statement, not a statement sequence. In the case of nested ifs, a semicolon cannot be used to avoid the dangling else problem (where the inner if does not have an else, but the outer if does) by putatively terminating the nested if with a semicolon \u2013 this instead terminates both if clauses. Instead, an explicit codice_7...codice_8 block must be used.\nResources.\nCompilers and interpreters.\nSeveral Pascal compilers and interpreters are available for general use:\nStandards.\nISO/IEC 7185:1990 Pascal.\nIn 1983, the language was standardized in the international standard IEC/ISO 7185 and several local country-specific standards, including the American ANSI/IEEE770X3.97-1983, and ISO 7185:1983. These two standards differed only in that the ISO standard included a \"level 1\" extension for conformant arrays (an array where the boundaries of the array are not known until run time), where ANSI did not allow for this extension to the original (Wirth version) language. In 1989, ISO 7185 was revised (ISO 7185:1990) to correct various errors and ambiguities found in the original document.\nThe ISO 7185 was stated to be a clarification of Wirth's 1974 language as detailed by the User Manual and Report [Jensen and Wirth], but was also notable for adding \"Conformant Array Parameters\" as a level 1 to the standard, level 0 being Pascal without conformant arrays. This addition was made at the request of C. A. R. Hoare, and with the approval of Niklaus Wirth. The precipitating cause was that Hoare wanted to create a Pascal version of the (NAG) Numerical Algorithms Library, which had originally been written in FORTRAN, and found that it was not possible to do so without an extension that would allow array parameters of varying size. Similar considerations motivated the inclusion in ISO 7185 of the facility to specify the parameter types of procedural and functional parameters.\nNiklaus Wirth himself referred to the 1974 language as \"the Standard\", for example, to differentiate it from the machine specific features of the CDC 6000 compiler. This language was documented in \"The Pascal Report\", the second part of the \"Pascal users manual and report\".\nOn the large machines (mainframes and minicomputers) Pascal originated on, the standards were generally followed. On the IBM PC, they were not. On IBM\u00a0PCs, the Borland standards Turbo Pascal and Delphi have the greatest number of users. Thus, it is typically important to understand whether a particular implementation corresponds to the original Pascal language, or a Borland dialect of it.\nThe IBM\u00a0PC versions of the language began to differ with the advent of UCSD Pascal, an interpreted implementation that featured several extensions to the language, along with several omissions and changes. Many UCSD language features survive today, including in Borland's dialect.\nISO/IEC 10206:1990 Extended Pascal.\nIn 1990, an extended Pascal standard was created as ISO/IEC 10206, which is identical in technical content&lt;ref name=\"ISO/ANSI identical\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; to IEEE/ANSI 770X3.160-1989\nAs of 2019, Support of Extended Pascal in FreePascal Compiler is planned.\nThe key feature of Extended Pascal is Modularity and Separate Compilation. Extended Pascal Application source code files can be separated into one 'program file' and multiple 'module files'. Each module file has their own type, constant, variable and procedure/function definitions and programmers can change the order of these 'entity definition' areas. Also, there are some module-specific definition areas called 'initialization' areas with the statement codice_24 and 'finalization' areas with the statement codice_25, which can manage the initial state and memory allocation of entities inside the module. By inserting codice_26 statements between module/program declaration and definition areas, modules can share their own entities with other modules (and programs).\nOther major features include variable binding, collections of similar types (Schemata), comprehensive string facilities, complex number type support, codice_27 keyword for default branch flow in codice_6 statement, and short circuit boolean evaluation.\nVariations.\nNiklaus Wirth's Z\u00fcrich version of Pascal was issued outside ETH in two basic forms: the CDC 6000 compiler source, and a porting kit called Pascal-P system. The Pascal-P compiler left out several features of the full language that were not required to bootstrap the compiler. For example, procedures and functions used as parameters, undiscriminated variant records, packing, dispose, interprocedural gotos and other features of the full compiler were omitted.\nUCSD Pascal, under Professor Kenneth Bowles, was based on the Pascal-P2 kit, and consequently shared several of the Pascal-P language restrictions. UCSD Pascal was later adopted as Apple Pascal, and continued through several versions there. Although UCSD Pascal actually expanded the subset Pascal in the Pascal-P kit by adding back standard Pascal constructs, it was still not a complete standard installation of Pascal.\nIn the early 1990s, Alan Burns and Geoff Davies developed Pascal-FC, an extension to Pl/0 (from the Niklaus' book \"Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs\"). Several constructs were added to use Pascal-FC as a teaching tool for Concurrent Programming (such as semaphores, monitors, channels, remote-invocation and resources). To be able to demonstrate concurrency, the compiler output (a kind of P-code) could then be executed on a virtual machine. This virtual machine not only simulated a normal \u2013 fair \u2013 environment, but could also simulate extreme conditions (unfair mode).\nBorland-like Pascal compilers.\nBorland's Turbo Pascal, written by Anders Hejlsberg, was written in assembly language independent of UCSD and the Z\u00fcrich compilers. However, it adopted much of the same subset and extensions as the UCSD compiler. This is probably because the UCSD system was the most common Pascal system suitable for developing applications on the resource-limited microprocessor systems available at that time.\nThe shrink-wrapped Turbo Pascal version 3 and later incarnations, including Borland's Object Pascal and Delphi and non-Borland near-compatibles became popular with programmers including shareware authors, and so the SWAG library of Pascal code features a large amount of code written with such versions as Delphi in mind.\nSoftware products (compilers, and IDE/Rapid Application Development (RAD)) in this category:\nReception.\nPascal generated a wide variety of responses in the computing community, both critical and complimentary.\nEarly criticism.\nWirth's initial definition of the language was widely criticized. In particular, Nico Habermann commented in his \"Critical Comments on the Programming Language Pascal\" (1973) that many of its constructs were poorly defined, in particular for data types, ranges, structures, and goto. Later, Brian Kernighan, who popularized the C language, outlined his criticisms of Pascal in 1981 in his article \"Why Pascal is Not My Favorite Programming Language\". The most serious problem Kernighan described was that array sizes and string lengths were part of the type, so it was not possible to write a function that would accept variable-length arrays or even strings as parameters. This made it unfeasible to write, for example, a sorting library. Kernighan also criticized the unpredictable order of evaluation of Boolean expressions, poor library support, and lack of static variables, and raised a number of smaller issues. Also, he stated that the language did not provide any simple constructs to \"escape\" (knowingly and forcibly ignore) restrictions and limitations. More general complaints from other sources noted that the scope of declarations was not clearly defined in the original language definition, which sometimes had serious consequences when using forward declarations to define pointer types, or when record declarations led to mutual recursion, or when an identifier may or may not have been used in an enumeration list. Another difficulty was that, like ALGOL 60, the language did not allow procedures or functions passed as parameters to predefine the expected type of their parameters.\nRising popularity in the 1970s and 1980s.\nIn the two decades after 1975, Pascal gained increasing attention and became a major programming language for important platforms (including Apple II, Apple III, Apple Lisa, Commodore systems, Z-80-based machines and IBM PC) due to the availability of UCSD Pascal and Turbo Pascal.\nDespite initial criticisms, Pascal continued to evolve, and most of Kernighan's points do not apply to versions of the language which were enhanced to be suitable for commercial product development, such as Borland's Turbo Pascal. As Kernighan predicted in his article, most of the extensions to fix these issues were incompatible from compiler to compiler. Since the early 1990s, however, most of the varieties seem condensed into two categories: ISO and Borland-like. Extended Pascal addresses many of these early criticisms. It supports variable-length strings, variable initialization, separate compilation, short-circuit Boolean operators, and default (codice_27) clauses for case statements.\nSome of the problems arising from the differences in the implementations of Pascal were later partly solved by the advent of Free Pascal, which supports several dialects with mode directives.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23776", "revid": "39869343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23776", "title": "Paint", "text": "Pigment applied over a surface that dries as a solid film\nPaint is a material or mixture that, when applied to a solid material and allowed to dry, adds a film-like layer. As art, this is used to create an image or images known as a painting. Paint can be made in many colors and types. Most paints are either oil-based or water-based, and each has distinct characteristics.\nPrimitive forms of paint were used tens of thousands of years ago in cave paintings.\nClean-up solvents are also different for water-based paint than oil-based paint. Water-based paints and oil-based paints will cure differently based on the outside ambient temperature of the object being painted (such as a house).\nHistory.\nPaint was used in some of the earliest known human artworks. Some cave paintings drawn with red or yellow ochre, hematite, manganese oxide, and charcoal may have been made by early \"Homo sapiens\" as long as 40,000 years ago. Paint may be even older. In 2003 and 2004, South African archeologists reported finds in Blombos Cave of a 100,000-year-old human-made ochre-based mixture that could have been used like paint. Further excavation in the same cave resulted in the 2011 report of a complete toolkit for grinding pigments and making a primitive paint-like substance.\nThe earliest applications of paint served purely ornamental purposes. Consequently, pigment lacking any adhesive agent\u2014composed mainly of iron oxide was employed in prehistoric cave art around the 15,000s BC in parts of Asia.\nInterior walls at the 5,000-year-old Ness of Brodgar have been found to incorporate individual stones painted in yellows, reds, and oranges, using ochre pigment made of haematite mixed with animal fat, milk or eggs.\nAncient colored walls at Dendera, Egypt, which were exposed for years to the elements, still possess their brilliant color, as vivid as when they were painted about 2,000 years ago. The Egyptians mixed their colors with a gummy substance and applied them separately from each other without any blending or mixture. They appear to have used six colors: white, black, blue, red, yellow, and green. They first covered the area entirely with white, then traced the design in black, leaving out the lights of the ground color. They used minium for red, generally of a dark tinge.\nThe oldest known oil paintings are Buddhist murals created c.\u2009650 AD. The works are located in cave-like rooms carved from the cliffs of Afghanistan's Bamiyan Valley, \"using walnut and poppy seed oils.\" Pliny mentions some painted ceilings in his day in the town of Ardea, which had been made before the foundation of Rome. After the lapse of so many centuries, he expressed great surprise and admiration at their freshness.\nIn the 13th century, oil was used to detail tempera paintings. In the 14th century, Cennino Cennini described a painting technique utilizing tempera painting covered by light layers of oil. The slow-drying properties of organic oils were commonly known to early European painters. However, the difficulty in acquiring and working the materials meant that they were rarely used (and indeed, the slow drying was seen as a disadvantage). The paint was made with the yolk of eggs, and therefore, the substance would harden and adhere to the surface it was applied to. The pigment was made from plants, sand, and different soils. Most paints use either oil or water as a base (the diluent, solvent, or vehicle for the pigment).\nThe Flemish-trained or influenced Antonello da Messina, who Vasari wrongly credited with the introduction of oil paint to Italy, does seem to have improved the formula by adding litharge, or lead (II) oxide. A still extant example of 17th-century house oil painting is Ham House in Surrey, England, where a primer was used along with several undercoats and an elaborate decorative overcoat; the pigment and oil mixture would have been ground into a paste with a mortar and pestle. The painters did the process by hand, which exposed them to lead poisoning due to the white-lead powder.\nIn 1718, Marshall Smith invented a \"Machine or Engine for the Grinding of Colors\" in England. It is not known precisely how it operated, but it was a device that dramatically increased the efficiency of pigment grinding. Soon, a company called Emerton and Manby was advertising exceptionally low-priced paints that had been ground with labor-saving technology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One Pound of Colour ground in a Horse-Mill will paint twelve Yards of Work, whereas Colour ground any other Way, will not do half that Quantity.\nBy the proper onset of the Industrial Revolution, in the mid-18th century, paint was being ground in steam-powered mills, and an alternative to lead-based pigments had been found in a white derivative of zinc oxide. Interior house painting increasingly became the norm as the 19th century progressed, both for decorative reasons and because the paint was effective in preventing the walls rotting from damp. Linseed oil was also increasingly used as an inexpensive binder.\nIn 1866, Sherwin-Williams in the United States opened as a large paint-maker and invented a paint that could be used from the tin without preparation.\nIt was only when the stimulus of World War II created a shortage of linseed oil in the supply market that artificial resins, or alkyds, were invented. Cheap and easy to make, they held the color well and lasted for a long time.\nTypes.\nPigmented.\nThrough the 20th century, paints used pigments, typically suspended in a liquid.\nStructural.\nIn the 21st century, \"paints\" that used structural color were created. Aluminium flakes dotted with smaller aluminium nanoparticles could be tuned to produce arbitrary colors by adjusting the nanoparticle sizes rather than picking/mixing minerals to do so. These paints weighed a tiny fraction of the weight of conventional paints, a particular advantage in air and road vehicles. They reflect heat from sunlight and do not break down outdoors. Preliminary experiments suggest it can reduce temperatures by 20 to 30 degrees Fahrenheit vs conventional paint. Its constituents are also less toxic.\nMaking the paint starts with a thin double-sided mirror. The researchers deposited metallic nanoparticles on both sides of the sheet. Large sheets were ground to produce small flakes.\nComponents.\nVehicle.\nThe binder is the film-forming component of paint, and the vehicle is composed of binder; if it is necessary to thin it with a diluent like solvent or water, it is a combination of binder and diluent. In this case, once the paint has dried or cured very nearly all of the diluent has evaporated and only the binder is left on the coated surface. Thus, an important quantity in coatings formulation is the \"vehicle solids\", sometimes called the \"resin solids\" of the formula. This is the proportion of the wet coating weight that is binder, i.e., the polymer backbone of the film that will remain after drying or curing is complete. The volume of paint after it has dried, therefore only leaving the solids, is expressed as the volume solid.\nBinder or film former.\nThe binder is the only component that is always present among all the various types of formulations. Many binders must be thick enough to be applied and thinned. The type of thinner, if present, varies with the binder.\nThe binder imparts properties such as gloss, durability, flexibility, and toughness.\nBinders include synthetic or natural resins such as alkyds, acrylics, vinyl-acrylics, vinyl acetate/ethylene (VAE), polyurethanes, polyesters, melamine resins, epoxy, silanes or siloxanes or oils.\nBinders can be categorized according to the mechanisms for film formation. Thermoplastic mechanisms include drying and coalescence. Drying refers to simply evaporating the solvent or thinner to leave a coherent film behind. Coalescence refers to a mechanism that involves drying followed by actual interpenetration and fusion of formerly discrete particles. Thermoplastic film-forming mechanisms are sometimes described as \"thermoplastic cure,\" but that is a misnomer because no chemical curing reactions are required to knit the film. On the other hand, thermosetting mechanisms are true curing mechanisms involving chemical reaction(s) among the polymers that make up the binder.\nThermoplastic Mechanisms.\nSome films are formed by simply cooling the binder. For example, encaustic or wax paints are liquid when warm, and harden upon cooling. In many cases, they re-soften or liquify if reheated.\nPaints that dry by solvent evaporation and contain the solid binder dissolved in a solvent are known as lacquers. A solid film forms when the solvent evaporates. Because no chemical crosslinking is involved, the film can re-dissolve in solvent; lacquers are unsuitable for applications where chemical resistance is important. Classic nitrocellulose lacquers fall into this category, as do non-grain raising stains composed of dyes dissolved in solvent. Performance varies by formulation, but lacquers generally tend to have better UV resistance and lower corrosion resistance than comparable systems that cure by polymerization or coalescence.\nThe paint type known as Emulsion in the UK and Latex in the United States is a water-borne dispersion of sub-micrometer polymer particles. These terms in their respective countries cover all paints that use synthetic polymers such as acrylic, vinyl acrylic (PVA), styrene acrylic, etc. as binders. The term \"latex\" in the context of paint in the United States simply means an aqueous dispersion; latex rubber from the rubber tree is not an ingredient. These dispersions are prepared by emulsion polymerization. Such paints cure by a process called coalescence where first the water and then the trace, or coalescing, solvent, evaporate and draw together and soften the binder particles and fuse them together into irreversibly bound networked structures, so that the paint cannot redissolve in the solvent/water that originally carried it. The residual surfactants in paint, as well as hydrolytic effects with some polymers cause the paint to remain susceptible to softening and, over time, degradation by water. The general term of latex paint is usually used in the United States, while the term emulsion paint is used for the same products in the UK, and the term latex paint is not used at all.\nThermosetting Mechanisms.\nPaints that cure by polymerization are generally one- or two-package coatings that polymerize by way of a chemical reaction and cure into a cross-linked film. Depending on composition, they may need to dry first by evaporation of solvent. Classic two-package epoxies or polyurethanes would fall into this category.\nThe \"drying oils\", counter-intuitively, cure by a crosslinking reaction even if they are not put through an oven cycle and seem to dry in air. The film formation mechanism of the simplest examples involves the first evaporation of solvents followed by a reaction with oxygen from the environment over a period of days, weeks, and even months to create a crosslinked network. Classic alkyd enamels would fall into this category. Oxidative cure coatings are catalyzed by metal complex driers such as cobalt naphthenate though cobalt octoate is more common.\nRecent environmental requirements restrict the use of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and alternative means of curing have been developed, generally for industrial purposes. UV curing paints, for example, enable formulation with very low amounts of solvent, or even none at all. This can be achieved because of the monomers and oligomers used in the coating have relatively very low molecular weight, and are therefore low enough in viscosity to enable good fluid flow without the need for additional thinner. If solvent is present in significant amounts, generally it is mostly evaporated first and then crosslinking is initiated by ultraviolet light. Similarly, powder coatings contain no solvent. Flow and cure are produced by the heating of the substrate after electrostatic application of the dry powder.\nCombination mechanisms.\nSo-called \"catalyzed\" lacquers\" or \"crosslinking latex\" coatings are designed to form films by a combination of methods: classic drying plus a curing reaction that benefits from the catalyst. There are paints called plastisols/organosols, which are made by blending PVC granules with a plasticiser. These are stoved and the mix coalesces.\nDiluent or solvent or thinner.\nThe main purposes of the diluent are to dissolve the polymer and adjust the viscosity of the paint. It is volatile and does not become part of the paint film. It also controls flow and application properties, and in some cases can affect the stability of the paint while in liquid state. Its main function is as the carrier for the non-volatile components. To spread heavier oils (for example, linseed) as in oil-based interior house paint, a thinner oil is required. These volatile substances impart their properties temporarily\u2014once the solvent has evaporated, the remaining paint is fixed to the surface.\nThis component is optional: some paints have no diluent.\nWater is the main diluent for water-borne paints, even the co-solvent types.\nSolvent-borne, also called oil-based, paints can have various combinations of organic solvents as the diluent \u2014 often referred to as paint thinner \u2014 including aliphatics, aromatics, alcohols, ketones and white spirit. Specific examples are organic solvents such as petroleum distillate, esters, glycol ethers, and the like. Sometimes volatile low-molecular weight synthetic resins also serve as diluents.\nPigment, dye and filler.\nPigments are solid particles or flakes incorporated in the paint, usually to contribute color to the paint film. Pigments impart color by selective absorption of certain wavelengths of light and/or by scattering or reflecting light. The particle size of the pigment is critical to the light-scattering mechanism. The size of such particles can be measured with a Hegman gauge. Dyes, on the other hand, are dissolve in the paint and impart color only by the selective absorption mechanism. Paints can be formulated with only pigments, only dyes, both, or neither.\nPigments can also be used to give the paint special physical or optical properties, as opposed to imparting color, in which case they are called functional pigments. Fillers or extenders are an important class of the functional pigments. These are typically used to build film thickness and/or reduce the cost of the paint, or they can impart toughness and texture to the film. Fillers are usually cheap and inert materials, such as diatomaceous earth, talc, lime, barytes, clay, etc. Floor paints that must resist abrasion may contain fine quartz sand as a filler. \nSometimes, a single pigment can serve both decorative and functional purposes. For example some decorative pigments protect the substrate from the harmful effects of ultraviolet light by making the paint opaque to these wavelengths, i.e. by selectively absorbing them. These hiding pigments include titanium dioxide, phthalo blue, red iron oxide, and many others.\nSome pigments are toxic, such as the lead pigments that are used in lead paint. Paint manufacturers began replacing white lead pigments with titanium white (titanium dioxide), before lead was banned in paint for residential use in 1978 by the US Consumer Product Safety Commission. The titanium dioxide used in most paints today is often coated with silica/alumina/zirconium for various reasons, such as better exterior durability, or better hiding performance (opacity) promoted by more optimal spacing within the paint film.\nMicaceous iron oxide (MIO) is another alternative to lead for protection of steel, giving more protection against water and light damage than most paints. When MIO pigments are ground into fine particles, most cleave into shiny layers, which reflect light, thus minimising UV degradation and protecting the resin binder. Most pigments used in paint tend to be spherical, but lamellar pigments, such as glass flake and MIO have overlapping plates, which impede the path of water molecules. For optimum performance MIO should have a high content of thin flake-like particles resembling mica. ISO 10601 sets two levels of MIO content. MIO is often derived from a form of hematite.\nPigments can be classified as either natural or synthetic. Natural pigments are taken from the earth or plant sources and include colorants such as metal oxides or carbon black, or various clays, calcium carbonate, mica, silicas, and talcs. Synthetics include a host of colorants created in the lab as well as engineered molecules, calcined clays, blanc fixe, precipitated calcium carbonate, and synthetic pyrogenic silicas. The pigments and dyes that are used as colorants are classified by chemical type using the Color Index system, which is commercially significant.\nAdditives.\nBesides the three main categories of ingredients (binder, diluent, pigment), paint can have a wide variety of miscellaneous additives, which are usually added in small amounts, yet provide a significant effect on the product. Some examples include additives to modify texture, surface tension, improve flow properties, improve the finished appearance, increase wet edge, improve pigment stability, impart antifreeze properties, control foaming, control skinning, create acrylic pouring cells, etc. Other types of additives include catalysts, thickeners, stabilizers, emulsifiers, texturizers, adhesion promoters, UV stabilizers, flatteners (de-glossing agents), biocides to fight bacterial growth and the like.\nAdditives normally do not significantly alter the percentages of individual components in a formulation.\nColor changing.\nVarious technologies exist for making paints that change color. Thermochromic ink and coatings contain materials that change conformation when heat is applied or removed, and so they change color. Liquid crystals have been used in such paints, such as in the thermometer strips and tapes used in aquaria and novelty/promotional thermal cups and straws.\nPhotochromic materials are used to make eyeglasses and other products. Similar to thermochromic molecules, photochromic molecules change conformation when light energy is applied or removed, and so they change color.\nColor-changing paints can also be made by adding halochromic compounds or other organic pigments. One patent cites use of these indicators for wall coating applications for light-colored paints. When the paint is wet it is pink in color but upon drying it regains its original white color. As cited in patent, this property of the paint enabled two or more coats to be applied on a wall properly and evenly. The previous coats having dried would be white whereas the new wet coat would be distinctly pink. Ashland Inc. introduced foundry refractory coatings with similar principle in 2005 for use in foundries.\nElectrochromic paints change color in response to an applied electric current. Car manufacturer Nissan has been reportedly working on an electrochromic paint, based on particles of paramagnetic iron oxide. When subjected to an electromagnetic field the paramagnetic particles change spacing, modifying their color and reflective properties. The electromagnetic field would be formed using the conductive metal of the car body. Electrochromic paints can be applied to plastic substrates as well, using a different coating chemistry. The technology involves using special dyes that change conformation when an electric current is applied across the film itself. This new technology has been used to achieve glare protection at the touch of a button in passenger airplane windows.\nColor can also change depending on viewing angle, using iridescence, for example, in ChromaFlair.\nArt.\nSince the time of the Renaissance, siccative (drying) oil paints, primarily linseed oil, have been the most commonly used kind of paints in fine art applications; oil paint is still common today. However, in the 20th century, new water-borne paints such acrylic paints, entered the market with the development of acrylic and other latex paints. Milk paints (also called casein), where the medium is derived from the natural emulsion that is milk, were common in the 19th century and are still used. Used by the earliest western artists, Egg tempera (where the medium is an emulsion of raw egg yolk mixed with oil) remains in use as well, as are encaustic wax-based paints. Gouache is an opaque variant of watercolor, which is based around varying levels of translucency; both paints use gum arabic as the binder and water as a thinner. Gouache is also known as 'designer color' or 'body color'.\nPoster paint is a distemper paint that has been used primarily in the creation of student works, or by children. There are varying brands of poster paint and depending on the brand, the quality will differ. More inexpensive brands will often crack or fade over time if they are left on a poster for an extended time. \nApplication.\nPaint can be applied as a solid, a gas, a gaseous suspension (aerosol) or a liquid. Techniques vary depending on the practical or artistic results desired.\nAs a solid (usually used in industrial and automotive applications), the paint is applied as a very fine powder, then baked at high temperature. This melts the powder and causes it to adhere to the surface. The reasons for doing this involve the chemistries of the paint, the surface itself, and perhaps even the chemistry of the substrate (the object being painted). This is called \"powder coating\" an object.\nIn a gas phase application, the coating composition is introduced (if gaseous), vaporized (if liquid) or sublimed (if solid) then deposited on a distant substrate, often under vacuum. These applications are classed broadly into physical vapor deposition methods like sputtering or vacuum deposition, in which solid or liquid starting materials produce a vapor that condenses on the substrate; or chemical vapor deposition methods, in which gaseous starting materials chemically react with the substrate to form a coating. These techniques are especially important in the electronics and optical industries.\nAs a gaseous suspension, liquid paint is aerosolized by the force of compressed air or by the action of high-pressure compression of the paint itself, and the paint is turned into small droplets that travel to the article to be painted. Alternate methods are airless spray, hot spray, hot airless spray, and any of these with an electrostatic spray included. There are numerous electrostatic methods available. The reasons for doing this include:\nIn a liquid application, paint can be applied by direct application using brushes, paint rollers, blades, scrapers, other instruments, or body parts such as fingers and thumbs.\nRollers generally have a handle that allows for different lengths of poles to be attached, allowing painting at different heights. Generally, roller application requires two coats for an even color. A roller with a thicker nap is used to apply paint on uneven surfaces. Edges are often finished with an angled brush.\nAfter liquid paint is applied, there is an interval during which it can be blended with additional painted regions (at the \"wet edge\") called \"open time\". The open time of an oil or alkyd-based emulsion paint can be extended by adding white spirit, similar glycols such as Dowanol (propylene glycol ether) or open time prolongers. This can also facilitate the mixing of different wet paint layers for aesthetic effect. Latex and acrylic emulsions require the use of drying retardants suitable for water-based coatings. Depending on the quality and type of liquid paint used, the open time will vary. Oil paints for instance are renowned for their open time as oil paints allow for artists to blend the colors for extended periods of time without having to add any extending agents.\nDipping used to be the norm for objects such as filing cabinets, but this has been replaced by high-speed air turbine-driven bells with electrostatic spray. Car bodies are primed using cathodic elephoretic primer, which is applied by charging the body depositing a layer of primer. The unchanged residue is rinsed off and the primer stoved.\nMany paints tend to separate when stored, the heavier components settling to the bottom, and require mixing before use. Some paint outlets have machines for mixing the paint by shaking the can vigorously for a few minutes.\nThe opacity and the film thickness of paint may be measured using a drawdown card.\nWater-based paints tend to be the easiest to clean up after use; the brushes and rollers can be cleaned with soap and water.\nProper disposal of left over paint is a challenge. Sometimes it can be recycled: Old paint may be usable for a primer coat or an intermediate coat, and paints of similar chemistry can be mixed to make a larger amount of a uniform color.\nTo dispose of paint it can be dried and disposed of in the domestic waste stream, provided that it contains no prohibited substances (see container). Disposal of liquid paint usually requires special handling and should be treated as hazardous waste, and disposed of according to local regulations.\n*Sacrificial coatings are clear coatings that allow the removal of graffiti, usually by washing the surface with high-pressure water that removes the graffiti together with the coating (hence the term \"sacrificial\"). After removal of the graffiti, the sacrificial coating must be re-applied for continued protection. Such sacrificial protective coatings are most commonly used on natural-looking masonry surfaces, such as statuary and marble walls, and on rougher surfaces that are difficult to clean. \n*Non-bonding coatings are clear, high-performance coatings, usually catalyzed polyurethanes, that do not bond strongly to paints used for graffiti. Graffiti on such a surface can be removed with a solvent wash, without damaging either the underlying surface or the protective non-bonding coating. These coatings work best on smooth surfaces, and are especially useful on decorative surfaces such as mosaics or painted murals, which might be expected to suffer harm from high pressure sprays.\nFailure.\nThe main reasons for paint failure after application on the surface are the applicator and improper treatment of the surface.\nDefects or degradation can be attributed to:\nThis usually occurs when the dilution of the paint is not done as per manufacturers recommendation. There can be a case of over dilution and under dilution, as well as dilution with the incorrect diluent.\n Foreign contaminants can cause various film defects.\n Most commonly due to improper surface treatment before application and inherent moisture/dampness being present in the substrate. The degree of blistering can be assessed according to ISO 4628 Part 2 or ASTM Method D714 (Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Blistering of Paints). \n Chalking is the progressive powdering of the paint film on the painted surface. The primary reason for the problem is polymer degradation of the paint matrix due to exposure of UV radiation in sunshine and condensation from dew. The degree of chalking varies as epoxies react quickly while acrylics and polyurethanes can remain unchanged for long periods. The degree of chalking can be assessed according to International Standard ISO 4628 Part 6 or 7 or American Society of Testing and Materials(ASTM) Method D4214 (Standard Test Methods for Evaluating the Degree of Chalking of Exterior Paint Films).\n Cracking of paint film is due to the unequal expansion or contraction of paint coats. It usually happens when the coats of the paint are not allowed to cure/dry completely before the next coat is applied. The degree of cracking can be assessed according to International Standard ISO 4628 Part 4 or ASTM Method D661 (Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Cracking of Exterior Paints). Cracking can also occur when the paint is applied to a surface that is incompatible or unstable. For instance, clay that hasn't dried completely when painted will cause the paint to crack due to the residual moisture in the clay.\nErosion is very quick chalking. It occurs due to external agents like air, water etc. It can be evaluated using ASTM Method ASTM D662 (Standard Test Method for Evaluating Degree of Erosion of Exterior Paints). The generation of acid by fungal species can be a significant component of erosion of painted surfaces. The fungus\u00a0\"Aureobasidium pullulans\"\u00a0is known for damaging wall paints.\nDangers.\nVolatile organic compounds (VOCs) in paint are considered harmful to the environment and especially for people who work with them on a regular basis. Extensive exposure to these vapours has been strongly related to organic solvent syndrome, although a definitive relation has yet to be fully established. The controversial solvent 2-butoxyethanol is also used in paint production. Jurisdictions such as Canada, China, the EU, India, the United States, and South Korea have definitions for VOCs in place, along with regulations to limit the use of VOCs in consumer products such as paint.\nIn the US, environmental regulations, consumer demand, and advances in technology led to the development of low-VOC and zero-VOC paints and finishes. These new paints are widely available and meet or exceed the old high-VOC products in performance and cost-effectiveness while having significantly less impact on human and environmental health.\nGlobally, the most widely accepted standard for acceptable levels of VOC in paint is https:// from the US which defines different VOC levels acceptable for different types of paint based on use case and performance requirements.\nA polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) was reported (published in 2009) in air samples collected in Chicago, Philadelphia, the Arctic, and several sites around the Great Lakes. PCB is a global pollutant and was measured in the wastewater effluent from paint production. The widespread distribution of PCB suggests volatilization of this compound from surfaces, roofs etc. PCB is present in consumer goods including newspapers, magazines, and cardboard boxes, which usually contain color pigments. Therefore, a hypothesis exists that PCB congeners are present as byproduct in some current commercial pigments.\nResearch is ongoing to remove heavy metals from paint formulations completely.\nEnvironmental impact of plastics in paints.\nThe ongoing scrutiny of the environmental impact of plastics in paint production is reminiscent of previous investigations into the use of lead in paints. This assessment is driven by accumulating evidence that underscores the role of paint as a significant contributor to microplastic pollution. In 2019, of the 44.4 million tons of globally produced paint, 95 percent was plastic-based. Further, a 2022 study by Environmental Action revealed that approximately 58 percent of the microplastics found in oceans and waterways could be traced back to paint.\nEfforts to mitigate this environmental issue have spurred the development and exploration of alternatives to plastic-based paints, such as those derived from linseed, walnut, milk, and limewash. However, their cost is a significant deterrent to the widespread adoption of these environmentally-friendly alternatives. As of 2023, a gallon of plastic-based paint may cost around $20 to $30, however the price for specialized paint, such as graphene and lime, ranges from $34 to $114 per gallon, underlining the financial challenges associated with transitioning from plastic-based paints.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23778", "revid": "50991530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23778", "title": "PC", "text": "PC or pc may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23781", "revid": "49512284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23781", "title": "Photoresist", "text": "Light-sensitive material used in making electronics\nA photoresist (also known simply as a resist) is a light-sensitive material used in several processes, such as photolithography and photoengraving, to form a patterned coating on a surface. This process is crucial in the electronics industry.\nThe photoengraving process begins by coating a substrate with a light-sensitive organic material. A patterned mask is then applied to the surface to block light, so that only unmasked regions of the material will be exposed to light. A solvent, called a developer, is then applied to the surface.\nIn the case of a positive photoresist, the photo-sensitive material is degraded by light, and the developer will dissolve away the regions that were exposed to light, leaving behind a coating where the mask was placed.\nIn the case of a negative photoresist, the photosensitive material is strengthened (either polymerized or cross-linked) by light, and the developer will dissolve away only the regions that were not exposed to light, leaving behind a coating in areas where the mask was not placed.\n A BARC (bottom anti-reflectant coating) may be applied before the photoresist is applied, to avoid reflections from occurring under the photoresist and to improve the photoresist's performance at smaller semiconductor nodes.\nConventional photoresists typically consist of 3 components: resin (a binder that provides physical properties such as adhesion, chemical resistance, etc), sensitizer (which has a photoactive compound), and solvent (which keeps the resist liquid).\nSimple resist polarity.\nPositive: light will weaken the resist, and create a hole\nNegative: light will toughen the resist and create an etch-resistant mask.\nTo explain this in graphical form, you may have a graph on Log exposure energy versus fraction of resist thickness remaining. The positive resist will be completely removed at the final exposure energy, and the negative resist will be completely hardened and insoluble by the end of exposure energy. The slope of this graph is the contrast ratio. Intensity (I) is related to energy by E = I*t.\nPositive photoresist.\nA \"positive photoresist\" is a type of photoresist in which a portion is exposed to light and becomes soluble to the photoresist developer. The unexposed portion of the photoresist remains insoluble in the photoresist developer.\nSome examples of positive photoresists are:\nPMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) single-component\nTwo-component DQN resists:\nNegative photoresist.\nA \"negative photoresist\" is a type of photoresist in which the portion of the photoresist that is exposed to light becomes insoluble in the photoresist developer. The unexposed portion of the photoresist is dissolved by the photoresist developer.\nModulation transfer function\nMTF (modulation transfer function is the ratio of image intensity modulation and object intensity modulation and it is a parameter that indicates the capability of an optical system.\nDifferences between positive and negative resist.\nThe following table is based on generalizations which are generally accepted in the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) fabrication industry.\nClassification.\nBased on the chemical structure of photoresists, they can be classified into three types: photopolymeric, photodecomposing, and photocrosslinking photoresist.\nLight sources.\nAbsorption at UV and shorter wavelengths.\nIn lithography, decreasing the wavelength of light source is the most efficient way to achieve higher resolution. Photoresists are most commonly used at wavelengths in the ultraviolet spectrum or shorter (&lt;400\u00a0nm). For example, diazonaphthoquinone (DNQ) absorbs strongly from approximately 300\u00a0nm to 450\u00a0nm. The absorption bands can be assigned to n-\u03c0* (S0\u2013S1) and \u03c0-\u03c0* (S1\u2013S2) transitions in the DNQ molecule. In the deep ultraviolet (DUV) spectrum, the \u03c0-\u03c0* electronic transition in benzene or carbon double-bond chromophores appears at around 200\u00a0nm. Due to the appearance of more possible absorption transitions involving larger energy differences, the absorption tends to increase with shorter wavelength, or larger photon energy. Photons with energies exceeding the ionization potential of the photoresist (can be as low as 5 eV in condensed solutions) can also release electrons which are capable of additional exposure of the photoresist. From about 5 eV to about 20 eV, photoionization of outer \"valence band\" electrons is the main absorption mechanism. Above 20 eV, inner electron ionization and Auger transitions become more important. Photon absorption begins to decrease as the X-ray region is approached, as fewer Auger transitions between deep atomic levels are allowed for the higher photon energy. The absorbed energy can drive further reactions and ultimately dissipates as heat. This is associated with the outgassing and contamination from the photoresist.\nElectron-beam exposure.\nPhotoresists can also be exposed by electron beams, producing the same results as exposure by light. The main difference is that while photons are absorbed, depositing all their energy at once, electrons deposit their energy gradually, and scatter within the photoresist during this process. As with high-energy wavelengths, many transitions are excited by electron beams, and heating and outgassing are still a concern. The dissociation energy for a C-C bond is 3.6 eV. Secondary electrons generated by primary ionizing radiation have energies sufficient to dissociate this bond, causing scission. In addition, the low-energy electrons have a longer photoresist interaction time due to their lower speed; essentially the electron has to be at rest with respect to the molecule in order to react most strongly via dissociative electron attachment, where the electron comes to rest at the molecule, depositing all its kinetic energy. The resulting scission breaks the original polymer into segments of lower molecular weight, which are more readily dissolved in a solvent, or else releases other chemical species (acids) which catalyze further scission reactions (see the discussion on chemically amplified resists below). It is not common to select photoresists for electron-beam exposure. Electron beam lithography usually relies on resists dedicated specifically to electron-beam exposure.\nParameters.\nPhysical, chemical, and optical properties of photoresists influence their selection for different processes. The primary properties of the photoresist are resolution capability, process dose and focus latitudes required for curing, and resistance to reactive ion etching.966 Other key properties are sensitivity, compatibility with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH), adhesion, environmental stability, and shelf life.966\nResolution is the ability to differ the neighboring features on the substrate. Critical dimension (CD) is a main measure of resolution. The smaller the CD is, the higher resolution would be.\nContrast is the difference from exposed portion to unexposed portion. The higher the contrast is, the more obvious the difference between exposed and unexposed portions would be.\nSensitivity is the minimum energy that is required to generate a well-defined feature in the photoresist on the substrate, measured in mJ/cm2. The sensitivity of a photoresist is important when using deep ultraviolet (DUV) or extreme-ultraviolet (EUV).\nViscosity is a measure of the internal friction of a fluid, affecting how easily it will flow. When it is needed to produce a thicker layer, a photoresist with higher viscosity will be preferred.\nAdherence is the adhesive strength between photoresist and substrate. If the resist comes off the substrate, some features will be missing or damaged.\nAnti-etching is the ability of a photoresist to resist the high temperature, different pH environment or the ion bombardment in the process of post-modification.\nSurface tension is the tension that induced by a liquid tended to minimize its surface area, which is caused by the attraction of the particles in the surface layer. In order to better wet the surface of substrate, photoresists are required to possess relatively low surface tension.\nChemical amplification.\nPhotoresists used in production for DUV and shorter wavelengths require the use of chemical amplification to increase the sensitivity to the exposure energy. This is done in order to combat the larger absorption at shorter wavelengths. Chemical amplification is also often used in electron-beam exposures to increase the sensitivity to the exposure dose. In the process, acids released by the exposure radiation diffuse during the post-exposure bake step. These acids render surrounding polymer soluble in developer. A single acid molecule can catalyze many such 'deprotection' reactions; hence, fewer photons or electrons are needed. Acid diffusion is important not only to increase photoresist sensitivity and throughput, but also to limit line edge roughness due to shot noise statistics. However, the acid diffusion length is itself a potential resolution limiter. In addition, too much diffusion reduces chemical contrast, leading again to more roughness.\nThe following reactions are an example of commercial chemically amplified photoresists in use today:\nThe e\u2212 represents a solvated electron, or a freed electron that may react with other constituents of the solution. It typically travels a distance on the order of many nanometers before being contained; such a large travel distance is consistent with the release of electrons through thick oxide in UV EPROM in response to ultraviolet light. This parasitic exposure would degrade the resolution of the photoresist; for 193\u00a0nm the optical resolution is the limiting factor anyway, but for electron beam lithography or EUVL it is the electron range that determines the resolution rather than the optics.\nTypes.\nDNQ-Novolac photoresist.\nOne very common positive photoresist used with the I, G and H-lines from a mercury-vapor lamp is based on a mixture of diazonaphthoquinone (DNQ) and novolac resin (a phenol formaldehyde resin). DNQ inhibits the dissolution of the novolac resin, but upon exposure to light, the dissolution rate increases even beyond that of pure novolac. The mechanism by which unexposed DNQ inhibits novolac dissolution is not well understood, but is believed to be related to hydrogen bonding (or more exactly diazocoupling in the unexposed region). DNQ-novolac resists are developed by dissolution in a basic solution (usually 0.26N tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) in water).\nEpoxy-based resists.\nOne very common negative photoresist is based on epoxy-based oligomer. The common product name is SU-8 photoresist, and it was originally invented by IBM, but is now sold by http:// and https://. One unique property of SU-8 is that it is very difficult to strip. As such, it is often used in applications where a permanent resist pattern (one that is not strippable, and can even be used in harsh temperature and pressure environments) is needed for a device. Mechanism of epoxy-based polymer is shown in 1.2.3 SU-8. SU-8 is prone to swelling at smaller feature sizes, which has led to the development of small-molecule alternatives that are capable of obtaining higher resolutions than SU-8.\nOff-stoichiometry thiol-enes(OSTE) polymer.\nIn 2016, OSTE Polymers were shown to possess a unique photolithography mechanism, based on diffusion-induced monomer depletion, which enables high photostructuring accuracy. The OSTE polymer material was originally invented at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, but is now sold by https://. Whereas the material has properties similar to those of SU8, OSTE has the specific advantage that it contains reactive surface molecules, which make this material attractive for microfluidic or biomedical applications.\nHydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ).\nHSQ is a common negative resist for e-beam, but also useful for photolithography. Originally invented by Dow Corning (1970), and now produced (https://) by Applied Quantum Materials Inc. (https://). Unlike other negative resists, HSQ is inorganic and metal-free. Therefore, exposed HSQ provides a low dielectric constant (low-k) Si-rich oxide. A comparative study against other photoresists was reported in 2015 (Dow Corning HSQ).\nApplications.\nMicrocontact printing.\nMicrocontact printing was described by Whitesides Group in 1993. Generally, in this techniques, an elastomeric stamp is used to generate two-dimensional patterns, through printing the \u201cink\u201d molecules onto the surface of a solid substrate.\nSteps for microcontact printing: 1) A scheme for the creation of a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) master stamp. 2) A scheme of the inking and contact process of microprinting lithography.\nPrinted circuit boards.\nThe manufacture of printed circuit boards is one of the most important uses of photoresist. Photolithography allows the complex wiring of an electronic system to be rapidly, economically, and accurately reproduced as if run off a printing press. The general process is applying photoresist, exposing image to ultraviolet rays, and then etching to remove the copper-clad substrate.\nPatterning and etching of substrates.\nThis includes specialty photonics materials, MicroElectro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), glass printed circuit boards, and other micropatterning tasks. Photoresist tends not to be etched by solutions with a pH greater than 3.\nMicroelectronics.\nThis application, mainly applied to silicon wafers and silicon integrated circuits is the most developed of the technologies and the most specialized in the field.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23783", "revid": "9183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23783", "title": "Payoff matrix", "text": ""}
{"id": "23785", "revid": "17163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23785", "title": "Phrenology", "text": "Pseudoscientific study of human skull shape\nPhrenology is a pseudoscience that involves the measurement of bumps on the skull to predict mental traits. It is based on the concept that the brain is the organ of the mind, and that certain brain areas have localized, specific functions or modules. It was said that the brain was composed of different muscles, so those that were used more often were bigger, resulting in the different skull shapes. This provided reasoning for the common presence of bumps on the skull in different locations. The brain \"muscles\" not being used as frequently remained small and were therefore not present on the exterior of the skull. Although both of those ideas have a basis in reality, phrenology generalizes beyond empirical knowledge in a way that departs from science. The central phrenological notion that measuring the contour of the skull can predict personality traits is discredited by empirical research. Developed by German physician Franz Joseph Gall in 1796, the discipline was influential in the 19th century, especially from about 1810 until 1840. The principal British centre for phrenology was Edinburgh, where the Edinburgh Phrenological Society was established in 1820.\nPhrenology is today recognized as pseudoscientific. The methodological rigor of phrenology was doubtful even for the standards of its time, since many authors already regarded phrenology as pseudoscience in the 19th century. There have been various studies conducted that discredited phrenology, most of which were done with ablation techniques. Marie-Jean-Pierre Flourens demonstrated through ablation that the cerebrum and cerebellum accomplish different functions. He found that the impacted areas never carried out the functions that were proposed through phrenology. Paul Broca also discredited the idea when he discovered and named the \"Broca's area\": the patient's ability to produce language was lost while their ability to understand language remained intact, due to a lesion on the left frontal lobe. He concluded that this area of the brain was responsible for language production. Between Flourens and Broca, the claims to support phrenology were dismantled. Phrenological thinking was influential in the psychiatry and psychology of the 19th century. Gall's assumption that character, thoughts, and emotions are located in specific areas of the brain is considered an important historical advance toward neuropsychology. He contributed to the idea that the brain is spatially organized, but not in the way he proposed. There is a clear division of labor in the brain but none of which even remotely correlates to the size of the head or the structure of the skull. It contributed to some advancements in understanding the brain and its functions.\nWhile phrenology itself has long been discredited, the study of the \"inner\" surface of the skulls of archaic human species allows modern researchers to obtain information about the development of various areas of the brains of those species, and thereby infer information about their cognitive and communicative abilities, and possibly even about their social lives. Due to its limitations, this technique is sometimes criticized as \"paleo-phrenology\".\nEtymology.\nThe term \"phrenology,\" from grc \" \"\u03c6\u03c1\u03ae\u03bd\" (phr\u0113n)\"\u00a0'mind' and \" \"\u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2\" (logos)\"\u00a0'knowledge', was used in the early 19th century to refer to what would now be considered psychology: a broader study of the mind and human mental faculties. This meaning has been eclipsed by the more specific study of the skull shape to infer psychological traits.\nOther terms historically used to discuss this specific relationship between the skull and the mind, and especially Gall's study of them, include craniology, cranioscopy, zoonomy, organology, bumpology and functionalism. \"Craniology\" and \"cranioscopy\" became detached from the specific sense of phrenology, and were later used to refer merely to the study of the skull, as in anthropology. Many of the other words had or have meanings in other sciences, and their use to refer to the study of phrenology is now archaic.\nMental faculties.\nPhrenologists believe that the human mind has a set of various mental faculties, each one represented in a different area of the brain. For example, the faculty of \"philoprogenitiveness\", from the Greek for \"love of offspring\", was located centrally at the back of the head (see illustration of the chart from \"Webster's Academic Dictionary\").\nThese areas were said to be proportional to a person's propensities. The importance of an organ was derived from relative size compared to other organs. It was believed that the cranial skull\u2014like a glove on the hand\u2014accommodates to the different sizes of these areas of the brain, so that a person's capacity for a given personality trait could be determined simply by measuring the area of the skull that overlies the corresponding area of the brain.\nPhrenology, which focuses on personality and character, is distinct from craniometry, which is the study of skull size, weight and shape, and physiognomy, the study of facial features.\nMethod.\nPhrenology is a process that involves observing and/or feeling the skull to determine an individual's psychological attributes. Franz Joseph Gall believed that the brain was made up of 27 individual organs that determined personality, the first 19 of these \"organs\" he believed to exist in other animal species. Phrenologists would run their fingertips and palms over the skulls of their patients to feel for enlargements or indentations. The phrenologist would often take measurements with a tape measure of the overall head size and more rarely employ a craniometer, a special version of a caliper. In general, instruments to measure sizes of cranium continued to be used after the mainstream phrenology had ended. The phrenologists put emphasis on using drawings of individuals with particular traits, to determine the character of the person and thus many phrenology books show pictures of subjects. From absolute and relative sizes of the skull the phrenologist would assess the character and temperament of the patient.\nGall's list of the \"brain organs\" was specific. An enlarged organ meant that the patient used that particular \"organ\" extensively. The number\u2014and more detailed meanings\u2014of organs were added later by other phrenologists. The 27 areas varied in function, from sense of color, to religiosity, to being combative or destructive. Each of the 27 \"brain organs\" was located under a specific area of the skull. As a phrenologist felt the skull, he would use his knowledge of the shapes of heads and organ positions to determine the overall natural strengths and weaknesses of an individual. Phrenologists believed the head revealed natural tendencies but not absolute limitations or strengths of character. The first phrenological chart gave the names of the organs described by Gall; it was a single sheet, and sold for a cent. Later charts were more expansive.\nHistory.\nAmong the first to identify the brain as the major controlling center for the body were Hippocrates and his followers, inaugurating a major change in thinking from Egyptian, biblical and early Greek views, which based bodily primacy of control on the heart. This belief was supported by the Greek physician Galen, who concluded that mental activity occurred in the brain rather than the heart, contending that the brain, a cold, moist organ formed of sperm, was the seat of the animal soul\u2014one of three \"souls\" found in the body, each associated with a principal organ.\nThe Swiss pastor Johann Kaspar Lavater (1741\u20131801) introduced the idea that physiognomy related to the specific character traits of individuals, rather than general types, in his \"Physiognomische Fragmente\", published between 1775 and 1778. His work was translated into English and published in 1832 as \"The Pocket Lavater, or, The Science of Physiognomy\". He believed that thoughts of the mind and passions of the soul were connected with an individual's external frame.\nOf the forehead, When the forehead is perfectly perpendicular, from the hair to the eyebrows, it denotes an utter deficiency of understanding. (p. 24)\nIn 1796 the German physician Franz Joseph Gall (1758\u20131828) began lecturing on organology: the isolation of mental faculties and later cranioscopy which involved reading the skull's shape as it pertained to the individual. It was Gall's collaborator Johann Gaspar Spurzheim who would popularize the term \"phrenology\".\nIn 1809 Gall began writing his principal work, \"The Anatomy and Physiology of the Nervous System in General, and of the Brain in Particular, with Observations upon the possibility of ascertaining the several Intellectual and Moral Dispositions of Man and Animal, by the configuration of their Heads\". It was not published until 1819. In the introduction to this main work, Gall makes the following statement in regard to his doctrinal principles, which comprise the intellectual basis of phrenology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;* The Brain is the organ of the mind\nThrough careful observation and extensive experimentation, Gall believed he had established a relationship between aspects of character, called \"faculties\", with precise \"organs\" in the brain.\nJohann Spurzheim was Gall's most important collaborator. He worked as Gall's anatomist until 1813 when for unknown reasons they had a permanent falling out. Publishing under his own name Spurzheim successfully disseminated phrenology throughout the United Kingdom during his lecture tours through 1814 and 1815 and the United States in 1832 where he would eventually die.\nGall was more concerned with creating a physical science, so it was through Spurzheim that phrenology was first spread throughout Europe and America. Phrenology, while not universally accepted, was hardly a fringe phenomenon of the era. George Combe would become the chief promoter of phrenology throughout the English-speaking world after he viewed a brain dissection by Spurzheim, convincing him of phrenology's merits.\nThe popularization of phrenology in the middle and working classes was due in part to the idea that scientific knowledge was important and an indication of sophistication and modernity. Cheap and plentiful pamphlets, as well as the growing popularity of scientific lectures as entertainment, also helped spread phrenology to the masses. Combe created a system of philosophy of the human mind that became popular with the masses because of its simplified principles and wide range of social applications that were in harmony with the liberal Victorian world view. George Combe's book \"On the Constitution of Man and its Relationship to External Objects\" sold more than 200,000 copies through nine editions. Combe also devoted a large portion of his book to reconciling religion and phrenology, which had long been a sticking point. Another reason for its popularity was that phrenology balanced between free will and determinism. A person's inherent faculties were clear, and no faculty was viewed as evil, though the abuse of a faculty was. Phrenology allowed for self-improvement and upward mobility, while providing fodder for attacks on aristocratic privilege. Phrenology also had wide appeal because of its being a reformist philosophy not a radical one. Phrenology was not limited to the common people, and both Queen Victoria and Prince Albert invited George Combe to read the heads of their children.\nThe American brothers Lorenzo Niles Fowler (1811\u20131896) and Orson Squire Fowler (1809\u20131887) were leading phrenologists of their time. Orson, together with associates Samuel Robert Wells and Nelson Sizer, ran the phrenological business and publishing house \"Fowlers &amp; Wells\" in New York City. Meanwhile, Lorenzo spent much of his life in England, where he initiated the famous phrenological publishing house L. N. Fowler &amp; Co. and gained considerable fame with his \"phrenology head\" (a china head showing the phrenological faculties), which has become a symbol of the discipline. Orson Fowler was known for his octagonal house.\nPhrenology came about at a time when scientific procedures and standards for acceptable evidence were still being codified. In the context of Victorian society, phrenology was a respectable scientific theory. The Phrenological Society of Edinburgh founded by George and Andrew Combe was an example of the credibility of phrenology at the time, and included a number of extremely influential social reformers and intellectuals, including the publisher Robert Chambers, the astronomer John Pringle Nichol, the evolutionary environmentalist Hewett Cottrell Watson, and asylum reformer William A. F. Browne. In 1826, out of the 120 members of the Edinburgh society an estimated one third were from a medical background. By the 1840s there were more than 28 phrenological societies in London with more than 1,000 members. Another important scholar was Luigi Ferrarese, the leading Italian phrenologist. He advocated that governments should embrace phrenology as a scientific means of conquering many social ills, and his \"Memorie Riguardanti La Dottrina Frenologica\" (1836), is considered \"one of the fundamental 19th-century works in the field\".\nTraditionally the mind had been studied through introspection. Phrenology provided an attractive, biological alternative that attempted to unite all mental phenomena using consistent biological terminology. Gall's approach prepared the way for studying the mind that would lead to the downfall of his own theories. Phrenology contributed to development of physical anthropology, forensic medicine, knowledge of the nervous system and brain anatomy as well as contributing to applied psychology.\nJohn Elliotson was a brilliant but erratic heart specialist who became a phrenologist in the 1840s. He was also a mesmerist and combined the two into something he called phrenomesmerism or phrenomagnatism. Changing behaviour through mesmerism eventually won out in Elliotson's hospital, putting phrenology in a subordinate role. Others amalgamated phrenology and mesmerism as well, such as the practical phrenologists Collyer and Joseph R. Buchanan. The benefit of combining mesmerism and phrenology was that the trance the patient was placed in was supposed to allow for the manipulation of his/her penchants and qualities. For example, if the organ of self-esteem was touched, the subject would take on a haughty expression.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Phrenology has been psychology's great \"faux pas\".\n\u2014\u2009J.C. Flugel (1933)\nPhrenology was mostly discredited as a scientific theory by the 1840s. This was due only in part to a growing amount of evidence against phrenology. Phrenologists had never been able to agree on the most basic mental organ numbers, going from 27 to over 40, and had difficulty locating the mental organs. Phrenologists relied on cranioscopic readings of the skull to find organ locations. Jean Pierre Flourens' experiments on the brains of pigeons indicated that the loss of parts of the brain either caused no loss of function, or the loss of a completely different function than what had been attributed to it by phrenology. Flourens' experiment, while not perfect, seemed to indicate that Gall's supposed organs were imaginary. Scientists had also become disillusioned with phrenology since its exploitation with the middle and working classes by entrepreneurs. The popularization had resulted in the simplification of phrenology and mixing in it of principles of physiognomy, which had from the start been rejected by Gall as an indicator of personality. Phrenology from its inception was tainted by accusations of promoting materialism and atheism, and being destructive of morality. These were all factors that led to the downfall of phrenology. Recent studies, using modern day technology like Magnetic Resonance Imaging have further disproven phrenology claims.\nDuring the early 20th century, a revival of interest in phrenology occurred, partly because of studies of evolution, criminology and anthropology (as pursued by Cesare Lombroso). The most famous British phrenologist of the 20th century was the London psychiatrist Bernard Hollander (1864\u20131934). His main works, \"The Mental Function of the Brain\" (1901) and \"Scientific Phrenology\" (1902), are an appraisal of Gall's teachings. Hollander introduced a quantitative approach to the phrenological diagnosis, defining a method for measuring the skull, and comparing the measurements with statistical averages.\nIn Belgium, Paul Bouts (1900\u20131999) began studying phrenology from a pedagogical background, using the phrenological analysis to define an individual pedagogy. Combining phrenology with typology and graphology, he coined a global approach known as psychognomy. Bouts, a Roman Catholic priest, became the main promoter of renewed 20th-century interest in phrenology and psychognomy in Belgium. He was also active in Brazil and Canada, where he founded institutes for characterology. His works \"Psychognomie\" and \"Les Grandioses Destin\u00e9es individuelle et humaine dans la lumi\u00e8re de la Caract\u00e9rologie et de l'Evolution c\u00e9r\u00e9bro-cranienne\" are considered standard works in the field. In the latter work, which examines the subject of paleoanthropology, Bouts developed a teleological and orthogenetical view on a \"perfecting evolution,\" from the paleo-encephalical skull shapes of prehistoric man, which he considered still prevalent in criminals and savages, towards a higher form of mankind, thus perpetuating phrenology's problematic racializing of the human frame. Bouts died on March 7, 1999. His work has been continued by the Dutch foundation PPP (\"Per Pulchritudinem in Pulchritudine\"), operated by Anette M\u00fcller, one of Bouts' students.\nDuring the 1930s, Belgian colonial authorities in Rwanda used phrenology to explain the purported superiority of Tutsis over Hutus.\nApplication.\nRacism.\nSome scientists believed phrenology affirmed European superiority over other races. By comparing skulls of different ethnic groups it was thought to allow for ranking of races from least to most evolved. Broussais, a disciple of Gall, proclaimed that the Caucasians were the most beautiful, while peoples like the Australian Aboriginal and M\u0101ori would never become civilized since \"they had no cerebral organ for producing great artists\". Few phrenologists argued for the emancipation of the slaves, while many used it to advocate for slavery. Instead they argued that through education and interbreeding the \"lesser peoples\" could improve. Another argument was that the natural inequality of people could be used to situate them in the most appropriate place in society.\nGender stereotyping.\nGender stereotyping was also common with phrenology. Women, whose heads were generally larger in the back with lower foreheads, were thought to have underdeveloped organs necessary for success in the arts and sciences while having larger mental organs relating to the care of children and religion. While phrenologists did not contest the existence of talented women, this minority did not provide justification for citizenship or participation in politics.\nThe popularly held phrenological belief in the Victorian era was that women's brains were smaller and weaker than those of men and as such were incapable of being practitioners themselves. Evidence from letters written by the phrenologists Johann Spurzheim to his wife, Honorine Spurzheim, suggest that he had a number of women attending his lectures that were interested in phrenology. He held the belief that women did not have necessary \"superiority of intellectual powers\". Despite this, many middle class women were just as captivated by the pseudoscience as their male counterparts. Contributions to the field of phrenology would be made by prominent figures such as Lydia Folger Fowler, the second American woman ever to receive a medical degree, who created character charts and lectured extensively on the subject.\nPhrenology had an appeal to middle class women as a chance to understand their own minds and \"know thyself\" by creating charts that were very clear evidence for the organs of intellect being just as prominent in their brains as they were in men's.\nEducation.\nOne of the considered practical applications of phrenology was education. Due to the nature of phrenology people were naturally considered unequal, as very few people would have a naturally perfect balance between organs. Thus education would play an important role in creating a balance through rigorous exercise of beneficial organs while repressing baser ones. One of the best examples of this is F\u00e9lix Voisin, who, for approximately ten years, ran a reform school in Issy for the express purpose of correction of the mind of children who had suffered some hardship. Voisin focused on four categories of children for his reform school:\nCriminology.\nPhrenology was one of the first to bring about the idea of rehabilitation of criminals instead of vindictive punishments that would not stop criminals, only with the reorganizing a disorganized brain would bring about change. Voisin believed along with others the accuracy of phrenology in diagnosing criminal tendencies. Diagnosis could point to the type of offender, the insane, an idiot or brute, and by knowing this an appropriate course of action could be taken. A strict system of reward and punishment, hard work and religious instruction, was thought to be able to correct those who had been abandoned and neglected with little education and moral ground works. Those who were considered intellectually disabled could be put to work and housed collectively while only criminals of intellect and vicious intent needed to be confined and isolated. Phrenology also advocated variable prison sentences, the idea being that those who were only defective in education and lacking in morals would soon be released while those who were \"mentally deficient\" could be watched and the truly abhorrent criminals would never be released. For other patients phrenology could help redirect impulses, one homicidal individual became a butcher to control his impulses, while another became a military chaplain so he could witness killings. Phrenology also provided reformist arguments for the lunatic asylums of the Victorian era. John Conolly, a physician interested in psychological aspects of disease, used phrenology on his patients in an attempt to use it as a diagnostic tool. While the success of this approach is debatable, Conolly, through phrenology, introduced a more humane way of dealing with the mentally ill. The first phrenological testimony in a court of law was solicited by American lawyer John Neal in Portland, Maine, in 1834. Neal argued unsuccessfully that the jury should take leniency on his client because the part of his brain associated with violent behavior was inflamed.\nPsychiatry.\nIn psychiatry, phrenology was proposed as a viable model in order to the disciplinary field. The South Italian psychiatrist Biagio Miraglia proposed a new classification of mental illness based on brain functions as they were described by Gall. In Miraglia's view, madness is consequent to dysfunctions of the cerebral organs: \"The organs of the brain that may become ill in isolation or in complex get their activities infected through energy, or depression, or inertia or deficiency. So the madness can take the appearance of these three characteristic forms; i.e. for enhanced activity, or for depressed activity, or for inertia or deficiency of brain activities\".\nPsychology.\nIn the Victorian era, phrenology as a psychology was taken seriously and permeated the literature and novels of the day. Many prominent public figures, such as the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher (a college classmate and initial partner of Orson Fowler) promoted phrenology actively as a source of psychological insight and self-knowledge. In Europe and the United States, many people visited phrenologists to have their heads analysed. After such an examination, clients received a written delineation of their character or a standardized chart with their score, combined with advice on how to improve themselves. People also consulted phrenologists for advice in matters such as hiring personnel or finding suitable marriage partners. As such, phrenology as a brain science waned but developed into the popular psychology of the 19th century.\nReception.\nGreat Britain.\nPhrenology was introduced at a time when the old theological and philosophical understanding of the mind was being questioned and no longer seemed adequate in a society that was experiencing rapid social and demographic changes. Phrenology became one of the most popular movements of the Victorian Era. In part phrenology's success was due to George Combe tailoring phrenology for the middle class. Combe's book \"On the Constitution of Man and its Relationship to External Objects\" was one of the most popular of the time, selling over two hundred thousand copies in a ten-year period. Phrenology's success was also partly because it was introduced at a time when scientific lectures were becoming a form of middle-class entertainment, exposing a large demographic of people to phrenological ideas who would not have heard them otherwise. As a result of the changing times, new avenues of exposure and its multifaceted appeal, phrenology flourished in popular culture although it was discredited as scientific theory by 1840.\nFrance.\nWhile still not a fringe movement, there was not popular widespread support of phrenology in France. This was not only due to strong opposition to phrenology by French scholars but also once again accusations of promoting atheism, materialism and radical religious views. Politics in France also played a role in preventing rapid spread of phrenology. In Britain phrenology had provided another tool to be used for situating demographic changes; the difference was there was less fear of revolutionary upheaval in Britain compared with France. Given that most French supporters of phrenology were liberal, left-wing or socialist, it was an objective of the social elite of France, who held a restrained vision of social change, that phrenology remain on the fringes. Another objection was that phrenology seemed to provide a built in excuse for criminal behaviour, since in its original form it was essentially deterministic in nature.\nIreland.\nPhrenology arrived in Ireland in 1815, through Spurzheim. While Ireland largely mirrored British trends, with scientific lectures and demonstrations becoming a popular pastime of the age, by 1815 phrenology had already been ridiculed in some circles priming the audiences to its skeptical claims. Because of this the general public valued it more for its comic relief than anything else; however, it did find an audience in the rational dissenters who found it an attractive alternative to explain human motivations without the attached superstitions of religion. The supporters of phrenology in Ireland were relegated to scientific subcultures because the Irish scholars neglected marginal movements like phrenology, denying it scientific support in Ireland. In 1830 George Combe came to Ireland, his self-promotion barely winning out against his lack of medical expertise, still only drawing lukewarm crowds. This was due to not only the Vatican's decree that phrenology was subversive of religion and morality but also that, based on phrenology, the \"Irish Catholics were sui generis a flawed and degenerate breed\". Because of the lack of scientific support, along with religious and prejudicial reasons, phrenology never found a wide audience in Ireland.\nUnited States.\nThe first publication in the United States in support of phrenology was published by John Bell, who reissued Combe's essays with an introductory discourse, in 1822. The following year, John G. Wells of Bowdoin College \"commenced an annual exposition, and recommendation of its doctrines, to his class\". In 1834, John D. Godman, professor of anatomy at Rutgers Medical College, emphatically defended phrenology when he wrote:It is, however, allowable to take as a principle, that there will be a relation betwixt vigour of intellect and perfection of form; and that, therefore, history will direct us to the original and chief family of mankind. We therefore ask, which are the nations that have excelled and figured in history, not only as conquerors, but as forwarding, by their improvements in arts and sciences, the progress of human knowledge?Phrenological teachings had become a widespread popular movement by 1834, when Combe came to lecture in the United States. Sensing commercial possibilities men like the Fowlers became phrenologists and sought additional ways to bring phrenology to the masses. Though a popular movement, the intellectual elite of the United States found phrenology attractive because it provided a biological explanation of mental processes based on observation, yet it was not accepted uncritically. Some intellectuals accepted organology while questioning cranioscopy. Gradually the popular success of phrenology undermined its scientific merits in the United States and elsewhere, along with its materialistic underpinnings, fostering radical religious views. There was increasing evidence to refute phrenological claims, and by the 1840s it had largely lost its credibility. In the United States, especially in the South, phrenology faced an additional obstacle in the antislavery movement. While phrenologists usually claimed the superiority of the European race, they were often sympathetic to liberal causes including the antislavery movement; this sowed skepticism about phrenology among those who were pro-slavery. The rise and surge in popularity in mesmerism, phrenomesmerism, also had a hand in the loss of interest in phrenology among intellectuals and the general public.\nJohn Brown Jr., son of the abolitionist John Brown, travelled for a time as a lecturer on phrenology.\nSouth Africa.\nUpon arrival in South Africa, phrenology clashed with the liberalist Cape residents, among whom were missionaries, merchants, and middle class, that held staunch beliefs in the equality of the human race in all varieties. They were advocates for theories of environmental racial differences rather than the phrenological held belief in innate differences of the mind between Africans and Europeans. Nonetheless, South Africa became the place where a lot of phrenologists, particularly in Britain, were receiving subjects to study the heads of Africans. Thomas Pringle was a friend of Combe and Mackenzie who was sending the skulls of Xhosa and Bushman indigenous tribes-people back to a friend in London, John Epps while doing field research in the Cape. Pringle was just one of many medical and military men on the frontier of the South Africa territory that were taking sample of local Africans and sending them back to Britain as patrons of phrenology. Liberals of South Africa would continue to remain skeptical of the validity of phrenology as it pertained to the pre-determining of ones character based on organs in their brain. Editor A.J. Ardine for the periodical \"A Catechism of Phrenology\" would add that he \"remained unconvinced by the new science\".\nWhile residents of the Western coastal urban regions of South Africa were skeptical of the ideological beliefs behind phrenology, those on the inland frontier were very receptive to the ideas of \"biological determinism\". Andrew Smith, better known as the founder of zoology, as well as Robert Knox were among these frontiersmen who were supportive and adherent to the ethnological implications of phrenology. Many phrenologists who came to South Africa, or took example from the native people there, would use findings to fuel more racist implications of the pseudoscience. Bushmen and other African people that had the misfortune of living on the frontier were subject to being remarked as similar \"to that of the monkey\" in facial structure. They had effectively become targets for European imperialist that sought to prove the superiority of their civilization through one sided field work. The inherit issue with their world view was that they conceived these ideas in Europe before coming to Africa on a mission to seek confirmation bias for their rhetoric.\nSpecific phrenological modules.\nFrom Combe:\nPropensities.\nPropensities do not form ideas; they solely produce propensities common to animals and man.\nSentiments.\nLower sentiments\nThese are common to man and animal.\nSuperior sentiments\nThese produce emotion or feeling lacking in animals.\nIntellectual faculties.\nThese are to know the external world and physical qualities\nReflecting faculties.\nThese produce ideas of relation or reflect. They minister to the direction and gratification of all the other powers:\nPhrenology as popular science.\nPart of phrenology's rise in popularity was the availability of ideas from scholars that were shared throughout the nineteenth century. Various societies all over Europe and in the United States kept the middle class well informed on the developments in the pseudoscientific field of research by way of regularly publishing journals.\nOne of the earliest publications of phrenology was George Combe's \"Phrenological Journal\" which sat among other books, pamphlets, and articles he published in order to popularize the pseudoscience. As mentioned previously, phrenology had a wide reach and a multi-faceted appeal from nobility to working class, and this would be his breakthrough publication in Great Britain. The most compelling argument Combe would make for the superiority of European nations and people over that of the rest of the world would be in an article he published titled \"On the Cerebral Development of Nations\". In this publication he determined that the reason Africa, Asian, and American Indians had never had a superior civilization due to \"their inherent mental deficiencies\".\nThe Edinburgh Phrenological Society had their own scholarly journal called the \"Phrenological Journal and Miscellany\" which ran from 1823 to 1847. This was highly influential and the most highly sought after publication to read on phrenology in the British provinces in the early nineteenth century.\nInfluences on popular culture.\nSeveral literary critics have noted the influence of phrenology (and physiognomy) in Edgar Allan Poe's fiction.\n\"Phrenology\" (2002) by the Roots was named so after group member Black Thought saw an article in a scientific journal and the group \"appropriated the term, not only for its political irony ...\"\nPhrenology, as well as physiognomy appears in a number of popular Victorian-era media and journal publications such as \"Dracula\" and \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\". In both of these works, the villains are shown to have the face of evil and it is heavily implied that the facial structure of characters can lead to some sort of conclusion as to the nature of their character. Works such as these gave the pseudoscience validation, and shows how far spread and influential its implications about the way people act being connected to their head structure truly were.\nPhrenology's decline in popularity.\nA popular contemporary argument for the decline of phrenology was an inherit problem with its wider reach to groups of people that construed it for their own agenda. Each new iteration that it went through, as it was constantly being picked up and interpreted, it strayed farther from scientific structure.\nAs early as the 1840's, phrenology had its fair share of critics from other scientists and philosophical thinkers of the time. Clergymen in particular protested against the human mind being reduced to a secular, materialistic thing that could be understood without the notion of a soul.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23787", "revid": "38933592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23787", "title": "Pope Alexander IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1254 to 1261\nPope Alexander IV (1199 or c. 1185 \u2013 25 May 1261) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 12 December 1254 to his death in 1261.\nEarly career.\nHe was born as Rinaldo di Jenne in Jenne (now in the Province of Rome), he was, on his mother's side, a member of the house Conti di Segni, the counts of Segni, like Pope Innocent III and Pope Gregory IX. His uncle Gregory IX made him cardinal deacon and Protector of the Order of Franciscans in 1227, Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church from 1227 until 1231 and Bishop of Ostia in 1231 (or 1232). On the death of Pope Innocent IV in 1254 he was elected pope at Naples on 12 December 1254.\nPontificate.\nAlexander's pontificate was signalled by efforts to reunite the Eastern Orthodox churches with the Catholic Church, by the establishment of the Inquisition in France, by favours shown to the mendicant orders, and by an attempt to organize a crusade against the Mongols after the second Mongol raid against Poland in 1259.\nOn 26 September 1255, Alexander IV canonized Saint Clare of Assisi, founder of the religious order for women called the Poor Clares. On 29 October 1255, in the papal bull \"Benigna Operatio\", Alexander declared \"his own knowledge\" of the stigmata attributed to Saint Francis of Assisi.\nIn 1256, Alexander IV condemned theories of Joachim of Fiore, a millenarian prophet who had died in 1202 and whose ideas were taken up by the Fraticelli strand of the Franciscan Order. On the basis of his interpretation of the Book of Revelation, Joachim had postulated that 1260 would see the beginning of a Third Age, an age governed by the Holy Spirit, in which the hierarchy of the Church would become unnecessary - an idea which was obviously unwelcome to the Pope. In the event, 1260 \u2013 still in Alexander IV's lifetime \u2013 came and went with no such Third Age materializing, but Joachim's ideas would in later centuries be taken up by the Cult of the Holy Spirit which had a major impact in Portugal and its colonies.\nThe pontiff also, on 27 September 1258, declared in the bull \"Quod super nonnullis\" that \"divination or sorcery\" was not to be investigated by Inquisitors of the Church, who were tasked with investigating heresy. Crimes involving magic should be left to local authorities unless they had \"knowledge of manifest heresy to be involved\", wherein \"manifest heresy\" included \"praying at the altars of idols, to offer sacrifices, to consult demons, [or] to elicit responses from them\". At this period in Church history, the use of magic was not seen as inherently heretical, but rather rooted in superstition or erroneous beliefs.\nSicily.\nOn 14 May 1254, shortly before his death, Innocent IV had granted Sicily, a papal fiefdom, to Edmund, second son of King Henry III of England. Alexander confirmed the grant on 9 April 1255, in return for of gold per annum, the service of 300 knights for three months when required, and 135,541 marks (about 32 tonnes of silver) to reimburse the pope for the money he had expended attempting to oust Manfred from Sicily. Henry's unsuccessful attempts to persuade his subjects to pay the taxes required to meet Alexander's demands were one of the factors in the conflict between the king and parliament which culminated in the Second Barons' War. In 1256, when relations between the two men were strained, Alexander firmly rejected Henry's choice of Archbishop of Dublin. On 12 April 1261, shortly before his death, Alexander issued a papal bull for King Henry that absolved him and the magnates of his realm from the oaths taken in the Provisions of Oxford, which was instrumental in the War.\nAlexander IV succeeded Innocent IV as guardian of Conradin, the last of the Hohenstaufens, promising him protection; but in less than three weeks he conspired against him and bitterly opposed Conradin's uncle Manfred. Alexander IV threatened excommunication and interdict against the party of Manfred without effect. Nor could he enlist the kings of England and Norway in a crusade against the Hohenstaufens. Rome itself became too Ghibelline for the Pope, who withdrew to Viterbo, where he died on 25 May 1261. He was buried in Viterbo Cathedral, but his tomb was destroyed during sixteenth-century renovations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
{"id": "23789", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23789", "title": "Pope Alexander VII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1655 to 1667\nPope Alexander VII (; 13 February 1599\u00a0\u2013 22 May 1667), born Fabio Chigi, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 7 April 1655 to his death, in May 1667. \nHe began his career as a vice-papal legate, and he held various diplomatic positions in the Holy See. He was ordained as a priest in 1634, and he became bishop of Nardo in 1635. He was later transferred in 1652, and he became bishop of Imola. Pope Innocent X made him secretary of state in 1651 and, in 1652, he was appointed a cardinal.\nEarly in his papacy, Alexander, who was seen as an anti-nepotist at the time of his election, lived simply; later, however, he gave jobs to his relatives, who eventually took over his administration. His administration worked to support the Jesuits. However, his administration's relations with France were strained due to his frictions with French diplomats.\nAlexander was interested in architecture and supported various urban projects in Rome. He also wrote poetry and patronized artists who expanded the decoration of churches. His theological writings included discussions of heliocentrism and the Immaculate Conception.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Siena, a member of the illustrious banking family of Chigi, son of Count Flavio Chigi-Ardenghesca (1549\u20131615), Gonfaloniere, Capitano del Popolo, and wife Laura Marsigli, and a great-grandnephew of Pope Paul V (1605\u20131621), Fabio Chigi was privately tutored and eventually received doctorates of philosophy, law, and theology from the University of Siena.\nFabio's nephew Antonio created a cardinal by his uncle on 9 April 1657. The appointment was made public on 10 November 1659. He appointed his nephew Giovanni Bichi, Admiral of the Papal Navy.\nPapal diplomat.\nIn 1627 he began his apprenticeship as vice-papal legate at Ferrara, and on recommendations from two cardinals he was appointed Inquisitor of Malta.\nChigi was ordained a priest in Rome in December 1634. He was appointed \"Referendarius utriusque signaturae\", which made him a prelate and gave him the right to practice before the Roman courts. On 8 January 1635, Chigi was named Bishop of Nard\u00f2 in southern Italy and consecrated on 1 July 1635 by Miguel Juan Balaguer Camarasa, Bishop of Malta. On 13 May 1652 he was transferred to the Bishopric of Imola.\nBishop Chigi was named nuncio in Cologne (1639\u20131651) on 11 June 1639. There, he supported Urban VIII's condemnation of the heretical book \"Augustinus\" by Cornelius Jansen, Bishop of Ypres, in the papal bull \"In eminenti\" of 1642.\nThough expected to take part in the negotiations which led in 1648 to the Peace of Westphalia, Bishop Chigi (and other Catholic delegates) declined to deliberate with persons whom the Catholic Church considered heretics. Negotiations therefore took place in two cities, Osnabr\u00fcck and M\u00fcnster in Westphalia, with intermediaries travelling back and forth between the Protestant and the Catholic delegates. Chigi protested against the Treaty of Westphalia on behalf of the Papacy once the instruments were finally completed. Pope Innocent X himself stated that the Peace \"is null, void, invalid, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all time.\" The Peace ended the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) and established the balance of European power that lasted until the French Revolutionary Wars (1792).\nSecretary of State and Cardinal.\nPope Innocent X (1644\u20131655) recalled Chigi to Rome and, in December 1651, named him Secretary of State. He was created a cardinal by Innocent X in the Consistory of 19 February 1652, and on 12 March was granted the title of Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria del Popolo.\nPapacy.\nElection as pope.\nWhen Innocent X died on 7 January 1655, Cardinal Chigi was elected pope after eighty days in the conclave, on 7 April 1655, taking the name of Alexander VII, in honor of Pope Alexander III.\nOn the morning of his election as he went to celebrate Mass before the final ballot, Chigi was greeted by his friend Luigi Omodei who, knowing that Chigi was soon to be elected, said: \"At length that day has come, so desired by me, and so happy for the Church!\" Chigi replied to Omodei by reciting Virgil and said: \"That day I shall always recollect with grief; with reverence also for the gods so willed it\". During the final ballot, Chigi had cast his vote for Giulio Cesare Sacchetti while in the accesso casting it for Giovanni Maria Battista Pallotta. Upon his election, one of the cardinals remarked: \"What a singular thing! The Spaniards disinterestedly wished you to be pope; the French wished it, though they had at first excluded you; the young men chose a man already aged, and the Barberini a man who was not their own creature!\"\nUpon his election, he was crowned on 18 April 1655 by the Cardinal Protodeacon Gian Giacomo Teodoro Trivulzio before taking possession of the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran on the following 9 May.\nOne of his first acts as pope was to order Olimpia Maidalchini (known popularly as \"la papessa\" due to her extraordinary influence over Pope Innocent X) to return to her native town of Orvieto. Maidalchini had been a rival of sorts since Chigi's office as Secretary of State commanded much power which Maidalchini hoped to utilize for her own ends while she worked with Cardinal Decio Azzolino to try to circumvent Chigi's authority with the hopes of having Chigi either effectively sidelined or replaced.\nNepotism.\nThe conclave believed he was strongly opposed to the nepotism that had been a feature of previous popes. In the first year of his reign, Alexander VII lived simply and forbade his relatives even to visit Rome, but in the consistory of 24 April 1656, Pope Alexander announced that his brother and nephews would be coming to assist him in Rome. His nephew, Cardinal Flavio Chigi assumed the position of cardinal-nephew. The administration was given largely into the hands of his relatives, and nepotism became entrenched as it had been in the Baroque Papacy. Cardinal Flavio began work on the Villa Chigi-Versaglia at Formello in 1664.\nWhen announcing to the cardinals in 1656 that he would summon his relatives to Rome, the pontiff asked that each cardinal provide his opinion on his suggestion. The cardinals agreed, but attached several conditions to ensure that nepotism did not run too rampant. The pope eventually received his relatives in an audience, however, the meeting was formal and his relatives were required to kneel for the entirety of the audience as the pope informed them of why they had been summoned and what was expected of them.\nUrban and architectural projects in Rome.\nA number of pontiffs are renowned for their urban planning in the city of Rome\u2014for example, Pope Julius II and Pope Sixtus V\u2014but Alexander VII's numerous urban interventions were not only diverse in scope and scale but demonstrated a consistent planning and architectural vision that the glorification and embellishment of the city, ancient and modern, sacred and secular, should be governed by order and decorum.\nCentral to Alexander's urbanism was the idea of \"teatro\" or urban theatre whereby his urban interventions became the grand settings or showpieces appropriate to the dignity of Rome and the Head of the Catholic Church. Therefore, and although the scales are vastly different, the small Santa Maria della Pace and its piazza are as much a teatro as the imposing monumental colonnade that forms St. Peter's Square in front of St. Peter's Basilica.\nThe various urban and architectural projects carried out during Alexander's reign were recorded in engravings by Giovanni Battista Falda and the first volume was published in 1665. The volumes were published by Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi under the title \"Il Nuovo Teatro delle fabriche et edificij in prospettiva di Roma moderna sotto il felice pontificato di N.S. Alessandro VII.\" A rival publication documenting these projects was published by Rossi's cousin Giovanni Battista de Rossi who employed the young Flemish architectural draughtsman Lieven Cruyl to produce drawings of Rome, 10 of which were published in 1666 under the title \"Prospectus Locorum Urbis Romae Insignium\".\nHis preferred architect was the sculptor and architect Gian Lorenzo Bernini but he also gave architectural commissions to the painter and architect Pietro da Cortona. Of the three leading architects of the Roman High Baroque, only Francesco Borromini fared less well under Alexander; this may be because he thought Borromini's architectural forms wilful but also Borromini could be notoriously difficult. Nonetheless, Alexander's family heraldic emblems of the mons or mountains with stars and oak leaves, adorn Borromini's church of Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza and many other works of his reign.\nAlexander took a keen personal interest in his urban and architectural projects and made notes of these in his diaries. His projects in Rome included: the church and piazza at Santa Maria della Pace; the Via del Corso, Piazza Colonna and associated buildings; reworking of the Porta del Popolo, the Piazza del Popolo and Santa Maria del Popolo; St. Peter's Square, the Scala Regia and interior embellishments in the Vatican Palace and St. Peter's; Sant'Andrea al Quirinale; part of the Quirinal Palace; the Arsenal of Civitavecchia, the obelisk and elephant in Piazza della Minerva; and the Chigi Palace. The Palazzo Chigi in Rome is not to be confused with the Palazzo Chigi in S. Quirico d'Orcia in Tuscany, or the Palazzo Chigi di Formello.\nForeign relations.\nMalta.\nBefore being elected as Pontiff, Chigi served as Inquisitor on the Island of Malta where he resided mostly at the Inquisitor's Palace in Birgu (alias Citt\u00e0 Vittoriosa). At that time Malta was a fiefdom of the Knights Hospitallers of the Sovereign Order of Saint John of Jerusalem, Knights of Malta, from which he bought one hundred slaves in 1662 for his naval squadron.\nSweden.\nThe conversion of Queen Christina of Sweden (1632\u20131654) occurred during Alexander VII's reign. After her abdication the queen came to reside in Rome, where she was confirmed in her baptism by the Pope, in whom she found a generous friend and benefactor, on Christmas Day, 1655. She was described by the Pope as 'a queen without a realm, a Christian without faith, and a woman without shame.' He was also said to have accused her of being 'a woman born of a barbarian, barbarously brought up and living with barbarous thoughts', therefore indicating that their relationship might have been contentious at best.\nShortly after her arrival in Rome, she quickly became the centre of Roman fashion and parties. However, following the pre-Lenten Carnival in 1656, Alexander VII quickly regretted having invited her to Rome since there existed an atmosphere of immorality which was linked to the Carnival. While the pontiff had originally hoped that Christina would become an inspiration for those considering conversion to the faith, he was dismayed that her interests were primarily political, even to the point that she helped plot the conquest of Naples with Cardinal Mazarin.\nFrance.\nIn foreign policy his instincts were not as humanist or as successful. Alexander VII's pontificate was shadowed by continual friction with Cardinal Mazarin, adviser to and effectively chief minister of Louis XIV of France (1643\u20131715), who had opposed him during the negotiations that led to the Peace of Westphalia and who defended the prerogatives of the Gallican Church. During the conclave, Mazarin had been hostile to Chigi's election, but was in the end had been compelled to accept him as a compromise. However, he prevented Louis XIV from sending the usual embassy of obedience to Alexander VII, and, while he lived, foiled the appointment of a French ambassador to Rome, diplomatic affairs being meantime conducted by cardinal protectors, generally personal enemies of the Pope. In 1662, Louis XIV made the equally hostile Duc de Crequi his ambassador. By his abuse of the traditional right of asylum granted to ambassadorial precincts in Rome, Crequi precipitated a quarrel between France and the papacy, which resulted in Alexander VII's temporary loss of Avignon and his forced acceptance of the humiliating Treaty of Pisa in 1664.\nSpain and Portugal.\nAlexander VII favored the Spanish in their claims against Portugal, which had reestablished its traditional independence in 1640. His pontificate was also marked by protracted controversies with Portugal.\nJesuits and Jansenism.\nAlexander VII favoured the Jesuits. When the Venetians called for help in Crete against the Ottoman Turks, the Pope extracted in return a promise that the Jesuits should be permitted back in Venetian territory, from which they had been expelled in 1606. He also continued to take the Jesuit part in their conflict with the Jansenists, whose condemnation he had vigorously supported as advisor to Pope Innocent X. The French Jansenists professed that the propositions condemned in 1653 were not in fact to be found in \"Augustinus\", written by Cornelius Jansen. Alexander VII confirmed that they were too, by the bull \"Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem\" (16 October 1656) declaring that five propositions extracted by a group of theologians from the Sorbonne out of Jansen's work, mostly concerning grace and the fallen nature of man, were heretical, including the proposition according to which to say \"that Christ died, or shed His blood for all men\" would be a semipelagian error. He also sent to France his famous \"formulary\", that was to be signed by all the clergy as a means of detecting and extirpating Jansenism and which inflamed public opinion, leading to Blaise Pascal's defense of Jansenism.\nWorks.\nAlexander VII disliked the business of state, preferring literature and philosophy; a collection of his Latin poems appeared at Paris in 1656 under the title \"Philomathi Labores Juveniles\". He also encouraged architecture, and the general improvement of Rome, where houses were razed to straighten and widen streets and where he had the opportunity to be a great patron for Gian Lorenzo Bernini: the decorations of the church of Santa Maria del Popolo, titular churches for several of the Chigi cardinals, the Scala Regia, the Chair of St. Peter in St. Peter's Basilica. In particular, he sponsored Bernini's construction of the beautiful colonnade in St. Peter's Square.\nAccording to William Roberts, Alexander VII wrote one of the most authoritative documents related to the heliocentrism issue. However, the document is not about any astronomic model and is not part of the Magisterium Ecclesiae. The Pope published his \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum Alexandri VII Pontificis Maximi jussu editus\" which presented anew the contents of the Index of Forbidden Books which had condemned many works related to many different matters: among them were the works of Copernicus and Galileo. He prefaced this with the bull \"Speculatores Domus Israel\" (1592), stating his reasons: \"in order that the whole history of each case may be known.\" 'For this purpose,' the Pontiff stated, 'we have caused the Tridentine and Clementine Indices to be added to this general Index, and also all the relevant decrees up to the present time, that have been issued since the Index of our predecessor Clement, that nothing profitable to the faithful interested in such matters might seem omitted.\" Among those included were the previous decrees placing various heliocentric works on the Index (\"...which we will should be considered as though it were inserted in these presents, together with all, and singular, the things contained therein...\") and, according to Roberts, using his Apostolic authority he bound the faithful to its contents (\"...and approve with Apostolic authority by the tenor of these presents, and: command and enjoin all persons everywhere to yield this Index a constant and complete obedience...\") Thus, for the geocentrists, Alexander turned definitively against the heliocentric view of the Solar System. After Alexander VII's pontificate, the \"Index\" underwent a number of revisions. \"In 1758 the general prohibition against works advocating heliocentrism was removed from the Index of prohibited books, although the specific ban on uncensored versions of the \"Dialogue\" and Copernicus's \"De Revolutionibus\" remained. All traces of official opposition to heliocentrism by the church disappeared in 1835 when these works were finally dropped from the Index\". The Index was abolished entirely in 1966. \nTheology.\nAlexander VII's Apostolic Constitution, \"Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum\" (8 December 1661), laid out the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary in terms almost identical to those utilized by Pope Pius IX when he issued his infallible definition \"Ineffabilis Deus\". Pius IX cites Alexander VII's bull in his footnote 11.\nMorality.\nOn 18 March 1666 in a decree issued, Alexander VII issued a correction on various moral matters that expanded upon a decree he had issued previously on 24 September 1665. In his decree, Alexander VII confirmed the authority and rulings from the Council of Trent while advising on matters ranging from sacramental confession, heresy, to proper courtship practices. The pontiff also confirmed the rulings made by predecessors such as Urban VIII in matters that concerned moral teachings. Pope Innocent XI later expanded upon some of his points in 1679.\nEcclesial activities.\nConsistories.\nAlexander VII created 38 cardinals in six consistories which included Flavio Chigi, his nephew in the role of Cardinal-Nephew, while naming Giulio Rospigliosi as a cardinal and whom would eventually succeed him as Pope Clement IX. Out of all the cardinals whom he had named, the pope had reserved five of those names \"in pectore\" and announced them at later dates.\nReligious orders.\nAlexander VII reformed the Constitution for the Cistercians in the papal brief \"In suprema\" on 19 April 1666 which effectively ended a dispute that had lasted for decades on the question of reform which had long since divided the Cistercians. The pope also played a role in changes made to the Barnabites and the Piarists (1656). In 1666, he formally approved the Congregation of Jesus and Mary which had been founded by Saint John Eudes while in 1655 he had given his approval to the Congregation of the Mission which had been founded by Saint Vincent de Paul.\nLiturgical actions.\nIn 1661, the pope forbade the translation of the Roman Missal into French which had been published in 1660 by the priest Joseph de Voisin. With the French episcopacy condemning the bilingual Missal in late 1660, the pontiff ratified this in a papal bull on 12 January 1661. In 1656, he revoked the decree of Innocent X and allowed the Chinese rites to be used by the Jesuit missionaries in China. Alexander VII expanded upon this in 1659 when he dispensed the Chinese clergy from having to pray the Divine Office in Latin.\nCanonizations and beatifications.\nThroughout his pontificate, Alexander VII beatified two individuals (Francis de Sales and Pedro de Arbu\u00e9s) and canonized five others which included Ferdinand III and F\u00e9lix de Valois amongst others.\nEastern Churches.\nIn 1661, the pope assured the Patriarch of the Chaldean Catholic Church, Shimun XII Yoalaha, that the Latin Church episcopacy would support those of the Chaldean Church. During his papacy, the pope also dispatched a mission consisting of Carmelite friars to Syria in order to evangelize and spread the faith in the Middle East. The pope also created the Archdiocese of Aleppo in 1659.\nDeath.\nAlexander VII died at age 68 from kidney failure. His health had initially begun to fail around March, with his ailment consistently causing him great pain. He kept his coffin in his bedroom, and a skull (carved by famed sculptor Bernini) on his writing table, because he was always aware that he would someday die. Suddenly taken by a fever on 18 May, he died on 22 May. A seventeenth-century pamphlet credited to Ayres, titled \"A short Account of the Life and Death of Pope Alexander VII\", contains many fascinating details about Alexander's passing. According to this pamphlet, Alexander, although bedridden, wanted to celebrate the Passion to ready himself for his impending death. Neither his surgeon nor his confessor was able to persuade him to save his strength. He blessed the large crowd of people on Easter, the last time they would ever see him alive.\nA precise and detailed account of the pope's last days is given in the \"Diary\" of the principal Master of Ceremonies, Fulvio Servantio, an official eyewitness to all the proceedings.\nShort Account of the Life and Death of Pope Alexander VII:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlexander VII died in 1667 and was memorialised in a spectacular tomb by Bernini. However, Pope Innocent XI ordered that the naked Truth be covered up with a drapery colored in white. It is famous for the skeleton holding a gilded hourglass, just above the doors. He was succeeded by Pope Clement IX (1667\u20131669). As the pope lay dying, he said to the cardinals gathered at his bedside: \"We never aspired to the tiara, nor took any steps to reach it. We have employed the moneys of the apostolical chamber solely in the service of the Catholic religion, and the embellishment of Rome and the building of churches. We were a whole year pontiff before we summoned any relative of ours to Rome, and we only at length did so because the Sacred College vanquished our unwillingness. We exhort you to elect a successor qualified to repair any errors we have committed in our pontificate\".\nMemory.\nThe poet John Flowre wrote a poem about the tomb of Pope Alexander in 1667.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23790", "revid": "23316696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23790", "title": "Pope Alexander VIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1689 to 1691\nPope Alexander VIII (; 22 April 1610\u00a0\u2013 1 February 1691), born Pietro Vito Ottoboni, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 6 October 1689 to his death in February 1691. He is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Alexander\".\nAlexander VIII is known for having overturned many of the policies of his predecessor, Innocent XI, deciding to indulge in nepotism in order to further enrich his family. Such nepotism exhausted the papal treasury, later forcing his successor, Innocent XII, to implement austere measures to restore the papal coffers. Despite his brief papacy, during which little of importance was undertaken, Alexander VIII is known for having condemned the doctrines of the so-called philosophical sin which was being taught in schools run by the Society of Jesus. Also during his papacy, King Louis XIV of France restored Avignon to the Holy See as a territory of the Papal States.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nPietro Vito Ottoboni was born in 1610 of a noble Venetian family, and was the youngest of nine children of Marco Ottoboni (1554\u20131646), grand chancellor of the Republic of Venice, and wife (1594) Vittoria Tornielli (d. 6 November 1635), and paternal grandson of Marcantonio Ottoboni (d. 30 July 1576) and wife Dianora Besal\u00f9, Basalu or Bassal\u00f9 (d. 1 December 1603). His brothers included Agostino Ottoboni (31 July 1608 - d. 2 August 1673), married firstly to Candida Benci (d. c. 31 December 1647) (parents of Vittoria Ottoboni (b. 1637), married to Luigi Priuli, with issue, and Antonio Ottoboni, married to Maria Moretti, parents of Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni) and married secondly in Venice on 22 April 1649 to Paolina Bernardo (parents of Chiara Ottoboni (b. 27 July 1651), married in 1670 to Francesco Zeno, with issue, and Marco Ottoboni, 1st Duke of Fiano). His sisters included Cristina Ottoboni, married to Giambattista Rubini, with issue, and Andriana Ottoboni, married as his first wife to her second cousin Marcantonio Padavino. The family was invited into the nobility of Venice as a result of the battle of Zonchio (1499) and later met the financial qualifications for nobility in the 17th century after amassing a fortune in the diplomatic service.\nHis early studies were made with marked brilliance at the University of Padua where, in 1627, he earned a doctorate in canon and civil law. Ottoboni went to Rome during the pontificate of Pope Urban VIII and served as the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura, and later was the governor of the cities Terni, Rieti, Citta di Castello and Spoleto. He also served as the auditor of the Sacred Roman Rota.\nEpiscopate and cardinalate.\nPope Innocent X appointed him to the cardinalate and in 1652 at the request of the Venetian government and he was made the Cardinal-Priest of San Salvatore in Lauro. He was appointed as Bishop of Brescia in 1654 and later received episcopal consecration in the church of San Marco in Rome. He would spend a quiet decade in his diocese. He opted to be Cardinal-Priest of San Marco in 1660 and resigned as Bishop of Brescia in 1664. Ottoboni also opted to become Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria in Trastevere in 1677 and later as Cardinal-Priest of Santa Prassede in 1680. He later became the Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina in 1681 and then to Frascati in 1683. His last swap was that of Porto e Santa Rufina in 1687.\nOttoboni was also the Vice-Dean of the College of Cardinals from 1687 to his pontifical election.\nPontificate.\nPapal election.\nThe ambassador of King Louis XIV (1643\u20131715) succeeded in procuring his election on 6 October 1689, as the successor to Pope Innocent XI (1676\u201389); nevertheless, after months of negotiation Alexander VIII finally condemned the declaration made in 1682 by the French clergy concerning the liberties of the Gallican church.\nHe chose the pontifical name of \"Alexander VIII\" in gratitude to Cardinal Flavio Chigi, the nephew of Pope Alexander VII, who also had helped support his candidacy. Ottoboni was crowned as pontiff on 16 October 1689 by the protodeacon Cardinal Francesco Maidalchini and took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 28 October 1689.\nOriginally, the allies of Cardinal Flavio Chigi proposed a Venetian in the form of Gregorio Barbarigo rather than their true choice of Ottoboni, hence, a case of misdirection to test whether or not the electors would consider the appointment of a Venetian to the papal throne. Though Barbarigo seemed to garner an exceptional number of votes which highlighted that a Venetian pontiff was indeed a tantalizing opportunity, Barbarigo could not garner any additional votes beyond what he already had accrued. However, many in the camp that wanted continuity with the policies of Innocent XI had caught on to the deception, which only served to create indignation within the conclave. However, since Chigi and his faction had not directly voted for Barbarigo in order to maintain the deception, the Ottoboni candidacy could go ahead and could remain unmarred since Chigi and his faction lied that they were waiting for the arrival of the French cardinals and did not wish to commit to any particular candidate. Though the Venetians indicated their support for Ottoboni, the republic had also managed to secure the support of Madrid and Vienna through their ambassadors, while Cardinal Medici made certain that the Imperial and Spanish factions would also support Ottoboni's candidacy. The determination to elect Ottoboni came conclusively when Ottoboni himself indicated that he was strongly in favor of reconciliation with the French, something that greatly appeased Louis XIV who had been in a more conciliatory mood of late.\nOld but of a strong constitution, Alexander VIII was said to be an able diplomat. During his brief pontificate he managed to destroy most of his predecessor's good work. All the money saved by Innocent XI was spent on enriching the Ottoboni family and to a cardinal he said: \"I have no time to lose; for me the day is almost done!\" Known to be an upright man who was generous and possessed a peaceful disposition, he held a profound compassion and attentiveness for the poor which was often squandered and abused by his nepotistic relatives upon whom he generously heaped riches that they, on their own behalf and to the discredit of his papacy, squandered for their own personal ends.\nAlexander VIII was almost an octogenarian when elected to the papacy, which lasted only sixteen months, during which time little of importance was done. Louis XIV, whose political situation was now critical, profited by the peaceful dispositions of the new pope, restored Avignon to him, and renounced the long-abused right of asylum for the French Embassy.\nReforms.\nOn 29 November 1690, the pontiff established that no more than ten thousand ducats could be spent on the funeral of a pope. That same year, he also forbade that any furnishings of the conclave could not be stripped to be sold for profit.\nOn 30 March 1690, the pope established and confirmed the rights of the neophytes in Southeast Asia in the papal brief \"Animarum salutes\".\nReversing the economic policies of his immediate predecessor, Alexander VIII attempted to reduce the tax burden on the populace as a means of providing financial assistance to the more disadvantaged peoples. However, this backfired due to the pope's focus on large-scale charity initiatives and his focus on the Great Turkish War against the Ottoman Empire, which quickly depleted papal funds which Innocent XI had been very careful to grow and safeguard.\nFinancial controversies.\nCharities on a large scale and unbounded nepotism exhausted the papal treasury, reversing the policies of his predecessor. Among the various nominations, his 22-year-old grandnephew Pietro was made cardinal and vice-chancellor of the Church, nephew Marco, son of his brother Agostino, was made inspector of naval fortifications and Duke of Fiano, and nephew Antonio, another of Agostino's children, was made general of the church. His nephew Giambattista Rubini was made Cardinal Secretary of State and bishop of Vicenza. Out of compassion for the poor of the impoverished Papal States, he sought to help them by reducing taxes. But this same generous nature led him to bestow on his relations the riches they were eager to accumulate; on their behalf, and to the discredit of his pontificate, he revived sinecure offices which had been suppressed by Innocent XI. He bought the books and manuscripts of Queen Christina of Sweden for the Vatican Library. Alexander VIII assisted his native Venice by generous subsidies in the war against the Turks, as well as sending seven galleys and 2,000 infantry for the campaign in Albania.\nIn 1690 he condemned the doctrines of the so-called philosophical sin, taught in the Jesuit schools. He also held three consistories that saw 14 new cardinals elevated.\nForeign policy.\nVenice.\nA Venetian himself, Alexander VIII largely supported the Republic of Venice in its military campaign against the Ottoman Empire for control of Peloponnese in Greece and the Aegean Sea, donating enough food to fill seven galleys while also sending infantry for their campaign in Albania.\nFrance.\nCondemning the precepts of the Gallican proposals which had been ratified in 1682, the pope attempted to try and mend the despairing relationship between the Holy See and the French which had been largely strained by his predecessor. Despite this, the proposals were revoked in 1693 only after Alexander VIII had died, in exchange for papal recognition of the right of the crown to administer to vacant dioceses. At the time as Louis XIV found his own political situation to be precarious, the monarch profited from the pope's peaceful dispositions while Louis XIV decided to renounce the long-abused right of asylum for the French embassy.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nAlexander VIII confirmed the cultus of Kinga of Poland on 11 June 1690 which served as the beatification. On 16 October 1690, he canonized several saints: Ss. Pascal Baylon, Lorenzo Giustiniani, John of Sahagun, John of God and John of Capistrano.\nConsistories.\nThe pope created 14 cardinals in three consistories and elevated individuals such as his grandnephew Pietro Ottoboni in a restoration of nepotism that had not been seen in his predecessor's reign. Among those whom he named was Gianfrancesco Albani, the future Pope Clement XI.\nThe pontiff also named Toussaint de Forbin-Janson to the cardinalate in 1690 despite his immediate predecessor having firmly refused to do so. While Innocent XI had refused to name him as a cardinal due to Forbin-Janson's support for the Gallican proposals in 1682, Alexander VIII opted to name him a cardinal in an attempt to smooth over tense relations with King Louis XIV who had been on relatively poor terms with Innocent XI. As a further overture to the French monarch, Alexander VIII also named two more French cardinals, a move that largely irked Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor and saw the emperor withdraw his ambassador to the Holy See. Moreover, the pontiff was less concerned with the emperor's actions primarily because the emperor had primarily been indifferent to defending against the Ottoman Empire in favor of hostility with the French.\nDeath and burial.\nOn 16 October 1690, the day that he celebrated a canonization Mass, it was noticed that Alexander VIII appeared to look relatively sluggish and hence seemed like he had fallen ill. While it was hypothesized that he may have had a minor stroke, his doctors suggested that the pope rest but were unsure of what exactly had caused the pope to fall ill. On 20 January 1691, Cardinal Forbin Janson informed King Louis XIV that the pope was seriously ill, and on 22 January, that his condition had dramatically deteriorated and that his nephew was pessimistic about his uncle's chances. On 27 January, it was reported that gangrene had set in while Alexander VIII met with twelve cardinals on 30 January. Alexander VIII died at 4:00pm on 1 February 1691 while a plague from Naples had spread to Rome, infecting the pope and hastening his death.\nHis grandiose tomb in Saint Peter's was commissioned by his grandnephew, Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni, and designed by Count Arrigo di San Martino. The bas-relief at the base and the flanking figures (1704) were sculpted by Angelo de' Rossi, while the bronze statue of the pope was cast by Giuseppe Bertosi.\nEpiscopal succession.\nPope Alexander VIII was the principal consecrator of:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23791", "revid": "23750853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23791", "title": "Pope Alexander VI", "text": "Bishop of Rome from 1492 to 1503\nPope Alexander VI (, , ; born Roderic Llan\u00e7ol i de Borja; epithet: \"Valentinus\" (\"The Valencian\"); c.\u20091431 \u2013 18 August 1503) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 11 August 1492 until his death in 1503.\nBorn into the prominent Borja family in X\u00e0tiva in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon (in present-day Spain), he was known as Roderic de Borja, and he is commonly referred to by the Italianized form as Rodrigo Borgia. He studied law at the University of Bologna. He was ordained deacon and made a cardinal in 1456 after the election of his uncle as Pope Callixtus III, and a year later he became vice-chancellor of the Catholic Church. He proceeded to serve in the Roman Curia under the next four popes, acquiring significant influence and wealth in the process. In 1492, Rodrigo was elected pope, taking the name Alexander VI.\nAlexander's papal bulls of 1493 confirmed or reconfirmed the rights of the Spanish crown in the New World following the finds of Christopher Columbus in 1492. During the second Italian war, Alexander VI supported his son Cesare Borgia as a condottiero for the French king. The scope of his foreign policy was to gain the most advantageous terms for his family.\nAlexander is one of the most controversial of the Renaissance popes, partly because he acknowledged fathering several children by his mistresses. As a result, his Italianized Valencian surname, \"Borgia\", became a byword for libertinism and nepotism, which are traditionally considered as characterizing his pontificate.\nBirth and family.\nRoderic de Borja was born c. 1431, in the town of X\u00e0tiva near Valencia, one of the component realms of the Crown of Aragon, in what is now Spain. He was named for his paternal grandfather, Rodrigo Gil de Borja y Fennolet. His parents were Jofr\u00e9 Llan\u00e7ol i Escriv\u00e0 (died bef. 24 March 1437) and his Aragonese wife and distant cousin Isabel de Borja y Cavanilles (died 19 October 1468), daughter of Juan Domingo de Borja y Doncel. He had a younger brother, Pedro. His family name is written \"Llan\u00e7ol\" in Valencian and \"Lanzol\" in Castillian. Roderic adopted his mother's family name of Borja in 1455 following the elevation to the papacy of maternal uncle Alonso de Borja (Italianized to Alfonso Borgia) as Callixtus III. His cousin and Callixtus's nephew Luis de Mil\u00e0 y de Borja became a cardinal.\nGerard Noel writes that Rodrigo's father was Jofr\u00e9 de Borja y Escriv\u00e0, making Rodrigo a Borja from his mother and father's side. However, Cesare, Lucrezia, and Jofre were known to be of Llan\u00e7ol paternal lineage. G. J. Meyer suggests that Rodrigo would have likely been uncle (from a shared female family member) to the children, and attributes the confusion to attempts to connect Rodrigo as the father of Giovanni (Juan), Cesare, Lucrezia, and Gioffre (Jofr\u00e9 in Valencian), who were surnamed \"Llan\u00e7ol i Borja\".\nAppearance and personality.\nPeter de Roo gives a flattering summary of contemporary descriptions of Alexander, relating him to have been \"of a medium complexion, with dark eyes and \nslightly full lips, of robust health\"; in later life, he reports that \"his aspect [was declared] to be venerable and far more \naugust than an ordinary human appearance\", and that he was \"so familiar with Holy Writ, that his speeches were fairly sparkling with well-chosen texts of the Sacred Books\".\nCareer.\nOverview.\nRoderic de Borja's career in the Church began in 1445 at the age of 14, when he was appointed sacristan at the Cathedral of Valencia by his influential uncle, Alfons Cardinal de Borja, who had been appointed a cardinal by Pope Eugene IV the previous year. In 1448, de Borja became canon at the cathedrals of Valencia, Barcelona, and Segorbe. His uncle, Cardinal de Borja, persuaded Pope Nicholas V to allow young de Borja to perform this role \"in absentia\" and receive the associated income, so that de Borja could travel to Rome. While in Rome, Rodrigo Borgia (as his name was usually spelled in Italian) studied under Gaspare da Verona, a humanist tutor. He then studied law at Bologna where he graduated, not simply as Doctor of Law, but as \"the most eminent and judicious jurisprudent.\"\nThe election of his uncle, Alfons Cardinal de Borja, as Pope Callixtus III in 1455 enabled Borgia's appointments to other positions in the Church. These nepotistic appointments were characteristic of the era. Each pope during this period found himself surrounded by the servants and retainers of his predecessors who often owed their loyalty to the family of the pontiff who had appointed them. In 1455, he inherited his uncle's post as bishop of Valencia, and Callixtus appointed him Dean of Santa Maria in X\u00e0tiva. The following year, he was ordained deacon and created cardinal-deacon of San Nicola in Carcere. Rodrigo Borgia's appointment as cardinal only occurred after Callixtus III asked the cardinals in Rome to create three new positions in the College of Cardinals, two for his nephews Rodrigo and Luis Juan de Mil\u00e0, and one for the Prince Jaime of Portugal.\nIn 1457, Callixtus III assigned the young Cardinal de Borja (or Borgia in Italian) to go to Ancona as a Papal legate to quell a revolt. Borgia was successful in his mission, and his uncle rewarded him with his appointment as vice-chancellor of the Holy Roman Church. The position of vice-chancellor was both incredibly powerful and lucrative, and Borgia held this post for 35 years until his own election to the papacy in 1492. At the end of 1457, Rodrigo Cardinal Borgia's elder brother, Pedro Luis Borgia, fell ill, so Rodrigo temporarily filled Pedro Luis' position as captain-general of the papal army until he recovered. In 1458, Cardinal Borgia's uncle and greatest benefactor, Pope Callixtus, died.\nIn the papal election of 1458, Rodrigo Borgia was too young to seek the papacy himself, so he sought to support a cardinal who would maintain him as vice-chancellor. Borgia was one of the deciding votes in the election of Cardinal Piccolomini as Pope Pius II, and the new pope rewarded Borgia not only with maintaining the chancellorship but also with a lucrative abbey benefice and another titular church. In 1460, Pope Pius rebuked Cardinal Borgia for attending a private party which Pius had heard turned into an orgy. Borgia apologized for the incident but denied that there had been an orgy. Pope Pius forgave him, and the true events of the evening remain unknown. In 1462, Rodrigo Borgia had his first son, Pedro Luis, with an unknown mistress. He sent Pedro Luis to grow up in Spain. The following year, Borgia acceded to Pope Pius's call for cardinals to help fund a new crusade. Before embarking to lead the crusade personally, Pope Pius II fell ill and died, so Borgia would need to ensure the election of yet another ally to the papacy to maintain his position as vice-chancellor.\nOn the first ballot, the conclave of 1464 elected Borgia's friend Pietro Barbo as Pope Paul II. Borgia was in high standing with the new pope and retained his positions, including that of vice-chancellor. Paul II reversed some of his predecessor's reforms that diminished the power of the chancellory. Following the election, Borgia fell ill of the plague but recovered. Borgia had two daughters, Isabella (*1467) and Girolama (*1469), with an unknown mistress. He openly acknowledged all three of his children. Pope Paul II died suddenly in 1471.\nWhile Borgia had acquired the reputation and wealth to mount a bid for the papacy in this conclave, there were only three non-Italians, making his election a near-impossibility. Consequently, Borgia continued his previous strategy of positioning himself as kingmaker. This time, Borgia gathered the votes to make Francesco della Rovere (the uncle of future Borgia rival Giuliano della Rovere) Pope Sixtus IV. Della Rovere's appeal was that he was a pious and brilliant Franciscan friar who lacked many political connections in Rome. He seemed to be the perfect cardinal to reform the Church, and the perfect cardinal for Borgia to maintain his influence. Sixtus IV rewarded Borgia for his support by promoting him to cardinal-bishop and consecrating him as the Cardinal-Bishop of Albano, requiring Borgia's ordination as a priest. Borgia also received a lucrative abbey from the pope and remained vice-chancellor. At the end of the year, the pope appointed Borgia to be the papal legate for Spain to negotiate a peace treaty between Castile and Aragon and to solicit their support for another crusade. In 1472, Borgia was appointed to be the papal chamberlain until his departure to Spain. Borgia arrived in his native Aragon in the summer, reuniting with family and meeting with King Juan II and Prince Ferdinand. The pope gave Cardinal Borgia discretion over whether to give dispensation for Ferdinand's marriage to his second cousin Isabella of Castile, and Borgia decided in favour of approving the marriage. The couple named Borgia to be the godfather of their first son in recognition of this decision. The marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella was critical in the unification of Castile and Aragon into Spain. Borgia also negotiated peace between Castile and Aragon and an end to the civil wars in the latter Kingdom, gaining the favour of the future King Ferdinand - who would go on to promote the interests of the Borgia family in Aragon. Borgia returned to Rome the following year, narrowly surviving a storm that sank a nearby galley that was carrying 200 men of the Borgia household. \nBack in Rome, Borgia began his affair with Vannozza dei Cattenei which would yield four children: Cesare in 1475, Giovanni in 1474 or 1476, Lucrezia in 1480, and Gioffre in 1482. In 1476, Pope Sixtus appointed Borgia to be the cardinal-bishop of Porto. In 1480, the pope legitimized Cesare as a favour to Cardinal Borgia, and in 1482, the pope began to appoint the seven-year-old to church positions, demonstrating Borgia's intention to use his influence to promote his children. Contemporaneously, Borgia continued to add to his list of benefices, becoming the wealthiest cardinal by 1483. He also become Dean of the College of Cardinals in that year. In 1484, Pope Sixtus IV died, necessitating another election for Borgia to manipulate to his advantage.\nBorgia was wealthy and powerful enough to mount a bid, but he faced competition from Giuliano della Rovere, the late pope's nephew. Della Rovere's faction had the advantage of being incredibly large as Sixtus had appointed many of the cardinals who would participate in the election. Borgia's attempts to gather enough votes included bribery and leveraging his close ties to Naples and Aragon. However, many of the Spanish cardinals were absent from the conclave and della Rovere's faction had an overwhelming advantage. Della Rovere chose to promote Cardinal Cibo as his preferred candidate, and Cibo wrote to the Borgia faction wanting to strike a deal. Once again, Borgia played kingmaker and conceded to Cardinal Cibo who became Pope Innocent VIII. Again, Borgia retained his position of vice-chancellor, successfully holding this position over the course of five papacies and four elections.\nIn 1485, Pope Innocent VIII nominated Borgia to become the Archbishop of Seville, a position that King Ferdinand II wanted for his own son. In response, Ferdinand angrily seized the Borgia estates in Aragon and imprisoned Borgia's son Pedro Luis. However, Borgia healed the relationship by turning down this appointment. Pope Innocent, at the urging of his close ally Giuliano della Rovere, decided to declare war against Naples, but Milan, Florence, and Aragon chose to support Naples over the pope. Borgia led the opposition within the College of Cardinals to this war, and King Ferdinand rewarded Borgia by making his son Pedro Luis the Duke of Gandia and arranging a marriage between his cousin Maria Enriquez and the new duke. Now, the Borgia family was directly tied to the royal families of Spain and Naples. While Borgia gained the favour of Spain, he stood opposed to the pope and the della Rovere family. As a part of his war opposition, Borgia sought to obstruct an alliance negotiation between the papacy and France. These negotiations were unsuccessful and in July 1486, the pope capitulated and ended the war. In 1488, Borgia's son Pedro Luis died, and Juan Borgia became the new duke of Gandia. In the following year, Borgia hosted the wedding ceremony between Orsino Orsini and Giulia Farnese, and within a few months, Farnese had become Borgia's new mistress. She was 15, and he was 58. Borgia continued to acquire new benefices with their large streams of income, including the bishopric of Majorca and Eger in Hungary. In 1492, Pope Innocent VIII died. Since Borgia was 61, this was likely his last chance to become pope.\nArchbishop of Valencia.\nWhen his uncle Alonso de Borja (bishop of Valencia) was elected Pope Callixtus III,\nhe \"inherited\" the post of bishop of Valencia. Sixteen days before the death of Pope Innocent VIII, he proposed Valencia as a metropolitan see and became the first archbishop of Valencia. When Rodrigo Borgia was elected pope as Alexander VI following the death of Innocent VIII, his son Cesare Borgia \"inherited\" the post as second archbishop of Valencia. The third and the fourth archbishops of Valencia were Juan de Borja and Pedro Luis de Borja, grandnephews of Alexander VI.\nElection to the papacy.\nThere was change in the constitution of the College of Cardinals during the course of the 15th century, especially under Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII. Of the 27 cardinals alive in the closing months of the reign of Innocent VIII no fewer than 10 were cardinal-nephews, eight were crown nominees, four were Roman nobles and one other had been given the cardinalate in recompense for his family's service to the Holy See; only four were able career churchmen.\nOn the death of Pope Innocent VIII on 25 July 1492, the three likely candidates for the Papacy were the 61-year-old Borgia, seen as an independent candidate, Ascanio Sforza for the Milanese, and Giuliano della Rovere, seen as a pro-French candidate.\nIt was rumoured but not substantiated that Borgia succeeded in buying the largest number of votes and Sforza, in particular, was bribed with four mule-loads of silver. Mallett shows that Borgia was in the lead from the start and that the rumours of bribery began after the election with the distribution of benefices; Sforza and della Rovere were just as willing and able to bribe as anyone else. The benefices and offices granted to Sforza, moreover, would be worth considerably more than four mule-loads of silver. Johann Burchard, the conclave's master of ceremonies and a leading figure of the papal household under several popes, recorded in his diary that the 1492 conclave was a particularly expensive campaign. Della Rovere was bankrolled to the cost of 200,000 gold ducats by King Charles VIII of France, with another 100,000 supplied by the Republic of Genoa.\nThe leading candidates in the first ballot were Oliviero Carafa of Sforza's party with nine votes, and Giovanni Michiel and Jorge Costa, both of della Rovere's party with seven votes each. Borgia himself gathered seven votes. However, Borgia convinced Sforza to join with his camp through the promise of being appointed vice-chancellor as well as bribes that included benefices and perhaps four mule-loads of silver. With Sforza now canvassing for votes, Borgia's election was assured. Borgia was elected on 11 August 1492 and assumed the name of Alexander VI (due to confusion about the status of Pope Alexander V, elected by the Council of Pisa). Many inhabitants of Rome were happy with their new pope because he was a generous and competent administrator who had served for decades as vice-chancellor.\nEarly years in office.\nIn contrast to the preceding pontificate, Pope Alexander VI adhered initially to strict administration of justice and orderly government. Before long, though, he began endowing his relatives at the Church's and at his neighbours' expense. Cesare Borgia, his son, while a youth of seventeen and a student at Pisa, was made Archbishop of Valencia, and Giovanni Borgia inherited the Spanish Dukedom of Gandia, the Borgias' ancestral home in Spain. For the Duke of Gandia and for Gioffre, also known as Goffredo, the Pope proposed to carve fiefs out of the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples. Among the fiefs destined for the duke of Gandia were Cerveteri and Anguillara, lately acquired by Virginio Orsini, head of that powerful house. This policy brought Alexander into conflict with Ferdinand I of Naples as well as with Cardinal della Rovere, whose candidature for the papacy had been backed by Ferdinand. Della Rovere fortified himself in his bishopric of Ostia at the Tiber's mouth as Alexander formed a league against Naples (25 April 1493) and prepared for war.\nFerdinand allied himself with Florence, Milan, and Venice. He also appealed to Spain for help, but Spain was eager to be on good terms with the papacy to obtain the title to the recently discovered New World. Alexander, in the bull \"Inter caetera\" on 4 May 1493, divided the title between Spain and Portugal along a demarcation line. This became the basis of the Treaty of Tordesillas.\nFrench involvement.\nPope Alexander VI made many alliances to secure his position. He sought help from Charles VIII of France (1483\u20131498), who was allied to Ludovico \"il Moro\" Sforza (the Moor, so-called because of his swarthy complexion), the \"de facto\" Duke of Milan, who needed French support to legitimise his rule. As King Ferdinand I of Naples was threatening to come to the aid of the rightful duke Gian Galeazzo Sforza, the husband of his granddaughter Isabella, Alexander encouraged the French king in his plan for the conquest of Naples.\nBut Alexander, always ready to seize opportunities to aggrandize his family, then adopted a double policy. Through the intervention of the Spanish ambassador, he made peace with Naples in July 1493 and cemented the peace by a marriage between his son Gioffre and Do\u00f1a Sancha, another granddaughter of Ferdinand I. In order to dominate the College of Cardinals more completely, Alexander, in a move that created much scandal, created 12 new cardinals. Among the new cardinals was his own son Cesare, then only 18 years old. Alessandro Farnese (later Pope Paul III), the brother of one of the Pope's mistresses, Giulia Farnese, was also among the newly created cardinals.\nOn 25 January 1494, Ferdinand I died and was succeeded by his son Alfonso II (1494\u20131495). Charles VIII of France now advanced formal claims on the Kingdom of Naples. Alexander authorised him to pass through Rome, ostensibly on a crusade against the Ottoman Empire, without mentioning Naples. But when the French invasion became a reality Pope Alexander VI became alarmed, recognised Alfonso II as king of Naples, and concluded an alliance with him in exchange for various fiefs for his sons (July 1494). A military response to the French threat was set in motion: a Neapolitan army was to advance through Romagna and attack Milan, while the fleet was to seize Genoa. Both expeditions were badly conducted and failed, and on 8 September Charles VIII crossed the Alps and joined Ludovico il Moro at Milan. The Papal States were in turmoil, and the powerful Colonna faction seized Ostia in the name of France. Charles VIII rapidly advanced southward, and after a short stay in Florence, set out for Rome (November 1494).\nAlexander appealed to Ascanio Sforza and even to the Ottoman Sultan Bayazid II for help. He tried to collect troops and put Rome in a state of defence, but his position was precarious. When the Orsini offered to admit the French to their castles, Alexander had no choice but to come to terms with Charles. On 31 December, Charles VIII entered Rome with his troops, the cardinals of the French faction, and Giuliano della Rovere. Alexander now feared that Charles might depose him for simony, and that the king would summon a council to nominate a new pope. Alexander was able to win over the bishop of Saint-Malo, who had much influence over the king, by making him a cardinal. Alexander agreed to send Cesare as legate to Naples with the French army; to deliver Cem Sultan, held as a hostage, to Charles VIII, and to give Charles Civitavecchia (16 January 1495). On 28 January Charles VIII departed for Naples with Cem and Cesare, but the latter slipped away to Spoleto. Neapolitan resistance collapsed, and Alfonso II fled and abdicated in favour of his son Ferdinand II. Ferdinand was abandoned by all and also had to escape, and the Kingdom of Naples was conquered with surprising ease.\nFrench in retreat.\nA reaction against Charles VIII soon set in, for all the European powers were alarmed at his success. On 31 March 1495 the Holy League was formed among the pope, the emperor, Venice, Ludovico il Moro and Ferdinand of Spain. The League was ostensibly formed against the Turks, but in reality it was made to expel the French from Italy. Charles VIII had himself crowned King of Naples on 12 May, but a few days later began his retreat northward. He met the League at Fornovo and cut his way through them and was back in France by November. Ferdinand II was reinstated at Naples soon afterwards, with Spanish help. The expedition, if it produced no material results, demonstrated the foolishness of the so-called \"politics of equilibrium\", the Medicean doctrine of preventing one of the Italian principates from overwhelming the rest and uniting them under its hegemony.\nCharles VIII's belligerence in Italy had made it transparent that the \"politics of equilibrium\" did nothing but render the country unable to defend itself against a powerful invading force. Italy was shown to be very vulnerable to the predations of the powerful nation-states, France and Spain, that had forged themselves during the previous century. Alexander VI now followed the general tendency of all the princes of the day to crush the great feudatories and establish a centralized despotism. In this manner, he was able to take advantage of the defeat of the French in order to break the power of the Orsini. From that time on, Alexander was able to build himself an effective power base in the Papal States.\nVirginio Orsini, who had been captured by the Spanish, died a prisoner at Naples, and the Pope confiscated his property. The rest of the Orsini clan still held out, defeating the papal troops sent against them under Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino and Giovanni Borgia, Duke of Gandia, at Soriano (January 1497). Peace was made through Venetian mediation, the Orsini paying 50,000 ducats in exchange for their confiscated lands; the Duke of Urbino, whom they had captured, was left by the pope to pay his own ransom. The Orsini remained very powerful, and Pope Alexander VI could count on none but his 3,000 Spanish troops. His only success had been the capture of Ostia and the submission of the Francophile cardinals Colonna and Savelli.\nThen occurred a major domestic tragedy for the house of Borgia. On 14 June, his son the Duke of Gandia, who was lately created Duke of Benevento and had a questionable lifestyle, disappeared; the next day, his corpse was found in the Tiber. Alexander, overwhelmed with grief, shut himself up in Castel Sant'Angelo. He declared that henceforth the moral reform of the Church would be the sole object of his life. Every effort was made to discover the assassin. No conclusive explanation was ever reached, and it may be that the crime was simply as a result of one of the Duke's sexual liaisons.\nCrime.\nThere is no evidence that the Borgias resorted to poisoning, judicial murder, or extortion to fund their schemes and the defense of the Papal States. The only contemporary accusations of poisoning were from some of their servants, extracted under torture by Alexander's bitter enemy Della Rovere, who succeeded him as Pope Julius II.\nSavonarola.\nThe debased state of the Curia was a major scandal. Opponents, such as the powerful Florentine friar Girolamo Savonarola, launched invectives against papal corruption and appealed for a general council to confront the papal abuses. Alexander is reported to have been reduced to laughter when Savonarola's denunciations were related to him. Nevertheless, he appointed Sebastian Maggi to investigate the friar, and he responded on 16 October 1495:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are displeased at the disturbed state of affairs in Florence, the more so in that it owes its origin to your preaching. For you predict the future and publicly declare that you do so by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit when you should be reprehending vice and praising virtue ... Prophecies like these should not be made when your charge is to forward peace and concord. Moreover, these are not the time for such teachings, calculated as they are to produce discord even in times of peace let alone in times of trouble. ... Since, however, we have been most happy to learn from certain cardinals and from your letter that you are ready to submit yourself to the reproofs of the Church, as becomes a Christian and a religious, we are beginning to think that what you have done has not been done with an evil motive, but from a certain simple-mindedness and a zeal, however misguided, for the Lord's vineyard. Our duty, however, prescribes that we order you, under holy obedience, to cease from public and private preaching until you are able to come to our presence, not under armed escort as is your present habit, but safely, quietly and modestly as becomes a religious, or until we make different arrangements. If you obey, as we hope you will, we for the time being suspend the operation of our former Brief so that you may live in peace in accordance with the dictates of your conscience.\nThe hostility of Savonarola seems to have been political rather than personal, and the friar sent a letter of condolence to the pope on the death of the Duke of Gandia; \"Faith, most Holy Father, is the one and true source of peace and consolation... Faith alone brings consolation from a far-off country.\" But eventually the Florentines tired of the friar's moralising and the Florentine government condemned the reformer to death, executing him on 23 May 1498.\nFamilial aggrandizement.\nThe prominent Italian families looked down on the Spanish Borgia family, and they resented their power, which they sought for themselves. This is, at least partially, why both Pope Callixtus III and Pope Alexander VI gave powers to family members whom they could trust.\nIn these circumstances, Alexander, feeling more than ever that he could rely only on his own kin, turned his thoughts to further family aggrandizement. He had annulled Lucrezia's marriage to Giovanni Sforza, who had responded to the suggestion that he was impotent with the unsubstantiated counterclaim that Alexander and Cesare indulged in incestuous relations with Lucrezia, in 1497. Unable to arrange a union between Cesare and the daughter of King Frederick IV of Naples (who had succeeded Ferdinand II the previous year), he induced Frederick by threats to agree to a marriage between the Duke of Bisceglie, a natural son of Alfonso II, and Lucrezia. Alexander and the new French king Louis XII entered a secret agreement; in exchange for a bull of divorce between the king and Joan of France (so he could marry Anne of Brittany) and making Georges d'Amboise (the king's chief advisor) the cardinal of Rouen, Cesare was given the duchy of Valentinois in France (chosen because it was homophonous with his nickname, Valentino, derived from his father's papal epithet \"Valentinus\" (\"The Valencian\", as seen on his coins denoting his origin in the Kingdom of Valencia, Spain), military assistance to help him subjugate the feudal princelings of papal Romagna, and a princess bride, Charlotte of Albret from the Kingdom of Navarre.\nAlexander hoped that Louis XII's help would be more profitable to his house than that of Charles VIII had been. In spite of the remonstrances of Spain and of the Sforza, he allied himself with France in January 1499 and was joined by Venice. By autumn Louis XII was in Italy expelling Lodovico Sforza from Milan. With French success seemingly assured, the Pope determined to deal drastically with Romagna, which although nominally under papal rule was divided into a number of practically independent lordships on which Venice, Milan, and Florence cast hungry eyes. Cesare, empowered by the support of the French, began to attack the turbulent cities one by one in his capacity as nominated \"gonfaloniere\" (standard bearer) of the church. But the expulsion of the French from Milan and the return of Lodovico Sforza interrupted his conquests, and he returned to Rome early in 1500.\nThe Jubilee (1500).\nIn the Jubilee year 1500, Alexander ushered in the custom of opening a holy door on Christmas Eve and closing it on Christmas Day the following year. After consulting with his Master of Ceremonies, Johann Burchard, Pope Alexander VI opened the first holy door in St. Peter's Basilica on Christmas Eve 1499, and papal representatives opened the doors in the other three patriarchal basilicas. For this, Pope Alexander had a new opening created in the \"portico\" of St. Peter's and commissioned a marble door.\nAlexander was carried in the \"sedia gestatoria\" to St. Peter's. He and his assistants, bearing candles, processed to the holy door, as the choir chanted Psalm 118:19\u201320. The pope knocked on the door three times, workers moved it from the inside, and everyone then crossed the threshold to enter into a period of penance and reconciliation. Thus, Pope Alexander formalized the rite and began a longstanding tradition that is still in practice. Similar ceremonies were held at the other three basilicas.\nAlexander instituted a special rite for the closing of a holy door, as well. On the Feast of the Epiphany in 1501, two cardinals began to seal the holy door with two bricks, one silver and one gold. \"Sampietrini\" (basilica workers) completed the seal, placing specially-minted coins and medals inside the wall.\nPersonal life.\nOf Alexander's many mistresses, one of his favourites was Vannozza dei Cattanei, born in 1442, and who was married to three different men. The relationship began in 1470, and she had four children whom the pope openly acknowledged as his own: Cesare (born 1475), Giovanni, afterwards duke of Gandia (commonly known as Juan, born 1474 or 1476), Lucrezia (born 1480), and Gioffre (Goffredo in Italian, born 1481 or 1482).\nRodrigo only legitimized his children after becoming pope. He had pretended that his four children with Vannozza were his niece and nephews and that they were fathered by Vannozza's husbands. G. J. Meyer argued that the birth dates of the four children in comparison with Alexander's known whereabouts preclude him from having fathered any of them. His \"acknowledgement\" merely consisted of addressing them as \"beloved son / daughter\" in correspondence (while applying the same address to, e.g., Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in the same letter).\nAnother mistress was the beautiful Giulia Farnese (\"Giulia la Bella\"), wife of Orsino Orsini. Giulia was mother of Laura Orsini, born in 1492, probably daughter of Alexander. However, he still loved Vannozza and his children by her. Caring for them proved the determining factor of his whole career. He lavished vast sums on them. Vannozza lived in the Palace of a late Cardinal, or in a large, palatial villa. The children lived between their mother's home and the Papal Palace itself.\nSix other children, Girolama, Isabella, Pedro-Luiz, Giovanni the \"Infans Romanus\", Rodrigo and Bernardo, were of uncertain maternal parentage. His daughter Isabella was the great-great-grandmother of Pope Innocent X, who was therefore descended in a direct line from Alexander.\nSlavery.\nWhile the explorers of Spain imposed a form of slavery called \"encomienda\" on the indigenous peoples they met in the New World, some popes had spoken out against the practice of slavery. In 1435, Pope Eugene IV had issued an attack on slavery in the Canary Islands in his papal bull \"Sicut dudum\", which included the excommunication of all those who engaged in the slave trade with native chiefs there. A form of indentured servitude was allowed, being similar to a peasant's duty to his liege lord in Europe.\nIn the wake of Columbus's landing in the New World, Pope Alexander was asked by the Spanish monarchy to confirm their ownership of these newly found lands. The bulls issued by Pope Alexander VI: \"Eximiae devotionis\" (3 May 1493), \"Inter caetera\" (4 May 1493) and \"Dudum siquidem\" (23 September 1493), granted rights to Spain with respect to the newly discovered lands in the Americas similar to those Pope Nicholas V had previously conferred on Portugal with the bulls \"Romanus Pontifex\" and \"Dum Diversas\". Morales Padr\u00f3n (1979) concludes that these bulls gave power to enslave the natives. Minnich (2010) asserts that this \"slave trade\" was permitted to facilitate conversions to Christianity. Other historians and Vatican scholars strongly disagree with these accusations and assert that Alexander never gave his approval to the practice of slavery. Other later popes, such as Pope Paul III in \"Sublimis Deus\" (1537), Pope Benedict XIV in \"Immensa Pastorum\" (1741), and Pope Gregory XVI in his letter \"In supremo apostolatus\" (1839), continued to condemn slavery.\nThornberry (2002) asserts that \"Inter caetera\" was applied in the Spanish Requirement of 1513, which was read to American Indians (who could not understand the colonisers' language) before hostilities against them began. They were given the option to accept the authority of the pope and Spanish crown or face being attacked and subjugated. In 1993, the Indigenous Law Institute called on Pope John Paul II to revoke \"Inter caetera\" and to make reparation for \"this unreasonable historical grief\". This was followed by a similar appeal in 1994 by the Parliament of World Religions.\nLast years.\nA danger now arose in the shape of a conspiracy by the deposed despots, the Orsini, and of some of Cesare's own \"condottieri\". At first, the papal troops were defeated and things looked bleak for the house of Borgia. But a promise of French help quickly forced the confederates to come to terms. Cesare, by an act of treachery, then seized the ringleaders at Senigallia and put Oliverotto da Fermo and Vitellozzo Vitelli to death (31 December 1502). When Alexander VI heard the news, he lured Cardinal Orsini to the Vatican and cast him into a dungeon, where he died. His goods were confiscated and many other members of the clan in Rome were arrested, while Alexander's son Goffredo Borgia led an expedition into the Campagna and seized their castles. Thus the two great houses of Orsini and Colonna, who had long fought for predominance in Rome and often flouted the pope's authority, were subjugated and the Borgias' power increased. Cesare then returned to Rome, where his father asked him to assist Goffredo in reducing the last Orsini strongholds; this he was unwilling to do, much to his father's annoyance; but he eventually marched out, captured Ceri and made peace with Giulio Orsini, who surrendered Bracciano.\nThe war between France and Spain for the possession of Naples dragged on, and the pope was forever intriguing, ready to ally himself with whichever power promised the most advantageous terms at any moment. He offered to help Louis XII on condition that Sicily be given to Cesare, and then offered to help Spain in exchange for Siena, Pisa and Bologna.\nDeath.\nCesare was preparing for another expedition in August 1503 when, after he and his father had dined with Cardinal Adriano Castellesi on 6 August, they were taken ill with fever a few days later. Cesare, who \"lay in bed, his skin peeling and his face suffused to a violet colour\" as a consequence of certain drastic measures to save him, eventually recovered; but the aged Pontiff apparently had little chance. Burchard's \"Diary\" provides a few details of the pope's final illness and death at age 72:\nSaturday, 12 August 1503, the pope fell ill in the morning. After the hour of vespers, between six and seven o'clock a fever appeared and remained permanently. On 15 August thirteen ounces of blood were drawn from him and the tertian ague supervened. On Thursday, 17 August, at nine o'clock in the forenoon he took medicine. On Friday, the 18th, between nine and ten o'clock he confessed to the Bishop Gamboa of Carignola, who then read Mass to him. After his Communion he gave the Eucharist to the pope who was sitting in bed. Then he ended the Mass at which were present five cardinals, Serra, Juan and Francesco Borgia, Casanova and Loris. The pope told them that he felt very bad. At the hour of vespers after Gamboa had given him Extreme Unction, he died.\nAs for his true faults, known only to his confessor, Pope Alexander VI apparently died genuinely repentant. The bishop of Gallipoli, Alexis Celadoni, spoke of the pontiff's contrition during his funeral oration to the electors of Alexander's successor, Pope Pius III:\nWhen at last the pope was suffering from a very severe sickness, he spontaneously requested, one after another, each of the last sacraments. He first made a very careful confession of his sins, with a contrite heart, and was affected even to the shedding of tears, I am told; then he received in Communion the most Sacred Body and Extreme Unction was administered to him.\nThe interregnum witnessed again the ancient \"tradition\" of violence and rioting. Cesare, too ill to attend to the business himself, sent Don Micheletto, his chief \"bravo\", to seize the pope's treasures before the death was publicly announced. The next day the body was exhibited to the people and clergy of Rome, but was covered by an \"old tapestry\" (\"antiquo tapete\"), having become greatly disfigured by rapid decomposition. According to Raphael Volterrano: \"It was a revolting scene to look at that deformed, blackened corpse, prodigiously swelled, and exhaling an infectious smell; his lips and nose were covered with brown drivel, his mouth was opened very widely, and his tongue, inflated by poison, ... therefore no fanatic or devotee dared to kiss his feet or hands, as custom would have required.\" The Venetian ambassador stated that the body was \"the ugliest, most monstrous and horrible dead body that was ever seen, without any form or likeness of humanity\". Ludwig von Pastor insists that the decomposition was \"perfectly natural\", owing to the summer heat.\nCommentaries attribute the pope's death to malaria, then prevalent in Rome, or to another such pestilence. One contemporary official wrote home that there was little surprise that Alexander and Cesare had both fallen ill, as the bad air had led to many in Rome, and especially in the Roman Curia, becoming sick.\nAfter a short stay, the body was removed from the crypts of St. Peter's and installed in the lesser known Spanish national church of Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli.\nLegacy.\nFollowing the death of Alexander VI, his rival and successor Julius II said on the day of his election: \"I will not live in the same rooms as the Borgias lived. He desecrated the Holy Church as none before.\" The Borgia Apartments remained sealed until the 19th century.\nCatholic apologists of Alexander VI have argued that the behaviors he receives criticism for were not atypical of the period. De Maistre, in his work \"Du Pape\", \"The latter are forgiven nothing, because everything is expected from them, wherefore the vices lightly passed over in a Louis XIV become most offensive and scandalous in an Alexander VI.\"\nAlexander VI had sought reforms of the increasingly irresponsible Curia, putting together a group of his most pious cardinals in order to move the process along. The planned reforms included new rules on the sale of Church property, the limiting of cardinals to one diocese, and stricter moral codes for clergy, though these were not implemented.\nAlexander VI was known for his patronage of the arts, and in his days a new architectural era was initiated in Rome with the coming of Bramante. Raphael, Michelangelo, and Pinturicchio all worked for him. He commissioned Pinturicchio to lavishly paint a suite of rooms in the Apostolic Palace in the Vatican, which are today known as the Borgia Apartments. He took a great interest in theatrics, and he even had Plautus's \"Menaechmi\" performed in his apartments.\nIn addition to the arts, Alexander VI also encouraged the development of education. In 1495, he issued a papal bull at the request of William Elphinstone, Bishop of Aberdeen, and James IV of Scotland, founding King's College, Aberdeen. King's College now forms an integral element of the University of Aberdeen. Alexander VI also, in 1501, approved the University of Valencia.\nAlexander VI, whom papal rival and successor Giuliano della Rovere alleged without evidence was a marrano, demonstrated relatively benign treatment of Jews. After the 1492 expulsion of the Jews from Spain, some 9,000 impoverished Iberian Jews arrived at the borders of the Papal States. Alexander welcomed them into Rome, declaring that they were \"permitted to lead their life, free from interference from Christians, to continue in their own rites, to gain wealth, and to enjoy many other privileges\". He similarly allowed the immigration of Jews expelled from Portugal in 1497 and from Provence in 1498.\nBohuslav Hasi\u0161tejnsk\u00fd z Lobkovic, a Bohemian humanist poet (1461\u20131510), wrote a hostile epitaph on Alexander in Latin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nDespite Julius II's hostility, the Roman barons and Romagna vicars were never again to be the same problem for the papacy and Julius' successes owe much to the framework laid by the Borgias. Unlike Julius, Alexander never made war unless absolutely necessary, preferring negotiation and diplomacy.\nAlexander Lee argues that the crimes attributed to the Borgias were exaggerated by contemporaries because they were outsiders expanding their holdings at the expense of the Italians, that they were Spaniards when it was felt that Spain had too much control on the Italian peninsula, and that after the death of Alexander the family lost its influence and therefore any incentive for anyone to defend them.\nOn the other hand, two of Alexander's successors, Sixtus V and Urban VIII, described him as one of the most outstanding popes since Saint Peter.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23792", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23792", "title": "Pope Alexander II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1061 to 1073\nPope Alexander II (1010/1015 \u2013 21 April 1073), born Anselm of Baggio, was the head of the Roman Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 1061 to his death in 1073. Born in Milan, Anselm was deeply involved in the Pataria reform movement. Elected according to the terms of his predecessor's bull, \"In nomine Domini\", Anselm's was the first election by the cardinals without the participation of the people and minor clergy of Rome. He also authorized the Norman Conquest of England in 1066.\nEarly life and work.\nAnselm was born in the parish of Cesano Boscone in the town of Corsico some from Milan of a noble family. The family took its name from Baggio, a suburb of Milan, where the family held the office of \"captain\". According to the \"Liber pontificalis\", his father's name was Anselmus or Ardericus.\nContemporary sources do not provide any information on where Anselm might have obtained his education. It was traditionally believed that Anselm de Baggio studied under Lanfranc at Bec Abbey. However, modern historiography rejects the assertion. He became a member of the clergy of the Milan Cathedral, and was ordained a priest by Archbishop Wido of Milan.\nHe was one of the founders of the Pataria, a movement in the Archdiocese of Milan, aimed at reforming the clergy and ecclesiastic government in the province, and supportive of Papal sanctions against simony and clerical marriage. They contested the ancient rights of the cathedral clergy of Milan and supported the Gregorian reforms. Anselm was one of four \"upright and honest\" priests suggested to succeed Ariberto da Intimiano as prince bishop of Milan. When the Emperor Henry III chose instead the more worldly Guido da Velate, protests followed. In order to silence a vocal critic, Bishop Guido sent Anselm to the Imperial Court.\nThe emperor instead named Anselm Bishop of Lucca in 1056 or 1057. The earliest testimony of his activity as bishop is on 23 March 1057. On 20 August 1057, he was with the imperial court at Trebur, and on 27 December at P\u00f6hlde. As bishop, he was an energetic associate of Hildebrand of Sovana in endeavouring to suppress simony and enforce clerical celibacy. So bad was the state of things at Milan, that benefices were openly bought and sold, and the clergy publicly married the women with whom they lived. With the increased prestige of his office, he reappeared twice in Milan as legate of the Holy See, in 1057 in the company of Hildebrand, and in 1059 with Peter Damian.\nBishop Anselm attended the Roman council of Pope Nicholas II in the first half of April 1059, and another synod of uncertain date. He was in Rome again in April 1060, for a synod in the Lateran palace, when he subscribed two papal bulls dated 14 April 1060.\nElection as pope.\nPope Nicholas II died on 27 July 1061. The cardinals met, and sent a representative, the former monk of Cluny, Cardinal Stephen, to seek the permission of the imperial court to conduct an election. After a five-day wait during which he was not received in audience, the Cardinal returned to Italy, without having received the \"cong\u00e9 d'\u00e9lire\". The cardinal-bishops then proceeded to an election, having forced their way into the city of Rome with the aid of Prince Richard I of Capua and his Norman troops. On 1 October 1061, they chose Bishop Anselmo de Baggio of Lucca, one of the leaders of the reform party, who took the name Pope Alexander II.\nUnlike previous papal elections, the assent of the Holy Roman Emperor to the election was not sought. Cardinal-bishops were the sole electors of the pope for the first time in the history of the Church, in accordance with Nicholas II's bull, . The bull effectively removed the control held by the Roman metropolitan church over the election of the pontiff, unilaterally abrogating the rights of the emperor, the nobles of Rome, the clergy, and the people of Rome.\nThe new Pope Alexander II was crowned at nightfall on 1 October 1061 in the Basilica of San Pietro in Vincoli, because opposition to the election on the part of the Romans and German sympathizers made a coronation in St. Peter's Basilica impossible. The German court nominated another candidate, Cadalus, bishop of Parma, who was proclaimed Pope at a council held at Basel under the name of Honorius II. He marched to Rome and for a long time threatened his rival's position.\nAt length, after a palace coup which replaced Empress Agnes as regent with Archbishop Anno II of Cologne, Honorius was forsaken by the German court. He was deposed by a council held at Mantua on 31 May-1 June 1064. Honorius continued to challenge Alexander II's position until he died in 1072. The next sixty years exhibited one schism after another.\nNormans of Southern Italy.\nAs early as 1063 the Normans, taking advantage of the schism, successfully expanded their empire by attacking and seizing the city of Gaeta, an important port leading into the southern part of the Roman campagna. In 1066, Richard of Capua, who had helped Alexander enter Rome and secure a coronation in October 1061, suddenly changed sides. With the Germans abandoning Cadalo and embracing Alexander, the Normans were no longer the mainstay and support of the papacy, and were faced with a competitor which had designs on the same territories as the Normans. The barons of the Roman campagna, too, saw an advantage to be gained (or at least revenge to be extracted) by joining the Normans against Alexander and the reform party of Hildebrand, which had robbed them of their rights in papal elections and the civil government of the Church. Moving north, Prince Richard seized Ceprano, devastated Lazio, and encamped outside Rome, from which he demanded the title of Patricius.\nIn the meantime, the frantic Cardinal Hildebrand repeatedly called upon Marquis Godfrey of Tuscany, who was with King Henry in Germany, to come to the aid of Rome. In spring 1067, he collected an army, lifted the siege of Rome, and caused Prince Richard to withdraw to Capua. Richard left his son Jordan in charge of the army in the plain below Aquino, to bar the way of the forces of Godfrey. However, it was a shortage of supplies, sickness, and bribery on the part of the Normans that brought Godfrey to negotiate with Jordanus and finally to return north. A new treaty between the papacy and the Normans was negotiated, and at the synod held at Melfi by Pope Alexander on 1 August 1067, Prince Richard returned to his allegiance and was confirmed as Duke of Apulia and Calabria.\nPolicies.\nIn the second half of April 1063, Pope Alexander held a synod at the Lateran Basilica in Rome, attended by more than a hundred bishops. During the synod, he excommunicated Honorius II (Bishop Cadalo). The pope and bishops also decreed: that no mercy was to be shown to simoniacs by preserving their dignity; that those who had been ordained by simoniacs were to be retained in their orders; in the case of a knowing consecration of a simoniac, both simoniac and consecrator were to be deprived of their offices; that a priest who has a wife or mistress should not say Mass; that no cleric should receive a church from a layman whether gratis or for pay; that no priest should hold two churches; that no one should be made a monk on the understanding that he would become abbot; and that a layman who becomes a cleric should change his costume.\nIn a letter of 15 May 1063, Pope Alexander ordered the archbishops of Reims, Sens, Tours, Bourges, and Bordeaux to obey his legate Cardinal Peter Damiani, Bishop of Ostia, \"who is our own eye and the immoveable foundation of the apostolic see.\" He also forbade Gervase, Archbishop of Reims, from consecrating Jocelyn as bishop of Soissons, on the grounds that he was a simoniac.\nOn 6 May 1065, Pope Alexander held a council in Rome, attended by at least eight cardinals and forty-three bishops. It is known that the privileges of the monastery of Saint Denis in Paris were confirmed, and it was granted the privilege of being exempt from the jurisdiction of the bishop of Paris. In 1067, he made a tour of the southern cities of the Papal States and of the Kingdom of Naples, holding a synod in Melfi in October and then later in the year at Siponto. In this council held at Siponto, Pope Alexander deposed Bishop Lando of Nucerino, Landolf of Tortiboli, and Benedict of Biccari, all on accusations of simony.\nReforms.\nIn an attempt to curtail simony (the buying and selling of sacred things or positions within the church), Alexander II sent out many legates and archbishops across Europe to enforce reform among local synods. Any clergy suspected of simony were then investigated. Any clergy who was invested in his office by a lay person were required to undergo a new investiture by a papal legate. A well-known victim of these campaigns included the bishop of Constance, who was removed from office for simony.\nOn 30 March 1068, Alexander held a synod in Rome, in which he absolved the bishop of Tortosa of a charge of homicide, but deposed the bishop of Florence on the grounds of simony; a charge of simony was laid against the bishop of Chiusi, who begged for absolution. The pope also ordered that churches not be held by lay persons and that ecclesiastical goods not be transmitted from parents to children as though they were subject to the laws of inheritance.\nBy 1071, the future Emperor Henry IV, though only 21 (and still only German King and Roman Patrician), was vigorously at work recovering the powers, privileges and properties which had been allowed to slip away from imperial control during his regencies. He crushed a riot in Saxony in 1069 and overcame the rebellion of the Saxon aristocrat Otto of Nordheim in 1071. But in 1071, Pope Alexander's reforming activities resulted in an open rupture with the King. Archbishop Guido of Milan recently died so Henry IV appointed Godfrey (Goffredo) de Castiglione as successor to Guido. However, Alexander II declared this investiture void, and appointed a Milanese priest named Attone (Atto), who had already been elected archbishop on 6 January 1072, in an electoral meeting sanctioned by Pope Alexander. In February 1072, he held a synod in Rome, in which he anathematized Goffredo, and confirmed Atto as archbishop. He wrote a letter to Henry IV, informing him of the papal actions. Henry IV sent five men to Rome to discuss the issue, but Alexander rejected and subsequently excommunicated them. This led to increased pressure between Henry IV and the popes.\nOn 1 October 1071, Pope Alexander consecrated the high altar of the new basilica dedicated to Saint Benedict at the monastery of Montecassino. He was assisted by Cardinal Hildebrand and other cardinals, by ten archbishops, and forty-four bishops, as well as abbots, clergy, nobles, and people. He had already, perhaps at the beginning of his reign, granted Abbot Desiderius personally the lordship over Terracina.\nPope Alexander also reformed the administration of the church of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme in Rome and of the Lateran Basilica, by replacing the monks of the Order of Montecassino with Canons Regular of the Congregation of S. Frediano of Lucca.\nIn liturgical matters, Alexander II ended the practice of singing or reciting the \"Alleluia\" during the Latin Church's observance of Lent. This reform was permanent.\nPosition on Jews.\nIn 1065, Pope Alexander II wrote to B\u00e9ranger, Viscount of Narbonne, and to Guifred, bishop of the city, praising them for having prevented the massacre of the Jews in their district, and reminding them that God does not approve of the shedding of innocent blood. On 11 June in that same year, he wrote a letter, admonishing Landulf VI of Benevento \"that the conversion of Jews is not to be obtained by force.\" He was warm in his praise for Spanish bishops, who protected the Jews against those who came to Spain crusading against the Moors.\nCrusade against the Moors.\nAlso in the same year, Alexander called for the Crusade of Barbastro against the Moors in Spain. Alexander II issued orders to the Bishops of Narbonne, instructing crusaders en route \"that you protect the Jews who live among you, so that they may not be killed by those who are setting out for Spain against the Saracens ... for the situation of the Jews is greatly different from that of the Saracens. One may justly fight against those [the Saracens] who persecute Christians and drive them from their towns and their own homes.\"\nEngland and William the Conqueror.\nIn 1066, Pope Alexander received an embassy from William, Duke of Normandy, after his successful invasion of Brittany. The embassy had been sent to obtain his blessing for William's prospective invasion of Anglo-Saxon England. Alexander gave it, along with a papal ring, a banner, and an edict to the autonomous Old English clergy guiding them to submit to the new regime. These favors were instrumental in the submission of the English church following the Battle of Hastings. Count Eustace carried his papal insignia, a gonfanon with three tails charged with a cross, which William of Poitiers said was given to William I to signify the pope's blessing of his invasion to secure submission to Rome.\nWilliam's successes in England brought the native English church into much greater control from Rome. William even agreed to Alexander's request to restore the payment of the Peter's Pence, which had lapsed in the time of Edward the Confessor. At the same time, William requested that the pope send him legates, to carry out a ceremonial crowning of the king. Alexander therefore sent Bishop Ermenfried of Sion (Sitten in Switzerland) and two \"clerici cardinales\" to England, who, at Eastertide 1070, presided at the coronation at Winchester.\nThe archbishop of Canterbury, Stigand, however, even though he made his peace with William, was a problem for Pope Alexander. Stigand had helped to drive the legitimate archbishop, Robert of Jumi\u00e8ges, from his see, and usurped the archbishopric for himself; he even dared to wear Archbishop Robert's \"pallium\". Additionally, he continued to hold the diocese of Winchester, of which he was the legitimate incumbent, along with the archbishopric of Canterbury. Five successive popes, Leo, Victor, Stephanus, Nicholas, and Alexander himself, had sent legates to England, who excommunicated Stigand. Stigand was therefore not able to crown William king, as was the right of the archbishop of Canterbury. Nonetheless, Stigand and William remained on good terms, until, during a visit of William to the continent in 1067, the Normans in England behaved with particular brutality. Stigand switched sides, and with Edgar the Atheling fled to safety in the camp of refuge in Ely. They were besieged by the Conqueror, and Stigand was captured. Pope Alexander's legates, as instructed, demanded the deposition of Stigand, and at a general council held at Winchester after King William's coronation, the deposition was duly voted.\nKing William determined that he would not have his brother, Bishop Odo of Bayeux, as his new archbishop, nor would he promote his chaplain and chancellor, Herfast. He assembled a council of bishops, abbots and other notables, in order to discuss a suitable candidate for the vacant archbishopric. After this consultation, William offered the archbishopric to Lanfranc, the Abbot of the royal monastery of St. Stephen at Caen, to whom he had once offered the archbishopric of Rouen, which Lanfranc had refused. When Lanfranc also refused the see of Canterbury, the determined king sent his queen, Matilda, and his son Robert (a former pupil of Lanfranc), accompanied by a contingent of Norman nobles, to persuade him, to no avail. Abbot Herluin of Bec was called upon to exert his influence, again without result. William then ordered the papal legates to go to Normandy, and convene a council of bishops, abbots, and nobles, to prevail upon Lanfranc to accept the king's offer. Reluctantly, Lanfranc crossed to England, where he engaged in intense talks with William, who only persuaded him by invoking the recommendation which had been expressed by Pope Alexander. Lanfranc was finally elected by a council on 15 August 1070, the Feast of the Assumption, and consecrated on 29 August, the Feast of St. John the Baptist.\nWhen Lanfranc wrote to Pope Alexander and to the Archdeacon Hildebrand that they defend him against the pretensions of the archbishop of York, and that they send him the \"pallium\" as his symbol of primacy, Hildebrand wrote a letter in reply, claiming that it was not the custom to send the \"pallium\", but that the recipient come to Rome to have it bestowed; and besides, he and the pope wanted to confer personally with Lanfranc about pressing matters. In 1071, therefore, Lanfranc and Archbishop Thomas of York travelled to Rome to receive their \"pallia\".\nSubsequently, Pope Alexander wrote to Archbishop Lanfranc, ordering him to see to the state of the monastery of Winchester, and expressing annoyance that he had not yet procured the release of the bishop (Stigand), perhaps out of negligence, perhaps out of disobedience, perhaps fearing punishment by King William.\nPoland.\nIn 1072 Alexander commanded the reluctant Canon of the cathedral of Krak\u00f3w, Stanislaus of Szczepan\u00f3w, who had been elected unanimously by the cathedral chapter, to accept appointment as the ninth Bishop of Krak\u00f3w in succession to Bishop Lampert. Stanislaus became one of the earliest native Polish bishops. This turned out to be a significant decision for the Polish Church. Once appointed, Stanislaus was a highly assertive bishop who got into conflict with Polish king Boles\u0142aw II the Bold, \"pro suis actibus sceleratis\" ('because of his wicked deeds'). Boles\u0142aw and his nobles assassinated Bishop Stanislaus in the church of St. Michael in Rupella on 11 April 1079, and cut up his corpse into seventy-two pieces. Poland was laid under the interdict for four years, and the see of Krak\u00f3w remained vacant. In 1088, the body of Bishop Stanislaus was transferred to his cathedral in Krak\u00f3w, and eventually, he was venerated as a saint.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nIn 1068, German King Henry IV attempted to divorce Bertha of Savoy. The Papal legate Peter Damian hinted that any further attempt at a divorce would lead the Pope to refuse to perform his coronation. Henry obeyed, and his wife, who had retired to Lorsch Abbey returned to Court.\nA series of disputes broke out between the bishop Gerhard (Iaromirus, Jaromi) of Prague and the bishop John (Brewnow) of Olmouc in Bohemia. Duke Vratislaus II of Bohemia drew this to the attention of Pope Alexander II when he happened to be at the papal court in 1073. Alexander sent \"nuntii\" to Prague to sort the matter out, but they were captured, mutilated, and then murdered. Shocked at the enormity of the offence, Pope Alexander sent Cardinal Rudolph to Prague. When Gerhard refused to cooperate with the cardinal, he was deposed and Prague was laid under the interdict; when the situation quieted down, he restored the bishop and lifted the interdict, but ordered both bishops to present themselves before the papal court. When they appeared, Pope Alexander confirmed the deposition of the bishop of Prague, though he restored him once again at the pleading of Countess Mathilda of Tuscany.\nDeath.\nPope Alexander II died at the Lateran Palace on 21 April 1073, and was buried in the Lateran Basilica.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23793", "revid": "46342673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23793", "title": "Pope Alexander III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1159 to 1181\nPope Alexander III (c. 1100/1105 \u2013 30 August 1181), born Roland (), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 7 September 1159 until his death in 1181.\nA native of Siena, Alexander became pope after a contested election, but had to spend much of his pontificate outside Rome while several rivals, supported by Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa, claimed the papacy. Alexander rejected Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos' offer to end the East\u2013West Schism, sanctioned the Northern Crusades, and held the Third Council of the Lateran. He canonized Thomas Becket and Bernard of Clairvaux. The city of Alessandria in Piedmont is named after him.\nEarly life and career.\nRolando was born in Siena. From the 14th century, he was referred to as a member of the aristocratic family of Bandinelli, although this has not been proven. He was long thought to be the 12th-century canon lawyer and theologian Master Roland of Bologna, who composed the \"Stroma\" or \"Summa Rolandi\"\u2014one of the earliest commentaries on the \"Decretum\" of Gratian\u2014and the \"Sententiae Rolandi\", a sentence collection displaying the influence of Pierre Ab\u00e9lard, but John T. Noonan and Rudolf Weigand have shown this to be another Rolandus.\nRolando probably studied at Bologna, where Robert of Torigni notes that he taught theology. In October 1150, Pope Eugene III created him Cardinal-Deacon of Santi Cosma e Damiano. Later he became Cardinal-Priest of St Mark. In 1153, he became papal chancellor and was the leader of the cardinals opposed to Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa. In 1156, he negotiated the Treaty of Benevento, which restored peaceful relations between Rome and the Kingdom of Sicily. At the diet of Besan\u00e7on in October 1157, he and Cardinal Bernard of San Clemente delivered a papal message that seemed to claim that Frederick I was a papal vassal, resulting in a serious diplomatic incident.\nDisputed election.\nPope Adrian IV died 1 September 1159. On 7 September 1159, Rolando Bandinelli was elected pope and took the name Alexander III. A minority of the cardinals, however, elected the cardinal priest Octavian, who assumed the name of Victor IV and became Frederick's antipope.\nBy 1160, faced with a papal schism, Alexander, and Victor, were summoned by Emperor Frederick to a council in Pavia. Alexander refused, stating a pope can only be judged by God. The council of Pavia met from 5 to 11 February and recognized Victor IV's election as pope. On 13 February, Victor IV excommunicated Alexander. Upon receiving the news on 24 March 1160, Alexander, who was at Anagni, excommunicated both Victor and Frederick.\nIn 1161, King G\u00e9za II of Hungary signed an agreement and recognised Alexander III as the rightful pope and declared that the supreme spiritual leader was the only one who could exercise the rite of investiture. This meant that Alexander's legitimacy was gaining strength, as soon proved by the fact that other monarchs, such as the king of France and King Henry II of England, recognized his authority. Because of imperial strength in Italy, Alexander was forced to reside outside Rome for a large part of his pontificate. When news reached him of the death of Victor in 1164, he openly wept, and scolded the cardinals in his company for rejoicing at the end of the rival antipope.\nHowever, the dispute between Alexander III, Victor IV and Victor's successors Paschal III and Calixtus III (who had the German imperial support) continued until Frederick Barbarossa's defeat at the Legnano in 1176, after which Barbarossa finally (in the Peace of Venice of 1177) recognized Alexander III as pope. On 12 March 1178, Alexander III returned to Rome, which he had been compelled to leave twice: the first time between 1162 and 23 November 1165. When Alexander was arrested by supporters of the imperialist Victor IV, he was freed by Oddone Frangipane, who sent him to safety in the Campania. Alexander again left Rome in 1167, travelling first to Benevento and later moving to various strongholds such as those of Anagni, Palestrina, Ferentino, Tusculum, and Veroli.\nPontificate.\nPolitics.\nAlexander III was the first pope known to have paid direct attention to missionary activities east of the Baltic Sea. He had created the Archbishopric of Uppsala in Sweden in 1164, probably at the suggestion of his close friend Archbishop Eskil of Lund \u2013 exiled in Clairvaux, France, due to a conflict with the Danish king. The latter appointed a Benedictine monk Fulco as a bishop in Estonia. In 1171, Alexander became the first pope to address the situation of the Church in Finland, with Finns allegedly harassing priests and only relying on God in time of war. In the bull \"Non parum animus noster\", in 1171 or 1172, he gave papal sanction to ongoing crusades against pagans in northern Europe, promising remission of sin for those who fought there. In doing so, he legitimized the widespread use of forced conversion as a tactic by those fighting in the Baltic.\nIn 1166, Alexander received an embassy from the Byzantine emperor Manuel I. The Byzantine ambassador, the \"sebastos\" Jordan relayed that Manuel would end the Great Schism of the eastern and western churches if Alexander would recognize him as emperor. As emperor, Manuel would supply the pope with men and money to restore his authority in Italy. Alexander gave an evasive answer, but in 1168 he rejected outright the same proposal from a second Byzantine embassy. His stated reason amounted to it being too difficult. He appears to have feared Byzantine domination of Italy if the pope owed his position to its support.\nBesides checkmating Barbarossa, Alexander humbled King Henry II of England for the murder of Thomas Becket in 1170, to whom he was unusually close, later canonizing Becket in 1173. This was the second English saint canonized by Alexander, the first being Edward the Confessor in 1161. Nonetheless, he confirmed the position of Henry as Lord of Ireland in 1172.\nThrough the papal bull \"Manifestis Probatum\", issued on 23 May 1179, Alexander recognized the right of Count Afonso Henriques to proclaim himself king of Portugal \u2013 an important step in the process of Portugal becoming a recognized independent kingdom. Afonso had been using the title of king since 1139.\nEfforts at reform.\nEven as a fugitive, Alexander enjoyed the favour and protection of Louis VII of France.\nIn 1163 Alexander summoned clergy and prelates from England, France, Italy, and Spain to the Council of Tours to address, among other things, the unlawful division of ecclesiastical benefices, clerical usury, and lay possession of tithes.\nIn March 1179, Alexander held the Third Council of the Lateran, one of the most important mediaeval church councils, reckoned by the Catholic Church as the eleventh ecumenical council. Its acts embodied several of the Pope's proposals for the betterment of the condition of the Church, among them the law requiring that no one could be elected pope without the votes of two-thirds of the cardinals. The rule was altered slightly in 1996, but was restored in 2007. The period from 1177, which saw the submission of both emperor Frederick and anti-pope Calixtus III, and this synod/council marked the summit of Alexander III's power.\nNevertheless, soon after the close of the synod, the Roman Republic forced Alexander to leave the city, which he never re-entered, and on 29 September 1179, some nobles set up the Antipope Innocent III. By the judicious use of money, however, Alexander got him into his power, so that he was deposed in January 1180. In 1181, Alexander excommunicated King William I of Scotland and put the kingdom under an interdict.\nEcclesial activities.\nThroughout his pontificate, Alexander elevated 68 cardinals in fifteen consistories which included two of his successors, Urban III and Clement III, and a cardinal whom he would later canonize as a saint.\nAlexander beatified no one during his papacy but he did canonize ten saints which included notable figures of the age such as Bernard of Clairvaux, Thomas Becket, and King Edward the Confessor\nDeath.\nAlexander died at Civita Castellana on 30 August 1181. It was one week short of twenty-two years since his election, the longest papacy since Adrian I in the 8th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23794", "revid": "44604570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23794", "title": "Pope Alexander I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from c. 107 to c. 115\nPope Alexander I (, died c. 115) was the bishop of Rome from about 108/109 to 116/119 (according to the 2012 \"Annuario Pontificio\"). Some believe he suffered martyrdom under the Roman emperor Trajan or Hadrian.\nLife and legend.\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", it was Alexander I who inserted the narration of the Last Supper (the \"Qui pridie\") into the liturgy of the Mass. However, the article on Saint Alexander I in the 1907 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", written by Thomas Shahan, judges this tradition to be inaccurate, a view shared by Roman Catholic and non-Roman Catholic experts alike. It is viewed as a product of the agenda of \"Liber Pontificalis\"\u2014this section of the book was probably written in the late 5th century\u2014to show an ancient pattern of the earliest bishops of Rome ruling the church by papal decree. The chronology of his pontificate is disputed, but he probably assumed office around 108/109 AD and died around 118/119 AD, after a tenure of 10 years. \nThe introduction of the customs of using blessed water mixed with salt for the purification of Christian homes from evil influences, as well as that of mixing water with the sacramental wine, are attributed to Pope Alexander I. Some sources consider these attributions unlikely. It is certainly possible, however, that Alexander played an important part in the early development of the Church of Rome's emerging liturgical and administrative traditions.\nA later tradition holds that in the reign of the emperor Hadrian, Alexander I converted the Roman governor Hermes by miraculous means, together with his entire household of 1,500 people. Quirinus of Neuss, who was Alexander's supposed jailer, and Quirinus' daughter Balbina of Rome were also among his converts.\nAlexander is said to have seen a vision of the infant Jesus. His remains are said to have been transferred to Freising in Bavaria, Germany in AD 834.\nSupposed identification with a martyr.\nSome editions of the Roman Missal identified Pope Alexander I with the Alexander that they give as commemorated, together with Eventius and Theodulus (who were supposed to be priests of his), on 3 May. See, for instance, the General Roman Calendar of 1954. But nothing is known of these three saints other than their names, together with the fact that they were martyred and were buried at the seventh milestone of the Via Nomentana on 3 May of some year. For this reason, the Pope John XXIII's 1960 revision of the calendar returned to the presentation that was in the 1570 Tridentine calendar of the three saints as simply \"Saints Alexander, Eventius and Theodulus Martyrs\" with no suggestion that any of them was a pope. The Roman Martyrology lists them as Eventius, Alexander and Theodulus, the order in which their names are given in historical documents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23796", "revid": "26270034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23796", "title": "Panarchism", "text": ""}
{"id": "23798", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23798", "title": "Poincar\u00e9 conjecture", "text": "Theorem in geometric topology\nIn the mathematical field of geometric topology, the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture (, , ) is a theorem about the characterization of the 3-sphere, which is the hypersphere that bounds the unit ball in four-dimensional space.\nOriginally conjectured by Henri Poincar\u00e9 in 1904, the theorem concerns spaces that locally look like ordinary three-dimensional space but which are finite in extent. Poincar\u00e9 hypothesized that if such a space has the additional property that each loop in the space can be continuously tightened to a point, then it is necessarily a three-dimensional sphere. Attempts to resolve the conjecture drove much progress in the field of geometric topology during the 20th century.\nThe eventual proof built upon Richard S. Hamilton's program of using the Ricci flow to solve the problem. By developing a number of new techniques and results in the theory of Ricci flow, Grigori Perelman was able to modify and complete Hamilton's program. In papers posted to the arXiv repository in 2002 and 2003, Perelman presented his work proving the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture (and the more powerful geometrization conjecture of William Thurston). Over the next several years, several mathematicians studied his papers and produced detailed formulations of his work.\nHamilton and Perelman's work on the conjecture is widely recognized as a milestone of mathematical research. Hamilton was recognized with the Shaw Prize in 2011 and the Leroy P. Steele Prize for Seminal Contribution to Research in 2009. The journal \"Science\" marked Perelman's proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture as the scientific Breakthrough of the Year in 2006. The Clay Mathematics Institute, having included the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture in their well-known Millennium Prize Problem list, offered Perelman their prize of US$1 million in 2010 for the conjecture's resolution. He declined the award, saying that Hamilton's contribution had been equal to his own.\nOverview.\nThe Poincar\u00e9 conjecture was a mathematical problem in the field of geometric topology. In terms of the vocabulary of that field, it says the following:\nPoincar\u00e9 conjecture.Every three-dimensional topological manifold which is closed, connected, and has trivial fundamental group is homeomorphic to the three-dimensional sphere.\nFamiliar shapes, such as the surface of a ball (which is known in mathematics as the \"two\"-dimensional sphere) or of a torus, are two-dimensional. The surface of a ball has trivial fundamental group, meaning that any loop drawn on the surface can be continuously deformed to a single point. By contrast, the surface of a torus has nontrivial fundamental group, as there are loops on the surface which cannot be so deformed. Both are topological manifolds which are closed (meaning that they have no boundary and take up a finite region of space) and connected (meaning that they consist of a single piece). Two closed manifolds are said to be homeomorphic when it is possible for the points of one to be reallocated to the other in a continuous way. Because the (non)triviality of the fundamental group is known to be invariant under homeomorphism, it follows that the two-dimensional sphere and torus are not homeomorphic.\nThe two-dimensional analogue of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture says that any two-dimensional topological manifold which is closed and connected but non-homeomorphic to the two-dimensional sphere must possess a loop which cannot be continuously contracted to a point. (This is illustrated by the example of the torus, as above.) This analogue is known to be true via the classification of closed and connected two-dimensional topological manifolds, which was understood in various forms since the 1860s. In higher dimensions, the closed and connected topological manifolds do not have a straightforward classification, precluding an easy resolution of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture.\nHistory.\nPoincar\u00e9's question.\nIn the 1800s, Bernhard Riemann and Enrico Betti initiated the study of topological invariants of manifolds. They introduced the Betti numbers, which associate to any manifold a list of nonnegative integers. Riemann showed that a closed connected two-dimensional manifold is fully characterized by its Betti numbers. As part of his 1895 paper \"Analysis Situs\" (announced in 1892), Poincar\u00e9 showed that Riemann's result does not extend to higher dimensions. To do this he introduced the fundamental group as a novel topological invariant, and was able to exhibit examples of three-dimensional manifolds which have the same Betti numbers but distinct fundamental groups. He posed the question of whether the fundamental group is sufficient to topologically characterize a manifold (of given dimension), although he made no attempt to pursue the answer, saying only that it would \"demand lengthy and difficult study\".\nThe primary purpose of Poincar\u00e9's paper was the interpretation of the Betti numbers in terms of his newly introduced homology groups, along with the Poincar\u00e9 duality theorem on the symmetry of Betti numbers. Following criticism of the completeness of his arguments, he released a number of subsequent \"supplements\" to enhance and correct his work. The closing remark of his second supplement, published in 1900, said:\nIn order to avoid making this work too prolonged, I confine myself to stating the following theorem, the proof of which will require further developments:\nEach polyhedron which has all its Betti numbers equal to 1 and all its tables \"T\"\"q\" orientable is simply connected, i.e., homeomorphic to a hypersphere.\n(In a modern language, taking note of the fact that Poincar\u00e9 is using the terminology of simple-connectedness in an unusual way, this says that a closed connected oriented manifold with the homology of a sphere must be homeomorphic to a sphere.) This modified his negative generalization of Riemann's work in two ways. Firstly, he was now making use of the full homology groups and not only the Betti numbers. Secondly, he narrowed the scope of the problem from asking if an arbitrary manifold is characterized by topological invariants to asking whether the sphere can be so characterized.\nHowever, after publication he found his announced theorem to be incorrect. In his fifth and final supplement, published in 1904, he proved this with the counterexample of the Poincar\u00e9 homology sphere, which is a closed connected three-dimensional manifold which has the homology of the sphere but whose fundamental group has 120 elements. This example made it clear that homology is not powerful enough to characterize the topology of a manifold. In the closing remarks of the fifth supplement, Poincar\u00e9 modified his erroneous theorem to use the fundamental group instead of homology:\nOne question remains to be dealt with: is it possible for the fundamental group of V to reduce to the identity without V being simply connected? [...] However, this question would carry us too far away.\nIn this remark, as in the closing remark of the second supplement, Poincar\u00e9 used the term \"simply connected\" in a way which is at odds with modern usage, as well as his own 1895 definition of the term. (According to modern usage, Poincar\u00e9's question is a tautology, asking if it is possible for a manifold to be simply connected without being simply connected.) However, as can be inferred from context, Poincar\u00e9 was asking whether the triviality of the fundamental group uniquely characterizes the sphere.\nThroughout the work of Riemann, Betti, and Poincar\u00e9, the topological notions in question are not defined or used in a way that would be recognized as precise from a modern perspective. Even the key notion of a \"manifold\" was not used in a consistent way in Poincar\u00e9's own work, and there was frequent confusion between the notion of a topological manifold, a PL manifold, and a smooth manifold. For this reason, it is not possible to read Poincar\u00e9's questions unambiguously. It is only through the formalization and vocabulary of topology as developed by later mathematicians that Poincar\u00e9's closing question has been understood as the \"Poincar\u00e9 conjecture\" as stated in the preceding section.\nHowever, despite its usual phrasing in the form of a conjecture, proposing that all manifolds of a certain type are homeomorphic to the sphere, Poincar\u00e9 only posed an open-ended question, without venturing to conjecture one way or the other. Moreover, there is no evidence as to which way he believed his question would be answered.\nSolutions.\nIn the 1930s, J. H. C. Whitehead claimed a proof but then retracted it. In the process, he discovered some examples of simply-connected (indeed contractible, i.e. homotopically equivalent to a point) non-compact 3-manifolds not homeomorphic to formula_1, the prototype of which is now called the Whitehead manifold.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, other mathematicians attempted proofs of the conjecture only to discover that they contained flaws. Influential mathematicians such as Georges de Rham, R. H. Bing, Wolfgang Haken, Edwin E. Moise, and Christos Papakyriakopoulos attempted to prove the conjecture. In 1958, R. H. Bing proved a weak version of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture: if every simple closed curve of a compact 3-manifold is contained in a 3-ball, then the manifold is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere. Bing also described some of the pitfalls in trying to prove the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture.\nW\u0142odzimierz Jakobsche showed in 1978 that, if the Bing\u2013Borsuk conjecture is true in dimension 3, then the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture must also be true.\nOver time, the conjecture gained the reputation of being particularly tricky to tackle. John Milnor commented that sometimes the errors in false proofs can be \"rather subtle and difficult to detect\". Work on the conjecture improved understanding of 3-manifolds. Experts in the field were often reluctant to announce proofs and tended to view any such announcement with skepticism. The 1980s and 1990s witnessed some well-publicized fallacious proofs (which were not actually published in peer-reviewed form).\nAn exposition of attempts to prove this conjecture can be found in the non-technical book \"Poincar\u00e9's Prize\" by George Szpiro.\nDimensions.\nThe classification of closed surfaces gives an affirmative answer to the analogous question in two dimensions. For dimensions greater than three, one can pose the Generalized Poincar\u00e9 conjecture: is a homotopy \"n\"-sphere homeomorphic to the \"n\"-sphere? A stronger assumption than simply-connectedness is necessary; in dimensions four and higher there are simply-connected, closed manifolds which are not homotopy equivalent to an \"n\"-sphere.\nHistorically, while the conjecture in dimension three seemed plausible, the generalized conjecture was thought to be false. In 1961, Stephen Smale shocked mathematicians by proving the Generalized Poincar\u00e9 conjecture for dimensions greater than four and extended his techniques to prove the fundamental h-cobordism theorem. In 1982, Michael Freedman proved the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture in four dimensions. Freedman's work left open the possibility that there is a smooth four-manifold homeomorphic to the four-sphere which is not diffeomorphic to the four-sphere. This so-called smooth Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, in dimension four, remains open and is thought to be very difficult. Milnor's exotic spheres show that the smooth Poincar\u00e9 conjecture is false in dimension seven, for example.\nThese earlier successes in higher dimensions left the case of three dimensions in limbo. The Poincar\u00e9 conjecture was essentially true in both dimension four and all higher dimensions for substantially different reasons. In dimension three, the conjecture had an uncertain reputation until the geometrization conjecture put it into a framework governing all 3-manifolds. John Morgan wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is my view that before Thurston's work on hyperbolic 3-manifolds and \u2026 the Geometrization conjecture there was no consensus among the experts as to whether the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture was true or false. After Thurston's work, notwithstanding the fact that it had no direct bearing on the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, a consensus developed that the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture (and the Geometrization conjecture) were true.\nHamilton's program and solution.\nHamilton's program was started in his 1982 paper in which he introduced the Ricci flow on a manifold and showed how to use it to prove some special cases of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture. In the following years, he extended this work but was unable to prove the conjecture. The actual solution was not found until Grigori Perelman published his papers.\nIn late 2002 and 2003, Perelman posted three papers on arXiv. In these papers, he sketched a proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture and a more general conjecture, Thurston's geometrization conjecture, completing the Ricci flow program outlined earlier by Richard S. Hamilton.\nFrom May to July 2006, several groups presented papers that filled in the details of Perelman's proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this paper, we shall present the Hamilton-Perelman theory of Ricci flow. Based on it, we shall give the first written account of a complete proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture and the geometrization conjecture of Thurston. While the complete work is an accumulated efforts of many geometric analysts, the major contributors are unquestionably Hamilton and Perelman.\nSome observers interpreted Cao and Zhu as taking credit for Perelman's work. They later posted a revised version, with new wording, on arXiv. In addition, a page of their exposition was essentially identical to a page in one of Kleiner and Lott's early publicly available drafts; this was also amended in the revised version, together with an apology by the journal's editorial board.\nAll three groups found that the gaps in Perelman's papers were minor and could be filled in using his own techniques.\nOn August 22, 2006, the ICM awarded Perelman the Fields Medal for his work on the Ricci flow, but Perelman refused the medal. John Morgan spoke at the ICM on the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture on August 24, 2006, declaring that \"in 2003, Perelman solved the Poincar\u00e9 Conjecture\".\nIn December 2006, the journal \"Science\" honored the proof of Poincar\u00e9 conjecture as the Breakthrough of the Year and featured it on its cover.\nRicci flow with surgery.\nHamilton's program for proving the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture involves first putting a Riemannian metric on the unknown simply connected closed 3-manifold. The basic idea is to try to \"improve\" this metric; for example, if the metric can be improved enough so that it has constant positive curvature, then according to classical results in Riemannian geometry, it must be the 3-sphere. Hamilton prescribed the \"Ricci flow equations\" for improving the metric;\n formula_2\nwhere \"g\" is the metric and \"R\" its Ricci curvature, and one hopes that, as the time \"t\" increases, the manifold becomes easier to understand. Ricci flow expands the negative curvature part of the manifold and contracts the positive curvature part.\nIn some cases, Hamilton was able to show that this works; for example, his original breakthrough was to show that if the Riemannian manifold has positive Ricci curvature everywhere, then the above procedure can only be followed for a bounded interval of parameter values, formula_3 with formula_4, and more significantly, that there are numbers formula_5 such that as formula_6, the Riemannian metrics formula_7 smoothly converge to one of constant positive curvature. According to classical Riemannian geometry, the only simply-connected compact manifold which can support a Riemannian metric of constant positive curvature is the sphere. So, in effect, Hamilton showed a special case of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture: \"if\" a compact simply-connected 3-manifold supports a Riemannian metric of positive Ricci curvature, then it must be diffeomorphic to the 3-sphere.\nIf, instead, one only has an arbitrary Riemannian metric, the Ricci flow equations must lead to more complicated singularities. Perelman's major achievement was to show that, if one takes a certain perspective, if they appear in finite time, these singularities can only look like shrinking spheres or cylinders. With a quantitative understanding of this phenomenon, he cuts the manifold along the singularities, splitting the manifold into several pieces and then continues with the Ricci flow on each of these pieces. This procedure is known as Ricci flow with surgery.\nPerelman provided a separate argument based on curve shortening flow to show that, on a simply-connected compact 3-manifold, any solution of the Ricci flow with surgery becomes extinct in finite time. An alternative argument, based on the min-max theory of minimal surfaces and geometric measure theory, was provided by Tobias Colding and William Minicozzi. Hence, in the simply-connected context, the above finite-time phenomena of Ricci flow with surgery is all that is relevant. In fact, this is even true if the fundamental group is a free product of finite groups and cyclic groups.\nThis condition on the fundamental group turns out to be necessary and sufficient for finite time extinction. It is equivalent to saying that the prime decomposition of the manifold has no acyclic components and turns out to be equivalent to the condition that all geometric pieces of the manifold have geometries based on the two Thurston geometries \"S\"2 \u00d7 R and \"S\"3. In the context that one makes no assumption about the fundamental group whatsoever, Perelman made a further technical study of the limit of the manifold for infinitely large times, and in so doing, proved Thurston's geometrization conjecture: at large times, the manifold has a thick-thin decomposition, whose thick piece has a hyperbolic structure, and whose thin piece is a graph manifold. Due to Perelman's and Colding and Minicozzi's results, however, these further results are unnecessary in order to prove the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture.\nSolution.\nOn November 11, 2002, Russian mathematician Grigori Perelman posted the first of a series of three eprints on arXiv outlining a solution of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture. Perelman's proof uses a modified version of a Ricci flow program developed by Richard S. Hamilton. In August 2006, Perelman was awarded, but declined, the Fields Medal (worth $15,000 CAD) for his work on the Ricci flow. On March 18, 2010, the Clay Mathematics Institute awarded Perelman the $1\u00a0million Millennium Prize in recognition of his proof. Perelman rejected that prize as well.\nPerelman proved the conjecture by deforming the manifold using the Ricci flow (which behaves similarly to the heat equation that describes the diffusion of heat through an object). The Ricci flow usually deforms the manifold towards a rounder shape, except for some cases where it stretches the manifold apart from itself towards what are known as singularities. Perelman and Hamilton then chop the manifold at the singularities (a process called \"surgery\"), causing the separate pieces to form into ball-like shapes. Major steps in the proof involve showing how manifolds behave when they are deformed by the Ricci flow, examining what sort of singularities develop, determining whether this surgery process can be completed, and establishing that the surgery need not be repeated infinitely many times.\nThe first step is to deform the manifold using the Ricci flow. The Ricci flow was defined by Richard S. Hamilton as a way to deform manifolds. The formula for the Ricci flow is an imitation of the heat equation, which describes the way heat flows in a solid. Like the heat flow, Ricci flow tends towards uniform behavior. Unlike the heat flow, the Ricci flow could run into singularities and stop functioning. A singularity in a manifold is a place where it is not differentiable: like a corner or a cusp or a pinching. The Ricci flow was only defined for smooth differentiable manifolds. Hamilton used the Ricci flow to prove that some compact manifolds were diffeomorphic to spheres, and he hoped to apply it to prove the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture. He needed to understand the singularities.\nHamilton created a list of possible singularities that could form, but he was concerned that some singularities might lead to difficulties. He wanted to cut the manifold at the singularities and paste in caps and then run the Ricci flow again, so he needed to understand the singularities and show that certain kinds of singularities do not occur. Perelman discovered the singularities were all very simple: consider that a cylinder is formed by 'stretching' a circle along a line in another dimension, repeating that process with spheres instead of circles essentially gives the form of the singularities. Perelman proved this using something called the \"Reduced Volume\", which is closely related to an eigenvalue of a certain elliptic equation.\nSometimes, an otherwise complicated operation reduces to multiplication by a scalar (a number). Such numbers are called eigenvalues of that operation. Eigenvalues are closely related to vibration frequencies and are used in analyzing a famous problem: can you hear the shape of a drum? Essentially, an eigenvalue is like a note being played by the manifold. Perelman proved this note goes up as the manifold is deformed by the Ricci flow. This helped him eliminate some of the more troublesome singularities that had concerned Hamilton, particularly the cigar soliton solution, which looked like a strand sticking out of a manifold with nothing on the other side. In essence, Perelman showed that all the strands that form can be cut and capped and none stick out on one side only.\nCompleting the proof, Perelman takes any compact, simply connected, three-dimensional manifold without boundary and starts to run the Ricci flow. This deforms the manifold into round pieces with strands running between them. He cuts the strands and continues deforming the manifold until, eventually, he is left with a collection of round three-dimensional spheres. Then, he rebuilds the original manifold by connecting the spheres together with three-dimensional cylinders, morphs them into a round shape, and sees that, despite all the initial confusion, the manifold was, in fact, homeomorphic to a sphere.\nOne immediate question posed was how one could be sure that infinitely many cuts are not necessary. This was raised due to the cutting potentially progressing forever. Perelman proved this cannot happen by using minimal surfaces on the manifold. A minimal surface is one on which any local deformation increases area; a familiar example is a soap film spanning a bent loop of wire. Hamilton had shown that the area of a minimal surface decreases as the manifold undergoes Ricci flow. Perelman verified what happened to the area of the minimal surface when the manifold was sliced. He proved that, eventually, the area is so small that any cut after the area is that small can only be chopping off three-dimensional spheres and not more complicated pieces. This is described as a battle with a Hydra by Sormani in Szpiro's book cited below. This last part of the proof appeared in Perelman's third and final paper on the subject.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23799", "revid": "50867215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23799", "title": "Power set", "text": "Mathematical set of all subsets of a set\nIn mathematics, the power set (or powerset) of a set S is the set of all subsets of S, including the empty set and S itself. In axiomatic set theory (as developed, for example, in the ZFC axioms), the existence of the power set of any set is postulated by the axiom of power set. \nThe powerset of S is variously denoted as , , \"P\"(\"S\"), formula_1, or 2\"S\".\nAny subset of is called a \"family of sets\" over S.\nExample.\nIf S is the set {\"x\", \"y\", \"z\"}, then all the subsets of S are\nand hence the power set of S is .\nProperties.\nIf \"S\" is a finite set with the cardinality |\"S\"| = \"n\" (i.e., the number of all elements in the set \"S\" is \"n\"), then the number of all the subsets of \"S\" is |\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0| = 2\"n\". This fact as well as the reason of the notation 2\"S\" denoting the power set are demonstrated in the below.\n An indicator function or a characteristic function of a subset \"A\" of a set \"S\" with the cardinality |\"S\"| = \"n\" is a function from \"S\" to the two-element set {0, 1}, denoted as \"I\"\"A\" : \"S\" \u2192 {0, 1}, and it indicates whether an element of \"S\" belongs to \"A\" or not; If \"x\" in \"S\" belongs to \"A\", then \"I\"\"A\"(\"x\") = 1, and 0 otherwise. Each subset \"A\" of \"S\" is identified by or equivalent to the indicator function \"I\"\"A\", and {0,1}\"S\" as the set of all the functions from \"S\" to {0, 1} consists of all the indicator functions of all the subsets of \"S\". In other words, {0, 1}\"S\" is equivalent or bijective to the power set . Since each element in \"S\" corresponds to either 0 or 1 under any function in {0, 1}\"S\", the number of all the functions in {0, 1}\"S\" is 2\"n\". Since the number 2 can be defined as {0, 1} (see, for example, von Neumann ordinals), the is also denoted as 2\"S\". Obviously |2\"S\"| = 2|\"S\"| holds. Generally speaking, \"X\"\"Y\" is the set of all functions from \"Y\" to \"X\" and |\"X\"\"Y\"| = |\"X\"||\"Y\"|.\nCantor's diagonal argument shows that the power set of a set (whether infinite or not) always has strictly higher cardinality than the set itself (or informally, the power set must be larger than the original set). In particular, Cantor's theorem shows that the power set of a countably infinite set is uncountably infinite. The power set of the set of natural numbers can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with the set of real numbers (see Cardinality of the continuum).\nThe power set of a set \"S\", together with the operations of union, intersection and complement, is a \u03c3-algebra over \"S\" and can be viewed as the prototypical example of a Boolean algebra. In fact, one can show that any \"finite\" Boolean algebra is isomorphic to the Boolean algebra of the power set of a finite set. For \"infinite\" Boolean algebras, this is no longer true, but every infinite Boolean algebra can be represented as a subalgebra of a power set Boolean algebra (see Stone's representation theorem).\nThe power set of a set \"S\" forms an abelian group when it is considered with the operation of symmetric difference (with the empty set as the identity element and each set being its own inverse), and a commutative monoid when considered with the operation of intersection (with the entire set \"S\" as the identity element). It can hence be shown, by proving the distributive laws, that the power set considered together with both of these operations forms a Boolean ring.\nRepresenting subsets as functions.\nIn set theory, \"X\"\"Y\" is the notation representing the set of all functions from Y to X. As \"2\" can be defined as {0, 1} (see, for example, von Neumann ordinals), 2\"S\" (i.e., {0, 1}\"S\") is the set of all functions from \"S\" to {0, 1}. As shown above, 2\"S\" and the power set of \"S\", , are considered identical set-theoretically.\nThis equivalence can be applied to the example above, in which \"S\" = {\"x\", \"y\", \"z\"}, to get the isomorphism with the binary representations of numbers from 0 to 2\"n\" \u2212 1, with n being the number of elements in the set \"S\" or |\"S\"| = \"n\". First, the enumerated set {(\"x\", 1), (\"y\", 2), (\"z\", 3)} is defined in which the number in each ordered pair represents the position of the paired element of \"S\" in a sequence of binary digits such as {\"x\", \"y\"} = 011(2); \"x\" of \"S\" is located at the first from the right of this sequence and \"y\" is at the second from the right, and 1 in the sequence means the element of \"S\" corresponding to the position of it in the sequence exists in the subset of \"S\" for the sequence while 0 means it does not.\nFor the whole power set of \"S\", we get:\nSuch an injective mapping from to integers is arbitrary, so this representation of all the subsets of \"S\" is not unique, but the sort order of the enumerated set does not change its cardinality. (E.g., {(\"y\", 1), (\"z\", 2), (\"x\", 3)} can be used to construct another injective mapping from to the integers without changing the number of one-to-one correspondences.)\nHowever, such finite binary representation is only possible if \"S\" can be enumerated. (In this example, \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" are enumerated with 1, 2, and 3 respectively as the position of binary digit sequences.) The enumeration is possible even if \"S\" has an infinite cardinality (i.e., the number of elements in \"S\" is infinite), such as the set of integers or rationals, but not possible for example if \"S\" is the set of real numbers, in which case we cannot enumerate all irrational numbers.\nRelation to binomial theorem.\nThe binomial theorem is closely related to the power set. A \"k\"\u2013elements combination from some set is another name for a \"k\"\u2013elements subset, so the number of combinations, denoted as C(\"n\", \"k\") (also called binomial coefficient) is a number of subsets with k elements in a set with n elements; in other words it's the number of sets with k elements which are elements of the power set of a set with n elements.\nFor example, the power set of a set with three elements, has:\nUsing this relationship, we can compute using the formula:\nformula_4\nTherefore, one can deduce the following identity, assuming |\"S\"| = \"n\":\nformula_5\nRecursive definition.\nIf \"S\" is a finite set, then a recursive definition of proceeds as follows:\nIn words: \nSubsets of limited cardinality.\nThe set of subsets of \"S\" of cardinality less than or equal to \"\u03ba\" is sometimes denoted by or [\"S\"]\"\u03ba\", and the set of subsets with cardinality strictly less than \"\u03ba\" is sometimes denoted or [\"S\"]&lt;\"\u03ba\". Similarly, the set of non-empty subsets of \"S\" might be denoted by or .\nPower object.\nA set can be regarded as an algebra having no nontrivial operations or defining equations. From this perspective, the concept of the power set of \"X\" as the set of all subsets of \"X\" generalizes naturally to the set to all subalgebras of an algebraic structure or algebra.\nThe power set of a set, when ordered by inclusion, is always a complete atomic Boolean algebra, and every complete atomic Boolean algebra arises as the lattice of all subsets of some set. The generalization to arbitrary algebras is that the set of subalgebras of an algebra, again ordered by inclusion, is always an algebraic lattice, and every algebraic lattice arises as the lattice of subalgebras of some algebra. So in that regard, subalgebras behave analogously to subsets.\nHowever, there are two important properties of subsets that do not carry over to subalgebras in general. First, although the subsets of a set form a set (as well as a lattice), in some classes it may not be possible to organize the subalgebras of an algebra as itself an algebra in that class, although they can always be organized as a lattice. Secondly, whereas the subsets of a set are in bijection with the functions from that set to the set {0, 1} = 2, there is no guarantee that a class of algebras contains an algebra that can play the role of 2 in this way.\nCertain classes of algebras enjoy both of these properties. The first property is more common; the case of having both is relatively rare. One class that does have both is that of multigraphs. Given two multigraphs \"G\" and \"H\", a homomorphism \"h\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\" consists of two functions, one mapping vertices to vertices and the other mapping edges to edges. The set \"H\"\"G\" of homomorphisms from \"G\" to \"H\" can then be organized as the graph whose vertices and edges are respectively the vertex and edge functions appearing in that set. Furthermore, the subgraphs of a multigraph \"G\" are in bijection with the graph homomorphisms from \"G\" to the multigraph \u03a9 definable as the complete directed graph on two vertices (hence four edges, namely two self-loops and two more edges forming a cycle) augmented with a fifth edge, namely a second self-loop at one of the vertices. We can therefore organize the subgraphs of \"G\" as the multigraph \u03a9\"G\", called the power object of \"G\".\nWhat is special about a multigraph as an algebra is that its operations are unary. A multigraph has two sorts of elements forming a set \"V\" of vertices and \"E\" of edges, and has two unary operations \"s\", \"t\" : \"E\" \u2192 \"V\" giving the source (start) and target (end) vertices of each edge. An algebra all of whose operations are unary is called a presheaf. Every class of presheaves contains a presheaf \u03a9 that plays the role for subalgebras that 2 plays for subsets. Such a class is a special case of the more general notion of elementary topos as a category that is closed (and moreover cartesian closed) and has an object \u03a9, called a subobject classifier. Although the term \"power object\" is sometimes used synonymously with exponential object , in topos theory \"Y\" is required to be \u03a9.\nFunctors and quantifiers.\nThere is both a covariant and contravariant power set functor, and . The covariant functor is defined more simply as the functor which sends a set \"S\" to and a morphism \"f\": \"S\" \u2192 \"T\" (here, a function between sets) to the image morphism. That is, for formula_7. Elsewhere in this article, the power set was defined as the set of functions of \"S\" into the set with 2 elements. Formally, this defines a natural isomorphism formula_8. The contravariant power set functor is different from the covariant version in that it sends \"f\" to the \"pre\"image morphism, so that if formula_9. This is because a general functor formula_10 takes a morphism formula_11 to precomposition by \"h\", so a function formula_12, which takes morphisms from \"b\" to \"c\" and takes them to morphisms from \"a\" to \"c\", through \"b\" via \"h\".\nIn category theory and the theory of elementary topoi, the universal quantifier can be understood as the right adjoint of a functor between power sets, the inverse image functor of a function between sets; likewise, the existential quantifier is the left adjoint.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23801", "revid": "50022150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23801", "title": "Procedural programming", "text": "Computer programming paradigm\nProcedural programming is a programming paradigm, classified as imperative programming, that involves implementing the behavior of a computer program as procedures (a.k.a. functions, subroutines) that call each other. The resulting program is a series of steps that forms a hierarchy of calls to its constituent procedures.\nThe first major procedural programming languages appeared c.\u20091957\u20131964, including Fortran, ALGOL, COBOL, PL/I and BASIC. Pascal and C were published c.\u20091970\u20131972.\nComputer processors provide hardware support for procedural programming through a stack register and instructions for calling procedures and returning from them. Hardware support for other types of programming is possible, like Lisp machines or Java processors, but no attempt was commercially successful.\nDevelopment practices.\nCertain software development practices are often employed with procedural programming in order to enhance quality and lower development and maintenance costs.\nModularity and scoping.\nModularity is about organizing the procedures of a program into separate modules\u2014each of which has a specific and understandable purpose.\nMinimizing the scope of variables and procedures can enhance software quality by reducing the cognitive load of procedures and modules.\nA program lacking modularity or wide scoping tends to have procedures that consume many variables that other procedures also consume. The resulting code is relatively hard to understand and to maintain.\nSharing.\nSince a procedure can specify a well-defined interface and be self-contained it supports code reuse\u2014in particular via the software library.\nComparison with other programming paradigms.\nImperative programming.\nProcedural programming is classified as an imperative programming, because it involves direct command of execution.\nProcedural is a sub-class of imperative since procedural includes block and scope concepts, whereas imperative describes a more general concept that does not require such features. Procedural languages generally use reserved words that define blocks, such as codice_1, codice_2, and codice_3, to implement control flow, whereas non-structured imperative languages (i.e. assembly language) use goto and branch tables for this purpose.\nObject-oriented programming.\nAlso classified as imperative, object-oriented programming (OOP) involves dividing a program implementation into objects that expose behavior (methods) and data (members) via a well-defined interface. In contrast, procedural programming is about dividing the program implementation into variables, data structures, and subroutines. An important distinction is that while procedural involves procedures to operate on data structures, OOP bundles the two together. An object is a data structure and the behavior associated with that data structure.\nSome OOP languages support the class concept which allows for creating an object based on a definition.\nNomenclature varies between the two, although they have similar semantics:\nFunctional programming.\nThe principles of modularity and code reuse in functional languages are fundamentally the same as in procedural languages, since they both stem from structured programming. For example:\nThe main difference between the styles is that functional programming languages remove or at least deemphasize the imperative elements of procedural programming. The feature set of functional languages is therefore designed to support writing programs as much as possible in terms of pure functions:\nMany functional languages, however, are in fact impurely functional and offer imperative/procedural constructs that allow the programmer to write programs in procedural style, or in a combination of both styles. It is common for input/output code in functional languages to be written in a procedural style.\nThere do exist a few esoteric functional languages (like Unlambda) that eschew structured programming precepts for the sake of being difficult to program in (and therefore challenging). These languages are the exception to the common ground between procedural and functional languages.\nLogic programming.\nIn logic programming, a program is a set of premises, and computation is performed by attempting to prove candidate theorems. From this point of view, logic programs are declarative, focusing on what the problem is, rather than on how to solve it.\nHowever, the backward reasoning technique, implemented by SLD resolution, used to solve problems in logic programming languages such as Prolog, treats programs as goal-reduction procedures. Thus clauses of the form:\nH :- B1, \u2026, Bn.\nhave a dual interpretation, both as procedures\nto show/solve H, show/solve B1 and \u2026 and Bn\nand as logical implications:\nB1 and \u2026 and Bn implies H.\nA skilled logic programmer uses the procedural interpretation to write programs that are effective and efficient, and uses the declarative interpretation to help ensure that programs are correct.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23802", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23802", "title": "Pareto index", "text": "In economics the Pareto index, named after the Italian economist and sociologist Vilfredo Pareto, is an approximation of income or wealth distribution. It is one of the parameters specifying a Pareto distribution and embodies the Pareto principle. As applied to income, the Pareto principle is sometimes stated in by saying 20% of the population has 80% of the income. Pareto's data on British income taxes in his \"Cours d'\u00e9conomie politique\" indicates approximately 20% of the population had about 80% of the income..\nOne of the simplest characterizations of the Pareto distribution, when used to model the distribution of incomes, says that the proportion of the population whose income exceeds any positive number \"x\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"x\"m is\nformula_1\nwhere \"x\"m is a positive number, the minimum of the support of this probability distribution (the subscript m stands for \"minimum\"). The Pareto index is the parameter \u03b1. Since a proportion must be between 0 and 1, inclusive, the index \u03b1 must be positive, but in order for the total income of the whole population to be finite, \u03b1 must also be greater than 1. The larger the Pareto index, the smaller the proportion of very high-income people.\nGiven a formula_2 rule , with formula_3, the Pareto index is given by:\nformula_4\nIf formula_5, this simplifies to\nformula_6\nAlternatively, in terms of odds, X:Y\nformula_7\nso X:1 yields\nformula_8\nFor example, the 80\u201320 (4:1) rule corresponds to \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a0log(5)/log(4)\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.16, 90\u201310 (9:1) corresponds to \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a0log(10)/log(9)\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.05, and 99\u20131 corresponds to \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a0log(100)/log(99)\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.002, whereas the 70\u201330 rule corresponds to \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a0log(0.3)/log(0.3/0.7)\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.42 and 2:1 (67\u201333) corresponds to \u03b1\u00a0=\u00a0log(3)/log(2)\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.585.\nMathematically, the formula above entails that all incomes are at least the lower bound \"x\"m, which is positive. At this income the probability density suddenly jumps up from zero and then starts decreasing, which is clearly unrealistic. Economists therefore sometimes state the Pareto law is only true for the upper 20% of the distribution."}
{"id": "23803", "revid": "50867367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23803", "title": "Pope Leo III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 795 to 816\nPope Leo III (; died 12 June 816) was bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 26 December 795 to his death on 12 June 816. Protected by Charlemagne from the supporters of his predecessor, Adrian I, Leo subsequently strengthened Charlemagne's position by crowning him emperor. The coronation was not approved by most people in Constantinople, although the Byzantines, occupied with their own defenses, were in no position to offer much opposition to it.\nRise.\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Leo was \"of the Roman nation, the son of Atzuppius\" (\"natione romanus ex patre Atzuppio\"). The \"Chronicon Anianense\" says, more specifically, that he was \"born in Rome to Asupius and Elizabeth\" (\"natus rome ex patre asupio matre helisabeth\"). Usually considered to be of Greek origin, his father's name may suggest an Arab background. An earlier person of the same name or nickname, Atzypios, was an iconoclast adversary of John of Damascus.\nLeo seems to have known Greek. He was made cardinal-priest of Santa Susanna by Pope Adrian I, and seemingly also vestiarius, or chief of the pontifical treasury, or wardrobe.\nHe was elected on 26 December 795, the day Adrian I was buried, and consecrated on the following day. It is quite possible that this haste may have been due to a desire on the part of the Romans to prevent any interference by the Franks. With the letter informing the Frankish ruler Charlemagne that he had been unanimously elected pope, Leo sent him the keys of the confession of St. Peter, and the standard of the city, and requested an envoy. This he did to show that he regarded the Frankish king as the protector of the Holy See. In return, Charlemagne sent letters of congratulation and a great part of the treasure which the king had captured from the Avars.\nPontificate.\nCharlemagne's gift enabled Leo to be a great benefactor to the churches and charitable institutions of Rome. While Charlemagne's letter is respectful and even affectionate, it also exhibits his concept of the coordination of the spiritual and temporal powers, and he does not hesitate to remind the pope of his grave spiritual obligations.\nAttack on Leo in 799.\nPrompted by jealousy, ambition, or the thought that only someone of the nobility should hold the office of pope, a number of relatives of Adrian I formed a plot to render Leo unfit to hold his office. On the occasion of the procession of the Greater Litanies, 25 April 799, when the pope was making his way towards the Flaminian Gate, he was suddenly attacked by armed men. He was dashed to the ground, and an effort was made to root out his tongue and tear out his eyes which left him injured and unconscious. He was rescued by two of Charlemagne's \"missi dominici\", who came with a considerable force. Duke Winiges of Spoleto sheltered the fugitive pope, who went later to Paderborn, where Charlemagne's camp then was and where he was received by the Frankish king with the greatest honour. This meeting forms the basis of the epic poem \"Karolus Magnus et Leo Papa\".\nLeo was accused by his enemies of adultery and perjury. Charlemagne ordered them to Paderborn, but no decision could be made. He then had Leo escorted back to Rome. In November 800, Charlemagne himself went to Rome, and on 1 December held a council there with representatives of both sides. Leo, on 23 December, took an oath of purgation concerning the charges brought against him, and his opponents were exiled.\nCoronation of Charlemagne.\nCharlemagne's father, Pepin the Short, defended the papacy against the Lombards and issued the Donation of Pepin, which granted the land around Rome to the pope as a fief. In 754 Pope Stephen II had conferred on Charlemagne's father the dignity of \"Patricius Romanus\", which implied primarily the protection of the Roman Church in all its rights and privileges; above all in its temporal authority which it had gradually acquired (notably in the former Byzantine Duchy of Rome and the Exarchate of Ravenna) by just titles in the course of the two preceding centuries.\nTwo days after his oath, on Christmas Day 800, Leo crowned Charlemagne as emperor. According to Charlemagne's biographer, Einhard, Charlemagne had no suspicion of what was about to happen, and if informed would not have accepted the imperial crown. There is, however, no reason to doubt that for some time previous the elevation of Charlemagne had been discussed, both at home and at Rome, especially since the imperial throne in Constantinople was controversially occupied by a woman, Irene of Athens, and since the Carolingian dynasty had firmly established its power and prestige. The coronation offended Constantinople, which had seen itself still as the rightful defender of Rome, but Empress Irene, like many of her predecessors since Justinian I, was too weak to offer protection to the city or its much reduced citizenry.\nIn 808, Leo committed Corsica to Charlemagne for safe-keeping because of Muslim raids, originating from Al-Andalus, on the island. Nonetheless, Corsica, along with Sardinia, would still go on to be occupied by Muslim forces in 809 and 810.\nEpiscopal policy.\nLeo helped restore King Eardwulf of Northumbria and settled various matters of dispute between the archbishops of York and Canterbury. He also reversed Pope Adrian I's decision in the granting of the pallium to Bishop Hygeberht of Lichfield. He believed that the English episcopate had been misrepresented before Adrian and that therefore his act was invalid. In 803, Lichfield was a regular diocese again.\nTheological policy.\nPope Leo III unambiguously supported the current theological position in the West in his time: that Holy Spirit proceeds from both the Father and the Son; he stated on this position: \"it is forbidden not to believe such a great mystery of the faith\". However, he refused to change the creed which he said was the product of the \"divine illumination\" of the council fathers, and considered not everything needed for salvation was in the creed. Leo III \"placed two silver shields in Rome with the uninterpolated creed in both Greek and Latin.\" The \"Liber Pontificalis\" states Leo III put those shields at the top of St. Peter's entrance \"in his love for and as a safeguard for the orthodox and catholic apostolic faith\".\nAnastasius Bibliothecarius, chief archivist at Rome under several later Popes, stated that the Latins understood the Filioque to be in reference to the temporal mission (missio), and not an eternal procession.\nDeath and legacy.\nLeo III died in 816 after a reign of more than 20 years. He was originally buried in his own monument. However, some years after his death, his remains were put into a tomb that contained the first four popes named Leo. In the 18th century, the relics of Leo the Great were separated from his namesakes, and he was given his own chapel.\nLeo III was canonized by Clement X, who, in 1673, had Leo's name entered in the \"Roman Martyrology\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "23804", "revid": "1312324715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23804", "title": "Pope Adrian I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 772 to 795\nPope Adrian I (; 700 \u2013 25 December 795) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 1 February 772 until his death on 25 December 795. Descended from a family of the military aristocracy of Rome known as \"domini de via Lata\", he was the son of Theodore, who died when Hadrian was still very young; he was welcomed by his paternal uncle Theodotus (or Theodatus) \"consul, dux et primicerius Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae\".\nAdrian and his predecessors had to contend with periodic attempts by the Lombards to expand their holdings in Italy at the expense of the papacy. Not receiving any support from Constantinople, the popes looked for help to the Franks. Adrian's tenure saw the culmination of on-going territorial disputes between Charlemagne and his brother Carloman I. The Lombard king Desiderius supported the claims of Carloman's sons to their late father's land, and requested Pope Adrian crown Carloman's sons \"Kings of the Franks\". When the Pope failed to do so, Desiderius invaded Papal territory and seized the Duchy of the Pentapolis. Charlemagne besieged Pavia and took the Lombard crown for himself. He then restored the Pentapolis to the Papacy as well as some of the captured Lombard territory.\nStart of papacy.\nShortly after Adrian's accession in 772, the territory ruled by the papacy was invaded by Desiderius, king of the Lombards, and Adrian was compelled to seek the assistance of the Frankish king Charlemagne, who entered Italy with a large army. Charlemagne besieged Desiderius in his capital of Pavia. After taking the town, he banished the Lombard king to the Abbey of Corbie in France, and adopted the title \"King of the Lombards\" himself. The pope, whose expectations had been aroused, had to content himself with some additions to the Duchy of Rome, the Exarchate of Ravenna, and the Pentapolis in the Marches, which consisted of the \"five cities\" on the Adriatic coast from Rimini to Ancona with the coastal plain as far as the mountains. He celebrated the occasion by striking the earliest papal coin, and in a mark of the direction the mediaeval papacy was to take, no longer dated his documents by the Emperor in the east, but by the reign of Charles, king of the Franks. He recognized the authority of Pope Adrian I, and in return the pope gave Charlemagne the title of \"Patrician of Rome\".\nA mark of such newly settled conditions in the Duchy of Rome is the \"Domusculta Capracorum\", the central Roman villa that Adrian assembled from a nucleus of his inherited estates and acquisitions from neighbors in the countryside north of Veii. The villa is documented in \"Liber Pontificalis\", but its site was not rediscovered until the 1960s, when excavations revealed the structures on a gently rounded hill that was only marginally capable of self-defense, but fully self-sufficient for a mixed economy of grains and vineyards, olives, vegetable gardens and piggery with its own grain mill, smithies and tile-kilns. During the 10th century, villages were carved out of Adrian's Capracorum estate: Campagnano, mentioned first in 1076; Formello, mentioned in 1027; Mazzano, mentioned in 945; and Stabia (modern Faleria), mentioned in 998.\nForeign relations.\nLombards.\nWhile the Lombards had always been openly respectful of the papacy, the popes distrusted them. The popes had sought aid from the Eastern Roman Empire to keep them in check. Adrian continued this policy. Because the East could offer no direct aid, Adrian then looked to the Franks to offset the power of the Lombards.\nBackground.\nUpon the death of Pepin the Short in 768, his kingdom was left to his sons Charlemagne and Carloman I. Relations between the brothers were said to be strained. In 770 Tassilo III, Duke of Bavaria married a Lombard princess, Liutperga, daughter of King Desiderius, to confirm the traditional alliance between Lombardy and Bavaria. That same year, Charlemagne concluded a treaty with Duke Tassilo, and married Liutperga's sister, Desiderata, to surround Carloman with his own allies. Less than a year later, Charlemagne repudiated Desiderata and married Hildegard, the daughter of Count Gerold of Kraichgau and his wife Emma, daughter, in turn, of Duke Nebe (Hnabi) of Alemannia. Hildegard's father had extensive possessions in the territory under Carloman's dominion. This marriage was advantageous to Charlemagne because it allowed him to strengthen his position east of the Rhine and also bind the Alemannian nobility to his side. With Desiderata's return to her father's court at Pavia, Desiderius was grievously insulted, and appears to have made an alliance with Carloman against Charlemagne and the Papacy, which looked to the Franks for protection against Lombard incursions into Papal territory.\nItaly.\nCarloman died in December 771, and when Charlemagne seized his brother's territory, Carloman's widow, Gerberga, and their two sons fled for refuge to the Lombard court at Pavia. Desiderius made overtures to Pope Adrian, requesting that he acknowledge Carloman's sons' right to succeed their father, and crown them as Kings of the Franks. With Charlemagne occupied with a campaign against the Saxons, Desiderius saw an opportunity to take all of Italy. He invaded the Duchy of the Pentapolis which had been given to the papacy in 756 by Charlemagne's father. Desiderius's support of the claims of Carloman's sons posed a potential challenge to the legitimacy of Charlemagne's possession of his brother's lands. In 773, he cut short a military campaign near Paderborn, crossed the Alps, and laid siege to Pavia. In exchange for their lives, the Lombards surrendered and Desiderius was sent to the abbey of Corbie. Charlemagne assumed the title \"King of the Lombards\".\nFranks.\nFrom 781 Adrian began dating papal documents by the years of Charlemagne's reign, instead of the reign of the Byzantine Emperor.\nFriendly relations between pope and king were not disturbed by the theological dispute about the veneration of icons. In 787, Second Council of Nicaea, approved by Pope Adrian, had confirmed the practice and excommunicated the iconoclasts. Charlemagne, however, who had received the council's decisions only in a bad Latin translation, consulted with his theologians and sent the Pope the \"Capitulare contra synodum\" (792), a response critical of several passages found in the council's acts. He also had his theologians, including Theodulf of Orleans, compose the more comprehensive \"Libri Carolini\". Pope Adrian reacted to the Capitulare with a defense of the council. In 794, a synod held at Frankfurt discussed the issue but refused to receive the Libri and contented itself with condemning extreme forms of veneration of icons.\nEnglish.\nIn 787 Adrian elevated the English diocese of Lichfield to an archdiocese at the request of the English bishops and King Offa of Mercia to balance the ecclesiastic power in that land between Kent and Mercia. He gave the Lichfield bishop Hygeberht the pallium in 788.\nMuslim Spain.\nRegarding the Muslims, he maintained the prohibition of Pope Zachary of selling slaves to Muslims, whom Adrian described as \"the unspeakable race of Saracens,\" in order to guarantee a labor pool and to keep the power of Muslim rivals in check. He also encouraged Charlemagne to lead his troops into Spain against the Muslims there, and was generally interested in expanding Christian influence and eliminating Muslim control.\nThe rise in the number of Christian girls being married to Muslims in al-Andalus prompted a letter of concern from Adrian. Adrian's response was due to dispatches from bishop Egila, who had been tasked with preaching the gospel in the peninsula. Egila eventually fell in with the Migetians, a rigorist sect, provoking Adrian's condemnation.\nLegacy.\nAdrian restored some of the ancient aqueducts of Rome and rebuilt the churches of Santa Maria in Cosmedin, decorated by Greek monks fleeing from the iconoclast persecutions, and of San Marco in Rome. At the time of his death at the age of 95, his was the longest pontificate since Saint Peter (the first pope) until it was surpassed by the 24-year papacy of Pius VI in the late 18th century. Only three other popes\u00a0\u2013 Pius IX, Leo XIII, and John Paul II\u00a0\u2013 have reigned for longer periods since.\nEpitaph.\nAdrian's epitaph was originally located in his burial chapel in St. Peter's Basilica, which was demolished in the mid-15th century as reconstruction works were initiated by Pope Nicholas V; since 1619 it has been preserved in the portico as rebuilt by Carlo Maderno. It is placed high on the wall between the Door of the Dead and the Door of Good and Evil. Charlemagne commissioned it in 796 and organized a literary competition for the text, won by Alcuin; a competing entry by Theodulf of Orl\u00e9ans also survives. Alcuin's text, in which Charlemagne speaks affectionately of Adrian as his lost (spiritual) father, was carved in Roman square capitals on black limestone from Sclayn in the Meuse valley, now in Belgium.350 Its lettering has been described as \"perfect and sharp\" and is a notable exemplar of Carolingian monumental script. The contemporaneous Annals of Lorsch refer to Adrian's epitaph being made in Francia and transported to Rome on Charlemagne's orders, and describe it as \"written in gold letters on marble.\"349\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23805", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23805", "title": "Pope John Paul II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1978 to 2005\nPope John Paul II (born Karol J\u00f3zef Wojty\u0142a; 18 May 1920\u00a0\u2013 2 April 2005) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City from 16 October 1978 until his death in 2005. He was the first non-Italian pope since Adrian VI in the 16th century, as well as the third-longest-serving pope in history, after Pius IX and St. Peter.\nIn his youth, Wojty\u0142a dabbled in stage acting. He graduated with excellent grades from an all-boys high school in Wadowice, Poland, in 1938, soon after which World War II broke out. During the war, to avoid being kidnapped and sent to a German forced labour camp, he signed up for work in harsh conditions in a quarry. Wojty\u0142a eventually took up acting and developed a love for the profession and participated at a local theatre. The linguistically skilled Wojty\u0142a wanted to study Polish at university. Encouraged by a conversation with Adam Stefan Sapieha, he decided to study theology and become a priest. Eventually, Wojty\u0142a rose to the position of Archbishop of Krak\u00f3w and then a cardinal, both positions held by his mentor. Wojty\u0142a was elected pope on the third day of the October 1978 conclave, becoming one of the youngest popes in history. The conclave was called after the death of John Paul I, who served only 33 days as pope. Wojty\u0142a adopted the name of his predecessor in tribute to him.\nJohn Paul II attempted to improve the Catholic Church's relations with Judaism, Islam, and the Eastern Orthodox Church in the spirit of ecumenism, holding atheism as the greatest threat. He maintained the Church's previous positions on such matters as abortion, artificial contraception, the ordination of women, and a celibate clergy, and although he supported the reforms of the Second Vatican Council, he was seen as generally conservative in their interpretation. He put emphasis on family and identity, while questioning consumerism, hedonism and the pursuit of wealth. He was one of the most-travelled world leaders in history, visiting 129\u00a0countries during his pontificate. As part of his special emphasis on the universal call to holiness, John Paul\u00a0II beatified 1,344 people, and canonised 483 saints, more than the combined tally of his predecessors during the preceding five centuries. By the time of his death, he had named most of the College of Cardinals, consecrated or co-consecrated many of the world's bishops, and ordained many priests. John Paul\u00a0II died on 2 April 2005, and was succeeded by Benedict XVI. \nJohn Paul\u00a0II has been credited with fighting against dictatorships and with helping to end communist rule in his native Poland and the rest of Europe. Under John Paul II, the Catholic Church greatly expanded its influence in Africa and Latin America and retained its influence in Europe and the rest of the world. On 19 December 2009, he was proclaimed venerable by Benedict XVI, and on 1 May 2011 (Divine Mercy Sunday) he was beatified. On 27 April 2014, John Paul\u00a0II was canonised by Francis, alongside John XXIII. He has been criticised for allegedly, as archbishop under Communist Poland, having been insufficiently harsh in acting against the sexual abuse of children by priests. After his canonisation, he has been referred to by some Catholics as Pope St. John Paul the Great, though that title is not official.\nUnder John Paul II, two of the most important documents of the contemporary Catholic Church were drafted and promulgated: the 1983 Code of Canon Law, which revised and updated the 1917 Code of Canon Law, and the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", the first universal catechism to be issued since the Roman Catechism.\nEarly life.\nKarol J\u00f3zef Wojty\u0142a was born in the Polish town of Wadowice. He was the youngest of three children born to Karol Wojty\u0142a (1879\u20131941), an ethnic Pole, and Emilia Kaczorowska (1884\u20131929), who was of distant Lithuanian heritage. Emilia, who was a schoolteacher, died from a heart attack and kidney failure in 1929 when Wojty\u0142a was eight years old. His elder sister Olga had died before his birth, but he was close to his brother Edmund, nicknamed Mundek, who was 13 years his senior. Edmund's work as a physician eventually led to his death from scarlet fever, a loss that affected Wojty\u0142a deeply.\nWojty\u0142a was baptized a month after his birth, made his First Communion at the age of 9, and was confirmed at the age of 18. As a boy, Wojty\u0142a was athletic, often playing association football as goalkeeper. During his childhood, Wojty\u0142a had contact with the large Jewish community of Wadowice. School football games were often organised between teams of Jews and Catholics, and Wojty\u0142a often played on the Jewish side. In 2005, he recalled: \"I remember that at least a third of my classmates at elementary school in Wadowice were Jews. At secondary school there were fewer. With some I was on very friendly terms. And what struck me about some of them was their Polish patriotism.\" It was around this time that the young Karol had his first serious relationship with a girl. He became close to a girl called Ginka Beer, described as \"a Jewish beauty, with stupendous eyes and jet black hair, slender, a superb actress.\"\nIn mid-1938, Wojty\u0142a and his father left Wadowice and moved to Krak\u00f3w, where he enrolled at the Jagiellonian University. While studying such topics as philology and various languages, he worked as a volunteer librarian and though required to participate in compulsory military training in the Academic Legion, he refused to fire a weapon. He performed with various theatrical groups and worked as a playwright. During this time, his talent for language blossomed, and he learned as many as 15 languages \u2013 Polish, Latin, Italian, English, Spanish, Portuguese, French, German, Luxembourgish, Dutch, Ukrainian, Serbo-Croatian, Czech, Slovak, and Esperanto, nine of which he used extensively as pope.\nIn 1939, after invading Poland, Nazi Germany's occupation forces closed the university. Able-bodied males were required to work, so from 1940 to 1944 Wojty\u0142a variously worked as a messenger for a restaurant, a manual labourer in a limestone quarry and for the Solvay chemical factory, to avoid deportation to Germany. In February 1940, he met Jan Tyranowski who introduced him to the Carmelite spirituality and the \"Living Rosary\" youth groups. In that same year he had two major accidents, suffering a fractured skull after being struck by a tram and sustaining injuries which left him with one shoulder higher than the other and a permanent stoop after being hit by a lorry in the quarry. His father, a former Austro-Hungarian non-commissioned officer and later officer in the Polish Army, died of a heart attack in 1941, leaving the young adult Wojty\u0142a an orphan and the immediate family's only surviving member. Reflecting on these times of his life, nearly 40 years later he said: \"I was not at my mother's death, I was not at my brother's death, I was not at my father's death. At twenty, I had already lost all the people I loved.\"\nAfter his father's death, he started thinking seriously about the priesthood. In October 1942, while World War II continued, he knocked on the door of the Bishop's Palace, and asked to study for the priesthood. Soon after, he began courses in the clandestine underground seminary run by the Archbishop of Krak\u00f3w, the future Cardinal Adam Stefan Sapieha. On 29 February 1944, Wojty\u0142a was hit by a German truck. German Wehrmacht officers tended to him and sent him to a hospital. He spent two weeks there recovering from a severe concussion and a shoulder injury. It seemed to him that this accident and his survival was a confirmation of his vocation. On 6 August 1944, a day known as \"Black Sunday\", the Gestapo rounded up young men in Krak\u00f3w to curtail the uprising there, similar to the recent uprising in Warsaw. Wojty\u0142a escaped by hiding in the basement of his uncle's house at 10 Tyniecka Street, while the German troops searched above. More than 8,000 men and boys were taken that day, while Wojty\u0142a escaped to the Archbishop's residence, where he remained until after the Germans had left.\nOn the night of 17 January 1945, the Germans fled the city, and the students reclaimed the ruined seminary. Wojty\u0142a and another seminarian volunteered for the task of clearing away piles of frozen excrement from the toilets. Wojty\u0142a also helped a 14-year-old Jewish refugee girl named Edith Zierer, who had escaped from a Nazi labour camp in Cz\u0119stochowa. Edith had collapsed on a railway platform, so Wojty\u0142a carried her to a train and stayed with her throughout the journey to Krak\u00f3w. She later credited Wojty\u0142a with saving her life that day. B'nai B'rith and other authorities have said that Wojty\u0142a helped protect many other Polish Jews from the Nazis. During the Nazi occupation of Poland, a Jewish family sent their son, Stanley Berger, to be hidden by a Gentile Polish family. Berger's biological Jewish parents were killed in the Holocaust, and after the war Berger's new Christian parents asked Karol Wojty\u0142a to baptise the boy. Wojty\u0142a refused, saying that the child should be raised in the Jewish faith of his birth parents and nation, not as a Catholic. He did everything he could to ensure that Berger leave Poland to be raised by his Jewish relatives in the United States. In April 2005, shortly after John Paul II's death, the Israeli government created a commission to honour the legacy of John Paul II. One of the honorifics proposed by a head of Italy's Jewish community, Emmanuele Pacifici was the medal of the Righteous Among the Nations. In Wojty\u0142a's last book, \"Memory and Identity\", he described the 12 years of the Nazi r\u00e9gime as \"bestiality\", quoting from the Polish theologian and philosopher Konstanty Michalski.\nPriesthood.\nAfter finishing his studies at the seminary in Krak\u00f3w, Wojty\u0142a was ordained as a priest on All Saints' Day, 1 November 1946, by the Archbishop of Krak\u00f3w, Cardinal Adam Stefan Sapieha. Sapieha sent Wojty\u0142a to Rome's Pontifical International Athenaeum \"Angelicum\", the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, to study under the French Dominican friar Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange beginning on 26 November 1946. He resided in the Belgian Pontifical College during this time, under rectorship of Maximilien de Furstenberg. Wojty\u0142a earned a licence in July 1947, passed his doctoral exam on 14 June 1948, and successfully defended his doctoral thesis titled \"Doctrina de fide apud S. Ioannem a Cruce\" (The Doctrine of Faith in St. John of the Cross) in philosophy on 19 June 1948. The \"Angelicum\" preserves the original copy of Wojty\u0142a's typewritten thesis. Among other courses at the \"Angelicum\", Wojty\u0142a studied Hebrew with the Dutch Dominican Peter G. Duncker, author of the \"Compendium grammaticae linguae hebraicae biblicae\".\nAccording to Wojty\u0142a's fellow student, the future Austrian cardinal Alfons Stickler, in 1947 during his sojourn at the \"Angelicum\", Wojty\u0142a visited Padre Pio, who heard his confession and told him that one day he would ascend to \"the highest post in the Church\". Stickler added that Wojty\u0142a believed that the prophecy was fulfilled when he became a cardinal.\nWojty\u0142a returned to Poland in the summer of 1948 for his first pastoral assignment in the village of Niegowi\u0107, from Krak\u00f3w, at the Church of the Assumption. He arrived at Niegowi\u0107 at harvest time, where his first action was to kneel and kiss the ground. He repeated this gesture, which he adopted from John Vianney, throughout his papacy.\nIn March 1949, Wojty\u0142a was transferred to the parish of Saint Florian in Krak\u00f3w. He taught ethics at Jagiellonian University and subsequently at the Catholic University of Lublin. While teaching, he gathered a group of about 20\u00a0young people, who began to call themselves \"Rodzinka\", the \"little family\". They met for prayer, philosophical discussion, and to help the blind and the sick. The group eventually grew to approximately 200\u00a0participants, and their activities expanded to include annual skiing and kayaking trips.\nIn 1953, Wojty\u0142a's habilitation thesis was accepted by the Faculty of Theology at the Jagiellonian University. In 1954, he earned a Doctorate in Sacred Theology, writing a dissertation titled \"Reevaluation of the possibility of founding a Catholic ethic on the ethical system of Max Scheler\" (). Scheler was a German philosopher who founded a broad philosophical movement that emphasised the study of conscious experience. The Polish Communist authorities abolished the Faculty of Theology at the Jagiellonian University, thereby preventing him from receiving the degree until 1957. Wojty\u0142a developed a theological approach, called phenomenological Thomism, that combined traditional Catholic Thomism with the ideas of personalism, a philosophical approach deriving from phenomenology, which was popular among Catholic intellectuals in Krak\u00f3w during Wojty\u0142a's intellectual development. He translated Scheler's \"Formalism and the Ethics of Substantive Values\". In 1961, he coined \"Thomistic Personalism\" to describe Aquinas's philosophy.\nDuring this period, Wojty\u0142a wrote a series of articles in Krak\u00f3w's Catholic newspaper, \"Tygodnik Powszechny\" (\"Universal Weekly\"), dealing with contemporary church issues. He focused on creating original literary work during his first dozen years as a priest. War, life in the Polish People's Republic, and his pastoral responsibilities all fed his poetry and plays. Wojty\u0142a published his work under two pseudonyms, \"Andrzej Jawie\u0144\" and \"Stanis\u0142aw Andrzej Gruda\", to distinguish his literary from his religious writings (issued under his own name), and also so that his literary works would be considered on their own merits. In 1960, Wojty\u0142a published the influential theological book \"Love and Responsibility\", a defence of traditional church teachings on marriage from a new philosophical standpoint.\nThe aforementioned students regularly joined Wojty\u0142a for hiking, skiing, bicycling, camping and kayaking, accompanied by prayer, outdoor Masses, and theological discussions. In Stalinist-era Poland, it was not permitted for priests to travel with groups of students. Wojty\u0142a asked his younger companions to call him \"Wujek\" (Polish for \"Uncle\") to prevent outsiders from deducing he was a priest. The nickname gained popularity among his followers. In 1958, when Wojty\u0142a was named auxiliary bishop of Krak\u00f3w, his acquaintances expressed concern that this would cause him to change. Wojty\u0142a responded to his friends, \"Wujek will remain Wujek\", and he continued to live a simple life, shunning the trappings that came with his position as bishop. This beloved nickname stayed with Wojty\u0142a for his entire life and continues to be affectionately used, particularly by the Polish people.\nEpiscopate and cardinalate.\nCall to the episcopate.\nOn 4 July 1958, while Wojty\u0142a was on a kayaking holiday in the lakes region of northern Poland, Pope Pius XII appointed him as an auxiliary bishop of Krak\u00f3w. He was consequently summoned to Warsaw to meet the Primate of Poland, Cardinal Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski, who informed him of his appointment. Wojty\u0142a accepted the appointment as auxiliary bishop to Krak\u00f3w's Archbishop Eugeniusz Baziak, and he received episcopal consecration (as titular bishop of Ombi) on 28 September 1958, with Baziak as the principal consecrator and as co-consecrators Bishop Boles\u0142aw Kominek (titular bishop of Sophene), auxiliary of the Catholic Archdiocese of Wroc\u0142aw, and Franciszek Jop, Auxiliary Bishop of Sandomierz (Titular Bishop of Daulia). Kominek was to become Cardinal Archbishop of Wroc\u0142aw and Jop was later Auxiliary Bishop of Wroc\u0142aw and then Bishop of Opole. At the age of 38, Wojty\u0142a became the youngest bishop in Poland.\nIn 1959, Wojty\u0142a began an annual tradition of saying a Midnight Mass on Christmas Day in an open field at Nowa Huta, the so-called model workers' town outside Krak\u00f3w that was without a church building. Baziak died in June 1962 and on 16 July, Wojty\u0142a was selected as \"Vicar Capitular\" \"(temporary administrator)\" of the Archdiocese until an archbishop could be appointed.\nParticipation in Vatican II and subsequent events.\nFrom October 1962, Wojty\u0142a took part in the Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965), where he made contributions to two of its most historic and influential products, the \"Decree on Religious Freedom\" (in Latin, \"Dignitatis humanae\") and the \"Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World\" (\"Gaudium et spes\"). Wojty\u0142a and the Polish bishops contributed a draft text to the Council for \"Gaudium et spes\". According to the Jesuit historian John W. O'Malley, the draft text \"Gaudium et spes\" that Wojty\u0142a and the Polish delegation sent \"had some influence on the version that was sent to the council fathers that summer but was not accepted as the base text\". According to John F. Crosby, as pope, John Paul II used the words of \"Gaudium et spes\" later to introduce his own views on the nature of the human person in relation to God: man is \"the only creature on earth that God has wanted for its own sake\", but man \"can fully discover his true self only in a sincere giving of himself\".\nWojty\u0142a also participated in the assemblies of the Synod of Bishops. On 13 January 1964, Pope Paul VI appointed him Archbishop of Krak\u00f3w. On 26 June 1967, Paul VI announced Wojty\u0142a's promotion to the College of Cardinals. Wojty\u0142a was named cardinal priest of the titular church of San Cesareo in Palatio.\nIn 1967, he was instrumental in formulating the encyclical \"Humanae vitae\", which dealt with the same issues that forbid abortion and artificial birth control.\nAccording to a contemporary witness, Wojty\u0142a was against the distribution of a letter around Krak\u00f3w in 1970, stating that the Polish Episcopate was preparing for the 50th anniversary of the Polish\u2013Soviet War.\nIn 1973, Wojty\u0142a met philosopher Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, the wife of Hendrik S. Houthakker, professor of economics at Stanford University and Harvard University, and member of President Richard Nixon's Council of Economic Advisers Tymieniecka collaborated with Wojty\u0142a on a number of projects including an English translation of Wojty\u0142a's book \"Osoba i czyn\" (\"Person and Act\"). \"Person and Act\", one of John Paul II's foremost literary works, was initially written in Polish. Tymieniecka produced the English-language version. They corresponded over the years, and grew to be good friends. When Wojty\u0142a visited New England in the summer of 1976, Tymieniecka put him up as a guest in her family home. Wojty\u0142a enjoyed his holiday in Pomfret, Vermont, kayaking and enjoying the outdoors, as he had done in his beloved Poland.\nDuring 1974\u20131975, Wojty\u0142a served Pope Paul VI as consultor to the Pontifical Council for the Laity, as recording secretary for the 1974 synod on evangelism and by participating extensively in the original drafting of the 1975 apostolic exhortation, \"Evangelii nuntiandi\".\nPapacy.\nElection.\nIn August 1978, following the death of Pope Paul VI, Wojty\u0142a voted in the papal conclave, which elected John Paul I. John Paul I died after only 33 days as pope, triggering another conclave.\nThe second conclave of 1978 started on 14 October, ten days after the funeral. It was split between two strong candidates for the papacy: Cardinal Giuseppe Siri, the conservative Archbishop of Genoa, and Cardinal Giovanni Benelli, the liberal Archbishop of Florence and a close friend of John Paul I.\nSupporters of Benelli were confident that he would be elected, and in early ballots, Benelli came within nine votes of success. However, both men faced sufficient opposition for neither to be likely to prevail. Giovanni Colombo, the Archbishop of Milan, was considered as a compromise candidate among the Italian cardinal-electors, but when he started to receive votes, he announced that, if elected, he would decline to accept the papacy. Cardinal Franz K\u00f6nig, Archbishop of Vienna, suggested Wojty\u0142a as another compromise candidate to his fellow electors. Wojty\u0142a won on the eighth ballot on the third day (16 October).\nAmong those cardinals who rallied behind Wojty\u0142a were supporters of Giuseppe Siri, Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski, most of the American cardinals (led by John Krol), and other moderate cardinals. He accepted his election with the words: \"With obedience in faith to Christ, my Lord, and with trust in the Mother of Christ and the Church, in spite of great difficulties, I accept\". The Pope, in tribute to his immediate predecessor, then took the papal name of \"John Paul II\", also in honour of the late Popes Paul VI and John XXIII, and the traditional white smoke informed the crowd gathered in St. Peter's Square that a pope had been chosen. There had been rumours that the new pope wished to be known as \"Pope Stanislaus\" in honour of the Polish saint of the name, but was convinced by the cardinals that it was not a Roman name. When the new pontiff appeared on the balcony, he broke tradition by addressing the gathered crowd:\n\"Dear brothers and sisters, we are saddened at the death of our beloved Pope John Paul I, and so the cardinals have called for a new bishop of Rome. They called him from a faraway land\u2014far and yet always close because of our communion in faith and Christian traditions. I was afraid to accept that responsibility, yet I do so in a spirit of obedience to the Lord and total faithfulness to Mary, our most Holy Mother. I am speaking to you in your\u2014no, our Italian language. If I make a mistake, please \"corrict\" [\"sic\"] me.\"\nWojty\u0142a became the 264th pope according to the chronological list of popes, and the first non-Italian in 455 years. At only 58 years of age, he was the youngest pope since Pope Pius IX in 1846, who was 54. Like his predecessor, John Paul\u00a0II dispensed with the traditional papal coronation and instead received ecclesiastical investiture with a simplified papal inauguration on 22 October 1978. During his inauguration, when the cardinals were to kneel before him to take their vows and kiss his ring, he stood up as the Polish prelate, Cardinal Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski knelt down, stopped him from kissing the ring, and simply embraced him.\nPastoral journeys.\nDuring his pontificate, John Paul II made journeys to 129 countries, travelling more than while doing so. He consistently attracted large crowds, some among the largest ever assembled in human history, such as the Manila World Youth Day 1995, which gathered up to four million people, the largest papal gathering ever, according to the Vatican. John Paul II's earliest official visits were to the Dominican Republic and Mexico in January 1979. While some of his journeys (such as to the United States and the Holy Land) were to places previously visited by Pope Paul VI, John Paul II became the first pope to visit the White House in October 1979, where he was greeted warmly by President Jimmy Carter. He was the first pope ever to visit several countries in one year, starting in 1979 with Mexico and Ireland. He was the first reigning pope to travel to the United Kingdom, in 1982, where he met Queen Elizabeth II, the Supreme Governor of the Church of England. While in Britain he also visited Canterbury Cathedral and knelt in prayer with Robert Runcie, the Archbishop of Canterbury, at the spot where Thomas Becket had been killed, as well as holding several large-scale open air Masses, including one at Wembley Stadium, which was attended by some 80,000 people.\nHe travelled to Haiti in 1983, where he spoke in Creole to thousands of impoverished Catholics gathered to greet him at the airport. His message, \"things must change in Haiti\", referring to the disparity between the wealthy and the poor, was met with thunderous applause. In 2000, he was the first modern pope to visit Egypt, where he met with the Coptic pope, Pope Shenouda\u00a0III, and the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria. He was the first Catholic pope to visit and pray in an Islamic mosque, in Damascus, Syria, in 2001. He visited the Umayyad Mosque, a former Christian church where John the Baptist is believed to be interred, where he made a speech calling for Muslims, Christians and Jews to live together.\nOn 15 January 1995, during the X World Youth Day, he offered Mass to an estimated crowd of between five and seven million in Luneta Park, Manila, Philippines, which was considered to be the largest single gathering in Christian history. In March 2000, while visiting Jerusalem, John Paul became the first pope in history to visit and pray at the Western Wall. In September 2001, amid post-11 September concerns, he travelled to Kazakhstan, with an audience largely consisting of Muslims, and to Armenia, to participate in the celebration of 1,700\u00a0years of Armenian Christianity.\nIn June 1979, John Paul II travelled to Poland, where ecstatic crowds constantly surrounded him. This first papal trip to Poland and the enthusiastic response to it contributed to the formation of the Solidarity movement in 1980, which later played a major role in the end of socialism in Poland. Leaders of the Polish United Workers' Party intended to use the Pope's visit to show the people that although the Pope was Polish, it did not alter their capacity to govern, oppress, and distribute the goods of society. They also hoped that if the Pope abided by the rules they set, the Polish people would see his example and follow them as well. If the Pope's visit inspired a riot, the Communist leaders of Poland were prepared to crush the uprising and blame the suffering on the Pope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Pope won that struggle by transcending politics. His was what Joseph Nye calls 'soft power' \u2014 the power of attraction and repulsion. He began with an enormous advantage, and exploited it to the utmost: He headed the one institution that stood for the polar opposite of the Communist way of life that the Polish people hated. He was a Pole, but beyond the regime's reach. By identifying with him, Poles would have the chance to cleanse themselves of the compromises they had to make to live under the regime. And so they came to him by the millions. They listened. He told them to be good, not to compromise themselves, to stick by one another, to be fearless, and that God is the only source of goodness, the only standard of conduct. 'Be not afraid,' he said. Millions shouted in response, 'We want God! We want God! We want God!' The regime cowered. Had the Pope chosen to turn his soft power into the hard variety, the regime might have been drowned in blood. Instead, the Pope simply led the Polish people to desert their rulers by affirming solidarity with one another. The Communists managed to hold on as despots a decade longer. But as political leaders, they were finished. Visiting his native Poland in 1979, Pope John Paul II struck what turned out to be a mortal blow to its Communist regime, to the Soviet Empire, [and] ultimately to Communism.\n\"When Pope John Paul II kissed the ground at the Warsaw airport he began the process by which Communism in Poland \u2014 and ultimately elsewhere in Europe \u2014 would come to an end.\"\nOn later trips to Poland, he gave tacit support to the Solidarity organisation. These visits reinforced this message and contributed to the collapse of East European Communism that took place between 1989 and 1990 with the reintroduction of democracy in Poland, and which then spread through Eastern Europe (1990\u20131991) and South-Eastern Europe (1990\u20131992).\nWorld Youth Days.\nAs an extension of his successful work with youth as a young priest, John Paul II pioneered the international World Youth Days. John Paul II presided over nine of them: Rome (1985 and 2000), Buenos Aires (1987), Santiago de Compostela (1989), Cz\u0119stochowa (1991), Denver (1993), Manila (1995), Paris (1997), and Toronto (2002). Total attendance at these signature events of the pontificate was in the tens of millions.\nDedicated years.\nKeenly aware of the rhythms of time and the importance of anniversaries in the Catholic Church's life, John Paul II led nine \"dedicated years\" during the twenty-six and a half years of his pontificate: the Holy Year of the Redemption in 1983\u201384, the Marian Year in 1987\u201388, the Year of the Family in 1993\u201394, the three Trinitarian years of preparation for the Great Jubilee of 2000, the Great Jubilee itself, the Year of the Rosary in 2002\u201303, and the Year of the Eucharist, which began on 17 October 2004, and concluded six months after the Pope's death.\nMusic albums.\nJohn Paul II recorded music albums. In 1979, his album \"Pope John Paul II sings at the Festival of Sacrosong\" was recorded by Infinity Records. In 1994 he released a music album title \"The Rosary\". In 1999, John Paul II released another music album titled \"Abba Pater\".\nGreat Jubilee of 2000.\nThe Great Jubilee of 2000 was a call to the church to become more aware and to embrace her missionary task for the work of evangelization:\nFrom the beginning of my Pontificate, my thoughts had been on this Holy Year 2000 as an important appointment. I thought of its celebration as a providential opportunity during which the Church, thirty-five years after the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, would examine how far she had renewed herself, in order to be able to take up her evangelising mission with fresh enthusiasm.\nJohn Paul II also made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land for the Great Jubilee of 2000. During his visit to the Holy Land, John Paul II visited many sites of the Rosary, including the following locations: Bethany Beyond the Jordan (Al-Maghtas), at the Jordan River, where John the Baptist baptized Jesus; Manger Square and the Church of the Nativity in the town of Bethlehem, the location of Jesus' birth; and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, the site of Jesus' burial and resurrection.\nTeachings.\nAs pope, John Paul II wrote 14 papal encyclicals and taught regularly in his general audiences.\nSome key elements of his strategy to \"reposition the Catholic Church\" were encyclicals such as \"Ecclesia de Eucharistia\", \"Reconciliatio et paenitentia\" and \"Redemptoris Mater\". In his \"At the beginning of the new millennium\" (\"Novo Millennio Ineunte\"), he emphasised the importance of \"starting afresh from Christ\": \"No, we shall not be saved by a formula but by a Person.\" In \"The Splendour of the Truth\" (\"Veritatis Splendor\"), he emphasised the dependence of man on God and His Law (\"Without the Creator, the creature disappears\") and the \"dependence of freedom on the truth\". He warned that man \"giving himself over to relativism and scepticism, goes off in search of an illusory freedom apart from truth itself\". In \"Fides et Ratio\" (\"On the Relationship between Faith and Reason\") John Paul promoted a renewed interest in philosophy and an autonomous pursuit of truth in theological matters. Drawing on many different sources (such as Thomism), he described the mutually supporting relationship between faith and reason, and emphasised that theologians should focus on that relationship. John Paul II wrote extensively about workers and the social doctrine of the church, which he discussed in three encyclicals: \"Laborem exercens\", \"Sollicitudo rei socialis\", and \"Centesimus annus\". Through his encyclicals and many Apostolic Letters and Exhortations, John Paul II talked about the dignity and the equality of women. He argued for the importance of the family for the future of humanity. He taught about sexuality in what is referred as the \"Theology of the Body\". Other encyclicals include \"The Gospel of Life\" (\"Evangelium Vitae\") and \"Ut unum sint\" (\"That They May Be One\"). Though critics accused him of inflexibility in explicitly re-asserting Catholic moral teachings against abortion and euthanasia that have been in place for well over a thousand years, he urged a more nuanced view of capital punishment. In his second encyclical, \"Dives in misericordia\", he stressed that divine mercy is the greatest feature of God, needed especially in modern times.\nPromulgation of 1983 Code of Canon Law and 1992 Catechism of the Catholic Church.\nJohn Paul II completed a full-scale reform of the Catholic Church's legal system, Latin and Eastern, and a reform of the Roman Curia.\nOn 18 October 1990, when promulgating the \"Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches\", John Paul II stated\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the publication of this Code, the canonical ordering of the whole Church is thus at length completed, following as it does...the \"Apostolic Constitution on the Roman Curia\" of 1988, which is added to both Codes as the primary instrument of the Roman Pontiff for 'the communion that binds together, as it were, the whole Church'\nIn 1998, John Paul II issued the motu proprio \"Ad tuendam fidem\", which amended two canons (750 and 1371) of the 1983 Code of Canon Law and two canons (598 and 1436) of the 1990 Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches.\n1983 \"Code of Canon Law\".\nOn 25 January 1983, with the apostolic constitution \"Sacrae disciplinae leges\" John Paul II promulgated the current code of canon law for all members of the Catholic Church who belonged to the Latin Church. It entered into force the first Sunday of the following Advent, which was 27 November 1983. John Paul II described the new code as \"the last document of Vatican II\". Edward N. Peters has referred to the 1983 \"Code\" as the \"Johanno-Pauline Code\" (\"Johannes Paulus\" is Latin for \"John Paul\"), parallelling the \"Pio-Benedictine\" 1917 code that it replaced.\n\"Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches\".\nJohn Paul II promulgated the \"Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches\" (CCEO) on 18 October 1990, by the document \"Sacri Canones\". The CCEO came into force of law on 1 October 1991. It is the codification of the common portions of the canon law for the 23 of the 24 \"sui iuris\" churches in the Catholic Church that are the Eastern Catholic Churches. It is divided into 30 titles and has a total of 1540 canons.\n\"Pastor bonus\".\nJohn Paul II promulgated the apostolic constitution \"Pastor bonus\" on 28 June 1988. It instituted a number of reforms in the process of running the Roman Curia. \"Pastor bonus\" laid out in considerable detail the organisation of the Roman Curia, specifying precisely the names and composition of each dicastery, and enumerating the competencies of each dicastery. It replaced the previous special law, \"Regimini Ecclesi\u00e6 univers\u00e6\", which was promulgated by Paul VI in 1967.\n\"Catechism of the Catholic Church\".\nOn 11 October 1992, in his apostolic constitution \"Fidei depositum\" (\"The Deposit of Faith\"), John Paul ordered the publication of the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\".\nHe declared the publication to be \"a sure norm for teaching the faith \u2026 a sure and authentic reference text for teaching Catholic doctrine and particularly for preparing local catechisms\". It was \"meant to encourage and assist in the writing of new local catechisms [both applicable and faithful]\" rather than replacing them.\nPolitical views and activity.\nAnti-communism.\nRole as spiritual inspiration and catalyst.\nBy the late 1970s, the dissolution of the Soviet Union had been predicted by some observers. John Paul II has been credited with being instrumental in bringing down Communism in Central and Eastern Europe, by being the spiritual inspiration behind its downfall and catalyst for \"a peaceful revolution\" in Poland. Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, the founder of Solidarity and the first post-Communist President of Poland, credited John Paul\u00a0II with giving Poles the courage to demand change. According to Wa\u0142\u0119sa, \"Before his pontificate, the world was divided into blocs. Nobody knew how to get rid of Communism. In Warsaw, in 1979, he simply said: 'Do not be afraid', and later prayed: 'Let your Spirit descend and change the image of the land ... this land'.\" It has also been widely alleged that the Vatican Bank covertly funded Solidarity.\nIn 1984, the foreign policy of the Ronald Reagan administration saw opened diplomatic relations with the Vatican for the first time since 1870. In sharp contrast to the long history of strong domestic opposition, this time there was very little opposition from Congress, the courts, and Protestant groups. Relations between Reagan and John Paul II were close, especially because of their shared anti-communism and keen interest in forcing the Soviets out of Poland. John Paul II and Reagan had earlier confided in the Vatican (in 1982) \"their conviction that God had spared their lives\" from assassination \"for the divine purpose of defeating the communist empire.\" Reagan's correspondence with the Pope reveals \"a continuous scurrying to shore up Vatican support for U.S. policies. Perhaps most surprisingly, the papers show that, as late as 1984, the Pope did not believe the Communist Polish government could be changed.\"\n\"No one can prove conclusively that he was a primary cause of the end of communism. However, the major figures on all sides\u2014not just Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, the Polish Solidarity leader, but also Solidarity's arch-opponent, General Wojciech Jaruzelski; not just the former American president George Bush Senior but also the former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev\u2014now agree that he was. I would argue the historical case in three steps: without the Polish Pope, no Solidarity revolution in Poland in 1980; without Solidarity, no dramatic change in Soviet policy towards eastern Europe under Gorbachev; without that change, no velvet revolutions in 1989.\"\nIn December 1989, John Paul II met with the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev at the Vatican and each expressed his respect and admiration for the other. Gorbachev once said: \"The collapse of the Iron Curtain would have been impossible without John Paul II.\" On John Paul II's death, Gorbachev said: \"Pope John Paul II's devotion to his followers is a remarkable example to all of us.\"\nOn 4 June 2004, U.S. president George W. Bush presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United States' highest civilian honour, to John Paul II during a ceremony at the Apostolic Palace. The president read the citation that accompanied the medal, which recognised \"this son of Poland\" whose \"principled stand for peace and freedom has inspired millions and helped to topple communism and tyranny\". After receiving the award, John Paul\u00a0II said, \"May the desire for freedom, peace, a more humane world symbolised by this medal inspire men and women of goodwill in every time and place.\"\nCommunist attempt to compromise John Paul II.\nIn 1983, Poland's Communist government unsuccessfully tried to humiliate John Paul II by falsely saying he had fathered an illegitimate child. Section D of S\u0142u\u017cba Bezpiecze\u0144stwa (SB), the security service, had an action named \"Triangolo\" to carry out criminal operations against the Catholic Church in Poland; the operation encompassed all Polish hostile actions against the Pope. Captain Grzegorz Piotrowski, one of the murderers of beatified Jerzy Popie\u0142uszko, was the leader of section D. They drugged Irena Kinaszewska, the secretary of the Krak\u00f3w-based weekly Catholic magazine \"Tygodnik Powszechny\" where Wojty\u0142a had worked, and unsuccessfully attempted to make her admit to having had sexual relations with him.\nThe SB then attempted to compromise Krak\u00f3w priest Andrzej Bardecki, an editor of \"Tygodnik Powszechny\" and one of the closest friends of Cardinal Wojty\u0142a before he became pope, by planting false memoirs in his dwelling; Piotrowski was exposed and the forgeries were found and destroyed before the SB could say to have discovered them.\nLatin American and Caribbean dictatorships.\nJohn Paul II was variously praised and criticized for actions which were perceived as both inspiring resistance but also potentially abetting dictatorships in Chile, Haiti, and Paraguay.\nRelations with other Christian denominations and religions.\nChristian denominations.\nJohn Paul II was publicly committed to improving relationships between Christian communities and engaged in numerous dialogues with leaders of other Christian churches, including the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodox Church, Assyrian Church of the East the Lutheran World Federation, and the Anglican Communion.\nReligions.\nJudaism.\nRelations between Catholicism and Judaism improved dramatically during the pontificate of John Paul II. He spoke frequently about the Catholic Church's relationship with the Jewish faith.\nAnimism.\nIn his book-length interview \"Crossing the Threshold of Hope\" with the Italian journalist Vittorio Messori published in 1995, John Paul II draws parallels between animism and Christianity. He wrote:\n\"...\u00a0it would be helpful to recall ... the animist religions which stress ancestor worship. It seems that those who practise them are particularly close to Christianity, and among them, the Church's missionaries also find it easier to speak a common language. Is there, perhaps, in this veneration of ancestors a kind of preparation for the Christian faith in the Communion of Saints, in which all believers\u2014whether living or dead\u2014form a single community, a single body? ... There is nothing strange, then, that the African and Asian animists would become believers in Christ more easily than followers of the great religions of the Far East.\"\nIn 1985, the Pope visited the African country of Togo, where 60 per cent of the population espouses animist beliefs. To honour the Pope, animist religious leaders met him at a Catholic Marian shrine in the forest, much to the pontiff's delight. John Paul II proceeded to call for the need for religious tolerance, praised nature, and emphasised common elements between animism and Christianity, saying:\n\"Nature, exuberant and splendid in this area of forests and lakes, impregnates spirits and hearts with its mystery and orients them spontaneously toward the mystery of He who is the author of life. It is this religious sentiment that animates you and one can say that animates all of your compatriots.\"\nDuring the investiture of President Thomas Boni Yayi of Benin as a titled Yoruba chieftain on 20 December 2008, the reigning Ooni of Ile-Ife, Nigeria, Olubuse II, referred to John Paul II as a previous recipient of the same royal honour.\nBuddhism.\nTenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, visited John Paul\u00a0II eight times. The two men held many similar views and understood similar plights, both coming from nations affected by Communism and both serving as heads of major religious bodies. As Archbishop of Krak\u00f3w, long before the 14th Dalai Lama was a world-famous figure, Wojty\u0142a held special Masses to pray for the Tibetan people's non-violent struggle for freedom from Maoist China. In 1987, he welcomed participants of the \"East-West Spiritual Exchanges\", an initiative by the Monastic Interreligious Dialogue (DIMMID) and the Institute for Zen Studies in which Buddhist and Christian monks or nuns take turns residing for one month in each other's monasteries. During his 1995 visit to Sri Lanka, a country where a majority of the population adheres to Theravada Buddhism, John Paul II expressed his admiration for Buddhism. He said:\n\"In particular I express my highest regard for the followers of Buddhism, the majority religion in Sri Lanka, with its ... four great values of \u2026 loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity; with its ten transcendental virtues and the joys of the Sangha expressed so beautifully in the Theragathas. I ardently hope that my visit will serve to strengthen the goodwill between us, and that it will reassure everyone of the Catholic Church's desire for interreligious dialogue and cooperation in building a more just and fraternal world. To everyone I extend the hand of friendship, recalling the splendid words of the Dhammapada: 'Better than a thousand useless words is one single word that gives peace' ... .\"\nIslam.\nJohn Paul\u00a0II made considerable efforts to improve relations between Catholicism and Islam.\nHe officially supported the project of the Mosque of Rome and participated in the inauguration in 1995.\nOn 14 May 1999, at a meeting with Muslim leaders in Syria, he was gifted and then promptly kissed a Qur'an, an act that was controversial with some Catholics.\nOn 6 May 2001, he became the first Catholic pope to enter and pray in a mosque, namely the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, Syria. Respectfully removing his shoes, he entered the former Byzantine-era Christian church dedicated to John the Baptist, who is also revered as a prophet of Islam. He gave a speech including the statement: \"For all the times that Muslims and Christians have offended one another, we need to seek forgiveness from the Almighty and to offer each other forgiveness.\"\nIn 2004, John Paul\u00a0II hosted the \"Papal Concert of Reconciliation\", which brought together leaders of Islam with leaders of the Jewish community and of the Catholic Church at the Vatican for a concert by the Krak\u00f3w Philharmonic Choir from Poland, the London Philharmonic Choir from the United Kingdom, the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra from the United States, and the Ankara State Polyphonic Choir of Turkey. The event was conceived and conducted by Gilbert Levine, KCSG and was broadcast throughout the world.\nJohn Paul\u00a0II oversaw the publication of the Catechism of the Catholic Church, which makes a special provision for Muslims; therein, it is written, \"together with us they adore the one, merciful God, mankind's judge on the last day.\"\nJainism.\nIn 1995, John Paul II held a meeting with 21 Jains, organised by the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue. He praised Mohandas Gandhi for his \"unshakeable faith in God\", assured the Jains that the Catholic Church will continue to engage in dialogue with their religion and spoke of the common need to aid the poor. The Jain leaders were impressed with the Pope's \"transparency and simplicity\", and the meeting received much attention in the Gujarat state in western India, home to many Jains.\nAssassination attempts and plots.\nAs he entered St. Peter's Square to address an audience on 13 May 1981, John Paul II was shot and critically wounded by Mehmet Ali A\u011fca, an expert Turkish gunman who was a member of the militant fascist group Grey Wolves. The assassin used a Browning 9\u00a0mm semi-automatic pistol, shooting the Pope in the abdomen and perforating his colon and small intestine multiple times. John Paul II was rushed into the Vatican complex and then to the Gemelli Hospital. On the way to the hospital, he lost consciousness. Even though the two bullets missed his superior mesenteric artery and abdominal aorta, he lost nearly three-quarters of his blood. He underwent five hours of surgery to treat his wounds. Surgeons performed a colostomy, temporarily rerouting the upper part of the large intestine to let the damaged lower part heal. When he briefly regained consciousness before being operated on, he instructed the doctors not to remove his Brown Scapular during the operation. One of the few people allowed in to see him at the Gemelli Clinic was one of his closest friends, philosopher Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, who arrived on Saturday 16 May and kept him company while he recovered from emergency surgery. The Pope later stated that the Blessed Virgin Mary helped keep him alive throughout his ordeal. He said:\n\"Could I forget that the event in St. Peter's Square took place on the day and at the hour when the first appearance of the Mother of Christ to the poor little peasants has been remembered for over sixty years at F\u00e1tima, Portugal? For in everything that happened to me on that very day, I felt that extraordinary motherly protection and care, which turned out to be stronger than the deadly bullet.\"\nA\u011fca was caught and restrained by a nun and other bystanders until police arrived. He was sentenced to life imprisonment. Two days after Christmas in 1983, John Paul II visited A\u011fca in prison. John Paul II and A\u011fca spoke privately for about twenty minutes. John Paul II said, \"What we talked about will have to remain a secret between him and me. I spoke to him as a brother whom I have pardoned and who has my complete trust.\"\nNumerous theories were advanced to explain the assassination attempt, some of them controversial. One such theory, advanced by Michael Ledeen and heavily pushed by the United States Central Intelligence Agency at the time of the assassination but never substantiated by evidence, was that the Soviet Union was behind the attempt on John Paul II's life in retaliation for the Pope's support of Solidarity, the Catholic, pro-democratic Polish workers' movement. This theory was supported by the 2006 Mitrokhin Commission, set up by Silvio Berlusconi and headed by senator Paolo Guzzanti, which alleged that Communist Bulgarian security departments were used to prevent the Soviet Union's role from being uncovered, and concluded that Soviet military intelligence (\"Glavnoje Razvedyvatel'noje Upravlenije\"), not the KGB, were responsible. Russian Foreign Intelligence Service spokesman Boris Labusov called the accusation \"absurd\". The Pope declared during a May 2002 visit to Bulgaria that the country's Soviet-bloc-era leadership had nothing to do with the assassination attempt. However, his secretary, Cardinal Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz, alleged in his book \"A Life with Karol\", that the Pope was convinced privately that the former Soviet Union was behind the attack. It was later discovered that many of John Paul II's aides had foreign-government attachments; Bulgaria and Russia disputed the Italian commission's conclusions, pointing out that the Pope had publicly denied the Bulgarian connection.\nA second assassination attempt was made on 12 May 1982, just a day before the anniversary of the first attempt on his life, in F\u00e1tima, Portugal, when a man tried to stab John Paul II with a bayonet. He was stopped by security guards. Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz later said that John Paul II had been injured during the attempt but managed to hide a non-life-threatening wound. The assailant, a traditionalist Catholic Spanish priest named Juan Mar\u00eda Fern\u00e1ndez y Krohn, had been ordained as a priest by Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre of the Society of St. Pius X and was opposed to the changes made by the Second Vatican Council, saying that the Pope was an agent of Communist Moscow and of the Marxist Eastern Bloc. Fern\u00e1ndez y Krohn subsequently left the priesthood and served three years of a six-year sentence. The ex-priest was treated for mental illness and then expelled from Portugal to become a solicitor in Belgium.\nThe Al-Qaeda-funded Bojinka plot planned to kill John Paul II during a visit to the Philippines during World Youth Day 1995 celebrations. On 15 January 1995 a suicide bomber was planning to dress as a priest and detonate a bomb when the Pope passed in his motorcade on his way to the San Carlos Seminary in Makati. The assassination was supposed to divert attention from the next phase of the operation. However, a chemical fire inadvertently started by the cell alerted police to their whereabouts, and all were arrested a week before the Pope's visit, and confessed to the plot.\nIn 2009 Jack Koehler, a journalist and former army intelligence officer, published \"Spies in the Vatican: The Soviet Union's Cold War Against the Catholic Church\". Mining mostly East German and Polish secret police archives, Koehler claimed the assassination attempts were \"KGB-backed\".\nApologies.\nJohn Paul II apologised to many groups that had suffered at the hands of the Catholic Church through the years. Before becoming pope he had been a prominent editor and supporter of initiatives such as the Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops from 1965. As pope, he officially made public apologies for over 100 wrongdoings, including:\nThe Great Jubilee of the year 2000 included a day of Prayer for Forgiveness of the Sins of the Church on 12 March 2000.\nOn 20 November 2001, from a laptop in the Vatican, John Paul II sent his first e-mail apologising for the Catholic sex abuse cases, the church-backed Stolen Generations of Aboriginal children in Australia, and to China for the behaviour of Catholic missionaries in colonial times.\nHealth.\nWhen he became pope in 1978 at the age of 58, John Paul II was an avid sportsman. He remained extremely healthy and active especially in his first years of papacy, jogging in the Vatican gardens, weight training, swimming, and hiking in the mountains. He was fond of football, skiing and swimming. The media contrasted the new pope's athleticism and trim figure to the poor health of John Paul I and Paul VI, the portliness of John XXIII and the constant claims of ailments of Pius XII. The only modern pope with a fitness regimen had been Pope Pius XI (1922\u20131939), who was an avid mountaineer, conquering summits like Monte Rosa, Mont Blanc (the highest of the Alps) and Matterhorn. Media occasionally referred to John Paul II's fitness regimen: for example, an \"Irish Independent\" article in the 1980s labelled him the \"keep-fit pope\", and an Italian newspaper called him \"l'atleta di Dio\" (\"God's athlete\") in 2005.\nHowever, after over 26 years as pope, two assassination attempts, one of which injured him severely, and a number of cancer scares, John Paul's physical health declined. In 2001 he was diagnosed as suffering from Parkinson's disease. International observers had suspected this for some time, but it was only publicly acknowledged by the Vatican in 2003. Despite difficulty speaking more than a few sentences at a time, trouble hearing, and severe osteoarthrosis, he continued to tour the world although rarely walking in public.\nDeath and funeral.\nFinal months.\nJohn Paul II was hospitalised with breathing problems caused by a bout of influenza on 1\u00a0February 2005. He left the hospital on 10 February, but was subsequently hospitalised again with breathing problems two weeks later and underwent a tracheotomy.\nFinal illness and death.\nOn 31 March 2005, following a urinary tract infection, he developed septic shock, a form of infection with a high fever and low blood pressure, but was not hospitalised. Instead, he was monitored by a team of consultants at his private residence. This was taken as an indication by the Pope, and those close to him, that he was nearing death; it would have been in accordance with his wishes to die in the Vatican. Later that day, Vatican sources announced that John Paul II had been given the Anointing of the Sick by his friend and secretary Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz. The day before his death, one of his closest personal friends, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, visited him at his bedside. During the final days of the Pope's life, the lights were kept burning through the night where he lay in the Papal apartment on the top floor of the Apostolic Palace. Tens of thousands of people assembled and held vigil in St. Peter's Square and the surrounding streets for two days. Upon hearing of this, the dying pope was said to have stated: \"I have searched for you, and now you have come to me, and I thank you.\"\nOn Saturday, 2 April 2005, at approximately 15:30 CEST, John Paul II spoke his final words in Polish, \"Pozw\u00f3lcie mi odej\u015b\u0107 do domu Ojca\" (\"Allow me to depart to the house of the Father\"), to his aides, and fell into a coma about four hours later. The Mass of the vigil of the Second Sunday of Easter commemorating the canonisation of Faustina Kowalska on 30 April 2000, had just been celebrated at his bedside, presided over by Dziwisz and two Polish associates. Present at the bedside was Cardinal Lubomyr Husar from Ukraine, who served as a priest with John Paul in Poland, along with Polish nuns of the Congregation of the Sisters, Servants of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, who ran the papal household. John Paul II died in his private apartment at 21:37 CEST (19:37 UTC) of heart failure from profound hypotension and complete circulatory collapse from septic shock. His death was verified when an electrocardiogram that ran for 20 minutes showed a flatline.\nHe had no close family by the time of his death; his feelings are reflected in his words written in 2000 at the end of his Last Will and Testament. Dziwisz later said he had not burned the pontiff's personal notes despite the request being part of the will.\nAftermath.\nThe death of the pontiff set in motion rituals and traditions dating back to medieval times. The Rite of Visitation took place from 4 April 2005 to 7 April 2005 at St. Peter's Basilica. John Paul II's testament, published on 7 April 2005, revealed that he contemplated being buried in his native Poland but left the final decision to the College of Cardinals, which in passing, preferred burial beneath St. Peter's Basilica, honouring the pontiff's request to be placed \"in bare earth\".\nThe Requiem Mass held on 8 April 2005 was said to have set world records both for attendance and number of heads of state present at a funeral. \"(See: List of Dignitaries.)\" It was the single largest gathering of heads of state up to that time, surpassing the funerals of Winston Churchill (1965) and Josip Broz Tito (1980). Four kings, five queens, at least 70 presidents and prime ministers, and more than 14 leaders of other religions attended. An estimated four million mourners gathered in and around Vatican City. Between 250,000 and 300,000 watched the event from within the Vatican's walls. In a historical rarity, Protestant and Eastern Orthodox leaders, as well as representatives and heads from Judaism, Islam, Druze and Buddhism, offered their own memorials and prayers as a way of sympathising with the grief of Catholics.\nThe Dean of the College of Cardinals, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, conducted the ceremony. John Paul II was interred in the grottoes under the basilica, the Tomb of the Popes. He was lowered into a tomb created in the same alcove previously occupied by the remains of John XXIII. The alcove had been empty since John XXIII's remains had been moved into the main body of the basilica after his beatification. The remains of John Paul II were moved to the Chapel of St. Sebastian within the main basilica upon his own beatification in 2011.\nPosthumous recognition.\nTitle \"the Great\".\nUpon the death of John Paul II, a number of clergy at the Vatican and laymen began referring to the late pontiff as \"John Paul the Great\" \u2013in theory only the fourth pope to be so acclaimed. Cardinal Angelo Sodano specifically referred to John Paul as \"the Great\" in his published written homily for the Pope's funeral Mass of Repose. The South African Catholic newspaper \"The Southern Cross\" has referred to him in print as \"John Paul II the Great\". Some Catholic educational institutions in the US have additionally changed their names to incorporate \"the Great\", including John Paul the Great Catholic University and schools called some variant of John Paul the Great High School.\nScholars of canon law say that there is no official process for declaring a pope \"Great\"; the title simply establishes itself through popular and continued usage, as was the case with celebrated secular leaders (for example, Alexander III of Macedon became popularly known as Alexander the Great). The three popes who today commonly are known as \"Great\" are Leo I, who reigned from 440\u2013461 and persuaded Attila the Hun to withdraw from Rome; Gregory I, 590\u2013604, after whom the Gregorian chant is named; and Pope Nicholas I, 858\u2013867, who consolidated the Catholic Church in the Western world in the Middle Ages.\nJohn Paul's successor, Benedict XVI, did not use the term directly in public speeches, but made oblique references to \"the great Pope John Paul\u00a0II\" in his first address from the loggia of St. Peter's Basilica, at the 20th World Youth Day 2005 in Germany when he said in Polish: \"As the great Pope John Paul\u00a0II would say: Keep the flame of faith alive in your lives and your people\"; and in May 2006 during a visit to Poland where he repeatedly made references to \"the great John Paul\" and \"my great predecessor\".\nBeatification.\nInspired by calls of \"Santo Subito!\" (\"[Make him a] Saint Immediately!\") from the crowds gathered during the funeral Mass that he celebrated, Benedict XVI began the beatification process for his predecessor, bypassing the normal restriction that five years must pass after a person's death before beginning the beatification process. In an audience with Pope Benedict XVI, Camillo Ruini, Vicar General of the Diocese of Rome, who was responsible for promoting the cause for canonisation of any person who died within that diocese, cited \"exceptional circumstances\", which suggested that the waiting period could be waived. This decision was announced on 13 May 2005, the Feast of Our Lady of F\u00e1tima and the 24th anniversary of the assassination attempt on John Paul II at St. Peter's Square.\nIn early 2006, it was reported that the Vatican was investigating a possible miracle associated with John Paul II. Sister Marie Simon-Pierre, a French nun and member of the Congregation of Little Sisters of Catholic Maternity Wards, confined to her bed by Parkinson's disease, was reported to have experienced a \"complete and lasting cure after members of her community prayed for the intercession of Pope John Paul II\". As of \u00a02008[ [update]], Sister Marie Simon-Pierre, then 46, was working again at a maternity hospital run by her religious institute.\n\"I was sick and now I am cured,\" she told reporter Gerry Shaw. \"I am cured, but it is up to the church to say whether it was a miracle or not.\"\nOn 28 May 2006, Pope Benedict XVI celebrated Mass before an estimated 900,000 people in John Paul II's native Poland. During his homily, he encouraged prayers for the early canonisation of John Paul II and stated that he hoped canonisation would happen \"in the near future\".\nIn January 2007, Cardinal Stanis\u0142aw Dziwisz announced that the interview phase of the beatification process, in Italy and Poland, was nearing completion. In February 2007, second class relics of John Paul II\u2014pieces of white papal cassocks he used to wear\u2014were freely distributed with prayer cards for the cause, a typical pious practice after a saintly Catholic's death. On 8 March 2007, the Vicariate of Rome announced that the diocesan phase of John Paul's cause for beatification was at an end. Following a ceremony on 2 April 2007\u2014the second anniversary of the Pontiff's death\u2014the cause proceeded to the scrutiny of the committee of lay, clerical, and episcopal members of the Vatican's Congregation for the Causes of Saints, to conduct a separate investigation. On the fourth anniversary of John Paul II's death, 2 April 2009, Cardinal Dziwisz, told reporters of a presumed miracle that had recently occurred at the former pope's tomb in St. Peter's Basilica. A nine-year-old Polish boy from Gda\u0144sk, who was suffering from kidney cancer and was completely unable to walk, had been visiting the tomb with his parents. On leaving St. Peter's Basilica, the boy told them, \"I want to walk,\" and began walking normally. On 16 November 2009, a panel of reviewers at the Congregation for the Causes of Saints voted unanimously that John Paul\u00a0II had lived a life of heroic virtue. On 19 December 2009, Pope Benedict XVI signed the first of two decrees needed for beatification and proclaimed John Paul II \"Venerable\", asserting that he had lived a heroic, virtuous life. The second vote and the second signed decree certified the authenticity of the first miracle, the curing of Sister Marie Simon-Pierre, a French nun, from Parkinson's disease. Once the second decree is signed, the \"position\" (the report on the cause, with documentation about his life and writings and with information on the cause) is complete. He can then be beatified. Some speculated that he would be beatified sometime during (or soon after) the month of the 32nd anniversary of his 1978 election, in October 2010. As Monsignor Oder said, this course would have been possible if the second decree were signed in time by Benedict XVI, stating that a posthumous miracle directly attributable to his intercession had occurred, completing the positio.\nThe Vatican announced on 14 January 2011 that Pope Benedict XVI had confirmed the miracle involving Sister Marie Simon-Pierre and that John Paul II was to be beatified on 1 May, the Feast of Divine Mercy. 1 May is commemorated in former Communist countries, such as Poland, and some Western European countries as May Day, and John Paul\u00a0II was well known for his contributions to Communism's relatively peaceful demise. In March 2011 the Polish mint issued a gold 1,000 Polish z\u0142oty coin (equivalent to US$350), with the Pope's image to commemorate his beatification.\nOn 29 April 2011, John Paul\u00a0II's coffin was disinterred from the grotto beneath St. Peter's Basilica ahead of his beatification, as tens of thousands of people arrived in Rome for one of the biggest events since his funeral. John Paul II's remains, which were not exposed, were placed in front of the Basilica's main altar, where believers could pay their respect before and after the beatification Mass in St. Peter's Square on 1 May 2011. On 3 May 2011 his remains were interred in the marble altar in Pier Paolo Cristofari Chapel of St. Sebastian, where Pope Innocent XI was buried. This more prominent location, next to the Chapel of the Piet\u00e0, the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament, and statues of Popes Pius XI and Pius XII was intended to allow more pilgrims to view his memorial. John Paul II's body is located near the bodies of Pope Pius X and Pope John XXIII, whose bodies were reinterred in the Basilica after their own beatifications and together are three of the five popes beatified in the last century. The two popes who were not exhumed and reinterred after becoming a blessed in the last century were Pope Paul VI and Pope John Paul I, who both remain entombed in the papal grottos.\nIn July 2012, a Colombian man, Marco Fidel Rojas, the former mayor of Huila, Colombia, testified that he was \"miraculously cured\" of Parkinson's disease after a trip to Rome where he met John Paul II and prayed with him. Antonio Schlesinger Piedrahita, a renowned neurologist in Colombia, certified Fidel's healing. The documentation was then sent to the Vatican office for sainthood causes.\nIn September 2020, Poland unveiled a sculpture of him, designed by Jerzy Kalina and installed outside the National Museum, Warsaw, holding up a meteorite. In the same month, a relic containing his blood was stolen from the Spoleto Cathedral in Italy.\nCanonisation.\nTo be eligible for canonisation (being declared a saint) by the Catholic Church, two miracles must be attributed to a candidate.\nThe first miracle attributed to John Paul was the above mentioned healing of a nun's Parkinson's disease, which was recognised during the beatification process. According to an article on the Catholic News Service (CNS) dated 23 April 2013, a Vatican commission of doctors concluded that a healing had no natural (medical) explanation, which is the first requirement for a claimed miracle to be officially documented.\nThe second miracle was deemed to have taken place shortly after the late pope's beatification on 1 May 2011; it was reported to be the healing of Costa Rican woman Floribeth Mora of an otherwise terminal brain aneurysm. A Vatican panel of expert theologians examined the evidence, determined that it was directly attributable to the intercession of John Paul II, and recognised it as miraculous. The next stage was for Cardinals who compose the membership of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints to give their opinion to Pope Francis to decide whether to sign and promulgate the decree and set a date for canonisation.\nOn 4 July 2013, Pope Francis confirmed his approval of John Paul II's canonisation, formally recognising the second miracle attributed to his intercession. He was canonised together with John XXIII. The date of the canonisation was on 27 April 2014, Divine Mercy Sunday.\nThe canonisation Mass for Pope John Paul II and Pope John XXIII, was celebrated by Pope Francis (with Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI), on 27 April 2014 in St. Peter's Square at the Vatican (John Paul II had died on vigil of Divine Mercy Sunday in 2005). About 150 cardinals and 700 bishops concelebrated the Mass, and at least 500,000 people attended the Mass, with an estimated 300,000 others watching from video screens placed around Rome.\nJohn Paul II's remains, considered to be holy relics, were exhumed from their place in the basilica's grotto, and a new tomb was established at the altar of St. Sebastian. His feast is celebrated annually on October 22, the day of his papal inauguration, as the anniversary of his death usually falls during Lent and often during Holy Week.\nBeatification of the Pope's parents.\nOn 10 October 2019, the Archdiocese of Krak\u00f3w and the Polish Episcopal Conference approved \"nihil obstat\" the opening of the beatification cause of the parents of its patron saint John Paul II, Karol Wojty\u0142a Sr. and Emilia Kaczorowska. It gained approval from the Holy See to open the diocesan phase of the cause on 7 May 2020.\nSexual abuse scandals.\nJohn Paul II was criticised by representatives of the victims of clergy sexual abuse for failing to respond quickly enough to the Catholic sex abuse crisis. After decades of inaction, the scandal came to a head when Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor infamously tore up a photo of John Paul II on a 3 October 1992 episode of \"Saturday Night Live\" while performing an a cappella rendition of Bob Marley's \"War\".\nIn response to mounting criticism over the next decade, John Paul II stated in 2002 that \"there is no place in the priesthood and religious life for those who would harm the young\". The Catholic Church instituted reforms to prevent future abuse by requiring background checks for church employees and, because a significant majority of victims were boys, disallowing ordination of men with \"deep-seated homosexual tendencies\". They now require dioceses faced with an allegation to alert the authorities, conduct an investigation and remove the accused from duty. In 2008, the church asserted that the scandal was a very serious problem and estimated that it was \"probably caused by 'no more than 1 per cent'\", or 5,000, of the over 500,000 Catholic priests worldwide.\nIn April 2002, John Paul II, despite being frail from Parkinson's disease, summoned all the American cardinals to the Vatican to discuss possible solutions to the issue of sexual abuse in the American Church. He asked them to \"diligently investigate accusations\". John Paul II suggested that American bishops be more open and transparent in dealing with such scandals and emphasised the role of seminary training to prevent sexual deviance among future priests. In what \"The New York Times\" called \"unusually direct language\", John Paul condemned the arrogance of priests that led to the scandals:\n\"Priests and candidates for the priesthood often live at a level both materially and educationally superior to that of their families and the members of their own age group. It is therefore very easy for them to succumb to the temptation of thinking of themselves as better than others. When this happens, the ideal of priestly service and self-giving dedication can fade, leaving the priest dissatisfied and disheartened.\"\nThe Pope read a statement intended for the American cardinals, calling the sex abuse \"an appalling sin\" and said the priesthood had no room for such men.\nIn 2002, Archbishop Juliusz Paetz, the Catholic Archbishop of Pozna\u0144, was accused of molesting seminarians. John Paul II accepted his resignation, and placed sanctions on him, prohibiting Paetz from exercising his ministry as bishop. It was reported that these restrictions were lifted, though Vatican spokesperson Federico Lombardi strenuously denied this saying \"his rehabilitation was without foundation\".\nIn 2003, John Paul\u00a0II reiterated that \"there is no place in the priesthood and religious life for those who would harm the young\". In April 2003, a three-day conference was held, titled \"Abuse of Children and Young People by Catholic Priests and Religious\", where eight non-Catholic psychiatric experts were invited to speak to near all Vatican dicasteries' representatives. The panel of experts overwhelmingly opposed implementation of policies of \"zero-tolerance\" such as was proposed by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. One expert called such policies a \"case of overkill\" since they do not permit flexibility to allow for differences among individual cases.\nIn 2004, John Paul\u00a0II recalled Bernard Francis Law to be Archpriest of the Papal Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore. Law had previously resigned as Archbishop of Boston in 2002 in response to the Catholic Church sexual abuse cases after church documents were revealed that suggested he had covered up sexual abuse committed by priests in his archdiocese. Law resigned from this position in November 2011.\nJohn Paul\u00a0II was a firm supporter of the Legion of Christ, and in 1998 discontinued investigations into sexual misconduct by its leader Marcial Maciel, who in 2005 resigned his leadership and was later requested by the Vatican to withdraw from his ministry. However, Maciel's trial began in 2004 during the pontificate of John Paul II, but the Pope died before it ended and the conclusions were known. In an interview with L'Osservatore Romano, Pope Francis said: \"I am grateful to Pope Benedict, who dared to say this publicly (when more facts began to come to light after Degollado's death in 2008, Pope Benedict XVI in 2010 launched another investigation and on 1 May 2010 announced a declaration about the crimes of the founder of the Legionaries), and to Pope John Paul II, who dared to give the green light to the Legionaries' case\".\nOn 10 November 2020, the Vatican published a report which found that John Paul II learned of allegations of sexual impropriety against former cardinal Theodore McCarrick, who at the time was serving as Archbishop of Newark, through a 1999 letter from Cardinal John O'Connor warning him that appointing McCarrick to be Archbishop of Washington D.C., a position which had recently been opened, would be a mistake. John Paul II ordered an investigation, which stalled when three of the four bishops tasked with investigating claims allegedly brought back \"inaccurate or incomplete information\". John Paul II planned on not giving McCarrick the appointment anyway, but relented and gave him the appointment after McCarrick wrote a letter of denial. He created McCarrick a cardinal in 2001. McCarrick would eventually be laicized after allegations surfaced that he abused minors. George Weigel, a biographer of John Paul II, defended the Pope's actions as follows: \"Theodore McCarrick fooled a lot of people ... and he deceived John Paul II in a way that is laid out in almost biblical fashion in [the Vatican's] report\".\nIn a 2019 interview with Mexican television, Pope Francis defended John Paul II's legacy on protecting minors against clerical sexual abuse. He said that John Paul II was \"often misled\", as in the case of Hans Hermann Gro\u00ebr. Francis said that with respect to the case of Marcial Maciel:\n\"Ratzinger was courageous, and so was John Paul II. ... With respect to John Paul II, we have to understand certain attitudes because he came from a closed world, from behind the Iron Curtain, where communism was still in force. There was a defensive mentality. We have to understand this well, and no one can doubt the saintliness of this great man and his good will. He was great, he was great.\"On March 6, 2023, an investigative report by the Polish television station TVN24 concluded that \"there [is now] no doubt\" that John Paul II \"knew about sexual abuse of children by priests under his authority and sought to conceal it when he was an archbishop in his native Poland\". The Dutch journalist Ekke Overbeek released a book on John Paul II with similar claims the following week. In response to the claims, Pope Francis stated: \"You have to put things in the context of the era[...] At that time everything was covered up. [...] It was only when the Boston scandal broke that the church began to look at the problem.\" The Polish Episcopal Conference stated that \"'further archival research' would be needed to arrive at a just evaluation of the decisions and actions\" of Wojty\u0142a. Furthermore, other journalists have criticised the report, including the sources and their interpretation. One of the sources used in the report was controversial archbishop and opponent of the pontiff Rembert Weakland. Another point of contention is the use of materials from the communist secret police in the report.\nOther criticism and controversy.\nJohn Paul II was widely criticised for a variety of his views. He was a target of criticism from progressives for his opposition to the ordination of women, opposition to the use of contraception, for his increased centralization of power, and for curtailing some post-Second Vatican Council practices which he deemed as going beyond what the Second Vatican Council documents authorized.3 Traditionalist Catholics frequently criticized him for his support for the Second Vatican Council and its reform of the liturgy. \nJohn Paul II's response to child sexual abuse within the Catholic Church has also come under heavy censure.\nOpus Dei controversies.\nJohn Paul II was criticised for his support of the Opus Dei prelature and the 2002 canonisation of its founder, Josemar\u00eda Escriv\u00e1, whom he called \"the saint of ordinary life\". Other movements and religious organisations of the church went decidedly under his wing Legion of Christ, the Neocatechumenal Way, Schoenstatt, the Charismatic Movement, etc. And he was accused repeatedly of taking a soft hand with them, especially in the case of Marcial Maciel, founder of the Legionaries of Christ.\nIn 1984 John Paul\u00a0II appointed Joaqu\u00edn Navarro-Valls, a member of Opus Dei, as Director of the Vatican Press Office. An Opus Dei spokesman said that \"the influence of Opus Dei in the Vatican has been exaggerated\". Of the nearly 200 cardinals in the Catholic Church, only two are known to be members of Opus Dei.\nPope John Paul II was said to engage in Self-flagellation, a practice of whipping oneself which is often used within Opus Dei.\nBanco Ambrosiano scandal.\nJohn Paul II was alleged to have links with Banco Ambrosiano, an Italian bank that collapsed in 1982. At the centre of the bank's failure was its chairman, Roberto Calvi, and his membership in the illegal Masonic Lodge Propaganda Due (aka P2). The Vatican Bank was Banco Ambrosiano's main shareholder, and the death of John Paul I in 1978 is rumoured to be linked to the Ambrosiano scandal.\nCalvi, often referred to as \"God's Banker\", was also involved with the Vatican Bank, and was close to Bishop Paul Marcinkus, the bank's chairman. Ambrosiano also provided funds for political parties in Italy, and for both the Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua and its Sandinista opposition. It has been widely alleged that the Vatican Bank provided money for Solidarity in Poland.\nCalvi used his complex network of overseas banks and companies to move money out of Italy, to inflate share prices, and to arrange massive unsecured loans. In 1978, the Bank of Italy produced a report on Ambrosiano that predicted future disaster. On 5 June 1982, two weeks before the collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, Calvi had written a letter of warning to John Paul II, stating that such a forthcoming event would \"provoke a catastrophe of unimaginable proportions in which the Church will suffer the gravest damage\". On 18 June 1982 Calvi's body was found hanging from scaffolding beneath Blackfriars Bridge in the financial district of London. Calvi's clothing was stuffed with bricks, and contained cash valued at US$14,000, in three different currencies.\nProblems with traditionalists.\nJohn Paul II was criticised by some traditionalist Catholics, in addition to those demanding modernisation. Points of contention with traditionalists included demanding a return to the Tridentine Mass, as well as the repudiation of reforms instituted after the Second Vatican Council, such as the use of the vernacular language in the formerly Latin-language Roman Rite, ecumenism, and the principle of religious liberty. In 1988, the controversial traditionalist Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre, founder of the Society of Saint Pius X (1970), was excommunicated under John Paul II because of the unapproved ordination of four bishops, which Cardinal Ratzinger called a \"schismatic act\".\nThe World Day of Prayer for Peace, a 1986 meeting in Assisi, Italy in which the pope prayed only with Christians, was criticised for giving the impression that syncretism and indifferentism were openly embraced by the Papal Magisterium. When a second Day of Prayer for Peace in the World was held in 2002, it was condemned as confusing the laity and compromising to false religions. Likewise criticised was his kissing of the Qur'an in Damascus, Syria, on one of his travels on 6 May 2001. His call for religious freedom was not always supported; bishops like Ant\u00f4nio de Castro Mayer promoted religious tolerance but at the same time rejected the Vatican II principle of religious liberty as being liberalist and already condemned by Pope Pius IX in his \"Syllabus errorum\" (1864) and at the First Vatican Council.\nReligion and AIDS.\nJohn Paul II continued the tradition of advocating for the culture of life. In solidarity with Pope Paul VI's \"Humanae vitae\", he rejected artificial birth control, even in the use of condoms to prevent the spread of AIDS. Critics have said that large families are caused by lack of contraception and exacerbate Third World poverty and problems, such as street children in South America. John Paul II argued that the proper way to prevent the spread of AIDS was not condoms but rather \"correct practice of sexuality, which presupposes chastity and fidelity\".\nSocial programmes.\nThere was strong criticism of the Pope for the controversy surrounding the alleged use of charitable social programmes as a means of converting people in the Third World to Catholicism. The Pope created an uproar in the Indian subcontinent when he suggested that a great harvest of faith would be witnessed on the subcontinent in the third Christian millennium.\nArgentine military regime.\nJohn Paul II endorsed Cardinal Pio Laghi, who critics say supported the Dirty War in Argentina and was on friendly terms with the Argentine generals of the military dictatorship, playing regular tennis matches with the Navy's representative in the junta, Admiral Emilio Eduardo Massera.\nIan Paisley.\nIn 1988, when John Paul II was delivering a speech to the European Parliament, Ian Paisley, the leader of the Democratic Unionist Party and Moderator of the General Assembly of the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, shouted \"I denounce you as the Antichrist!\" He held up a red banner reading \"Pope John Paul II ANTICHRIST\". Otto von Habsburg (the last Crown Prince of Austria-Hungary), a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for Germany, snatched Paisley's banner, tore it up, and along with other MEPs helped eject him from the chamber. The Pope continued with his address after Paisley had been ejected.\nMe\u0111ugorje apparitions.\nA number of quotes about the apparitions of Me\u0111ugorje, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have been attributed to John Paul II. In 1998, when a certain German gathered various statements that were supposedly made by the Pope and Cardinal Ratzinger, and then forwarded them to the Vatican in the form of a memorandum, Ratzinger responded in writing on 22 July 1998: \"The only thing I can say regarding statements on Me\u0111ugorje ascribed to the Holy Father and myself is that they are [\"frei erfunden\"] complete invention\". Similar claims were also rebuked by the Vatican's Secretariate of State.\nBeatification controversy.\nSome Catholic theologians disagreed with the call for the beatification of John Paul\u00a0II. Eleven dissident theologians, including Jesuit professor Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Castillo and Italian theologian Giovanni Franzoni, said that his stance against contraception and the ordination of women as well as the church scandals during his pontificate presented \"facts which according to their consciences and convictions should be an obstacle to beatification\". Some traditionalist Catholics opposed his beatification and canonisation for his views on liturgy and participation in prayer with enemies of the church, heretics and non-Christians.\nAfter the 2020 report about the handling of the sexual misconduct complaints against Theodore McCarrick, some called for John Paul II's sainthood to be revoked.\nPersonal life.\nWojty\u0142a was a Cracovia football team supporter, and the club retired number 1 in his honour. Having played the game himself as a goalkeeper, Wojtyla was a fan of English football team Liverpool F.C., where his compatriot Jerzy Dudek played in the same position.\nIn 1973, while still the archbishop of Krak\u00f3w, Wojty\u0142a befriended a Polish-born, later American philosopher, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka. The thirty-two-year friendship (and occasional academic collaboration) lasted until his death. She served as his host when he visited New England in 1976, and photos show them together on skiing and camping trips. Letters that he wrote to her were part of a collection of documents sold by Tymieniecka's estate in 2008 to the National Library of Poland. According to the BBC the library had initially kept the letters from public view, partly because of John Paul's path to sainthood, but a library official announced in February 2016 the letters would be made public. In February 2016, the BBC documentary program \"Panorama\" reported that John Paul II had apparently had a close relationship with the Polish-born philosopher. The pair exchanged personal letters over 30 years, and Stourton believes that Tymieniecka had confessed her love for Wojty\u0142a. The Vatican described the documentary as \"more smoke than fire\", and Tymieniecka denied being involved with John Paul II.\nWriters Carl Bernstein, the veteran investigative journalist of the Watergate scandal, and Vatican expert Marco Politi, were the first journalists to talk to Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka in the 1990s about her importance in John Paul's life. They interviewed her and dedicated 20 pages to her in their 1996 book \"His Holiness\".&lt;ref name=\"Bernstein/Politi\"&gt;http:// by Barbi Latzu Nadeau, 15 February 2016&lt;/ref&gt; Bernstein and Politi even asked her if she had ever developed any romantic relationship with John Paul II, \"however one-sided it might have been\". She responded, \"No, I never fell in love with the cardinal. How could I fall in love with a middle-aged clergyman? Besides, I'm a married woman.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23806", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23806", "title": "Patanjali", "text": "Ancient Indian scholar(s)\nPatanjali (, IAST: , ; also called Gonardiya or Gonikaputra) was the name of one or more author(s), mystic(s) and philosopher(s) in ancient India. His name is recorded as an author and compiler of a number of Sanskrit works. The greatest of these are the \"Yoga Sutras\", a classical yoga text. Estimates based on analysis of this work suggests that its author(s) may have lived between the 2nd century BCE and the 5th century CE.\nAn author of the same name is credited with the authorship of the classic text on Sanskrit grammar named \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya\", that is firmly datable to the 2nd century BCE, and authorship of medical texts possibly dating from 8th-10th centuries CE. The two works, \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya\" and \"Yoga Sutras\", are completely different in subject matter, and Indologist Louis Renou has shown that there are significant differences in language, grammar and vocabulary. Before the time of Bhoja (11th century), no known text conflates the identity of the two authors.\nThere has been speculation as to whether the sage Pata\u00f1jali is the author of all the works attributed to him, as there are a number of known historical authors of the same name. A great deal of scholarship has been devoted over the 20th century to the issue of the historicity or identity of this author or these authors. The view that these were likely different authors is now generally accepted by Western scholars, but \"glorification\" of Patanjali as singular author of the yoga, grammar, and medical texts \"has become an oft-repeated article of faith\" \"in more traditional circles\" and yoga culture.\nPatanjali is regarded as an avatar of Adi Sesha.\nIdentities.\nAmongst the more important authors called Pata\u00f1jali are:\nName.\nAccording to Monier Monier-Williams, the word \"Pata\u00f1jali\" is a compound name from \"patta\" (Sanskrit: \u092a\u0924, \"falling, flying\") and \"a\u00f1j\" (\u0905\u091e\u094d\u091c\u094d, \"honor, celebrate, beautiful\") or \"a\u00f1jali\" (\u0905\u091e\u094d\u091c\u0932\u093f, \"reverence, joining palms of the hand\"). It means, flowing from reverence.\nLife.\nMany scholars including Louis Renou have suggested that the Pata\u00f1jali who wrote on Yoga was a different person than the Patanjali who wrote a commentary on Panini's grammar. In 1914, James Wood proposed that they were the same person. In 1922, Surendranath Dasgupta presented a series of arguments to tentatively propose that the famed Grammar text and the Yoga text author may be identical.\nThe view that these were likely two different authors is generally accepted, but some Western scholars consider them as a single entity.\nSome in the Indian tradition have held that one Pata\u00f1jali wrote treatises on grammar, medicine and yoga. This has been memorialised in a verse by Bhoja at the start of his commentary on the Yogasutras called \"R\u0101jam\u0101rttanda\" (11th century), and the following verse found in Shivarama's 18th-century text:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u092f\u094b\u0917\u0947\u0928 \u091a\u093f\u0924\u094d\u0924\u0938\u094d\u092f \u092a\u0926\u0947\u0928 \u0935\u093e\u091a\u093e\u0902 \u092e\u0932\u0902 \u0936\u0930\u0940\u0930\u0938\u094d\u092f \u091a \u0935\u0948\u0926\u094d\u092f\u0915\u0947\u0928\u0964 \u092f\u094b\u093d\u092a\u093e\u0915\u0930\u094b\u0924\u094d\u0924\u0902 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0935\u0930\u0902 \u092e\u0941\u0928\u0940\u0928\u093e\u0902 \u092a\u0924\u091e\u094d\u091c\u0932\u093f\u0902 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u093e\u091e\u094d\u091c\u0932\u093f\u0930\u093e\u0928\u0924\u094b\u093d\u0938\u094d\u092e\u093f\u0965\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Y\u014dg\u0113na cittasya pad\u0113na v\u0101c\u0101\u1e41 mala\u1e41 \u015bar\u012brasya ca vaidyak\u0113na. Y\u014dp\u0101kar\u014dtta\u1e41 pravara\u1e41 mun\u012bn\u0101\u1e41 pata\u00f1jali\u1e41 pr\u0101\u00f1jalir\u0101nat\u014dsmi\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;English translation: I bow with my hands together to the eminent sage Pata\u00f1jali, who removed the impurities of the mind through yoga, of speech through grammar, and of the body through medicine.\nThis tradition is discussed by Meulenbeld who traces this \"relatively late\" idea back to Bhoja (11th century), who was perhaps influenced by a verse by Bhart\u1e5bhari (ca. 5th century) that speaks of an expert in yoga, medicine and grammar who, however, is not named. No known Sanskrit text prior to the 10th century states that the one and the same Patanjali was behind all the three treatises.\nThe sage Pata\u00f1jali is said to have attained Samadhi through yogic meditation at the Brahmapureeswarar Temple located at Tirupattur, Tamil Nadu, India. Jeeva Samadhi of sage Patanjali, which is now an enclosed meditation hall, can be seen near the Brahma's shrine within Brahmapureeswarar Temple complex.\nGrammatical tradition.\nIn the grammatical tradition, Pata\u00f1jali is believed to have lived in the second century BCE. He wrote a \"Mahabhasya\" on Panini's sutras, in a form that quoted the commentary of K\u0101ty\u0101yana's \"v\u0101rttikas\". This is a major influential work on Sanskrit grammar and linguistics. The dating of Patanjali and his \"Mahabhasya\" is established by a combination of evidence: that from the Maurya Empire period, the historical events mentioned in the examples he used to explain his ideas, the chronology of ancient classical Sanskrit texts that respect his teachings, and the mention of his text or his name in ancient Indian literature. Of the three ancient grammarians, the chronological dating of Patanjali to mid 2nd century B.C. is considered as \"reasonably accurate\" by mainstream scholarship.\nThe text influenced Buddhist grammatical literature, as well as memoirs of travellers to India. For example, the Chinese pilgrim I-tsing mentions that the \"Mahabhasya\" is studied in India and advanced scholars learn it in three years.\nYoga tradition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSelf study\n&lt;poem&gt;\nPractice self study,\nto commune with\nyour chosen divinity.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 Patanjali, \"Yogasutras II.44\"\nIn the Yoga tradition, Pata\u00f1jali is a revered name. This Pata\u00f1jali's oeuvre comprises the sutras about Yoga (\"Yogas\u016btra\") and the commentary integral to the sutras, called the \"Bh\u0101\u1e63ya\". Some consider the sutras and the Bha\u1e63ya to have had different authors, the commentary being ascribed to \"an editor\" (Skt. \"vy\u0101sa\"). According to Phillipp Maas, the same person named Patanjali composed the sutras and the \"Bh\u0101\u1e63ya\" commentary.\nRadhakrishnan and Moore attribute the text to the grammarian Pata\u00f1jali, dating it as 2nd century BCE, during the Maurya Empire (322\u2013185 BCE). Maas estimates Pata\u00f1jali's Yogasutra's date to be about 400 CE, based on tracing the commentaries on it published in the first millennium CE. Edwin Bryant, on the other hand, surveys the major commentators in his translation of the \"Yoga S\u016btras\". He states that \"most scholars date the text shortly after the turn of the Common Era (circa first to second century), but that it has been placed as early as several centuries before that.\" Bryant concludes that \"A number of scholars have dated the \"Yoga S\u016btras\" as late as the fourth or fifth century C.E., but these arguments have all been challenged\", and late chronology for this Patanjali and his text are problematic.\nTamil Saivite legend.\nRegarding his early years, the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta tradition from around 10th century AD holds that Pata\u00f1jali learned Yoga along with seven other disciples from the great Yogic Guru Nandhi Deva, as stated in Tirumular's \"Tirumandiram\" (Tantra 1). His Samadhi is said to be at Rameswaram Shiva temple and a shrine for him still exists in the temple.\n\"Nandhi arulPetra Nadharai Naadinom\"\n\"Nandhigal Nalvar Siva Yoga MaaMuni\"\n\"Mandru thozhuda Pata\u00f1jali Vyakramar\"\n\"Endrivar Ennodu (Thirumoolar) Enmarumaame\"\nTranslation\nWe sought the feet of the God who graced Nandikesvara\nThe Four Nandhis, \nSivayoga Muni, Pata\u00f1jali, Vyaghrapada and I (Thirumoolar)\nWe were these eight.\nWorks.\nWhether the two works, the Yoga Sutras and the Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya, are by the same author has been the subject of considerable debate. The authorship of the two is first attributed to the same person in Bhojadeva's \"Rajamartanda\", a relatively late (10th century) commentary on the Yoga Sutras, as well as several subsequent texts. As for the texts themselves, the Yoga Sutra iii.44 cites a sutra as that from Patanjali by name, but this line itself is not from the Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya. This 10th-century legend of single-authorship is doubtful. The literary styles and contents of the Yogas\u016btras and the Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya are entirely different, and the only work on medicine attributed to Pata\u00f1jali is lost. Sources of doubt include the lack of cross-references between the texts, and no mutual awareness of each other, unlike other cases of multiple works by (later) Sanskrit authors. Also, some elements in the Yoga Sutras may date from as late as the 4th century C.E., but such changes may be due to divergent authorship, or due to later additions which are not atypical in the oral tradition. Most scholars refer to both works as \"by Patanjali\", without meaning that they are by the same author.\nIn addition to the Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya and Yoga S\u016btras, the 11th-century commentary on Charaka by the Bengali scholar Chakrapani Datta, and the 16th-century text \"Patanjalicarita\" ascribes to Pata\u00f1jali a medical text called the \"Carakapratisa\u1e43sk\u1e5bta\u1e25\" (now lost) which is apparently a revision (\"pratisa\u1e43sk\u1e5bta\u1e25\") of the medical treatise by Caraka. While there is a short treatise on yoga in the medical work called the Carakasa\u1e43hit\u0101 (by Caraka), towards the end of the chapter called \u015b\u0101r\u012brasth\u0101na, it is notable for not bearing much resemblance to the Yoga S\u016btras, and in fact presents a form of eightfold yoga that is completely different from that laid out by Pata\u00f1jali in the Yoga S\u016btras and the commentary Yogas\u016btrabh\u0101\u1e63ya.\nYoga S\u016btra.\nThe \"Yoga S\u016btras of Pata\u00f1jali\" are 196 Indian sutras (aphorisms) on Yoga. It was the most translated ancient Indian text in the medieval era, having been translated into about forty Indian languages and two non-Indian languages: Old Javanese and Arabic. The text fell into obscurity for nearly 700 years from the 12th to 19th century, and made a comeback in late 19th century due to the efforts of Swami Vivekananda and others. It gained prominence again as a comeback classic in the 20th century.\nBefore the 20th century, history indicates the Indian yoga scene was dominated by other Yoga texts such as the \"Bhagavad Gita\", \"Yoga Vasistha\" and \"Yoga Yajnavalkya\". Scholars consider the \"Yoga S\u016btras of Pata\u00f1jali\" formulations as one of the foundations of classical Yoga philosophy of Hinduism.\nThe (\"great commentary\") of Pata\u00f1jali on the of is a major early exposition on P\u0101\u1e47ini, along with the somewhat earlier \"Varttika\" by Katyayana. Patanjali relates to how words and meanings are associated \u2013 Patanjali claims \"shabdapram\u00e2NaH\" \u2013 that the evidentiary value of words is inherent in them, and not derived externally \u2013 the word-meaning association is natural. These issues in the word-meaning relation (symbol) would be elaborated in the Sanskrit linguistic tradition, in debates between the Mimamsa, Nyaya and Buddhist schools over the next fifteen centuries.\nSphota.\nPatanjali also defines an early notion of sphota, which would be elaborated considerably by later Sanskrit linguists like Bhartrihari. In Patanjali, a \"sphoTa\" (from \"sphuT\", spurt/burst) is the invariant quality of speech. The noisy element (\"dhvani\", audible part) can be long or short, but the sphoTa remains unaffected by individual speaker differences. Thus, a single letter or 'sound' (\"varNa\") such as \"k\", \"p\" or \"a\" is an abstraction, distinct from variants produced in actual enunciation. This concept has been linked to the modern notion of phoneme, the minimum distinction that defines semantically distinct sounds. Thus a phoneme is an abstraction for a range of sounds. However, in later writings, especially in Bhartrihari (6th century CE), the notion of \"sphoTa\" changes to become more of a mental state, preceding the actual utterance, akin to the lemma.\nPata\u00f1jali's writings also elaborate some principles of morphology (\"prakriy\u0101\"). In the context of elaborating on P\u0101\u1e47ini's aphorisms, he also discusses K\u0101ty\u0101yana's commentary, which are also aphoristic and \"s\u016btra\"-like; in the later tradition, these were transmitted as embedded in Pata\u00f1jali's discussion. In general, he defends many positions of P\u0101\u1e47ini which were interpreted somewhat differently in Katyayana.\nMetaphysics as grammatical motivation.\nUnlike P\u0101\u1e47ini's objectives in the Ashtyadhyayi, which is to distinguish correct forms and meanings from incorrect ones (\"shabdaunushasana\"), Patanjali's objectives are more metaphysical. These include the correct recitations of the scriptures (\"Agama\"), maintaining the purity of texts (\"raksha\"), clarifying ambiguity (\"asamdeha\"), and also the pedagogic goal of providing an easier learning mechanism (\"laghu\"). This stronger metaphysical bent has also been indicated by some as one of the unifying themes between the Yoga Sutras and the Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya, although a close examination\nof actual Sanskrit usage by Woods showed no similarities in language or terminology.\nThe text of the \"\" was first critically edited by the 19th-century orientalist Franz Kielhorn, who also developed philological criteria for distinguishing K\u0101ty\u0101yana's \"voice\" from Pata\u00f1jali's. Subsequently, a number of other editions have come out, the 1968 text and translation by S.D. Joshi and J.H.F. Roodbergen often being considered definitive. Regrettably, the latter work is incomplete.\nPatanjali is often stated as having claimed there was a hostility between the orthodox Brahminic (\"Astika\") groups and the heterodox, \"nAstika\" groups (Buddhism, Jainism, and atheists), like that between a mongoose and a snake. Nathan McGovern argues Patanjali never used this mongoose-snake analogy.\nPatanjali also sheds light on contemporary events, commenting on the recent Greek incursion, and also on several tribes that lived in the Northwest regions of the subcontinent.\nPatanjalatantra.\nPatanjali is also the reputed author of a medical text called \"Patanjalah\", also called \"Patanjala\" or \"Patanjalatantra\". This text is quoted in many yoga and health-related Indian texts. Patanjali is called a medical authority in a number of Sanskrit texts such as \"Yogaratnakara\", \"Yogaratnasamuccaya\", \"Padarthavijnana\", \"Cakradatta bhasya\". Some of these quotes are unique to \"Patanjala\", but others are also found in major Hindu medical treatises such as \"Charaka Samhita\" and \"Sushruta Samhita\".\nThere is a fourth scholar also named Patanjali, who likely lived in 8th-century and wrote a commentary on \"Charaka Samhita\" and this text is called \"Carakavarttika\". The two medical scholars named Patanjali may be the same person, but generally accepted to be completely different person than the Patanjali who wrote the Sanskrit grammar classic \"Mahabhasya\".\nLegacy.\nPatanjali is honoured with invocations and shrines in some modern schools of yoga, including Iyengar Yoga and Ashtanga Vinyasa Yoga. The yoga scholar David Gordon White writes that yoga teacher training often includes \"mandatory instruction\" in the \"Yoga Sutra\". White calls this \"curious to say the least\", since the text is in his view essentially irrelevant to \"yoga as it is taught and practiced today\", commenting that the \"Yoga Sutra\" is \"nearly devoid of discussion of postures, stretching, and breathing\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23807", "revid": "1427850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23807", "title": "Pope John XXIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1958 to 1963\nPope John XXIII (born Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli; 25\u00a0November 1881\u00a0\u2013 3 June 1963) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City from 28 October 1958 until his death on 3 June 1963. He is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"John\".\nRoncalli was among 13 children born to Marianna Mazzola and Giovanni Battista Roncalli in a family of sharecroppers who lived in Sotto il Monte, a village in the province of Bergamo, Lombardy. He was ordained to the priesthood on 10\u00a0August 1904 and served in a number of posts, as nuncio in France and a delegate to Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey. In a consistory on 12 January 1953 Pope Pius XII made Roncalli a cardinal as the Cardinal-priest of Santa Prisca in addition to naming him as the Patriarch of Venice. Roncalli was unexpectedly elected pope on 28 October 1958 at age 76 after Pope Pius XII's death. Pope John XXIII surprised those who expected him to be a caretaker pope by calling the historic Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965), the first session opening on 11\u00a0October 1962, which is now his feast.\nJohn XXIII made many passionate speeches during his pontificate. His views on equality were summed up in his statement, \"We were all made in God's image, and thus, we are all Godly alike.\" He made a major impact on the Catholic Church, opening it up to the changes of the Second Vatican Council and by his own dealings with other churches and nations. In Italian politics, he prohibited bishops from interfering with local elections, and he helped the Christian Democracy party to cooperate with the Italian Socialist Party. In international affairs, his engaged in dialogue with the communist countries of Eastern Europe. He especially reached out to the Eastern Orthodox churches.\nHis overall goal was to modernize the Church by emphasizing its pastoral role, and its necessary involvement with affairs of state. He dropped the traditional rule of 70 cardinals, increasing the size to 85. He used the opportunity to name the first cardinals from Africa, Japan, and the Philippines. He promoted ecumenical movements in cooperation with other Christian faiths. In doctrinal matters, he was a traditionalist, but he ended the practice of automatically formulating social and political policies on the basis of old theological propositions.\nHe did not live to see the Second Vatican Council to completion. In September 1962, he was diagnosed with stomach cancer and died eight months later on 3 June 1963. His cause for canonization was opened on 18 November 1965 by his successor, Pope Paul VI, who declared him a Servant of God. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 2000. On 5\u00a0July 2013, Pope Francis \u2013 bypassing the traditionally required second miracle \u2013 declared John XXIII a saint, based on his virtuous, model lifestyle, and because of the good which had come from his opening of the Second Vatican Council. He was canonized alongside Pope John Paul II himself on 27 April 2014. John XXIII today is affectionately known as \"the Good Pope\" ().\nEarly life.\nAngelo Giuseppe Roncalli was born on 25 November 1881 in Sotto il Monte, a small country village in the Bergamo province of the Lombardy region of Italy. He was the eldest son of Giovanni Battista Roncalli (1854\u20131935) and his wife Marianna Giulia Mazzola (1855\u20131939), and fourth in a family of thirteen. His siblings were:\nHis family worked as sharecroppers, as did most of the people of Sotto il Monte \u2013 a striking contrast to that of his predecessor, Eugenio Pacelli (Pope Pius XII), who came from a family established in senior roles in the Papal administration. Roncalli was nonetheless a descendant of an Italian noble family, albeit from a secondary and impoverished branch; \"(he) derived from no mean origins but from worthy and respected folk who can be traced right back to the beginning of the fifteenth century.\" The Roncallis maintained a vineyard and cornfields and kept cattle.\nIn 1889, Roncalli received both his First Communion and Confirmation at the age of 8.\nOn 1 March 1896, Luigi Isacchi, the spiritual director of his seminary, enrolled him into the Secular Franciscan Order. He professed his vows as a member of that order on 23 May 1897.\nIn 1904, Roncalli completed his doctorate in theology and was ordained a priest in the Church of Santa Maria in Montesanto in Piazza del Popolo in Rome on 10 August. Shortly after that, while still in Rome, Roncalli was taken to Saint Peter's Basilica to meet Pope Pius X. After this, he returned to his town to celebrate Mass for feast of the Assumption.\nPriesthood.\nIn 1905, Giacomo Radini-Tedeschi, the new Bishop of Bergamo, appointed Roncalli as his secretary. Roncalli worked for Radini-Tedeschi until the bishop's death on 22\u00a0August 1914, two days after the death of Pius X, Radini-Tedeschi's last words to Roncalli were \"Angelo, pray for peace\". The death of Radini-Tedeschi had a deep effect on Roncalli. During this period Roncalli was also a lecturer in the diocesan seminary in Bergamo.\nDuring World War I, Roncalli was drafted into the Royal Italian Army as a sergeant, serving in the medical corps as a stretcher-bearer and as a chaplain. After being honorably discharged from the army in early 1919, he was named spiritual director of the seminary. On 7 May 1921, Roncalli was appointed a Domestic Prelate of His Holiness, which gave him the title of \"Monsignor\". On 6 November, he travelled to Rome where he met the Pope. After their meeting, Pope Benedict XV appointed him as the Italian president of the Society for the Propagation of the Faith. Roncalli would recall Benedict XV as being the most sympathetic of the popes he had met.\nEpiscopate.\nIn February 1925, the Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Gasparri summoned him to the Vatican and informed him of Pope Pius XI's decision to appoint him the Apostolic Visitor to Bulgaria (1925\u20131935). On 3 March, Pius XI also appointed him titular archbishop of Areopolis, Jordan. Roncalli was initially reluctant about a mission to Bulgaria, but he soon relented. His nomination as apostolic visitor was made official on 19 March. Roncalli was consecrated a bishop by Giovanni Tacci Porcelli in the church of San Carlo al Corso in Rome, on 25 March 1925.\nOn 30 November 1934, he was appointed Apostolic Delegate to Turkey and Greece and titular archbishop of Mesembria, Bulgaria. He became known in Turkey's predominantly Muslim society as \"the Turcophile Pope\". Roncalli took up this post in 1935 and used his office to help the Jewish underground in saving thousands of refugees in Europe, leading some to consider him to be a Righteous Gentile (see Pope John XXIII and Judaism). In October 1935, he led Bulgarian pilgrims to Rome and introduced them to Pope Pius XI on 14 October.\nIn February 1939, he received news from his sisters that his mother was dying. On 10 February 1939, Pope Pius XI died. Roncalli was unable to see his mother for the end as the death of a pontiff meant that he would have to stay at his post until the election of a new pontiff: she died on 20 February 1939, during the nine days of mourning for the late Pius XI. He was sent a letter by Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli, and Roncalli later recalled that it was probably the last letter Pacelli sent until his election as Pope Pius XII on 2 March 1939. Roncalli expressed happiness that Pacelli was elected and, on the radio, listened to the coronation of the new pontiff.\nRoncalli remained in Bulgaria at the time that World War II commenced, optimistically writing in his journal in April 1939, \"I don't believe we will have a war.\" When the war began, he was in Rome, meeting with Pope Pius XII on 5 September 1939. In 1940, Roncalli was asked by the Vatican to devote more of his time to Greece; therefore, he made several visits in January and May of that year. He maintained close relations with the Jews and also intervened to convince Bulgaria's King Boris III to cancel deportations of Greek Jews during the Nazi occupation of Greece.\nEfforts during the Holocaust.\nAs nuncio, Roncalli made efforts during the Holocaust in World War II to save refugees, mostly Jews, from the Nazis. Among his efforts were:\nIn 1965, the \"Catholic Herald\" newspaper quoted Pope John XXIII as saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are conscious today that many, many centuries of blindness have cloaked our eyes so that we can no longer see the beauty of Thy chosen people nor recognise in their faces the features of our privileged brethren. We realize that the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads. Across the centuries our brother Abel has lain in blood which we drew, or shed tears we caused by forgetting Thy love. Forgive us for the curse we falsely attached to their name as Jews. Forgive us for crucifying Thee a second time in their flesh. For we know not what we did.\nOn 7 September 2000, the International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation launched the International Campaign for the Acknowledgement of the humanitarian actions undertaken by Vatican Nuncio Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli for people, most of whom were Jewish, persecuted by the Nazi regime. The launching took place at the Permanent Observation Mission of the Vatican to the United Nations, in the presence of Vatican State Secretary Cardinal Angelo Sodano.\nThe International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation has carried out exhaustive historical research related to different events connected with interventions of Nuncio Roncalli in favour of Jewish refugees during the Holocaust. As of September 2000 three reports have been published compiling different studies and materials of historical research about the humanitarian actions carried out by Roncalli when he was nuncio.\nIn 2011, the International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation submitted a massive file (the Roncalli Dossier) to Yad Vashem, with a strong petition and recommendation to bestow upon him the title of Righteous among the Nations.\nRelations with Israel.\nAfter 1944, he played an active role in gaining Catholic Church support for the establishment of the State of Israel. His support for Zionism, and the establishment of Israel was the result of his cultural and religious openness toward other faiths and cultures, and especially concern with the fate of Jews after the war. He was one of the Vatican's most sympathetic diplomats toward Jewish immigration to Palestine, which he saw as a humanitarian issue, and not a matter of biblical theology.\nNuncio.\nOn 22 December 1944, during World War II, Pope Pius XII named Roncalli to be the new Apostolic Nuncio to recently liberated France. In this capacity he had to negotiate the retirement of bishops who had collaborated with the German occupying power.\nRoncalli was chosen among several other candidates, one of whom was Archbishop Giuseppe Fietta. Roncalli met with Domenico Tardini to discuss his new appointment, and their conversation suggested that Tardini did not approve of it. One curial prelate referred to Roncalli as an \"old fogey\" while speaking with a journalist.\nRoncalli left Ankara on 27 December 1944 on a series of short-haul flights that took him to several places, such as Beirut, Cairo and Naples. He ventured to Rome on 28 December and met with both Tardini and his friend Giovanni Battista Montini. He left for France the next day to commence his newest role. In November 1948, he went for his yearly retreat to the En-Calcat Abbey in Southern France.\nCardinal.\nRoncalli received a message from Montini on 14 November 1952 asking him if he would want to become the new Patriarch of Venice in light of the nearing death of Carlo Agostini. Furthermore, Montini told him via letter on 29 November 1952 that Pius XII had decided to raise him to the cardinalate. Roncalli knew that he would be appointed to lead the patriarchy of Venice due to the death of Agostini, who was to have been raised to the rank of cardinal.\nOn 12 January 1953, he was appointed Patriarch of Venice and raised to the rank of Cardinal-Priest of Santa Prisca by Pope Pius XII. Before departing Paris he invited to dinner the eight men who had served as prime minister during Roncalli's term as nuncio. Roncalli left France for Venice on 23 February 1953, stopping briefly in Milan and then to Rome. On 15 March 1953, he took possession of his new diocese in Venice. As a sign of his esteem, the President of France, Vincent Auriol, claimed the ancient privilege possessed by French monarchs and bestowed the red biretta on Roncalli at a ceremony in the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace. It was around this time that he, with the aid of Monsignor Bruno Heim, formed his coat of arms with a lion of Saint Mark on a white ground. Auriol also awarded Roncalli three months later with the award of Commander of the Legion of Honour.\nRoncalli decided to live on the second floor of the residence reserved for the patriarch, choosing not to live in the first-floor room once resided in by Giuseppe Melchiorre Sarto, who later became Pope Pius X. On 29 May 1954, the late Pius X was canonized, and Roncalli ensured that the late pontiff's patriarchal room was remodeled into a 1903 (the year of the new saint's papal election) look in his honor. With Pius X's few surviving relatives, Roncalli celebrated a Mass in his honor.\nHis sister Ancilla would soon be diagnosed with stomach cancer in the early 1950s. Roncalli's last letter to her was dated 8 November 1953 where he promised to visit her within the next week. He could not keep that promise, as Ancilla died on 11 November 1953 at the time when he was consecrating a new church in Venice. He attended her funeral back in his hometown. In his will around this time, he mentioned that he wished to be buried in the crypt of St Mark's Basilica in Venice with some of his predecessors rather than with the family in Sotto il Monte.\nIn 1958, he held a diocesan synod.\nPapacy.\nPapal election.\nFollowing the death of Pope Pius XII on 9 October 1958, Roncalli watched the live funeral on his last full day in Venice on 11 October. His journal was specifically concerned with the funeral and the abused state of the late pontiff's corpse. Roncalli left Venice for the conclave in Rome well aware that he was , and after eleven ballots, was elected to succeed the late Pius XII, so it came as no surprise to him, though he had arrived at the Vatican with a return train ticket to Venice.\nMany had considered Giovanni Battista Montini, the Archbishop of Milan, a possible candidate, but, although he was the archbishop of one of the most ancient and prominent sees in Italy, he had not yet been made a cardinal. Though his absence from the 1958 conclave did not make him ineligible \u2013 under Canon Law any Catholic male who is capable of receiving priestly ordination and episcopal consecration may be elected \u2013 the College of Cardinals usually chose the new pontiff from among the Cardinals who attend the papal conclave. At the time, as opposed to modern practice, the participating Cardinals did not have to be below age 80 to vote, there were few Eastern-rite Cardinals, and some Cardinals were just priests at the time of their elevation.\nRoncalli was summoned to the final ballot of the conclave at 4:00pm. He was elected pope at 4:30pm with a total of 38 votes. After the long pontificate of Pope Pius XII, the cardinals chose a man who \u2013 it was presumed because of his advanced age \u2013 would be a short-term or \"stop-gap\" pope. Upon his election, Cardinal Eug\u00e8ne Tisserant asked him the ritual questions of whether he would accept and, if so, what name he would take for himself. Roncalli gave the first of his many surprises when he chose \"John\" as his papal name. Roncalli's exact words were, \"I will be called John.\" This was the first time in over 500 years that this name had been chosen; previous popes had avoided its use since the time of the Antipope John XXIII during the Western Schism several centuries before.\nOn the choice of his papal name, Pope John XXIII said to the cardinals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I will be called John... a name sweet to us because it is the name of our father, dear to us because it is the name of the humble parish church where we were baptized, the solemn name of numberless cathedrals scattered throughout the world, including our own basilica [St. John Lateran]. Twenty-two Johns of indisputable legitimacy have [been Pope], and almost all had a brief pontificate. We have preferred to hide the smallness of our name behind this magnificent succession of Roman Pontiffs.\nUpon his choosing the name, there was some confusion as to whether he would be known as John XXIII or John XXIV; in response, he declared that he was John XXIII, thus affirming the antipapal status of antipope John XXIII.\nBefore this antipope, the most recent popes called John had been John XXII (1316\u20131334) and John XXI (1276\u20131277). No Pope John XX existed, owing to confusion caused by medieval historians misreading the Liber Pontificalis to refer to another Pope John between John XIV and John XV.\nAfter his election, he confided in Cardinal Maurice Feltin that he had chosen the name \"in memory of France and in the memory of John XXII who continued the history of the papacy in France.\"\nAfter he answered the two ritual questions, the traditional Habemus Papam announcement was delivered by Cardinal Nicola Canali to the people at 6:08pm, an exact hour after the white smoke appeared. A short while later, he appeared on the balcony and gave his first Urbi et Orbi blessing to the crowds of the faithful below in Saint Peter's Square. That same night, he appointed Domenico Tardini as his Cardinal Secretary of State. Of the three cassocks prepared for whoever the new pope was, even the largest was not enough to fit his obese frame, which had to be let out in certain places and only to be held together with great effort by safety pins. When he first saw himself in the mirror in his new vestments, he said with an appraising and critical look, \"This man will be a disaster on television!\" while later saying he felt his first appearance before the globe was as if he were a \"newborn babe in swaddling clothes.\"\nHis coronation took place on 4 November 1958, on the feast of Saint Charles Borromeo, in the central loggia of the Vatican. He was crowned with the 1877 Palatine Tiara. His coronation lasted the traditional five hours.\nIn John XXIII's first consistory on 15 December of that same year, Montini was created a cardinal and would become John XXIII's successor in 1963, taking the name of Paul VI. That consistory was notable for being the first to expand the Sacred College membership beyond the then-traditional 70.\nFollowing his election, the new pope told the tale of how, in his first weeks, he was walking when he heard a woman exclaim in a loud voice: \"My God, he's so fat!\" The new pope casually remarked: \"Madame, the holy conclave isn't exactly a beauty contest!\"\nVisits around Rome.\nOn 25 December 1958, he became the first pope since 1870 to make pastoral visits in his Diocese of Rome, when he visited children infected with polio at the Bambino Ges\u00f9 Hospital and then visited Santo Spirito Hospital. The following day, he visited Rome's Regina Coeli prison, where he told the inmates: \"You could not come to me, so I came to you.\" These gestures created a sensation, and he wrote in his diary: \"... great astonishment in the Roman, Italian and international press. I was hemmed in on all sides: authorities, photographers, prisoners, warders...\"\nDuring these visits, John XXIII put aside the normal papal use of the formal \"we\" when referring to himself, such as when he visited a reformatory school for juvenile delinquents in Rome telling them \"I have wanted to come here for some time\". The media noticed this and reported that \"He talked to the youths in their own language.\"\n\"Ostpolitik\" and Eastern Europe.\nIn international affairs, his \"Ostpolitik\" [\"Eastern policy\"] engaged in dialogue with the Communist countries of Eastern Europe. He worked to reconcile the Vatican with the Russian Orthodox Church to settle tensions between the local churches. The Second Vatican Council did not condemn Communism and did not even mention it, in what some have called a secret agreement between the Holy See and the Soviet Union. In \"Pacem in terris,\" John XXIII also sought to prevent nuclear war and tried to improve relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. He began a policy of dialogue with Soviet leaders in order to seek conditions in which Eastern Catholics could find relief from persecution.\nRelations with Jews.\nPope John XXIII made several gestures to demonstrate his sympathetic feelings for the Jewish community. He sent a message to the Chief Rabbi of Israel announcing his election, even though the Holy See did not recognize the State of Israel. On 17 October 1960, he met with a delegation of 130 American Jews associated with the United Jewish Appeal. He greeted them with words from the Bible, \"I am Joseph your brother,\" to establish that he and they were starting a new relationship despite what may have passed between Catholics and Jews before, as Joseph reconciled with his brothers in Book of Genesis. On 17 March 1962, he stopped his car when he saw people exiting the synagogue in Rome and blessed them in the morning. A rabbi described the scene: \"After a moment of understandable bewilderment, the Jews surrounded him and applauded him enthusiastically. It was in fact the first time in history that a pope had blessed Jews and it was perhaps the first real gesture of reconciliation.\"\nOne of the notable acts of Pope John XXIII, in 1960, was to eliminate the description of Jews as \"perfidius\" (Latin for \"perfidious\" or \"faithless\") in the prayer for the conversion of the Jews in the Good Friday liturgy. He interrupted the first Good Friday liturgy in his pontificate to address this issue when he first heard a celebrant refer to the Jews with that word. He also made a confession for the Church for antisemitism through the centuries. Also, in 1960, John XXIII modified the language used in the baptism of adults, removing the warning against returning to one's earlier religious faith, with texts available for a pagan, Muslim, Jew, and heretical Christian. In the case of a Jewish convert the text was: \"You should abhor Hebrew perfidy and reject Hebrew superstition.\" The modification was made because Pope John wanted \"to emphasize everything that unites and to remove anything that unduly divides believers in God\".\nWhile Vatican II was being held, John XXIII tasked Cardinal Augustin Bea with creating several important documents that pertained to reconciliation with Jewish people. The declaration \"Nostra aetate\" is generally thought to have been influenced by Pope John's teachings.\nThese words and actions endeared him to the Jewish people. The Chief Rabbi of Israel, Yitzhak Nissim, later mourned his death as \"A loss that saddens all those who seek peace and human love.\"\nCalling the Council.\nFar from being a mere \"stopgap\" pope, to great excitement, John XXIII called for an ecumenical council fewer than 90 years after the First Vatican Council (Vatican I's predecessor, the Council of Trent, had been held in the 16th century). This decision was announced on 25 January 1959 at the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls. Cardinal Giovanni Battista Montini, who later became Pope Paul VI, remarked to Giulio Bevilacqua that \"this holy old boy doesn't realize what a hornet's nest he's stirring up.\" From the Second Vatican Council came changes that reshaped the face of Catholicism: a comprehensively revised liturgy, a stronger emphasis on ecumenism, and a new approach to the world.\nPrior to the first session of the council, John XXIII visited Assisi and Loreto on 4 October 1962 to pray for the new upcoming council as well as to mark the feast day of Saint Francis of Assisi. He was the first pope to travel outside Rome since Pope Pius IX. Along the way, there were several halts at Orte, Narni, Terni, Spoleto, Foligno, Fabriano, Iesi, Falconara Marittima and Ancona where the crowds greeted him.\nMoral and doctrinal theology.\nIn matters of doctrinal theology, John XXIII has been considered to be a traditionalist. Stravinskas notes his \"determination ... to ensure doctrinal fidelity\" with past church teaching while ensuring that there was a contemporary tone in how such teaching was communicated.\nContraception.\nIn 1963, John XXIII established a commission of six non-theologians to investigate questions of birth control.\nHuman rights.\nJohn XXIII was an advocate for human rights, including the rights of the unborn and the elderly. He wrote about human rights in his encyclical \"Pacem in terris\". He wrote, \"Man has the right to live. He has the right to bodily integrity and to the means necessary for the proper development of life, particularly food, clothing, shelter, medical care, rest, and, finally, the necessary social services. In consequence, he has the right to be looked after in the event of ill health; disability stemming from his work; widowhood; old age; enforced unemployment; or whenever through no fault of his own he is deprived of the means of livelihood.\"\nDivorce.\nJohn XXIII said that human life is transmitted through the family, which is founded on the sacrament of marriage and is both one and indissoluble as a union in God, therefore, it is against the teachings of the Church for a married couple to divorce.\nPope John XXIII and papal ceremonial.\nPope John XXIII was the last pope to use full papal ceremony, some of which was abolished after Vatican II, while the rest fell into disuse. His papal coronation ran for the traditional five hours (Pope Paul\u00a0VI, by contrast, opted for a shorter ceremony, while later popes declined to be crowned). Pope John XXIII, like his predecessor Pius XII, chose to have the coronation itself take place on the balcony of St. Peter's Basilica, in view of the crowds assembled in Saint Peter's Square below.\nHe wore a number of papal tiaras during his papacy. On the most formal of occasions, he would don the 1877 Palatine tiara he received at his coronation, but on other occasions, he used the 1922 tiara of Pope Pius XI, which was used so often that it was associated with him quite strongly. The people of Bergamo gave him an expensive silver tiara, but he requested that the number of jewels used be halved and that the money be given to the poor.\nLiturgical reform.\nMaintaining continuity with his predecessors, John XXIII continued the gradual reform of the Roman liturgy and published changes that resulted in the 1962 Roman Missal, the last typical edition containing the Tridentine Mass codified in 1570 by Pope Pius V after the Council of Trent. It inserted into the canon of the Mass the name of Saint Joseph, the first change for centuries in the canon of the Mass. Many traditionalist Catholics, today, continue to use the 1962 Roman Missal, to celebrate Mass.\nBeatifications and canonization ceremonies.\nJohn XXIII beatified four individuals in his reign: Elena Guerra (26 April 1959), Innocenzo da Berzo (12 November 1961), Elizabeth Ann Seton (17 March 1963) and Luigi Maria Palazzolo (19 March 1963).\nHe also canonized a small number of individuals: he canonized Charles of Sezze and Joaquina Vedruna de Mas on 12 April 1959, Gregorio Barbarigo on 26 May 1960, Juan de Ribera on 12 June 1960, Maria Bertilla Boscardin on 11 May 1961, Martin de Porres on 6 May 1962, and Antonio Maria Pucci, Francis Mary of Camporosso and Peter Julian Eymard on 9 December 1962. His final canonization was that of Vincent Pallotti on 20 January 1963.\nDoctor of the Church.\nJohn XXIII proclaimed Saint Lawrence of Brindisi as a Doctor of the Church on 19 March 1959 and conferred upon him the title \"Doctor apostolicus\" (\"Apostolic Doctor\").\nRelationship with Padre Pio.\nAccording to the Italian historian S\u00e9rgio Luzzatto, the relationship between Pope John XXIII and Pio of Pietrelcina (or \"Padre Pio\") was controversial and characterized by skepticism and criticism of Padre Pio made by John XXIII. He also accused Padre Pio of being a fraud and a lost soul who had an almost medieval faith and incorrect relationships with several women.\nHowever, another source stated that John XXIII's attitude towards Padre Pio was generally very positive but that, due to the wrong and negative information he received, John XXIII became quite skeptical and critical. However, according to this same source, shortly before his death, the Pope confessed that he had been wrongly informed and recognized the holiness of Padre Pio, and even asked Padre Pio to pray for him.\nConsistories.\nThe pope created 52 cardinals in five consistories, including his successor who would become Pope Paul VI. John XXIII decided to expand the size of the College of Cardinals beyond its limit of seventy that Pope Sixtus V established in 1586. The pope also reserved three additional cardinals \"in pectore\" in 1960 which meant he secretly named cardinals without revealing their identities. The pope died before he could reveal these names, therefore meaning that these appointments were never legitimized. John XXIII also sought to further internationalize the College of Cardinals like Pius XII attempted, while also naming the first-ever cardinals from countries such as Japan (Peter Doi) and Tanzania (Laurean Rugambwa). Unlike his predecessor, John XXIII held frequent consistories in a marked departure from Pius XII, returning to the frequency seen in the earlier 20th century.\nJohn XXIII also issued a rule in 1962 mandating that all cardinals should be bishops; he himself ordained as bishops the twelve non-bishop cardinals in April 1962.\nAccording to a June 2007 interview, Loris Francesco Capovilla revealed that Francesco Lardone was one of the cardinals that John XXIII had reserved \"in pectore\" in 1960. According to Capovilla, Lardone's precarious position in Turkey meant that he would have to abandon his position if he were named to the cardinalate. Lardone was of the opinion that he could assist bishops in the Iron Curtain from his posting which he would be unable to do if he was relocated to accept a position in Rome. In November 1960, in preparation for the next consistory, John XXIII offered the cardinalate to Diego Venini who declined the offer.\nVatican II: The first session.\nOn 11 October 1962, the first session of the Second Vatican Council was held in the Vatican. He gave the Gaudet Mater Ecclesia speech, which served as the opening address for the council. The day consisted of electing members for several council commissions that would work on the issues presented in the council. On the night following the conclusion of the first session, the people in Saint Peter's Square chanted and yelled with the objective of having John XXIII appear at the window to address them.\nPope John XXIII appeared at the window and delivered a speech to the people below, and told them to return home and hug their children, telling them that the hug came from the pope. This speech would later become known as the so-called 'Speech of the Moon, as John pointed to the moon, saying it was looking down on proceedings.'\nThe first session ended in a solemn ceremony on 8 December 1962, with the next session scheduled to occur in 1963 from 12 May to 29 June \u2013 this was announced on 12 November 1962. John XXIII's closing speech made subtle references to Pope Pius IX, and he had expressed the desire to see Pius IX beatified and eventually canonized. In his journal in 1959, during a spiritual retreat, John XXIII made this remark: \"I always think of Pius IX of holy and glorious memory, and by imitating him in his sacrifices, I would like to be worthy to celebrate his canonization.\"\nFinal months and death.\nOn 23 September 1962, Pope John XXIII was diagnosed with stomach cancer. The diagnosis, which was kept from the public, followed nearly eight months of occasional stomach hemorrhages and reduced the pontiff's appearances. Looking pale and drawn during these events, he gave a hint to his ultimate fate in April 1963, when he said to visitors, \"That which happens to all men perhaps will happen soon to the Pope who speaks to you today.\"\nPope John XXIII offered to mediate between US President John F. Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev during the Cuban Missile Crisis in October 1962. Both men applauded the pope for his deep commitment to peace. Khrushchev would later send a message via Norman Cousins and the letter expressed his best wishes for the pontiff's ailing health. John XXIII personally typed and sent a message back to him, thanking him for his letter. Cousins, meanwhile, traveled to New York City and ensured that John would become \"Time\" magazine's 'Man of the Year.' John XXIII became the first Pope to receive the title, followed by John Paul II in 1994 and Francis in 2013.\nOn 10 February 1963, John XXIII officially opened the process of beatification for the late Cardinal Andrea Carlo Ferrari, Archbishop of Milan from 1894 to 1921. This conferred upon him the title of Servant of God.\nOn 7 March 1963, the feast of the university's patron Saint Thomas Aquinas, Pope John XXIII visited the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas \"Angelicum\" and with the \"motu proprio\" \"Dominicanus Ordo\", raised the \"Angelicum\" to the rank of Pontifical University. Thereafter, it would be known as the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas in the city.\nOn 10 May 1963, John XXIII received the Balzan Prize in private at the Vatican but deflected achievements of himself to the five popes of his lifetime, Pope Leo XIII to Pius XII. On 11 May, the Italian President Antonio Segni officially awarded Pope John XXIII with the Balzan Prize for his engagement for peace. While in the car en route to the official ceremony, he suffered great stomach pains but insisted on meeting with Segni to receive the award in the Quirinal Palace, refusing to do so within the Vatican. He stated that it would have been an insult to honor a pontiff on the remains of the crucified Saint Peter. It was the pope's last public appearance.\nOn 25 May 1963, the pope suffered another hemorrhage and required several blood transfusions, but cancer had perforated the stomach wall, and peritonitis soon set in. The doctors conferred in a decision regarding this matter, and John XXIII's aide Loris F. Capovilla broke the news to him, saying that the cancer had done its work and nothing could be done for him. Around this time, his remaining siblings arrived to be with him. By 31 May, it had become clear that the cancer had overcome the resistance of John XXIII \u2013 it had left him confined to his bed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At 11\u00a0am Petrus Canisius van Lierde as Cardinal Secretary of State and Papal Sacristan was at the bedside of the dying pope, ready to anoint him. The pope began to speak for the last time: \"I had the great grace to be born into a Christian family, modest and poor, but with the fear of the Lord. My time on Earth is drawing to a close. But Christ lives on and continues his work in the Church. Souls, souls, \"ut omnes unum sint\".\" Van Lierde then anointed his eyes, ears, mouth, hands, and feet. Overcome by emotion, van Lierde forgot the right order of anointing. John XXIII gently helped him before bidding those present a last farewell.\u2014\u200a\nJohn XXIII died of peritonitis caused by a perforated stomach at 19:49 local time on 3 June 1963 at the age of 81, ending a historic pontificate of four years and seven months. He died just as a Mass for him finished in Saint Peter's Square below, celebrated by Luigi Traglia. Then, the room was illuminated, thus informing the people of what had happened. The Italian government announced three days of mourning with flags half-masted and the closure of offices and schools. Spain announced ten days of mourning with flags half-masted; The Philippines announced nine days of mourning with flags half-masted; Brazil declared five days of mourning; Portugal, Paraguay and Guatemala announced three days of mourning; the Republic of the Congo declared one day of mourning. He was buried on 6 June in the Vatican Grottoes. Two wreaths, placed on the two sides of his tomb, were donated by the prisoners of the Regina Coeli prison and the Mantova jail in Verona. On 22 June 1963, one day after his friend and successor Pope Paul VI was elected, the latter prayed at his tomb. John XXIII's tomb is located near the tombs of both Pope Pius X and Pope John Paul II.\nBeatification and canonization.\nHe was known affectionately as the \"Good Pope\". His cause for canonization was opened under Pope Paul VI during the final session of the Second Vatican Council on 18 November 1965, along with the cause of Pope Pius XII. On 3 September 2000, John XXIII was declared \"Blessed\" alongside Pope Pius IX by Pope John Paul II, the penultimate step on the road to sainthood, after a miracle of curing an ill woman was discovered. He was the first pope since Pope Pius X to receive this honour. Following his beatification, his body was moved from its original burial place in the grottoes below the Vatican to the altar of St. Jerome and displayed for the veneration of the faithful.\nAt the time, the body was observed to be extremely well preserved\u00a0\u2013 a condition which the Church ascribes to embalming and the lack of airflow in his sealed triple coffin rather than a miracle. When John XXIII's body was moved in 2001, it was once again treated to prevent deterioration. The original vault above the floor was removed and a new one built beneath the ground; it was here that the body of Pope John Paul II was entombed from 9 April 2005 to April 2011, before being moved for his beatification on 1 May 2011. The tomb was ultimately occupied by Benedict XVI following his death in 2022.\nThe 50th anniversary of his death was celebrated on 3 June 2013 by Pope Francis, who visited his tomb and prayed there, then addressed the gathered crowd and spoke about the late pope. The people who gathered there at the tomb were from Bergamo, the province where the late pope came from. A month later, on 5\u00a0July 2013, Francis approved Pope John XXIII for canonization, along with Pope John Paul II, without the traditional second miracle required. Instead, Francis based this decision on John XXIII's merits for the Second Vatican Council. On Sunday, 27 April 2014, John XXIII and Pope John Paul II were declared saints on Divine Mercy Sunday.\nThe date assigned for the liturgical celebration of John XXIII is not 3 June, the anniversary of his death, as would be usual (due to the obligatory memorial of saints Charles Lwanga and his companion martyrs), but 11 October, the anniversary of his opening of the Second Vatican Council. He is also commemorated in the Anglican Church of Canada, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and some other organizations with a feast day of 3 June or 4 June.\nTributes.\nOn 3 December 1963, US President Lyndon B. Johnson posthumously awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United States' highest civilian award, in recognition of the good relationship between Pope John XXIII and the United States of America. The citation for the medal reads:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"His Holiness Pope John XXIII, dedicated servant of God. He brought to all citizens of the planet a heightened sense of the dignity of the individual, of the brotherhood of man, and of the common duty to build an environment of peace for all humankind.\"\nPaul VI wrote in his first encyclical letter, \"Ecclesiam Suam\", that John had \"labored with masterly assurance to bring divine truths as far as may be within the reach of the experience and understanding of modern man.\"\nIn 1965, Harry Saltzman produced a biography of Pope John XXIII, called \"A Man Named John\", based on the diary he kept between the ages of 14 and 18, documenting his lifelong concern for tolerance, for the underprivileged, and for world peace. His character is played by Rod Steiger.\nLegacy.\nFrom his teens, when he entered the seminary, he maintained a diary of spiritual reflections that was subsequently published as the \"Journal of a Soul.\" The collection of writings charts Roncalli's goals and his efforts as a young man to \"grow in holiness\" and continues after his election to the papacy; it remains widely read.\nThe opening titles of Pier Paolo Pasolini's film \"The Gospel According to St. Matthew\" (1964) dedicate the film to the memory of John XXIII.\nInstitutions named after John XXIII include: John XXIII College (Perth) in Western Australia; Escola Estadual de Ensino M\u00e9dio Cardeal Roncalli, in Frederico Westphalen, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; Pope John Senior High School and Junior Seminary in Koforidua, Ghana; the Catholic Learning Community of John XXIII, a primary school in Sydney; Roncalli College, located in Timaru, New Zealand; Roncalli High Schools in Indianapolis, Indiana, Aberdeen, South Dakota, Manitowoc, Wisconsin, Sparta, New Jersey and Omaha, Nebraska; Saint John XXIII College Preparatory in Katy, Texas, John XXIII School in India; Jean-XXIII High School in Montr\u00e9al, Qu\u00e9bec; St. John XXIII Catholic School in Kingston, Ontario, St. John XXIII College Seminary in Pal-ing, Malaybalay City, Bukidnon in the Philippines, and The Diocese of St John XXIII - Reformed Catholic Church.\nParishes named after John XXIII in the US are located in Evanston, Illinois; Fort Collins, Colorado; Fort Myers, Florida; West Seneca, New York; Perrysburg, Ohio; Canal Winchester, Ohio; Knoxville, Tennessee; and Tacoma, Washington. Since 2001, there is a John XXIII parish in Dubrava, Zagreb in Croatia. There is a statue of Pope John XXIII in Istanbul, Turkey.\nDuring an event held on 6 May 2019 in Sofia (Bulgaria), Pope Francis invoked John XXIII's encyclical \"Pacem in terris\" as a \"code of conduct\" for peace between Catholics and other religions.\nControversies.\nResponse to sexual abuse.\nOn 17 August 2003, \"The Guardian\", a British newspaper, published a confidential document of the Church, to which it had access, dated 16 March 1962, instructing bishops around the world to cover up cases of sexual abuse by clergy, or they would run the risk of being excommunicated from the Church. The document, bearing the seal of Pope John XXIII, is named \"Crimen sollicitationis\", translated to \"On the Manner of Proceeding in Cases of the Crime of Solicitation\" \nIn the 69-page document, victims are asked to take an oath of secrecy when making a complaint to Church officials. It states that the instructions must 'be diligently stored in the secret archives of the [Vatican] Curia as strictly confidential. The theme focuses on sexual abuse initiated as part of the confessional relationship between a priest and a member of his congregation, but also covers aspects related to the \"indescribable crime\" with young people of both sexes and sex with animals. Bishops are instructed to investigate these cases 'in the most secret way [...] contained by a perpetual silence [...] and all must observe the strictest secret that is commonly considered a secret of the Holy Office, under penalty of excommunication. \nThe document was valid until 2001, when a new set of procedures was published by the Vatican to investigate and judge particularly serious canonical crimes, including certain sexual crimes committed by members of the clergy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23808", "revid": "46342673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23808", "title": "Pope Pius XII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1939 to 1958\nPope Pius XII (; born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli; 2 March 1876\u00a0\u2013 9 October 1958) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City from 2 March 1939 until his death on 9 October 1958. He is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Pius\".\nThe papacy of Pius\u00a0XII was long, even by modern standards; it lasted almost 20 years, and spanned a consequential fifth of the 20th century. Pius was a diplomat pope during the destruction wrought by the Second World War, the recovery and rebuilding which followed, the beginning of the Cold War, and the early building of a new international geopolitical order, which aimed to protect human rights and maintain global peace through the establishment of international rules and institutions (such as the United Nations). Born, raised, educated, ordained, and resident for most of his life in Rome, his work in the Roman Curia\u2014as a priest, then bishop, then cardinal\u2014was extensive. He served as secretary of the Vatican's diplomatic Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs, papal nuncio to Germany, Camerlengo of the Apostolic Chamber, and Cardinal Secretary of State for the Holy See, in which capacity he worked to conclude treaties with various European and Latin American nations, including the \"Reichskonkordat\" treaty with Nazi Germany.\nWhile the Vatican was officially neutral during the Second World War, the \"Reichskonkordat\" and Pius' leadership of the Catholic Church during the war remain the subject of controversy\u2014including allegations of public silence and inaction concerning the fate of the Jews. Pius employed diplomacy to aid the victims of the Nazis during the war and, by directing the church to provide discreet aid to Jews and others, saved thousands of lives. Pius maintained links to the German resistance, and shared intelligence with the Allies. His strong public condemnation of genocide was considered inadequate by the Allied Powers, while the Nazis viewed him as an Allied sympathizer who had dishonoured his policy of Vatican neutrality.\nDuring his papacy, the Catholic Church issued the Decree against Communism, declaring that Catholics who profess the atheistic and materialist doctrines of communism are to be excommunicated as apostates from the Christian faith. The church experienced severe persecution and mass deportations of Catholic clergy in the Eastern Bloc. He explicitly invoked \"ex cathedra\" papal infallibility with the dogma of the Assumption of Mary in his Apostolic constitution . His forty-one encyclicals include \"Mystici Corporis Christi\", on the Church as the Mystical Body of Christ; \"Mediator Dei\" on liturgy reform; and \"Humani generis\", in which he instructed theologians to adhere to episcopal teaching and allowed that the human body might have evolved from earlier forms. He removed, by additional international cardinal appointments, the Italian majority in the College of Cardinals in 1946.\nAfter he died in 1958, Pope Pius\u00a0XII was succeeded by John XXIII. In the process towards sainthood, his cause for canonization was opened on 18 November 1965 by Paul VI during the final session of the Second Vatican Council. He was made a Servant of God (the first threshold step towards sainthood) by John Paul II in 1990, and Benedict XVI declared Pius XII Venerable (the second step) on 19 December 2009.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nEugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli was born on the second day of Lent, 2 March 1876, in Rome into an upper-class family of intense Catholic piety with a history of ties to the papacy (the \"Black Nobility\"). His parents were Filippo Pacelli (1837\u20131916) and Virginia (n\u00e9e Graziosi) Pacelli (1844\u20131920). His grandfather Marcantonio Pacelli had been Under-Secretary in the Papal Ministry of Finances and then Secretary of the Interior under Pope Pius IX from 1851 to 1870 and helped found the Vatican's newspaper, \"L'Osservatore Romano\" in 1861. His cousin, Ernesto Pacelli, was a key financial advisor to Pope Leo XIII; his father, Filippo Pacelli, a Franciscan tertiary, was the dean of the Roman Rota; and his brother, Francesco Pacelli, became a lay canon lawyer and the legal advisor to Pope Pius XI, in which role he negotiated the Lateran Treaty in 1929 with Benito Mussolini, bringing an end to the Roman Question.\nTogether with his brother Francesco (1872\u20131935) and his two sisters, Giuseppina (1874\u20131955) and Elisabetta (1880\u20131970), he grew up in the Parione district in the centre of Rome. Soon after the family had moved to Via Vetrina in 1880, he began school at the convent of the French Sisters of Divine Providence in the Piazza Fiammetta. The family worshipped at Chiesa Nuova. Eugenio and the other children made their First Communion at this church and Eugenio served there as an altar boy from 1886. In 1886, he also was sent to the private school of Professor Giuseppe Marchi, close to the Piazza Venezia. In 1891 Pacelli's father sent Eugenio to the Ennio Quirino Visconti Liceo Ginnasio, a state school situated in what had been the Collegio Romano, the premier Jesuit university in Rome.\nIn 1894, aged 18, Pacelli began his theology studies at Rome's oldest seminary, the Almo Collegio Capranica, and in November of the same year, registered to take a philosophy course at the Jesuit Pontifical Gregorian University and theology at the Pontifical Roman Athenaeum S. Apollinare. He was also enrolled at the State University, La Sapienza where he studied modern languages and history. At the end of the first academic year however, in the summer of 1895, he dropped out of both the Capranica and the Gregorian University. According to his sister Elisabetta, the food at the Capranica was to blame. Having received a special dispensation he continued his studies from home and so spent most of his seminary years as an external student. In 1899, he completed his education in Sacred Theology with a doctoral degree awarded on the basis of a short dissertation and an oral examination in Latin.\nChurch career.\nPriest and monsignor.\nWhile all other candidates from the Rome diocese were ordained in the Basilica of Saint John Lateran, Pacelli was ordained a priest on Easter Sunday, 2 April 1899, alone in the private chapel of a family friend the Vicegerent of Rome, Francesco di Paola Cassetta. Shortly after ordination he began postgraduate studies in canon law at Sant'Apollinaire. He received his first assignment as a curate at Chiesa Nuova. In 1901, he entered the Congregation for Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs, a sub-office of the Vatican Secretariat of State.\nPietro Gasparri, the recently appointed undersecretary at the Department of Extraordinary Affairs, had underscored his proposal to Pacelli to work in the \"Vatican's equivalent of the Foreign office\" by highlighting the \"necessity of defending the Church from the onslaughts of secularism and liberalism throughout Europe\". Pacelli became an \"apprendista\", an apprentice, in Gasparri's department. In January 1901 he was also chosen, by Pope Leo XIII himself, according to an official account, to deliver condolences on behalf of the Vatican to King Edward VII of the United Kingdom after the death of Queen Victoria.\nBy 1904 Pacelli received his doctorate. The theme of his thesis was the nature of concordats and the function of canon law when a concordat falls into abeyance. Promoted to the position of \"minutante\", he prepared digests of reports that had been sent to the Secretariat from all over the world and in the same year became a papal chamberlain. In 1905 he received the title domestic prelate. From 1904 until 1916, he assisted Cardinal Pietro Gasparri in his codification of canon law with the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs. According to John Cornwell \"the text, together with the Anti-Modernist Oath, became the means by which the Holy See was to establish and sustain the new, unequal, and unprecedented power relationship that had arisen between the papacy and the Church\".\nIn 1908, Pacelli served as a Vatican representative on the International Eucharistic Congress, accompanying Rafael Merry del Val to London, where he met Winston Churchill. In 1911, he represented the Holy See at the coronation of George V and Mary. Pacelli became the under-secretary in 1911, adjunct-secretary in 1912 (a position he received under Pope Pius X and retained under Pope Benedict XV), and secretary of the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs in February 1914. On 24 June 1914, just four days before Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated in Sarajevo, Pacelli, together with Cardinal Merry del Val, represented the Vatican when the Serbian Concordat was signed. Serbia's success in the First Balkan War against Turkey in 1912 had increased the number of Catholics within greater Serbia. At this time Serbia, encouraged by Russia, was challenging Austria-Hungary's sphere of influence throughout the Balkans. Pius X died on 20 August 1914. His successor Benedict XV named Gasparri as secretary of state and Gasparri took Pacelli with him into the Secretariat of State, making him undersecretary. During World War I, Pacelli maintained the Vatican's registry of prisoners of war and worked to implement papal relief initiatives. In 1915, he travelled to Vienna to assist Raffaele Scapinelli, nuncio to Vienna, in his negotiations with Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria regarding Italy.\nArchbishop and papal nuncio.\nPope Benedict XV appointed Pacelli as nuncio to Bavaria on 23 April 1917, consecrating him as titular Archbishop of Sardis in the Sistine Chapel on 13 May 1917, the same day as the first apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Fatima, Portugal. After his consecration, Eugenio Pacelli left for Bavaria. As there was no nuncio to Prussia or Germany at the time, Pacelli was, for all practical purposes, the nuncio to all of the German Empire.\nOnce in Munich, he conveyed the papal initiative to end the war to German authorities. He met with King Ludwig III on 29 May, and later with Kaiser Wilhelm II and Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg, who replied positively to the Papal initiative. However, Bethmann Hollweg was forced to resign and the German High Command, hoping for a military victory, delayed the German reply until 20 September.\nSister Pascalina Lehnert later recalled that the Nuncio was heartbroken that the Kaiser turned a \"deaf ear to all his proposals\". She later wrote, \"Thinking back today on that time, when we Germans still all believed that our weapons would be victorious and the Nuncio was deeply sorry that the chance had been missed to save what there was to save, it occurs to me over and over again how clearly he foresaw what was to come. Once as he traced the course of the Rhine with his finger on a map, he said sadly, 'No doubt this will be lost as well'. I did not want to believe it, but here, too, he was to be proved right.\"\nFor the remainder of the Great War, Pacelli concentrated on Benedict's humanitarian efforts especially among Allied prisoners of war in German custody. In the upheaval following the Armistice, a disconcerted Pacelli sought Benedict XV's permission to leave Munich, where Kurt Eisner had formed the Free State of Bavaria, and he left for a while to Rorschach, and a tranquil Swiss sanatorium run by nuns. Schioppa, the \"uditore\", was left in Munich.\n\"His recovery began with a 'rapport'\" with the 24-year-old Sister Pascalina Lehnert \u2013 she would soon be transferred to Munich when Pacelli \"pulled strings at the highest level\".\nWhen he returned to Munich, following Eisner's assassination by the Bavarian nationalist Count Anton von Arco auf Valley, he informed Gasparri-using Schioppa's eye-witness testimony of the chaotic scene at the former royal palace as the trio of Max Levien, Eugen Levine, and Tobias Akselrod sought power: \"the scene was indescribable [-] the confusion totally chaotic [-] in the midst of all this, a gang of young women, of dubious appearance, Jews like the rest of them hanging around [-] the boss of this female rabble was Levien's mistress, a young Russian woman, a Jew and a divorc\u00e9e [-] and it was to her that the nunciature was obliged to pay homage in order to proceed [-] Levien is a young man, also Russian and a Jew. Pale, dirty, with drugged eyes, vulgar, repulsive ...\" John Cornwell alleges that a worrying impression of anti-Semitism is discernible in the \"catalogue of epithets describing their physical and moral repulsiveness\" and Pacelli's \"constant harping on the Jewishness of this party of power usurpers\" chimed with the \"growing and widespread belief among Germans that the Jews were the instigators of the Bolshevik revolution, their principal aim being the destruction of Christian civilization\". Also according to Cornwell, Pacelli informed Gasparri that \"the capital of Bavaria, is suffering under a harsh Jewish-Russian revolutionary tyranny\".\nAccording to Sister Pascalina Lehnert, the Nuncio was repeatedly threatened by emissaries of the Bavarian Soviet Republic. Once, in a violation of international law, the Bavarian Revolutionary Government attempted to confiscate the Nunciature's car at gunpoint. Despite their demands, however, Pacelli refused to leave his post.\nAfter the Bavarian Soviet Republic was defeated and toppled by \"Freikorps\" and \"Reichswehr\" troops, the Nuncio focused on, according to Lehnert, \"alleviating the distress of the postwar period, consoling, supporting all in word and deed\".\nPacelli was appointed Apostolic Nuncio to Germany on 23 June 1920, and \u2013 after the completion of a Bavarian Concordat (1924) \u2013 his nunciature was moved to Berlin in August 1925. Many of Pacelli's Munich staff stayed with him for the rest of his life, including his advisor Robert Leiber and Sister Pascalina Lehnert\u2014housekeeper, cook, friend, and adviser for 41 years. In Berlin, Pacelli was Dean of the Diplomatic Corps and active in diplomatic and many social activities. He was aided by the German priest Ludwig Kaas, who was known for his expertise in Church-state relations and was a full-time politician, politically active in the Catholic Centre Party, a party he led following Wilhelm Marx's resignation in October 1928. While in Germany, he travelled to all regions, attended Katholikentag (national gatherings of the faithful), and delivered some 50 sermons and speeches to the German people. In Berlin he lived in the Tiergarten quarter and threw parties for the official and diplomatic elite. Paul von Hindenburg, Gustav Stresemann, and other members of the Cabinet were regular guests.\nIn post-war Germany, in the absence of a nuncio in Moscow, Pacelli worked also on diplomatic arrangements between the Vatican and the Soviet Union. He negotiated food shipments for Russia, where the Catholic Church was persecuted. He met with Soviet representatives including Foreign Minister Georgi Chicherin, who rejected any kind of religious education, the ordination of priests and bishops, but offered agreements without the points vital to the Vatican.\nDespite Vatican pessimism and a lack of visible progress, Pacelli continued the secret negotiations, until Pius XI ordered them to be discontinued in 1927. Pacelli supported German diplomatic activity aimed at rejection of punitive measures from victorious former enemies. He blocked French attempts for an ecclesiastical separation of the Saar region, supported the appointment of a papal administrator for Danzig and aided the reintegration of German priests expelled from Poland. A Prussian Concordat was signed on 14 June 1929. Following the Wall Street crash of 1929, the beginnings of a world economic slump appeared, and the days of the Weimar Republic were numbered. Pacelli was summoned back to Rome at this time\u2014the call coming by telegram when he was resting at his favourite retreat, the Rorschach convent sanatorium. He left Berlin on 10 December 1929. David G. Dalin wrote \"of the forty-four speeches Pacelli gave in Germany as papal nuncio between 1917 and 1929, forty denounced some aspect of the emerging Nazi ideology\". In 1935 he wrote a letter to Karl Joseph Schulte, the archbishop of Cologne, describing the Nazis as \"false prophets with the pride of Lucifer\" and as \"bearers of a new faith and a new Evangile\" who were attempting to create \"a mendacious antimony between faithfulness to the Church and the Fatherland\". Two years later at Notre Dame de Paris he named Germany as \"that noble and powerful nation whom bad shepherds would lead astray into an ideology of race\".\nCardinal Secretary of State and Camerlengo.\nPacelli was made a Cardinal-Priest of Santi Giovanni e Paolo al Celio on 16 December 1929 by Pope Pius XI, and within a few months, on 7 February 1930, Pius XI appointed him Cardinal Secretary of State, responsible for foreign policy and state relations throughout the world. In 1935, Pacelli was named Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church.\nAs Cardinal Secretary of State, Pacelli signed concordats with a number of countries and states. Immediately on becoming Cardinal Secretary of State, Pacelli and Ludwig Kaas took up negotiations on a Baden Concordat which continued until the spring and summer of 1932. Papal fiat appointed a supporter of Pacelli and his concordat policy, Conrad Gr\u00f6ber, the new Archbishop of Freiburg, and the treaty was signed in August 1932. Others followed: Austria (1933), Germany (1933), Yugoslavia (1935) and Portugal (1940). The Lateran treaties with Italy (1929) were concluded before Pacelli became Secretary of State. Catholicism had become the sole recognized religion; the powerful democratic Catholic Popular Party, in many ways similar to the Centre Party in Germany, had been disbanded, and in place of political Catholicism the Holy See encouraged Catholic Action. It was permitted only so long as it developed \"its activity outside every political party and in direct dependence upon the Church hierarchy for the dissemination and implementation of Catholic principles\". Such concordats allowed the Catholic Church to organize youth groups, make ecclesiastical appointments, run schools, hospitals, and charities, or even conduct religious services. They also ensured that canon law would be recognized within some spheres (e.g., church decrees of nullity in the area of marriage).\nAs the decade began Pacelli wanted the Centre Party in Germany to turn away from the socialists. In the summer of 1931 he clashed with Catholic Chancellor Heinrich Br\u00fcning, who frankly told Pacelli he believed that he \"misunderstood the political situation in Germany and the real character of the Nazis\". Following Br\u00fcning's resignation in May 1932 Pacelli, like the new Catholic chancellor Franz von Papen, wondered if the Centre Party should look to the Right for a coalition, \"that would correspond to their principles\". He made many diplomatic visits throughout Europe and the Americas, including an extensive visit to the United States in 1936 where he met President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who appointed a personal envoy\u2014who did not require Senate confirmation\u2014to the Holy See in December 1939, re-establishing a diplomatic tradition that had been broken since 1870 when the Pope lost temporal power.\nPacelli presided as Papal Legate over the International Eucharistic Congress in Buenos Aires, Argentina on 10\u201314 October 1934, and in Budapest on 25\u201330 May 1938. At this time, antisemitic laws were in the process of being formulated in Hungary. Pacelli made reference to the Jews \"whose lips curse [Christ] and whose hearts reject him even today\". This traditional adversarial relationship with Judaism would be reversed in \"Nostra aetate\" issued during the Second Vatican Council. According to Joseph Bottum, Pacelli in 1937 \"warned A. W. Klieforth, that Hitler was 'an untrustworthy scoundrel and fundamentally wicked person', to quote Klieforth, who also wrote that Pacelli 'did not believe Hitler capable of moderation, and ... fully supported the German bishops in their anti-Nazi stand'. This was matched with the discovery of Pacelli's anti-Nazi report, written the following year for President Roosevelt and filed with Ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., which declared that the church regarded compromise with the Third Reich as 'out of the question'.\"\nHistorian Walter Bussmann argued that Pacelli, as Cardinal Secretary of State, dissuaded Pope Pius XI \u2013 who was nearing death at the time \u2013 from condemning the \"Kristallnacht\" in November 1938, when he was informed of it by the papal nuncio in Berlin.\nThe draft encyclical \"Humani generis unitas\" (\"On the Unity of the Human Race\") was ready in September 1938 but, according to those responsible for an edition of the document and other sources, it was not forwarded to the Holy See by the Jesuit General Wlodimir Led\u00f3chowski. On 28 January 1939, eleven days before the death of Pius XI, a disappointed Gundlach informed LaFarge, the encyclical's author, \"It cannot go on like this\". The text had not been forwarded to the Vatican. He had talked to the American assistant to Father General, who promised to look into the matter in December 1938, but did not report back. The draft encyclical contained an open and clear condemnation of colonialism, racial persecution and antisemitism. Historians Passelecq and Suchecky have argued that Pacelli learned about the existence of the draft only after the death of Pius XI and did not promulgate it as Pope. He did use parts of it in his inaugural encyclical \"Summi Pontificatus\", which he titled \"On the Unity of Human Society\". His various positions on church and policy issues during his tenure as Cardinal Secretary of State were made public by the Holy See in 1939. Most noteworthy among the 50 speeches is his review of Church-State issues in Budapest in 1938.\nA year before his papal election, on 26 January 1938, the Cardinal Secretary of State officiated at the baptism of the Infante Juan Carlos (King of Spain from 1975 to 2014), in a ceremony held at the Palazzo Malta in Rome.\n\"Reichskonkordat\" and \"Mit brennender Sorge\".\nThe \"Reichskonkordat\" was an integral part of four concordats Pacelli concluded on behalf of the Vatican with German States. The state concordats were necessary because the German federalist Weimar constitution gave the German states authority in the area of education and culture and thus diminished the authority of the churches in these areas; this diminution of church authority was a primary concern of the Vatican. As Bavarian nuncio, Pacelli negotiated successfully with the Bavarian authorities in 1924. He expected the concordat with Catholic Bavaria to be the model for the rest of Germany. Prussia showed interest in negotiations only after the Bavarian concordat. However, Pacelli obtained less favorable conditions for the church in the Prussian Concordat of 1929, which excluded educational issues. A concordat with the German state of Baden was completed by Pacelli in 1932, after he had moved to Rome. There he also negotiated a concordat with Austria in 1933. A total of 16 concordats and treaties with European states had been concluded in the ten-year period 1922\u20131932.\nThe \"Reichskonkordat\", signed on 20 July 1933, between Germany and the Holy See, while thus a part of an overall Vatican policy, was controversial from its beginning. It remains the most important of Pacelli's concordats. It is debated, not because of its content, which is still valid today, but because of its timing. A national concordat with Germany was one of Pacelli's main objectives as secretary of state, because he had hoped to strengthen the legal position of the church. Pacelli, who knew German conditions well, emphasized in particular protection for Catholic associations (\u00a731), freedom for education and Catholic schools, and freedom for publications.\nAs nuncio during the 1920s, he had made unsuccessful attempts to obtain German agreement for such a treaty, and between 1930 and 1933 he attempted to initiate negotiations with representatives of successive German governments, but the opposition of Protestant and Socialist parties, the instability of national governments and the care of the individual states to guard their autonomy thwarted this aim. In particular, the questions of denominational schools and pastoral work in the armed forces prevented any agreement on the national level, despite talks in the winter of 1932.\nAdolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor on 30 January 1933 and sought to gain international respectability and to remove internal opposition by representatives of the church and the Catholic Centre Party. He sent his vice chancellor Franz von Papen, a Catholic nobleman, to Rome to offer negotiations about a Reichskonkordat. On behalf of Pacelli, Prelate Ludwig Kaas, the outgoing chairman of the Centre Party, negotiated first drafts of the terms with von Papen. The concordat was finally signed, by Pacelli for the Vatican and von Papen for Germany, on 20 July and ratified on 10 September 1933. Bishop Konrad von Preysing cautioned against compromise with the new regime, against those who saw the Nazi persecution of the church as an aberration that Hitler would correct.\nBetween 1933 and 1939, Pacelli issued 55 protests of violations of the \"Reichskonkordat\". Most notably, early in 1937, Pacelli asked several German cardinals, including Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber, to help him write a protest of Nazi violations of the \"Reichskonkordat\"; this was to become Pius XI's 1937 encyclical, \"Mit brennender Sorge\" (in English \"With deep [lit. 'burning'] anxiety\"). The encyclical was written in German and not the usual Latin of official Catholic Church documents. Secretly distributed by an army of motorcyclists and read from every German Catholic Church pulpit on Palm Sunday, it condemned the paganism of the Nazi ideology. Pius XI credited its creation and writing to Pacelli. It was the first official denunciation of Nazism made by any major organization and resulted in persecution of the church by the infuriated Nazis who closed all the participating presses and \"took numerous vindictive measures against the Church, including staging a long series of immorality trials of the Catholic clergy\". On 10 June 1941, the Pope commented on the problems of the \"Reichskonkordat\" in a letter to the Bishop of Passau, in Bavaria: \"The history of the Reichskonkordat shows, that the other side lacked the most basic prerequisites to accept minimal freedoms and rights of the Church, without which the Church simply cannot live and operate, formal agreements notwithstanding\".\nRelations with the media.\nCardinal Pacelli gave a lecture entitled \"La Presse et L'Apostolat\" at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\" on 17 April 1936.\nPapacy.\nElection and coronation.\nPope Pius XI died on 10 February 1939. Several historians have interpreted the conclave to choose his successor as facing a choice between a diplomatic or a spiritual candidate, and they view Pacelli's diplomatic experience, especially with Germany, as one of the deciding factors in his election on 2 March 1939, his 63rd birthday, after only one day of deliberation and three ballots. He was the first cardinal Secretary of State to be elected pope since Clement IX in 1667. He was one of only two men known to have served as Camerlengo immediately prior to being elected as pope (the other being Pope Leo XIII). According to rumours, he asked for another ballot to be taken to ensure the validity of his election. After his election was indeed confirmed, he chose the name Pius XII in honour of his immediate predecessor.\nHis coronation took place on 12 March 1939. Upon being elected pope he was also formally the Grand Master of the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem, prefect of the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office, prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Oriental Churches and prefect of the Sacred Consistorial Congregation. There was however a Cardinal-Secretary to run these bodies on a day-to-day basis.\nPacelli took the same papal name as his predecessor, a title used exclusively by . He was quoted as saying \"I call myself Pius; my whole life was under Popes with this name, but especially as a sign of gratitude towards Pius XI.\" On 15 December 1937, during his last consistory, Pius XI strongly hinted to the cardinals that he expected Pacelli to be his successor, saying \"He is in your midst.\" He had previously been quoted as saying: \"When today the Pope dies, you'll get another one tomorrow, because the Church continues. It would be a much bigger tragedy, if Cardinal Pacelli dies, because there is only one. I pray every day, God may send another one into one of our seminaries, but as of today, there is only one in this world.\"\nAppointments.\nAfter his election, he made Luigi Maglione his successor as Cardinal Secretary of State. Cardinal Maglione, a seasoned Vatican diplomat, had reestablished diplomatic relations with Switzerland and was for twelve years nuncio in Paris. Yet, Maglione did not exercise the influence of his predecessor Pacelli, who as Pope continued his close relation with Giovanni Battista Montini (later Pope Paul VI) and Domenico Tardini. After the death of Maglione in 1944, Pius left the position open and named Tardini head of its foreign section and Montini head of the internal section. Tardini and Montini continued serving there until 1953, when Pius XII decided to appoint them cardinals, an honor which both turned down. They were then later appointed to be Pro-Secretary with the privilege to wear Episcopal Insignia. Tardini continued to be a close co-worker of the Pope until the death of Pius XII, while Montini became archbishop of Milan, after the death of Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster.\nPius XII slowly eroded the Italian monopoly on the Roman Curia; he employed German and Dutch Jesuit advisors, Robert Leiber, Augustin Bea, and Sebastian Tromp. He also supported the elevation of Americans such as Cardinal Francis Spellman from a minor to a major role in the church. After World War II, Pius XII appointed more non-Italians than any Pope before him. American appointees included Joseph P. Hurley as regent of the nunciature in Belgrade, Gerald P. O'Hara as nuncio to Romania, and Aloisius Joseph Muench as nuncio to Germany. For the first time, numerous young Europeans, Asians and \"Americans were trained in various congregations and secretariats within the Vatican for eventual service throughout the world\".\nConsistories.\nOnly twice in his pontificate did Pius XII hold a consistory to create new cardinals, in contrast to Pius XI, who had done so 17 times in as many years. Pius XII chose not to name new cardinals during World War II, and the number of cardinals shrank to 38, with Dennis Joseph Dougherty of Philadelphia being the only living U.S. cardinal.\nThe first occasion on 18 February 1946 yielded the elevation of a record 32 new cardinals, almost half of the College of Cardinals and reaching the canonical limit of 70 cardinals. In the 1946 consistory, Pius XII, while maintaining the maximum size of the College of Cardinals at 70, named cardinals from China, India, the Middle East and increased the number of Cardinals from the Americas, proportionally lessening the Italian influence.\nIn his second consistory on 12 January 1953, it was expected that his closest co-workers, Msgrs. Domenico Tardini and Giovanni Montini would be elevated and Pius XII informed the assembled cardinals that both of them were originally on the top of his list, but they had turned down the offer, and were rewarded instead with other promotions. Both Montini and Tardini would become Cardinals shortly after Pius' death; Montini later became Pope Paul VI. The two consistories of 1946 and 1953 brought an end to over five hundred years of Italians constituting a majority of the College of Cardinals.\nWith few exceptions, Italian prelates accepted the changes positively; there was no protest movement or open opposition to the internationalization efforts.\nChurch reforms.\nLiturgy reforms.\nIn his encyclical \"Mediator Dei\", Pius XII links liturgy with the last will of Jesus Christ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But it is His will, that the worship He instituted and practised during His life on earth shall continue ever afterwards without intermission. For He has not left mankind an orphan. He still offers us the support of His powerful, unfailing intercession, acting as our \"advocate with the Father\". He aids us likewise through His Church, where He is present indefectibly as the ages run their course: through the Church which He constituted \"the pillar of truth\" and dispenser of grace, and which by His sacrifice on the cross, He founded, consecrated and confirmed forever.\nThe Church has, therefore, according to Pius XII, a common aim with Christ himself, teaching all men the truth, and offering to God a pleasing and acceptable sacrifice. This way, the church re-establishes the unity between the Creator and His creatures. The Sacrifice of the Altar, being Christ's own actions, conveys and dispenses divine grace from Christ to the members of the Mystical Body.\nBishop Carlos Duarte Costa, a long-time critic of Pius XII's policies during World War II and an opponent of clerical celibacy and the use of Latin as language of the liturgy, was excommunicated by Pius XII on 2 July 1945. He later established a schismatic group called the \"Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church\".\nCanon law reforms.\nDecentralized authority and increased independence of the Uniate Churches were aimed at in the Canon Law/Codex Iuris Canonici (CIC) reform. In its new constitutions, Eastern Patriarchs were made almost independent from Rome (CIC Orientalis, 1957) Eastern marriage law (CIC Orientalis, 1949), civil law (CIC Orientalis, 1950), laws governing religious associations (CIC Orientalis, 1952) property law (CIC Orientalis, 1952) and other laws. These reforms and writings of Pius XII were intended to establish Eastern Orientals as equal parts of the mystical body of Christ, as explained in the encyclical \"Mystici Corporis Christi\".\nIn 1947, Venerable Pope Pius XII issued the Apostolic Constitution Provida Mater Ecclesia establishing the secular institute. The growth and 70th anniversary of these institutes was celebrated in 2017.\nIn June 1950, Venerable Pope Pius XII provided a formal pontifical recognition of St Josemaria's work of God. St Josemaria considered early Christianity a helpful model to explain his mystical experience on 2 October 1928 and he maintained this interest in early Christianity throughout his whole life. Wikipedia provides an insightful review of early Christianity up until the First Council of Nicea in 325. Many leaders recalled the 1700th anniversary of this Council in 2025. Venerable Pope Pius XII's, formal legal pontifical recognition followed earlier legal diocesan recognition and foreshadowed later formal legal recognition in the Univeral Church's 1983 Code of Canon Law. A broad insightful commentary on the history of canon law is available online by Britannica.\nPriests and religious.\nWith the Apostolic constitution \"Sedis Sapientiae\", Pius XII added social sciences, sociology, psychology and social psychology, to the pastoral training of future priests. Pius XII emphasised the need to systematically analyze the psychological condition of candidates to the priesthood to ensure that they are capable of a life of celibacy and service. Pius XII added one year to the theological formation of future priests. He included a \"pastoral year\", an introduction into the practise of parish work.\nPius XII wrote in \"Menti Nostrae\" that the call to constant interior reform and Christian heroism means to be above average, to be a living example of Christian virtue. The strict norms governing their lives are meant to make them models of Christian perfection for lay people. Bishops are encouraged to look at model saints like Boniface, and Pope Pius X. Priests were encouraged to be living examples of the love of Christ and his sacrifice.\nTheology.\nPius XII explained the Catholic faith in 41 encyclicals and almost 1000 messages and speeches during his long pontificate. \"Mystici Corporis Christi\" clarified membership and participation in the church. The encyclical \"Divino afflante Spiritu\" opened the doors for biblical research. His magisterium was far larger and is difficult to summarize. In numerous speeches Catholic teaching is related to various aspects of life, education, medicine, politics, war and peace, the life of saints, Mary, the Mother of God, things eternal and contemporary. Theologically, Pius XII specified the nature of the teaching authority of the Catholic Church. He also gave a new freedom to engage in theological investigations.\nTheological orientation.\nBiblical research.\nThe encyclical \"Divino afflante Spiritu\", published in 1943, emphasized the role of the Bible. Pius XII freed biblical research from previous limitations. He encouraged Christian theologians to revisit original versions of the Bible in Greek and Hebrew. Noting improvements in archaeology, the encyclical reversed Pope Leo XIII's encyclical, which had only advocated going back to the original texts to resolve ambiguity in the Latin Vulgate. The encyclical demands a much better understanding of ancient Hebrew history and traditions. It requires bishops throughout the church to initiate biblical studies for lay people. The Pontiff also requests a reorientation of Catholic teaching and education, relying much more on sacred scriptures in sermons and religious instruction.\nRole of theology.\nThis theological investigative freedom does not, however, extend to all aspects of theology. According to Pius, theologians, employed by the Catholic Church, are assistants, to teach the official teachings of the church and not their own private thoughts. They are free to engage in empirical research, which the church generously supports, but in matters of morality and religion, they are subjected to the teaching office and authority of the church, the Magisterium. \"The most noble office of theology is to show how a doctrine defined by the Church is contained in the sources of revelation, ... in that sense in which it has been defined by the Church.\" The deposit of faith is authentically interpreted not to each of the faithful, not even to theologians, but only to the teaching authority of the Church.\nMariology and the dogma of the Assumption.\nWorld consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.\nAs a young boy and in later life, Pacelli was an ardent follower of the Virgin Mary. He was consecrated as a bishop on 13 May 1917, the very first day of the apparitions of Our Lady of F\u00e1tima. Based on the Portuguese mystic Alexandrina of Balazar's requests, he consecrated the world to the Immaculate Heart of Mary in 1942. His remains were to be buried in the crypt of Saint Peter's Basilica on the feast day of Our Lady of F\u00e1tima, 13 October 1958.\nDogma of the Assumption of Mary.\nOn 1 November 1950, Pius XII invoked papal infallibility for the first time since 1854 by defining the dogma of the Assumption of Mary, namely that she, \"having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory\". To date this is the last time full papal infallibility has been used. The dogma was preceded by the 1946 encyclical \"Deiparae Virginis Mariae\", which requested all Catholic bishops to express their opinion on a possible dogmatization. On 8 September 1953, the encyclical \"Fulgens corona\" announced a Marian year for 1954, the centennial of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception. In the encyclical \"Ad caeli reginam\" he promulgated the Queenship of Mary feast. \"Mystici Corporis Christi\" summarizes his mariology. On 15 August 1954, the Feast of the Assumption, he initiated the practice of leading the Angelus every Sunday before address to the crowd assembled at Castel Gandolfo.\nSocial teachings.\nMedical theology.\nPius XII delivered numerous speeches to medical professionals and researchers. He addressed doctors, nurses, midwives, to detail all aspects of rights and dignity of patients, medical responsibilities, moral implications of psychological illnesses and the uses of psycho pharmaca. He also took on issues like the uses of medicine in terminally ill persons, medical lies in face of grave illness, and the rights of family members to make decisions against expert medical advice. Pope Pius XII often reconsidered previously accepted truth, thus he was first to determine that the use of pain medicine in terminally ill patients is justified, even if this may shorten the life of the patient, as long as life shortening is not the objective itself.\nFamily and sexuality.\nPope Pius XII developed an extensive theology of the family, taking issue with family roles, sharing of household duties, education of children, conflict resolution, financial dilemmas, psychological problems, illness, taking care of older generations, unemployment, marital holiness and virtue, common prayer, religious discussions and more. He accepted the rhythm method as a moral form of family planning, although only in limited circumstances, within the context of family.\nTheology and science.\nTo Pius XII, science and religion were heavenly sisters, different manifestations of divine exactness, who could not possibly contradict each other over the long term. Regarding their relation, his advisor Professor Robert Leiber wrote: \"Pius XII was very careful not to close any doors prematurely. He was energetic on this point and regretted that in the case of Galileo.\"\nEvolution of the human body.\nIn 1950, Pius XII promulgated \"Humani generis\", which acknowledged that evolution might accurately describe the biological origins of the human form, but at the same time criticized those who \"imprudently and indiscreetly hold that evolution\u00a0... explains the origin of all things\". Catholics must believe that the human soul was created immediately by God. Since the soul is a spiritual substance, it is not brought into being through transformation of matter, but directly by God, whence the special uniqueness of each person. Fifty years later, Pope John Paul II, stating that scientific evidence now seemed to favour the evolutionary theory, upheld the distinction of Pius XII regarding the human soul. \"Even if the human body originates from pre-existent living matter, the spiritual soul is spontaneously created by God.\"\nCapital punishment.\nIn an address given on 14 September 1952, Pope Pius XII said that the church does not regard the execution of criminals as a violation by the State of the universal right to life:\nWhen it is a question of the execution of a condemned man, the State does not dispose of the individual's right to life. In this case it is reserved to the public power to deprive the condemned person of the enjoyment of life in expiation of his crime when, by his crime, he has already disposed himself of his right to live.\nThe Church regards criminal penalties as both \"medicinal\", preventing the criminal from re-offending, and \"vindictive\", providing retribution for the offence committed. Pius defended the authority of the State to carry out punishment, up to and including the death penalty.\nDemocracy and monarchy.\nPius XII taught that the masses were a threat to true democracy. In such a democracy, liberty is the individual's moral duty and equality is the right of all people to honorably live in the place and station that God has assigned them.\nOn 1 June 1946, one day before the 1946 Italian institutional referendum on whether to abolish or keep the Italian monarchy, Pius XII delivered a sermon on St. Peter's Square. While he did not directly mention monarchy or republicanism, given the context, his speech was nonetheless widely seen as endorsing Umberto II in the referendum, with it being difficult to misunderstand his plea.\nPius stated:\nThe problem is whether one or the other of those nations, of those two Latin sisters [elections were taking place in France on the same day] with several thousands of years of civilization will continue to learn against the solid rock of Christianity...or on the contrary do they want to hand over the fate of their future to the impossible omnipotence of a material state without extraterrestrial ideals, without religion, and without God. One of these two alternatives shall occur according to whether the names of the champions or the destroyers of Christian civilization emerge victorious from the urns.\nAfter the referendum was successful and the Italian monarchy was abolished, Pius privately agreed with his envoy Myron Taylor \"...that it would have been far preferable for Italy to remain a monarchy, but he also noted that what was done was done\".\nEncyclicals, writings and speeches.\nPius XII issued 41 encyclicals during his pontificate\u2014more than all his successors in the past 50 years taken together\u2014along with many other writings and speeches. The pontificate of Pius XII was the first in Vatican history that published papal speeches and addresses in vernacular language on a systematic basis. Until then, papal documents were issued mainly in Latin in \"Acta Apostolicae Sedis\" since 1909. Because of the novelty of it all, and a feared occupation of the Vatican by the German Wehrmacht, not all documents exist today. In 1944, a number of papal documents were burned or \"walled in\".\nSeveral encyclicals addressed the Eastern Catholic Churches. \"Orientalis Ecclesiae\" was issued in 1944 on the 15th centenary of the death of Cyril of Alexandria, a saint common to Eastern Christianity and Latin Churches. Pius XII asks for prayer for better understanding and unification of the churches. \"Orientales omnes Ecclesias\", issued in 1945 on the 350th anniversary of the reunion, is a call to continued unity of the Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church, threatened in its very existence by the authorities of the Soviet Union. \"Sempiternus Rex\" was issued in 1951 on the 1500th anniversary of the Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon. It included a call to oriental communities adhering to Miaphysite theology to return to the Catholic Church. \"Orientales Ecclesias\" was issued in 1952 and addressed to the Eastern Churches, protesting the continued Stalinist persecution of the church. Several Apostolic Letters were sent to the bishops in the East. On 13 May 1956, Pope Pius addressed all bishops of the Eastern Rite. Mary, the mother of God, was the subject of encyclical letters to the people of Russia in \"Fulgens corona\", as well as a papal letter to the people of Russia.\nPius XII made two substantial interventions on the media. His 1955 discourse \"The Ideal Movie\", originally given in two parts to members of the Italian cinema industry, offered a \"sophisticated analysis of the film industry and the role of cinema in modern society\". Compared to his predecessor's teaching, the encyclical \"Miranda Prorsus\" (1957) shows a \"high regard for the importance of cinema, television, and radio\".\nFeasts and devotions.\nIn 1958, Pope Pius XII declared the Feast of the Holy Face of Jesus as Shrove Tuesday (the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday) for all Catholics. The first medal of the Holy Face, produced by Sister Maria Pierina de Micheli, based on the image on the Shroud of Turin had been offered to Pius XII who approved the medal and the devotion based on it. The general devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus had been approved by Pope Leo XIII in 1885 before the image on the Turin Shroud had been photographed.\nCanonisations and beatifications.\nPope Pius XII canonized numerous people, including Pope Pius X\u2014\"both were determined to stamp out, as far as possible, all traces of dangerous heterodoxy\"\u2014and Maria Goretti. He beatified Pope Innocent XI. The first canonizations were two women, the founder of a congregation for women, Mary Euphrasia Pelletier, and a young laywoman, Gemma Galgani. Pelletier had a reputation for opening new ways for Catholic charities, helping people in difficulties with the law, who had been neglected by the system and the church. Galgani was a virtuous woman in her twenties, said to have the stigmata.\nPius XII also named Anthony of Padua as a Doctor of the Church on 16 January 1946 while conferring upon him the title \"Doctor evangelius\".\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II Pius saw his primary obligation as being to ensure the continuation of the \"Church visible\" and its divine mission. Pius XII lobbied world leaders to prevent the outbreak of World War II and then expressed his dismay that war had come in his October 1939 \"Summi Pontificatus\" encyclical. He followed a strict public policy of Vatican neutrality for the duration of the conflict mirroring that of Pope Benedict XV.\nIn 1939, Pius XII turned the Vatican into a centre of aid which he organized from various parts of the world. At the request of the Pope, an information office for prisoners of war and refugees operated in the Vatican under Giovanni Battista Montini, which in the years of its existence from 1939 until 1947 received almost 10\u00a0million (9,891,497) information requests and produced more than 11\u00a0million (11,293,511) answers about missing persons.\nMcGoldrick (2012) concludes that during the war:\nPius XII had genuine affection for Germany, though not the criminal element into whose hands it had fallen; he feared Bolshevism, an ideology dedicated to the annihilation of the church of which he was head, but his sympathies lay with the Allies and the democracies, especially the United States, into whose war economy he had transferred and invested the Vatican's considerable assets.\nOutbreak of war.\nSummi Pontificatus.\n\"Summi Pontificatus\" was the first papal encyclical issued by Pope Pius XII, in October 1939 and established some of the themes of his pontificate. During the drafting of the letter, the Second World War commenced with the German/Soviet invasion of Poland\u2014the \"dread tempest of war is already raging despite all Our efforts to avert it\". The papal letter denounced antisemitism, war, totalitarianism, the attack on Catholic Poland and the Nazi persecution of the church.\nPius XII reiterated church teaching on the \"principle of equality\"\u2014with specific reference to Jews: \"there is neither Gentile nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision\". The forgetting of solidarity \"imposed by our common origin and by the equality of rational nature in all men\" was called \"pernicious error\". Catholics everywhere were called upon to offer \"compassion and help\" to the victims of the war. The Pope declared determination to work to hasten the return of peace and trust in prayers for justice, love and mercy, to prevail against the scourge of war. The letter also decried the deaths of noncombatants.\nFollowing themes addressed in \"Non abbiamo bisogno\" (1931); \"Mit brennender Sorge\" (1937) and \"Divini Redemptoris\" (1937), Pius wrote against \"anti-Christian movements\" and needing to bring back to the church those who were following \"a false standard\u00a0... misled by error, passion, temptation and prejudice, [who] have strayed away from faith in the true God\". Pius wrote of \"Christians unfortunately more in name than in fact\" having shown \"cowardice\" in the face of persecution by these creeds, and endorsed resistance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Who among \"the Soldiers of Christ\"\u00a0\u2013 ecclesiastic or layman\u00a0\u2013 does not feel himself incited and spurred on to a greater vigilance, to a more determined resistance, by the sight of the ever-increasing host of Christ's enemies; as he perceives the spokesmen of these tendencies deny or in practice neglect the vivifying truths and the values inherent in belief in God and in Christ; as he perceives them wantonly break the Tables of God's Commandments to substitute other tables and other standards stripped of the ethical content of the Revelation on Sinai, standards in which the spirit of the Sermon on the Mount and of the Cross has no place?\nPius wrote of a persecuted Church and a time requiring \"charity\" for victims who had a \"right\" to compassion. Against the invasion of Poland and killing of civilians he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[This is an] \"Hour of Darkness\"...\u00a0in which the spirit of violence and of discord brings indescribable suffering on mankind... The nations swept into the tragic whirlpool of war are perhaps as yet only at the \"beginnings of sorrows\"...\u00a0but even now there reigns in thousands of families death and desolation, lamentation and misery. The blood of countless human beings, even noncombatants, raises a piteous dirge over a nation such as Our dear Poland, which, for its fidelity to the Church, for its services in the defense of Christian civilization, written in indelible characters in the annals of history, has a right to the generous and brotherly sympathy of the whole world, while it awaits, relying on the powerful intercession of Mary, Help of Christians, the hour of a resurrection in harmony with the principles of justice and true peace.\nWith Italy not yet an ally of Hitler in the war, Italians were called upon to remain faithful to the Catholic Church. Pius avoided explicit denunciations of Hitlerism or Stalinism, establishing the \"impartial\" public tone which would become controversial in later assessment of his pontificate: \"A full statement of the doctrinal stand to be taken in face of the errors of today, if necessary, can be put off to another time unless there is disturbance by calamitous external events; for the moment We limit Ourselves to some fundamental observations.\"\nInvasion of Poland.\nIn \"Summi Pontificatus\", Pius expressed dismay at the killing of non-combatants in the Nazi/Soviet invasion of Poland and expressed hope for the \"resurrection\" of that country. The Nazis and Soviets commenced a persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland. In April 1940, the Vatican advised the U.S. government that its efforts to provide humanitarian aid had been blocked by the Germans and that the Holy See had been forced to seek indirect channels through which to direct its aid. Michael Phayer, a critic of Pius XII, assesses his policy as having been to \"refuse to censure\" the \"German\" invasion and annexation of Poland. This, Phayer wrote, was regarded as a \"betrayal\" by many Polish Catholics and clergy, who saw his appointment of Hilarius Breitinger as the apostolic administrator for the Wartheland in May 1942, an \"implicit recognition\" of the breakup of Poland; the opinions of the \"Volksdeutsche\", mostly German Catholic minorities living in occupied Poland, were more mixed. Phayer argues that Pius XII\u2014both before and during his papacy \u2013 consistently \"deferred to Germany at the expense of Poland\", and saw Germany\u2014not Poland\u2014as critical to \"rebuilding a large Catholic presence in Central Europe\". In May 1942, Kazimierz Pap\u00e9e, Polish ambassador to the Vatican, complained that Pius had failed to condemn the recent wave of atrocities in Poland; when Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione replied that the Vatican could not document individual atrocities, Pap\u00e9e declared, \"when something becomes notorious, proof is not required\". Although Pius XII received frequent reports about atrocities committed by or against Catholics, his knowledge was incomplete; for example, he wept after the war on learning that Cardinal August Hlond had banned German liturgical services in Poland.\nThere was a well-known case of Jewish rabbis who, seeking support against the Nazi persecution of Polish Jews in the General Government (Nazi-occupied Polish zone), complained to the representatives of the Catholic Church. The church's attempted intervention caused the Nazis to retaliate by arresting rabbis and deporting them to the death camp. Subsequently, the Catholic Church in Poland abandoned direct intervention, instead focusing on organizing underground aid, with huge international support orchestrated by Pope Pius XII and his Holy See. The Pope was informed about Nazi atrocities committed in Poland by both officials of the Polish Church and the Polish Underground. Those intelligence materials were used by Pius XII on 11 March 1940 during a formal audience with Joachim von Ribbentrop (Hitler's foreign affairs adviser) when Pope was \"listing the date, place, and precise details of each crime\" as described by Joseph L. Lichten after others.\nEarly actions to end conflict.\nWith Poland overrun, but France and the Low Countries yet to be attacked, Pius continued to hope for a negotiated peace to prevent the spread of the conflict. The similarly minded US President Franklin D. Roosevelt re-established American diplomatic relations with the Vatican after a 70-year hiatus and dispatched Myron C. Taylor as his personal representative. Pius warmly welcomed Roosevelt's envoy and peace initiative, calling it \"an exemplary act of fraternal and hearty solidarity... in defence against the chilling breath of aggressive and deadly godless anti-Christian tendencies\". American correspondence spoke of \"parallel endeavours for peace and the alleviation of suffering\". Despite the early collapse of peace hopes, the Taylor mission continued at the Vatican.\nAccording to the Hitler biographer John Toland, following the November 1939 assassination attempt by Johann Georg Elser, Hitler said Pius would have wanted the plot to succeed: \"he's no friend of mine\". In the spring of 1940, a group of German generals seeking to overthrow Hitler and make peace with the British approached Pope Pius XII, who acted as an interlocutor between the British and the abortive plot. According to Toland, a lawyer from Munich named Joseph Muller made a clandestine trip to Rome in October 1939, met with Pius XII and found him willing to act as intermediary. The Vatican agreed to send a letter outlining the bases for peace with England and the participation of the Pope was used to try to persuade the senior German generals Franz Halder and Walther von Brauchitsch to act against Hitler.\nPius warned the Allies of the planned German invasion of the Low Countries in 1940. In Rome in 1942, U.S. envoy Myron C. Taylor, thanked the Holy See for the \"forthright and heroic expressions of indignation made by Pope Pius XII when Germany invaded the Low countries\". After Germany invaded the Low Countries during 1940, Pius XII sent expressions of sympathy to Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands, King Leopold III of Belgium, and Charlotte, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg. When Mussolini learned of the warnings and the telegrams of sympathy, he took them as a personal affront and had his ambassador to the Vatican file an official protest, charging that Pius XII had taken sides against Italy's ally Germany. Mussolini's foreign minister Galeazzo Ciano claimed that Pius XII was \"ready to let himself be deported to a concentration camp, rather than do anything against his conscience\".\nWhen, in 1940, the Nazi Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop led the only senior Nazi delegation permitted an audience with Pius XII and he asked why the Pope had sided with the Allies, Pius replied with a list of recent Nazi atrocities and religious persecutions committed against Christians and Jews, in Germany, and in Poland, leading \"The New York Times\" to headline its report \"Jews Rights Defended\" and write of \"burning words he spoke to Herr Ribbentrop about religious persecution\". During the meeting, von Ribbentrop suggested an overall settlement between the Vatican and the Reich government in exchange for Pius XII instructing the German bishops to refrain from political criticism of the German government, but no agreement was reached.\nAt a special mass at St Peters for the victims of the war, held in November 1940, soon after the commencement of the London Blitz bombing by the \"Luftwaffe\", Pius preached in his homily: \"may the whirlwinds, that in the light of day or the dark of night, scatter terror, fire, destruction, and slaughter on helpless folk cease. May justice and charity on one side and on the other be in perfect balance, so that all injustice be repaired, the reign of right restored\". Later he appealed to the Allies to spare Rome from aerial bombing, and visited wounded victims of the Allied bombing of 19 July 1943.\nWidening conflict.\nPius attempted, unsuccessfully, to dissuade the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini from joining Hitler in the war. In April 1941, Pius XII granted a private audience to Ante Paveli\u0107, the leader of the newly proclaimed Croatian state (rather than the diplomatic audience Paveli\u0107 had wanted). Pius was criticised for his reception of Paveli\u0107: an unattributed British Foreign Office memo on the subject described Pius as \"the greatest moral coward of our age\". The Vatican did not officially recognise Paveli\u0107's regime. While Pius XII did not publicly condemn the expulsions and forced conversions to Catholicism perpetrated on Serbs by Paveli\u0107, the Holy See did expressly repudiate the forced conversions in a memorandum dated 25 January 1942, from the Vatican Secretariat of State to the Yugoslavian Legation. The Pope was well informed of Catholic clergy involvement with the Usta\u0161e regime, even possessing a list of clergy members who had \"joined in the slaughter\", but decided against condemning the regime or taking action against the clergy involved, fearing that it would lead to schism in the Croatian church or undermine the formation of a future Croatian state. Pius XII would elevate Aloysius Stepinac\u2014a Croatian archbishop convicted of collaborating with the Usta\u0161e by the newly established Yugoslav Communist regime\u2014to the cardinalate in 1953. Phayer agrees that Stepinac's was a \"show trial\", but states \"the charge that he [Pius XII] supported the Usta\u0161a regime was, of course, true, as everyone knew\", and that \"if Stepinac had responded to the charges against him, his defense would have inevitably unraveled, exposing the Vatican's support of the genocidal Paveli\u0107\". Throughout 1942, the Yugoslav government in exile sent letters of protest to Pius XII asking him to use all possible means to stop the massacres against the Serbs in the Croat state, however Pius XII did nothing.\nIn 1941, Pius XII interpreted \"Divini Redemptoris\", an encyclical of Pope Pius XI, which forbade Catholics to help Communists, as not applying to military assistance to the Soviet Union. This interpretation assuaged American Catholics who had previously opposed Lend-Lease arrangements with the Soviet Union.\nIn March 1942, Pius XII established diplomatic relations with the Empire of Japan and received ambassador Ken Harada, who remained in that position until the end of the war.\nIn June 1942, diplomatic relations were established with the Nationalist government of China. This step was envisaged earlier, but delayed due to Japanese pressure to establish relations with the pro-Japanese Wang Jingwei regime. The first Chinese Minister to the Vatican, Hsieh Shou-kang, was only able to arrive at the Vatican in January 1943, due to difficulties of travel resulting from the war. He remained in that position until late 1946.\nThe pope employed the new technology of radio and a series of Christmas messages to preach against selfish nationalism and the evils of modern warfare and offer sympathy to the victims of the war. Pius XII's 1942 Christmas address via Vatican Radio voiced concern at human rights abuses and the murder of innocents based on race. The majority of the speech spoke generally about human rights and civil society; at the very end of the speech, Pius XII mentioned \"the hundreds of thousands of persons who, without any fault on their part, sometimes only because of their nationality or race, have been consigned to death or to a slow decline\". According to Rittner, the speech remains a \"lightning rod\" in debates about Pius XII. The Nazis themselves responded to the speech by stating that it was \"one long attack on everything we stand for.\u00a0... He is clearly speaking on behalf of the Jews.\u00a0... He is virtually accusing the German people of injustice toward the Jews, and makes himself the mouthpiece of the Jewish war criminals.\" \"The New York Times\" wrote that \"The voice of Pius XII is a lonely voice in the silence and darkness enveloping Europe this Christmas.\u00a0... In calling for a 'real new order' based on 'liberty, justice and love',\u00a0... the Pope put himself squarely against Hitlerism.\" Historian Michael Phayer claims, however, that \"it is still not clear \"whose\" genocide or \"which\" genocide he was referring to\". Speaking on the 50th anniversary of Pius's death in 2008, the German Pope Benedict XVI recalled that the Pope's voice had been \"broken by emotion\" as he \"deplored the situation\" with a \"clear reference to the deportation and extermination of the Jews\".\nSeveral authors have alleged a plot to kidnap Pius XII by the Nazis during their occupation of Rome in 1943 (Vatican City itself was not occupied); the British historian Owen Chadwick and the Jesuit ADSS editor Robert A. Graham each concluded such claims were an intentional creation of the British Political Warfare Executive. However, in 2007, subsequently to those accounts, Dan Kurzman published a work in which he establishes that the plot was a fact.\nIn 1944, Pius XII issued a Christmas message in which he warned against rule by the masses and against secular conceptions of liberty and equality.\nFinal stages.\nAs the war was approaching its end in 1945, Pius advocated a lenient policy by the Allied leaders in an effort to prevent what he perceived to be the mistakes made at the end of World War I. On 23 August 1944, he met the British prime minister, Winston Churchill, who was visiting Rome. At their meeting, the Pope acknowledged the justice of punishing war criminals, but expressed a hope that the people of Italy would not be punished, preferring that they should be made \"full allies\" in the remaining war effort.\nHolocaust.\nDuring the Second World War, after Nazi Germany commenced its mass-murder of Jews in occupied Soviet territory, Pius XII employed diplomacy to aid victims of the Holocaust and directed the church to provide discreet aid to Jews. Upon his death in 1958, among many Jewish tributes, the Chief Rabbi of Rome Elio Toaff, said: \"Jews will always remember what the Catholic Church did for them by order of the Pope during the Second World War. When the war was raging, Pius spoke out very often to condemn the false race theory.\" This is disputed by the academic John Cornwell, who, in his book, \"Hitler's Pope\", argues that the Pope was weak and vacillating in his approach to Nazism. Cornwell asserts that the Pope did little to challenge the progressing holocaust of the Jews out of fear of provoking the Nazis into invading Vatican City.\nIn his 1939 \"Summi Pontificatus\" first papal encyclical, Pius reiterated Catholic teaching against racial persecution and antisemitism and affirmed the ethical principles of the \"Revelation on Sinai\". At Christmas 1942, once evidence of the mass-murder of Jews had emerged, Pius XII voiced concern at the murder of \"hundreds of thousands\" of \"faultless\" people because of their \"nationality or race\" and intervened to attempt to block Nazi deportations of Jews in various countries. Upon his death in 1958, Pius was praised emphatically by the Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir, and other world leaders. But his insistence on Vatican neutrality and avoidance of naming the Nazis as the evildoers of the conflict became the foundation for contemporary and later criticisms from some quarters. His strongest public condemnation of genocide was considered inadequate by the Allied Powers, while the Nazis viewed him as an Allied sympathizer who had dishonoured his policy of Vatican neutrality. Hitler biographer John Toland, while scathing of Pius's cautious public comments in relation to the mistreatment of Jews, concluded that the Allies' own record of action against the Holocaust was \"shameful\", while \"The Church, under the Pope's guidance, had already saved the lives of more Jews than all other churches, religious institutions and rescue organizations combined\".\nIn 1939, the newly elected Pope Pius XII appointed several prominent Jewish scholars to posts at the Vatican after they had been dismissed from Italian universities under Fascist leader Benito Mussolini's racial laws. In 1939, the Pope employed a Jewish cartographer, Roberto Almagia, to work on old maps in the Vatican Library. Almagia had been at the Sapienza University of Rome since 1915 but was dismissed after Benito Mussolini's antisemitic legislation of 1938. The pope's appointment of two Jews to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences as well as the hiring of Almagia were reported by \"The New York Times\" in the editions of 11 November 1939 and 10 January 1940.\nPius later engineered an agreement\u2014formally approved on 23 June 1939\u2014with the President of Brazil Get\u00falio Vargas to issue 3,000 visas to \"non-Aryan Catholics\". However, over the next 18 months, Brazil's Conselho de Imigra\u00e7\u00e3o e Coloniza\u00e7\u00e3o (CIC) continued to tighten the restrictions on their issuance, including requiring a baptismal certificate dated before 1933, a substantial monetary transfer to the Banco do Brasil, and approval by the Brazilian Propaganda Office in Berlin. The programme was cancelled 14 months later, after fewer than 1,000 visas had been issued, amid suspicions of \"improper conduct\" (i.e., continuing to practice Judaism) among those who had received visas.\nIn April 1939, after the submission of Charles Maurras and the intervention of the Carmel of Lisieux, Pius XII ended his predecessor's ban on Action Fran\u00e7aise, a virulently antisemitic organization.\nFollowing the German/Soviet invasion of Poland, the Pope's first encyclical, \"Summi Pontificatus\" reiterated Catholic teaching against racial persecution and rejected antisemitism, quoting scripture singling out the \"principle of equality\"\u2014with specific reference to Jews: \"there is neither Gentile nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision\" and direct affirmation of the Jewish \"Revelation on Sinai\". The forgetting of solidarity \"imposed by our common origin and by the equality of rational nature in all men\" was called \"pernicious error\". Catholics everywhere were called upon to offer \"compassion and help\" to the victims of the war. The Pope declared determination to work to hasten the return of peace and trust in prayers for justice, love and mercy, to prevail against the scourge of war. The letter also decried the deaths of noncombatants.\nCardinal Secretary of State Luigi Maglione received a request from Chief Rabbi of Palestine Isaac Herzog in the spring of 1940 to intercede on behalf of Lithuanian Jews about to be deported to Germany. Pius called Joachim von Ribbentrop on 11 March, repeatedly protesting against the treatment of Jews. In 1940, Pius asked members of the clergy, on Vatican letterhead, to do whatever they could on behalf of interned Jews.\nIn 1941, Cardinal Theodor Innitzer of Vienna informed Pius of Jewish deportations in Vienna. Later that year, when asked by the Vichy regime Head of State Philippe P\u00e9tain if the Vatican objected to antisemitic laws, Pius responded that the church condemned antisemitism, but would not comment on specific rules. Similarly, when P\u00e9tain's regime adopted the \"Jewish statutes\", the Vichy ambassador to the Vatican, L\u00e9on B\u00e9rard (a French politician), was told that the legislation did not conflict with Catholic teachings. Valerio Valeri, the nuncio to France, was \"embarrassed\" when he learned of this publicly from P\u00e9tain and personally checked the information with Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione who confirmed the Vatican's position. In June 1942, Pius XII personally protested against the mass deportations of Jews from France, ordering the papal nuncio to protest to P\u00e9tain against \"the inhuman arrests and deportations of Jews\". In September 1941, Pius XII objected to a Slovak Jewish Code, which, unlike the earlier Vichy codes, prohibited intermarriage between Jews and non-Jews. In October 1941, Harold H. Tittmann Jr., a U.S. delegate to the Vatican, asked the Pope to condemn the atrocities against Jews; Pius replied that the Vatican wished to remain \"neutral\", reiterating the neutrality policy that Pius had invoked as early as September 1940.\nIn 1942, the Slovak charg\u00e9 d'affaires told Pius that Slovak Jews were being sent to concentration camps. On 11 March 1942, several days before the first transport was due to leave, the charg\u00e9 d'affaires in Bratislava reported to the Vatican: \"I have been assured that this atrocious plan is the handwork of ... Prime Minister (Tuka), who confirmed the plan ... he dared to tell me\u2014he who makes such a show of his Catholicism\u2014that he saw nothing inhuman or un-Christian in it ... the deportation of 80,000 persons to Poland, is equivalent to condemning a great number of them to certain death.\" The Vatican protested to the Slovak government that it \"deplore(s) these... measures which gravely hurt the natural human rights of persons, merely because of their race.\"\nOn 18 September 1942, Pius XII received a letter from Monsignor Montini (future Pope Paul VI), saying \"the massacres of the Jews reach frightening proportions and forms\". Later that month, Myron Taylor warned Pius that the Vatican's \"moral prestige\" was being injured by silence on European atrocities, a warning that was echoed simultaneously by representatives from the United Kingdom, Brazil, Uruguay, Belgium, and Poland. Myron C. Taylor passed a U.S. Government memorandum to Pius on 26 September 1942, outlining intelligence received from the Jewish Agency for Palestine, which said that Jews from across the Nazi Empire were being systematically \"butchered\". Taylor asked if the Vatican might have any information that might \"tend to confirm the reports\", and, if so, what the Pope might be able to do to influence public opinion against the \"barbarities\".\nCardinal Maglione handed Harold Tittmann a response to the letter on 10 October. The note thanked Washington for passing on the intelligence, and confirmed that reports of severe measures against the Jews had reached the Vatican from other sources, though it had not been possible to \"verify their accuracy\". Nevertheless, Maglione stated, \"every opportunity is being taken by the Holy See, however, to mitigate the suffering of these unfortunate people\". According to David Kertzer's \"The Pope at War\", Monsignor Domenico Tardini \"told the British envoy to the Vatican in mid-December [1942] that the Pope couldn't speak out about Nazi atrocities because the Vatican hadn't been able to verify the information\".\nIn December 1942, when Tittmann asked Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione if Pius would issue a proclamation similar to the Allied declaration \"German Policy of Extermination of the Jewish Race\", Maglione replied that the Vatican was \"unable to denounce publicly particular atrocities\". Pius XII directly explained to Tittman that he could not name the Nazis without at the same time mentioning the Bolsheviks.\nOn 14 December 1942, the German Jesuit and German resistance activist Lothar K\u00f6nig wrote to Reverend Robert Leiber, the Pope's private secretary and a liaison to the Resistance, to inform him that his sources had confirmed approximately 6,000 Polish and Jewish people were being killed every day in \"SS-furnaces\" located in an area of what was then German-occupied Poland and is now part of western Ukraine. It also referenced the Nazi death camps at Auschwitz and Dachau. Giovanni Coco, an archivist in the Vatican Apostolic Archive, said that K\u00f6nig urged the Holy See to withhold this information to protect the lives of his sources in the resistance.\nFollowing the Nazi/Soviet invasion of Poland, Pius XII's \"Summi Pontificatus\" called for the sympathy of the whole world towards Poland, where \"the blood of countless human beings, even noncombatants\" was being spilled. Pius never publicly condemned the Nazi massacre of 1,800,000\u20131,900,000 Poles, overwhelmingly Catholic (including 2,935 members of the Catholic clergy). In late 1942, Pius XII advised German and Hungarian bishops to speak out against the massacres on the Eastern Front. In his 1942 Christmas Eve message, he expressed concern for \"those hundreds of thousands, who ... sometimes only by reason of their nationality or race, are marked down for death or progressive extinction. On 7 April 1943, Msgr. Tardini, one of Pius XII's closest advisors, advised Pius XII that it would be politically advantageous after the war to take steps to help Slovak Jews.\nIn January 1943, Pius XII declined to denounce publicly the Nazi discrimination against the Jews, following requests to do so from W\u0142adys\u0142aw Raczkiewicz, president of the Polish government-in-exile, and Bishop Konrad von Preysing of Berlin. According to Toland, in June 1943, Pius XII addressed the issue of mistreatment of Jews at a conference of the Sacred College of Cardinals and said: \"Every word We address to the competent authority on this subject, and all Our public utterances have to be carefully weighed and measured by Us in the interests of the victims themselves, lest, contrary to Our intentions, We make their situation worse and harder to bear\".\nOn 26 September 1943, following the German occupation of northern Italy, Nazi officials gave Jewish leaders in Rome 36 hours to produce of gold (or the equivalent), threatening to take 300 hostages. Then Chief Rabbi of Rome Israel Zolli recounts in his memoir that he was selected to go to the Vatican and seek help. The Vatican offered to loan 15 kilos, but the offer proved unnecessary when the Jews received an extension. Soon afterward, when deportations from Italy were imminent, 477 Jews were hidden in the Vatican itself and another 4,238 were protected in Roman monasteries and convents. Eighty percent of Roman Jews were saved from deportation. Phayer argues that the German diplomats in Rome were the \"initiators of the effort to save the city's Jews\", but holds that Pius XII \"cooperated in this attempt at rescue\", while agreeing with Zuccotti that the Pope \"did not give orders\" for any Catholic institution to hide Jews.\nOn 30 April 1943, Pius XII wrote to Bishop Konrad von Preysing of Berlin to say: \"We give to the pastors who are working on the local level the duty of determining if and to what degree the danger of reprisals and of various forms of oppression occasioned by episcopal declarations\u00a0... \"ad maiora mala vitanda\" (to avoid worse)\u00a0... seem to advise caution. Here lies one of the reasons, why We impose self-restraint on Ourselves in our speeches; the experience, that we made in 1942 with papal addresses, which We authorized to be forwarded to the Believers, justifies our opinion, as far as We see.\u00a0... The Holy See has done whatever was in its power, with charitable, financial and moral assistance. To say nothing of the substantial sums which we spent in American money for the fares of immigrants.\"\nOn 28 October 1943, Ernst von Weizs\u00e4cker, the German Ambassador to the Vatican, telegraphed Berlin that \"the Pope has not yet let himself be persuaded to make an official condemnation of the deportation of the Roman Jews.\u00a0... Since it is currently thought that the Germans will take no further steps against the Jews in Rome, the question of our relations with the Vatican may be considered closed.\"\nIn March 1944, through the papal nuncio in Budapest, Angelo Rotta, the Pope urged the Hungarian government to moderate its treatment of the Jews. The Pope ordered Rotta and other papal legates to hide and shelter Jews. \nAfter George Mantello, Jewish First Secretary of El Salvador in Switzerland, received the Auschwitz Protocol with much delay around June 22, 1944 he immediately publicized its summary. From about June 24, 1944 in Switzerland that led to large-scale grassroots protests, Sunday masses and about 400 articles in the papers about the barbarism against Europe's Jews. These unprecedented events created so much \"noise\" that it attracted international attention to the large-scale daily deportation of Hungary's Jews to Auschwitz since May 1944. Protests by the King of Sweden, the International Red Cross, the United States, Britain and the Vatican forced Hungary's Regent Miklos Horthy to order cessation of most deportations of Jews from Hungary to Auschwitz on July 6, 1944 and termination of transports three days later. That saved many of the Jews of Hungary.\nIn 1944, Pius appealed to 13 Latin American governments to accept \"emergency passports\", although it also took the intervention of the United States Department of State for those countries to honor the documents. The Kaltenbrunner Report to Hitler, dated 29 November 1944, against the backdrop of the 20 July 1944 Plot to assassinate Hitler, states that the Pope was somehow a conspirator, specifically naming Eugenio Pacelli (Pope Pius XII), as being a party in the attempt.\nJewish orphans controversy.\nIn 2005, \"Corriere della Sera\" published a document dated 20 November 1946 on the subject of Jewish children baptized in war-time France. The document ordered that baptized children, if orphaned, should be kept in Catholic custody and stated that the decision \"has been approved by the Holy Father\". Nuncio Angelo Roncalli (who became Pope John XXIII, and was recognized by Yad Vashem as Righteous Among the Nations) ignored this directive. Abe Foxman, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), who had himself been baptized as a child and had undergone a custody battle afterwards, called for an immediate freeze on Pius's beatification process until the relevant Vatican Secret Archives and baptismal records were opened. Two Italian scholars, Matteo Luigi Napolitano and Andrea Tornielli, confirmed that the memorandum was genuine, although the reporting by the \"Corriere della Sera\" was misleading, as the document had originated in the French Catholic Church archives rather than the Vatican archives and strictly concerned itself with children without living blood relatives who were supposed to be handed over to Jewish organizations.\nWritings from released Vatican records revealed that Pius XII was personally but secretly involved in hiding the Finaly children from their Jewish family in an ultimately failed attempt to keep them Catholic after their secret baptism done against the wishes of their family. The French Catholic Church received very bad press from the affair, and several nuns and monks were jailed for the kidnapping before the children were discovered and spirited away to Israel. Only recently was the Pope's personal involvement revealed.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nAfter World War II, Pope Pius XII focused on material aid to war-torn Europe, an internal internationalization of the Catholic Church, and the development of its worldwide diplomatic relations. His encyclicals, \"Evangelii praecones\" and \"Fidei donum\", issued on 2 June 1951 and 21 April 1957, respectively, increased the local decision-making of Catholic missions, many of which became independent dioceses. Pius XII demanded recognition of local cultures as fully equal to European culture. Though his language retained old conceptions\u00a0\u2013 Africa, for example, merited special attention since the church there worked 'to forward her work among the heathen multitudes' \u2013 in 1956 he expressed solidarity with the 'non-Europeans who aspire to full political independence'.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the war, Pius XII elevated a number of high-profile resistors of Nazism to the College of Cardinals in 1946, among them the German bishops Joseph Frings of Cologne, Clemens von Galen of M\u00fcnster and Konrad von Preysing of Berlin. From elsewhere in the liberated Greater Germanic Reich Pius selected other resistors: the Dutch archbishop Johannes de Jong; the Hungarian bishop J\u00f3zsef Mindszenty; the Polish archbishop Adam Stefan Sapieha; and the French archbishop Jules-G\u00e9raud Sali\u00e8ge. In 1946 and 1953, respectively, he named as cardinals Thomas Tien Ken-sin of China and Valerian Gracias of India\u00a0\u2013 the first indigenous Catholics of their respective nations to sit in the College of Cardinals. The Italian papal diplomat Angelo Roncalli (later Pope John XXIII) and Polish Archbishop Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski were others among those elevated in 1953.\nA German contingent dominated his inner circle at this period\u00a0\u2013 the German Jesuits Robert Leiber, Wilhelm Hentrich and Ivo Zeiger. His personal confessor Augustin Bea was a German Jesuit and Mother Pascalina Lehnert and the other German speaking sisters of the papal household added to this element. The American bishop Aloisius Muench wrote in November 1948 that Pius XII was 'more interested in affairs of the Church in Germany than in any other part of the Church' and resolved to make the postwar German crisis a top priority \u2013 'its refugee crisis, poverty, hunger and disease, the fate of prisoners-of-war and accused war criminals, the disruption to the internal organization and communal life of German Catholicism, and Germany's uncertain political future'.\nPius XII was an anti-communist.17As he sought to secure resources from abroad to aid post-war recovery, believing deprivation fuelled political agitation, so he also sought to influence Italian politics. In January 1948, Luigi Gedda, of Italy's Catholic Action movement, was called to the Vatican as the election campaign for the first parliament of Italy's post-fascist republic was underway.\nPius XII was rather distrustful of Alcide de Gasperi and Italy's Christian Democrats, considering the party indecisive and fractious\u00a0\u2013 reformist currents within it particularly, which tended to the moderate Left\u00a0\u2013 represented by the Sicilian priest Luigi Sturzo for example\u00a0\u2013 he considered too accommodating to the Left. On the eve of the 1952 local elections in Rome, in which again the Communist and Socialist parties threatened to win out, he used informal connections to make his views known. Pius XII stated that the war against Communism was a holy war and excommunicated members of the Italian Communist Party. Having decided to encourage the Christian Democrats to consider a political alliance with the Rightist parties as part of an anti-left coalition, he asked the Jesuit, Father Riccardo Lombardi, to speak with de Gasperi to consider such an alliance\u00a0\u2013 an electoral alliance with those even of monarchist and neo-fascist tendencies -including the Italian Social Movement. Adopting a domino theory he warned that, if \"the Communists win in Rome, in Italy, it will cast a shadow on the entire world: France would become Communist, and then Spain and then all of Europe.\"\nPius XII urged Chinese Catholics to resist the People's Republic of China government.17\nLater life, illness and death.\nLate years of Pope Pius XII.\nA long illness in late 1954 caused the pope to consider abdication. Afterwards, changes in his work habit became noticeable. The Pope avoided long ceremonies, canonizations and consistories and displayed hesitancy in personnel matters. He found it increasingly difficult to chastise subordinates and appointees such as his physician, Riccardo Galeazzi-Lisi, who after numerous indiscretions was excluded from papal service for the last years, but, keeping his title, was able to enter the papal apartments to photograph the dying pope, which he sold to French magazines. Pius underwent three courses of cellular rejuvenation treatment administered by Paul Niehans, the most important in 1954 when Pius was gravely ill. Side-effects of the treatment included hallucinations, from which the Pope suffered in his last years. \"These years were also plagued by horrific nightmares. Pacelli's blood-curdling screams could be heard throughout the papal apartments.\"\nPius XII often elevated young priests as bishops, such as Julius D\u00f6pfner (35 years) and Karol Wojty\u0142a (later Pope John Paul II, 38 years), one of his last appointees in 1958. He took a firm stand against pastoral experiments, such as \"worker-priests\", who worked full-time in factories and joined political parties and unions. He continued to defend the theological tradition of Thomism as worthy of continued reform, and as superior to modern trends such as phenomenology or existentialism.\nIllness and death.\nWith frequent absences from work, Pope Pius XII had come to depend heavily on a few close colleagues, especially his aide Domenico Tardini, his speechwriter Robert Leiber, and his long-serving housekeeper Sister Pascalina Lehnert. The Pope still addressed lay people and groups about a wide range of topics. Sometimes he answered specific moral questions addressed to him. To professional associations he explained specific occupational ethics in light of church teachings. Robert Leiber helped him occasionally with his speeches and publications. Cardinal Augustin Bea was his personal confessor. Sister Pascalina was for forty years his \"housekeeper, muse and lifelong companion\".\nOn Monday, 6 October 1958, at around 8:30 CET (7:30 GMT), he suffered a stroke, weakening him greatly in addition to his other maladies, after having taken ill the previous day after a series of meetings. He received the last rites. However, his condition suitably improved until 8 October when he suffered a second stroke. By the mid-afternoon, his doctors had reported that Pius XII was suffering from a severe cardio-pulmonary collapse and by 15:00 CET (14:00 GMT) believed that his death was imminent. Just before sunset, Pius XII contracted pneumonia and doctors immediately moved to bring in oxygen and blood plasma. His last words were reportedly, \"Pray. Pray that this regrettable situation for the church may end\".\nOn the last full day of his life, his temperature rose steadily and his breathing became difficult. At 3:52 CET (2:52 GMT) on Thursday, 9 October, a Feast of Saint Denis of Paris, he gave a smile, lowered his head and died. The cause of death was recorded as acute heart failure. Domenico Tardini prayed the \"Magnificat Anima mea dominum\", the Virgin Mary's praise of the Lord, in Latin. His doctor Gaspanini said afterwards: \"The Holy Father did not die because of any specific illness. He was completely exhausted. He was overworked beyond limit. His heart was healthy, his lungs were good. He could have lived another 20 years, had he spared himself.\" Spain declared ten days of mourning; Brazil declared five days of mourning; Italy declared three days of mourning and the closure of offices and schools as a sign of respect; Portugal and Cuba declared three days of mourning.\nThe Testament of Pope Pius XII was published in the month of his death.\nBotched embalming.\nPius XII's physician, Riccardo Galeazzi-Lisi, reported that the pontiff's body was embalmed in the room where he died using a novel process invented by Oreste Nuzzi.\nPope Pius XII did not want the vital organs removed from his body, demanding instead that it should be kept in the same condition \"in which God created it\". According to Galeazzi-Lisi, this was the reason why he and Nuzzi, an embalmer from Naples, used an atypical approach with the embalming procedure. In a controversial press conference, Galeazzi-Lisi described in great detail the embalming of the body of the late pontiff. He claimed to have used the same system of oils and resins with which the body of Jesus Christ was preserved.\nGaleazzi-Lisi asserted that the new process would \"preserve the body indefinitely in its natural state\". However, whatever chance the new embalming process had of efficaciously preserving the body was obliterated by intense heat in Castel Gandolfo during the embalming process. As a result, the body decomposed rapidly and the viewing of the faithful had to be terminated abruptly.\nGaleazzi-Lisi reported that heat in the halls where the body of the late pope lay in state caused chemical reactions which required it to be treated twice after the original preparation. Others describe Galeazzi and Nuzzi \"crawling over the catafalque in the dead of night... to renew their embalming\". Swiss guards stationed around Pius XII's body were reported to have become ill during their vigil, and the body of the pope reportedly turned \"emerald green\". However, other sources indicate it was the smell of the chemicals and resins that caused the eyes of the Noble Guard to water.\nFuneral.\nHis funeral procession into Rome was the largest congregation of Romans as of that date. Romans mourned \"their\" pope, who was born in their own city, especially as a hero in the time of war. Cardinal Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli (later Pope John XXIII) wrote in his diary on Saturday, 11 October 1958 that probably no Roman had enjoyed such a triumph, which he viewed as a reflection of the spiritual majesty and religious dignity of the late Pius XII.\nWhen Pius XII was interred, the small crucifix and rosary that he held in his hands as he died were buried with him.\nCause for canonization.\nPope Pius XII's cause of canonization was opened on 18 November 1965 by Pope Paul VI during the final session of the Second Vatican Council. In May 2007, the congregation recommended that Pius XII should be declared Venerable. Pope Benedict XVI did so on 19 December 2009, simultaneously making the same declaration in regard to Pope John Paul II.\nFor Venerable status, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints certifies the \"heroic virtues\" of the candidate. Making Pius XII as Venerable met with various responses, most centered on the papal words and actions during World War II. Benedict's signature on the decree of heroic virtue was regarded by some as a public relations blunder, though acceptance of Pius XII as a saviour of Europe's Jews is regarded as 'proof of fidelity to the Church, the \"pope\" and the Tradition' by neoconservative Catholic groups. On the other hand, Rabbi Marvin Hier, founder and dean at the Simon Wiesenthal Center said \"there would be a great distortion of history\" if Pius XII were canonized. Rabbi Jeremy Lawrence, the head of Sydney's Great Synagogue, said: \"How can one venerate a man who ... seemed to give his passive permission to the Nazis as the Jews were prised from his doorstep in Rome?\"\nOn 1 August 2013, an anonymous \"source who works for the Congregation for the Causes of Saints\" said Pope Francis was considering canonization without a miracle, \"us[ing] the formula of \"scientia certa\"\".\nPope Francis also announced his intention in January 2014 to open the Vatican Secret Archives to scholars so that an evaluation of Pius' role in the war can be determined before canonization. This has been met with praise by the Jewish community. However, it was said that it could take up to a year to gather all the documents and then analyze them.\nOn 26 May 2014, on his way back from the Holy Land to the Vatican City, Pope Francis stated that the late pope would not be beatified because the cause had stalled. Pope Francis stated that he checked the progress of the cause for Pius XII and said that there were no miracles attributed to his intercession, which was the main reason that the cause had halted.\nFather Peter Gumpel stated, in a 12 January 2016 documentary on the late pope, that there was consultation of the Vatican Secret Archives which were carried out in secret; in short, it means that there are no controversies surrounding the late pontiff that could impede the potential beatification. In that same documentary, the cause's vice-postulator Marc Lindeijer stated that several miracles attributed to the late pope are reported to the postulation every year but the individuals related to the healings do not come forward to enact diocesan proceedings of investigation. Lindeijer explained that this was the reason that the cause has stalled in the past as none have come forward to assist the postulation in their investigations.\nPotential miracle.\nReports from 2014 indicate a potential miracle from the United States attributed to the intercession of the late pope that was reported to the postulation. The miracle pertains to a male plagued with severe influenza and pneumonia that could have proven to be fatal; the individual was said to have been healed in full after a novena to Pius XII.\nViews, interpretations and scholarship.\nContemporary.\nDuring the war, \"Time\" credited Pius XII and the Catholic Church for \"fighting totalitarianism more knowingly, devoutly and authoritatively, and for a longer time, than any other organised power\". During the war he was also praised editorially by \"The New York Times\" for opposing Nazi antisemitism and aggression. According to Paul O'Shea, \"The Nazis demonised the Pope as the agent of international Jewry; the Americans and British were continually frustrated because he would not condemn Nazi aggression; and the Russians accused him of being an agent of Fascism and the Nazis.\"\nOn 21 September 1945, the general secretary of the World Jewish Congress, Aryeh Leon Kubowitzki, presented an amount of money to the Pope, \"in recognition of the work of the Holy See in rescuing Jews from Fascist and Nazi persecutions.\" After the war, in the autumn of 1945, Harry Greenstein from Baltimore, a close friend of Chief Rabbi Herzog of Jerusalem, told Pius XII how grateful Jews were for all he had done for them. \"My only regret\", the Pope replied, \"is not to have been able to save a greater number of Jews\".\nPius XII was also criticised during his lifetime. Leon Poliakov wrote in 1950 that Pius XII had been a tacit supporter of Vichy France's antisemitic laws, calling him \"less forthright\" than Pope Pius XI either out of \"Germanophilia\" or the hope that Hitler would defeat Communist Russia.\nAfter Pius XII's death on 9 October 1958 many Jewish organisations and newspapers around the world paid tribute to his legacy. At the United Nations, Golda Meir, Israel's Foreign Minister, said, \"When fearful martyrdom came to our people in the decade of Nazi terror, the voice of the Pope was raised for the victims. The life of our times was enriched by a voice speaking out on the great moral truths above the tumult of daily conflict.\" \"The Jewish Chronicle\" (London) stated on 10 October, \"Adherents of all creeds and parties will recall how Pius XII faced the responsibilities of his exalted office with courage and devotion. Before, during, and after the Second World War, he constantly preached the message of peace. Confronted by the monstrous cruelties of Nazism, Fascism and Communism, he repeatedly proclaimed the virtues of humanity and compassion.\" In the Canadian Jewish Chronicle (17 October), Rabbi J. Stern stated that Pius XII \"made it possible for thousands of Jewish victims of Nazism and Fascism to be hidden away...\" In 6 November edition of \"The Jewish Post &amp; News\" in Winnipeg, William Zukerman, the former \"The American Hebrew\" columnist, wrote that no other leader \"did more to help the Jews in their hour of greatest tragedy, during the Nazi occupation of Europe, than the late Pope\". Other prominent Jewish figures, such as Israeli Prime Minister Moshe Sharett and Chief Rabbi Yitzhak Herzog expressed their public gratitude to Pius XII.\nEarly historical accounts.\nSome early works echoed the favourable sentiments of the war period, including Polish historian Oskar Halecki's \"Pius XII: Eugenio Pacelli: Pope of peace\" (1954) and Nazareno Padellaro's \"Portrait of Pius XII\" (1949).\nPinchas Lapide, a Jewish theologian and Israeli diplomat to Milan in the 1960s, estimated controversially in \"Three Popes and the Jews\" that Pius \"was instrumental in saving at least 700,000 but probably as many as 860,000 Jews from certain death at Nazi hands\". Some historians have questioned this often cited number, which Lapide reached by \"deducting all reasonable claims of rescue\" by non-Catholics from the total number of European Jews surviving the Holocaust. A Catholic scholar, Kevin J. Madigan, has interpreted this and other praise from prominent Jewish leaders, including that offered by Golda Meir, as less than sincere, an attempt to secure Vatican recognition of the State of Israel.\n\"The Deputy\".\nIn 1963, Rolf Hochhuth's controversial drama \"Der Stellvertreter. Ein christliches Trauerspiel\" (\"The Deputy, a Christian tragedy\", released in English in 1964) portrayed Pope Pius XII as a hypocrite who remained silent about the Holocaust. The depiction is described as lacking \"credible substantiation\" by the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\". Books such as Joseph Lichten's \"A Question of Judgment\" (1963), written in response to \"The Deputy\", defended Pius XII's actions during the war. Lichten labelled any criticism of the Pope's actions during World War II as \"a stupefying paradox\" and said, \"no one who reads the record of Pius XII's actions on behalf of Jews can subscribe to Hochhuth's accusation\". Critical scholarly works like Guenter Lewy's controversial \"The Catholic Church and Nazi Germany\" (1964) also followed the publication of \"The Deputy\". Lewy's conclusion was that \"the Pope and his advisers\u2014influenced by the long tradition of moderate anti-Semitism so widely accepted in Vatican circles\u2014did not view the plight of the Jews with a real sense of urgency and moral outrage. For this assertion no documentation is possible, but it is a conclusion difficult to avoid\". In 2002 the play was adapted into the film, \"Amen.\". An article in \"La Civilit\u00e0 Cattolica\" in March 2009 indicated the accusations that Hochhuth's play made widely known originated not among Jews but in the Communist bloc. It was on Moscow Radio, on 2 June 1945, that the first accusation directly against Pius XII of refusing to speak out against the exterminations in Nazi concentration camps. It was also the first medium to call him \"Hitler's Pope\".\nThe former high-ranking Securitate General Ion Mihai Pacepa alleged in 2007 that Hochhuth's play and numerous publications attacking Pius XII as a Nazi sympathizer were fabrications that were part of a KGB and Eastern Bloc secret services disinformation campaign, named Seat 12, to discredit the moral authority of the Church and Christianity in the West. Pacepa indicated that he was involved in contacting Eastern Bloc agents close the Vatican in order to fabricate the story to be used for the attack against the wartime pope.\n\"Actes\".\nIn the aftermath of the controversy surrounding \"The Deputy\", in 1964, Pope Paul VI authorized Jesuit scholars to access the Vatican State Secretariat Archives, which are normally not opened for seventy-five years. Original documents in French and Italian, \"Actes et documents du Saint Si\u00e8ge relatifs \u00e0 la Seconde Guerre Mondiale\", were published in eleven volumes between 1965 and 1981. Pierre Blet also published a summary of the eleven volumes.\n\"Hitler's Pope\" and \"The Myth of Hitler's Pope\".\nIn 1999 the British author John Cornwell's \"Hitler's Pope\" criticised Pius for his actions and inactions during the Holocaust. Cornwell argued that Pius subordinated opposition to the Nazis to his goal of increasing and centralising the power of the papacy. Further, Cornwell accused Pius of antisemitism. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" described Cornwell's depiction of Pius XII as anti-Semitic as lacking \"credible substantiation\". Kenneth L. Woodward stated in his review in \"Newsweek\" that \"errors of fact and ignorance of context appear on almost every page\". Paul O'Shea summarized the work by saying it was \"disappointing because of its many inaccuracies, selective use of sources, and claims that do not bear any scrutiny. However, [Cornwell] has rendered a service by insisting Pacelli be re-examined thoroughly and placed firmly within the context of his times\". Five years after the publication of \"Hitler's Pope\", Cornwell stated: \"I would now argue, in the light of the debates and evidence following \"Hitler's Pope\", that Pius XII had so little scope of action that it is impossible to judge the motives for his silence during the war, while Rome was under the heel of Mussolini and later occupied by Germany\".\nCornwell's work was the first to have access to testimonies from Pius XII's beatification process as well as to many documents from Pacelli's nunciature which had just been opened under the 75-year rule by the Vatican State Secretary archives. Susan Zuccotti's \"\" (2000) and Michael Phayer's \"The Catholic Church and the Holocaust, 1930\u20131965\" (2000) and \"Pius XII, The Holocaust, and the Cold War\" (2008) provided further critical, though more scholarly analysis of Pius's legacy. Daniel Goldhagen's \"A Moral Reckoning\" and David Kertzer's \"The Pope Against the Jews\" denounced Pius, while Ralph McInery and Jos\u00e9 Sanchez wrote less critical assessments of Pius XII's pontificate.\nIn specific riposte to Cornwell's criticism, American Rabbi and historian David Dalin published \"The Myth of Hitler's Pope: How Pope Pius XII Rescued Jews from the Nazis\" in 2005. He reaffirmed previous accounts of Pius having been a saviour of thousands of Europe's Jews. In a review of the book, another Jewish scholar, the Churchill biographer Martin Gilbert, wrote that Dalin's work was \"an essential contribution to our understanding of the reality of Pope Pius XII's support for Jews at their time of greatest danger. Hopefully, his account will replace the divisively harmful version of papal neglect, and even collaboration, that has held the field for far too long\". Dalin's book also argued that Cornwell and others were liberal Catholics and ex-Catholics who \"exploit the tragedy of the Jewish people during the Holocaust to foster their own political agenda of forcing changes on the Catholic Church today\" and that Pius XII was responsible for saving the lives of many thousands of Jews.\nA number of other scholars replied with favourable accounts of Pius XII, including Margherita Marchione's \"Yours Is a Precious Witness: Memoirs of Jews and Catholics in Wartime Italy\" (1997), \"Pope Pius XII: Architect for Peace\" (2000) and \"Consensus and Controversy: Defending Pope Pius XII\" (2002); Pierre Blet's \"Pius XII and the Second World War, According to the Archives of the Vatican\" (1999); and Ronald J. Rychlak's \"Hitler, the War and the Pope\" (2000). Ecclesiastical historian William Doino (author of \"The Pius War: Responses to the Critics of Pius XII\"), concluded that Pius was \"emphatically \"not\" silent\". Other important works challenging the negative characterization of Pius's legacy were written by Eamon Duffy, Clifford Longley, Cardinal Winning, Michael Burleigh, Paul Johnson, and Denis Mack Smith.\nIn his 2003 book \"A Moral Reckoning\", Daniel Goldhagen asserted that Pius XII \"chose again and again not to mention the Jews publicly... [In] public statements by Pius XII ... any mention of the Jews is conspicuously absent.\" In a review of Goldhagen's book, Mark Riebling counters that Pius used the word \"Jew\" in his first encyclical, \"Summi Pontificatus\", published on 20 October 1939. \"There Pius insisted that all human beings be treated charitably\u2014for, as Paul had written to the Colossians, in God's eyes \"there is neither Gentile nor Jew\". In saying this, the Pope affirmed that Jews were full members of the human community\u2014which is Goldhagen's own criterion for establishing 'dissent from the anti-Semitic creed'.\"\nIn \"Pius XII, the Hound of Hitler\", the Catholic journalist Gerard Noel dismissed accusations that Pius was \"anti-semitic\" or \"pro-Nazi\", but accused him of \"silence\" based on fear of retaliation and wrote that \"Hitler played the Pope with consummate expertise\". Ian Kershaw came to a similar conclusion about Pius's motives. He suggested that besides seeking to protect his own church and parishioners, Pius feared that speaking out would worsen the plight of the Jews, though he could have hardly made it worse after 1942. Kershaw called the 1942 Christmas message \"a missed opportunity\", adding: \"Having decided to refer to the genocide, Pius ought to have followed this with a condemnation that was loud, plain and unequivocal.\" However, he doubted that condemnation from the Pope would have led to Nazi Germany changing course.\nGerald Steinacher's \"Nazis on the Run\" accused Pius of turning a blind eye to the activities of Vatican priests assisting \"denazification through conversion\", which he said helped ex-Nazi anti-communists to escape justice.\nA Berlin Jewish couple, Mr. and Mrs. Wolfsson, argued in defence of the pope: \"None of us wanted the Pope to take an open stand. We were all fugitives, and fugitives do not wish to be pointed at. The Gestapo would have become more excited and would have intensified its inquisitions. If the Pope had protested, Rome would have become the center of attention. It was better that the Pope said nothing. We all shared this opinion at the time, and this is still our conviction today.\" There were examples when the Catholic Church reaction to Nazi brutality only intensified SS persecutions of both Jews and the church.\nInternational Catholic\u2013Jewish Historical Commission.\nIn 1999, in an attempt to address some of this controversy, the International Catholic\u2013Jewish Historical Commission (Historical Commission), a group of three Catholic and three Jewish scholars was appointed, respectively, by the Holy See's Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews (Holy See's Commission) and the International Jewish Committee for Interreligious Consultations (IJCIC), to whom a preliminary report was issued in October 2000.\nThe Commission did not discover any documents, but had the agreed-upon task to review the existing Vatican volumes, that make up the \"Actes et Documents du Saint Si\u00e8ge (ADSS)\" The commission was internally divided over the question of access to additional documents from the Holy See, access to the news media by individual commission members, and, questions to be raised in the preliminary report. It was agreed to include all 47 individual questions by the six members, and use them as Preliminary Report.&lt;ref name=\"Gerard P Fogarty, Vatican/Holocaust\"&gt;Fogarty, Gerard P., \"The Vatican and the Holocaust, Presentation to the Dominican House of Studies, Washington, D.C.\", 9 December 2000&lt;/ref&gt; In addition to the 47 questions, the commission issued no findings of its own. It stated that it was not their task to sit in judgment of the Pope and his advisors but to contribute to a more nuanced understanding of the papacy during the Holocaust.\nThe 47 questions by the six scholars were grouped into three parts: (a) 27 specific questions on existing documents, mostly asking for background and additional information such as drafts of the encyclical \"Mit brennender Sorge\", which was largely written by Eugenio Pacelli. (b) Fourteen questions dealt with themes of individual volumes, such as the question how Pius viewed the role of the church during the war. (c) Six general questions, such as the absence of any anti-communist sentiments in the documents. The disagreement between members over additional documents locked up under the Holy See's 70-year rule resulted in a discontinuation of the commission in 2001 on friendly terms. Unsatisfied with the findings, Michael Marrus, one of the three Jewish members of the commission, said the commission \"ran up against a brick wall ... It would have been really helpful to have had support from the Holy See on this issue.\"\nPeter Stanford, a Catholic journalist and writer, wrote, regarding \"Fatal Silence: The Pope, the Resistance and the German Occupation of Rome\" (written by Robert Katz; Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2003):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The Vatican] still refuses to open all its files from the period\u2014which seems to me to be a conclusive admission of guilt\u2014but Katz has winkled various papers out of God's business address on earth to add to the stash of new information he has uncovered in America in the archives of the Office of Strategic Services. From this we learn that, although Pius's defenders still say that he paid a golden ransom in a vain effort to save Rome's Jews from transportation to the death camps, the most he did was indicate a willingness to chip in if the Jews could not raise the sum demanded. He also shows that no individual Jews were spared, as is often claimed, after Pius personally intervened with the Nazis. Moreover, Katz reveals that those who did escape the Nazi round-up and found sanctuary in church buildings in Rome did so in the face of explicit opposition from the Vatican. The real heroes and heroines were the priests and nuns who refused to bow to Pius's officials and hand over the desperate people whom they were hiding. The main problem with writing about Pius's wartime is that in effect, he did nothing. Facing the murders of six million people, he remained silent. As Jews were taken away from the ghetto that sat right alongside St Peter's, he may have agonised, but he did not intervene. When he did raise his voice with the German occupiers, it was either to ensure that the Vatican City state would not be compromised\u2014that is to say, he would be safe\u2014or to emphasise his own neutrality in a conflict which, for many, became a battle between good and evil. His unrealistic hope was that the Catholic Church could emerge as the peacemaker across Europe. Instead, both the American and British leaderships, as Katz shows, regarded the papacy as tainted by its association with Nazism and irrelevant in the post-1945 reshaping of the continent. Both had urged Pius to speak up against the Holocaust and so drew their own conclusions about him. Far from being a saint, then, he was at best a fool, perhaps an anti-Semite and probably a coward.\nKatz's book also discusses how the Pope's view of the anti-Nazi resistance\u2014as harbingers of Communism\u2014meant he chose not to intervene in the Ardeatine massacre.\nRecent developments.\nIn \"The Real Odessa: How Peron Brought the Nazi War Criminals to Argentina\" (2002), the journalist Uki Go\u00f1i described how the Argentinian government dealt with war criminals. However, during his research Go\u00f1i accidentally stumbled on British Foreign Office documents relating to the involvement of Vatican personnel in the smuggling of war criminals, the so-called post-war \"ratlines\". Go\u00f1i found out that the British Envoy D'Arcy Osborne had intervened with Pope Pius XII to put an end to these illegal activities. Furthermore, he claimed \"that the Pope secretly pleaded with Washington and London on behalf of notorious criminals and Nazi collaborators\". Suzanne Brown-Fleming's \"The Holocaust and Catholic Conscience: Cardinal Aloisius Muench and the Guilt Question in Germany\" (2006) underlines Go\u00f1i's findings. Brown-Fleming stated how Pius XII allegedly intervened on behalf of German war criminals (e.g. Otto Ohlendorf). Brown-Fleming's main source was the archive of Pope Pius XII's representative in post-war Germany, Cardinal Aloisius Joseph Muench. Then, Phayer's \"Pius XII, the Holocaust, and the Cold War\" (2008) utilized documents that were released via Bill Clinton's 1997 executive order declassifying wartime and postwar documents, many of which are currently at the US National Archives and Holocaust Memorial Museum. These documents include diplomatic correspondence, American espionage, and decryptions of German communications. Relevant documents have also been released by the Argentine government and the British Foreign Office. Other information sources have become available, including the diary of Bishop Joseph Patrick Hurley. These documents reveal new information about Pius XII's actions regarding the Usta\u0161e regime, the genocides in Poland, the finances of the wartime church, the deportation of the Roman Jews, and the ratlines for Nazis and fascists fleeing Europe. According to Phayer, \"the face of Pope Pius that we see in these documents is not the same face we see in the eleven volumes the Vatican published of World War II documents, a collection which, though valuable, is nonetheless critically flawed because of its many omissions\".\nOn 19 September 2008, Pope Benedict XVI held a reception for conference participants during which he praised Pius XII as a pope who made every effort to save Jews during the war. A second conference was held from 6\u20138 November 2008 by the Pontifical Academy of Life.\nOn 9 October 2008, the 50th anniversary of Pius XII's death, Benedict XVI celebrated pontifical Mass in his memory. Shortly before and after the Mass, dialectics continued between the Jewish hierarchy and the Vatican as Rabbi She'ar Yashuv Cohen of Haifa addressed the Synod of Bishops and expressed his disappointment towards Pius XII's \"silence\" during the war.\nOn 16 June 2009, the \"Pave the Way Foundation\" announced that it would release 2,300 pages of documents in Avellino, Italy, dating from 1940 to 1945, which the organisation claims show that Pius XII \"worked diligently to save Jews from Nazi tyranny\"; the organisation's founder, Krupp, has accused historians of harbouring \"private agendas\" and having \"let down\" the public. The foundation's research led to the publication of the book \"Pope Pius XII and World War II: the documented truth\", authored by Krupp; the book reproduces 225 pages of the new documents produced by the foundation's research.\nMark Riebling argued in his 2015 book \"Church of Spies\" that Pius XII was involved in plots to overthrow Hitler from mid-October 1939 and was prepared to mediate a peace between the Allies and the Axis in the event of a regime change in Germany. The courier between the resistance group under Admiral Wilhelm Canaris and the pope was the Bavarian lawyer and Catholic politician Joseph M\u00fcller.\nOpening of the Vatican Secret Archives.\nOn the occasion of the 80th anniversary of the appointment of Pius XII as Bishop of Rome, Pope Francis announced during an audience for staff of the Vatican Secret Archives on 4 March 2019 that Vatican archival materials pertaining to Pius XII's pontificate would be accessible to scholars beginning on 2 March 2020. While this announcement was welcome by researchers, much of it was clouded by the role of Pope Pius XII with regard to the Holocaust. However, archival research of this period was expected to inform a much broader shift within global Christianity, from Europe to the global South.\nThe Vatican archives have provided many millions of pages and it was expected to take many years to process the findings. As of May 2021, the study of the archive had been inconclusive. In January 2022, historian Michael F. Feldkamp announced that he had discovered in the Vatican archives evidence that Pius XII had personally saved at least 15,000 Jews from extermination, and that he had sent a report on the Holocaust to the American government shortly after the Wannsee Conference of January 20, 1942, although they did not believe the pope.\nIn June 2022, David Kertzer, one of the first historians to have analyzed the archives, published his book \"The Pope at War\". Kertzer, with the support of thousands of unpublished documents, uncovered the existence of secret negotiations between Hitler and Pius XII already a few weeks after the end of the conclave, promoted by Hitler himself with the intention of improving his relations with the Vatican. For his part, Pius XII concentrated his efforts on protecting and improving the situation of the Church in Germany in the face of the anti-Catholic policies of the Nazis, although no agreement was reached.\nIn September 2023, \"Corriere della Sera\" published a newly discovered documentation from the Vatican Secret Archive showing that a German Jesuit had informed the Pope of the Holocaust.\nThe archives have also alleged that Pope Pius XII had knowledge of Marcial Maciel's accusations of crimes, including sexual abuse of seminarians and drug abuse, before action was taken. The Vatican may have known of Maciel's crimes for 50 years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23809", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23809", "title": "Pope John II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 533 to 535\nPope John II (; c. 475 \u2013 8 May 535), born Mercurius, was the Bishop of Rome from 2 January 533 to his death on 8 May 535. As a priest at St. Clement's Basilica, he endowed that church with gifts and commissioned stone carvings for it. Mercurius became the first pope to adopt a new papal name upon his elevation to the office. During his pontificate, John II notably removed Bishop Contumeliosus of Riez from his office, convened a council on the readmission of Arian clergy, and approved an edict of emperor Justinian, promulgating doctrine opposed by his predecessor, Pope Hormisdas.\nEarly life.\nMercurius was born in Rome, son of Praeiectus. He became a priest at St. Clement's Basilica on the Caelian Hill, and even before becoming pope he had commissioned work for the basilica and made generous donations. The basilica still retains memorials of \"Johannes surnamed Mercurius\"; he donated sculpted balustrades (\"plutei\") and carved marble \"transennae\", grates or screens that partitioned the space without blocking light. A reference to \"Presbyter Mercurius\" appears on a fragment of an ancient ciborium, and his monogram, in the style of the sixth century, is found on several marble slabs that enclose the \"schola cantorum\".\nPontificate.\nMercurius was elected pope on 2 January 533, apparently the first pope to adopt a new name upon elevation to the papacy, perhaps because he had been named after a pagan god.\nThe notoriously adulterous behavior of Bishop Contumeliosus of Riez caused John to order the bishops of Gaul to confine him in a monastery. Until a new bishop could be appointed, he bade the clergy of Riez to obey the Bishop of Arles.\nStemming from Pope Hormisdas' suppression of the statement \"one of the Trinity suffered in the flesh\" in Scythian monastic liturgies, the Acoemetae, or Sleepless Monks, began to support Nestorianism, the belief that Jesus is neither human nor divine. Emperor Justinian I and patriarch Epiphanius of Constantinople opposed this ideology and sent a deputation to Rome which prompted John II to assemble a synod, excommunicate the Acoemetae, and to issue statements approving the doctrine of the emperor.\nArianism.\nIn 535, 217 bishops assembled in a council at Carthage submitted to John II a decision about whether bishops who had lapsed into Arianism should, on repentance, keep their rank or be admitted only to lay communion. The question of re-admittance to the lapsed troubled North Africa for centuries (see Novatianism and Donatism). The answer to their question was given by Agapetus I, as John II died on 8 May 535. He was buried in St Peter's Basilica.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23810", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23810", "title": "Pope Agapetus I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 535 to 536\nPope Agapetus I (489/490 \u2013 22 April 536) was the bishop of Rome from 13 May 535 to his death on 22 April 536. His father, Gordianus, was a priest in Rome and he may have been related to two popes, Felix III and Gregory I.\nIn 536, Agapetus traveled to Constantinople at the behest of King Theodahad of the Ostrogoths and unsuccessfully tried to persuade Emperor Justinian I to call off a Byzantine invasion of the Ostrogoth kingdom. While in Constantinople, Agapetus also deposed the patriarch Anthimus I and personally consecrated his successor who is Menas of Constantinople. Four of Agapetus\u2019 letters from this period have survived: two addressed to Justinian, one to the bishops of Africa, and one to the Bishop of Carthage.\nAgapetus was canonized in both the Catholic and Orthodox traditions; his feast day is April 22.\nFamily.\nAgapetus was born in Rome, although his exact date of birth is unknown. He was the son of Gordianus, a Roman priest who had been slain during the riots in the days of Pope Symmachus (term 498\u2013514). The name of his father might point to a familial relation with popes: Felix III (483\u2013492) and Gregory I (590\u2013604).\nPontificate.\nJeffrey Richards describes him as \"the last survivor of the Symmachan old guard\", having been ordained as a deacon perhaps as early as 502, during the Laurentian schism. He was elevated from archdeacon to pope in 535. His first official act was to burn, in the presence of the assembled clergy, the anathema which Boniface II had pronounced against the latter's deceased rival Dioscurus on a false charge of simony and had ordered to be preserved in the Roman archives.\nAgapetus assisted Cassiodorus in the founding of his monastery at Vivarium. He confirmed the decrees of the Council of Carthage, after the retaking of North Africa from the Vandals, according to which converts from Arianism were declared ineligible to Holy Orders and those already ordained were merely admitted to lay communion. He accepted an appeal from Contumeliosus, Bishop of Riez, whom the Council of Marseilles had condemned for immorality, and he ordered Caesarius of Arles to grant the accused a new trial before papal delegates.\nMeanwhile, the Byzantine general Belisarius was preparing for an invasion of Italy. King Theodahad of the Ostrogoths begged Agapetus to proceed on an embassy to Constantinople and use his personal influence to appease Emperor Justinian I following the death of Amalasuntha. To defray the costs of the embassy, Agapetus pledged the sacred vessels of the Church of Rome. He set out in mid-winter with five bishops and a large retinue. In February 536, he appeared in the capital of the East. Justinian declined to call a halt to the planned invasion as preparations were far too advanced. Agapetus immediately turned his attention from the political matter Theodahad had sent him to address to a religious one.\nThe occupant of the Byzantine patriarchal see was Anthimus I, who had left his episcopal see of Trebizond. Against the protests of the orthodox, the Empress Theodora finally seated Anthimus in the patriarchal chair. When Agapetus arrived members of the clergy entered charges against Anthimus as an intruder and a heretic. Agapetus ordered him to make a written profession of faith and to return to his forsaken see; upon Anthimus' refusal, Agapetus deposed him. The Emperor threatened Agapetus with banishment. Agapetus is said to have replied, \"With eager longing have I come to gaze upon the Most Christian Emperor Justinian. In his place I find a Diocletian, whose threats, however, terrify me not.\" Agapetus, for the first time in the history of the Church, personally consecrated Anthimus' legally elected successor, Menas.\nJustinian delivered to the Pope a written confession of faith, which the latter accepted with the proviso that \"although he could not admit in a layman the right of teaching religion, yet he observed with pleasure that the zeal of the Emperor was in perfect accord with the decisions of the Fathers\". Four of Agapetus' letters have survived. Two are addressed to Justinian in reply to a letter from the emperor, in the latter of which Agapetus refuses to acknowledge the Orders of the Arians. A third is addressed to the bishops of Africa, on the same subject. The fourth is a response to Reparatus, Bishop of Carthage, who had sent him congratulations upon his elevation to the Pontificate.\nShortly afterwards, Agapetus fell ill and died on 22 April 536, after a reign of just ten months. His remains were brought in a lead coffin to Rome and deposited in St. Peter's Basilica. On the Clivus Scauri the archeological remains known as the 'apsidal Hall of the Library of Pope Agapitus I' is located near the ancient Church of St. Andrew on the Caelian Hill.\nVeneration.\nAgapetus I has been canonised by both the Catholic and Orthodox traditions. The \"Roman Martyrology\" commemorates him on 22 April, the day of his death, as do the Eastern churches, but some Catholic sources list his feast day as 20 September, the date of his deposition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23811", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23811", "title": "Pope Agatho", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 678 to 681\nPope Agatho (577 \u2013 10 January 681) served as the bishop of Rome from 27 June 678 until his death on 10 January 681. He heard the appeal of Wilfrid of York, who had been displaced from his see by the division of the archdiocese ordered by Theodore of Canterbury. During Agatho's tenure, the Sixth Ecumenical Council was convened to deal with monothelitism. He is venerated as a saint by both the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. He is said to have been the longest lived pope ever.\nEarly life.\nThe details of Agatho's early life are uncertain. It has been written that he was born in Palermo, Sicily, and was a Greek, whose parents died when he was young. After the death of his parents, it is said that he joined the monastery of San Giovanni degli Eremiti in Palermo. Due to the Rashidun Caliphate's raids on Sicily that began in 652, many Sicilian clergy had fled to Rome, and Agatho may have been among them. \nHe served several years as treasurer of the church of Rome. He succeeded Pope Donus, and ascended to the papacy on 27 June 678, a Sunday.\nPapacy.\nShortly after Agatho became pope, Bishop Wilfrid of York arrived in Rome to invoke the authority of the Holy See on his behalf. Wilfrid had been deposed from his see by Archbishop Theodore of Canterbury, who had carved up Wilfrid's diocese and appointed three bishops to govern the new sees. At a synod which Pope Agatho convoked in the Lateran to investigate the affair, it was decided that Wilfrid's diocese should indeed be divided, but that Wilfrid himself should name the bishops.\nThe major event of Agatho\u2019s pontificate was the Sixth Ecumenical Council (680\u2013681), following the end of the Muslim Siege of Constantinople, which suppressed Monothelitism, which had been tolerated by previous popes (Honorius I among them). The council began when Emperor Constantine IV, wanting to heal the schism that separated the two sides, wrote to Pope Donus suggesting a conference on the matter, but Donus was dead by the time the letter arrived. Agatho was quick to seize the olive branch offered by the Emperor. He ordered councils held throughout the West so that legates could present the universal tradition of the Western Church. Then he sent a large delegation to meet the Easterners at Constantinople.\nThe legates and patriarchs gathered in the imperial palace on 7 November 680. The Monothelites presented their case. Then a letter of Pope Agatho was read that explained the traditional belief of the Church that Christ was of two wills, divine and human. Patriarch George of Constantinople accepted Agatho's letter, as did most of the bishops present. The council proclaimed the existence of the two wills in Christ and condemned Monothelitism, with Pope Honorius I being included in the condemnation. When the council ended in September 681 the decrees were sent to the Pope, but Agatho had died in January. The council had not only ended Monothelism, but also had healed the schism.\nAgatho also undertook negotiations between the Holy See and Constantine IV concerning the interference of the Byzantine court in papal elections. Constantine promised Agatho to abolish or reduce the tax that the popes had to pay to the imperial treasury on their consecration.\nAge.\nChurch records state that Agatho served as pope as a centenarian, dying between the ages of 103\u2013104. Recent research has cast doubt on his age, with some claiming that Pope Agatho and a monk called Agathon have been confused, and are two different people.\nVeneration.\nAnastatius says that the number of his miracles procured him the title of \"Thaumaturgus\". He died in 681, having held the pontificate about two and a half years. He is venerated as a saint by both Catholics and Eastern Orthodox. His feast day in Western Christianity is on 10 January. Eastern Christians, including Eastern Orthodox and the Eastern Catholic Churches, commemorate him on 20 February.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23812", "revid": "42052556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23812", "title": "Pope-elect Stephen", "text": "Roman priest (died 752)\nPope-elect Stephen (Latin: \"Stephanus\"; 7th or 8th century \u2014 25 March 752), before 1961 previously known as Pope Stephen II, was a Roman cardinal-priest and presbyter selected on 22 March 752 to succeed Pope Zachary. Because he died before his episcopal consecration, Stephen is merely considered a pope-elect rather than a legitimate pope.\nHe is one of two \"popes-elect\" of the Catholic Church, the other being Pope-elect Celestine II.\nLife.\nAlthough not much is known surrounding his life, Stephen was born in Rome (then part of the Exarchate of Ravenna) in the Byzantine Empire during either the seventh or eighth century. He was baptised into the state religion of Christianity; later in life, he was ordained as a priest in the Diocese of Rome, serving as a presbyter.\nIn 745, Stephen was made a cardinal-priest by Pope Zachary, one of the twenty-two cardinals he created. His titular church was San Crisogono, where he would serve until 752. \nElection to the Papacy and death.\nZachary died around 15 March 752 (aside from this, he may have died on either on the 12th or 14th of that month). Following his funeral, on the night of 22 March, Stephen was unanimously selected to become the new pope, settling into the Lateran Palace in Rome (at that time within the Kingdom of the Lombards). However, he reportedly felt unwell a day later. He was not legally bishop of Rome, owing to the canon law of the time, which stated that a pope's pontificate started upon his consecration.\nWhile ordering household chores from family members, Stephen suffered a stroke on 25 March. He succumbed to its effects the following day, still at the Lateran Palace, on 26 March; thus, Stephen died before his official consecration as bishop of Rome and coronation. He was succeeded by Stephen II the next day, who reigned until 757. Stephen II is legally acknowledged as Zachary's rightful successor by the Catholic Church. \nFollowing his own funeral, Stephen was buried in the atrium of the Old St. Peter's Basilica; however, his tomb was destroyed and subsequently lost during its demolition.\nLegacy.\nDue to his extraordinarily brief tenure (which did not even legally begin), Stephen did not personally have any palpable impact on the Catholic Church. If he is counted a pope, then he carries the shortest term of any pope in history.\nLater canon law considered that a man became pope the moment he accepted his election, and Pope-elect Stephen was then anachronistically called Pope Stephen II. The pope currently acknowledged as Pope Stephen II was, in turn, called \"Pope Stephen III\", with all subsequent popes by this name ascending in number.\nHis name was removed from the list of popes in the \"Annuario Pontificio\" in 1961. He was originally included in the \"Annuario\" from the sixteenth century onwards. Despite the Catholic Church omitting him from this list, he is often acknowledged by modern historians as a pope.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23813", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23813", "title": "Pope Stephen II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 752 to 757\nPope Stephen II (; 714 \u2013 26 April 757) was born a Roman aristocrat and member of the Orsini family. Stephen was the bishop of Rome from 26 March 752 to his death on 26 April 757. Stephen II marks the historical delineation between the Byzantine Papacy and the Frankish Papacy. During Stephen's pontificate, Rome was facing invasion by the Lombards when Stephen II went to Paris to seek assistance from Pepin the Short. Pepin defeated the Lombards and made a gift of land to the pope, eventually leading to the establishment of the Papal States.\nElection.\nIn 751, the Lombard king Aistulf captured the Exarchate of Ravenna, and turned his attention to the Duchy of Rome. Stephen, a Roman aristocrat and member of the Orsini family, was selected on 26 March 752 to succeed Pope Zachary following the recent death of Pope-elect Stephen. \nLombard threat.\nRelations were very strained in the mid-8th century between the papacy and the Eastern Roman emperors over the support of the Isaurian dynasty for . Likewise, maintaining political control over Rome became untenable as the Eastern Roman Empire itself was beset by the Abbasid Caliphate to the south and Bulgars to the northwest. Constantinople could send no troops, and Emperor Constantine V Copronymus, in answer to the repeated requests for help of the new pope, Stephen II, could only offer him the advice to act in accordance with the ancient policy of Rome, to pit some other Germanic tribe against the Lombards.\nStephen turned to Pepin the Short, the king of the Franks who had recently defeated the Muslim Umayyad invasion of Gaul. He traveled to Paris to plead for help in person against the surrounding Lombard and Muslim threats. On 6 January 754, Stephen re-consecrated Pepin as king. In return, Pepin assumed the role of ordained protector of the Church and set his sights on the Lombards, as well as addressing the threat of Islamic Al-Andalus. Pepin invaded Italy twice to settle the Lombard problem and delivered the territory between Rome and Ravenna to the papacy, but left the Lombard kings in possession of their kingdom.\nDuchy of Rome and the Papal States.\nPrior to Stephen II's alliance with Pepin, Rome had constituted the central city of the Duchy of Rome, which composed one of two districts within the Exarchate of Ravenna, along with Ravenna itself. At Quiercy the Frankish nobles finally gave their consent to a campaign in Lombardy. Catholic tradition asserts that then and there Pepin executed in writing a promise to give to the Church certain territories that were to be wrested from the Lombards, and which would be referred to later as the Papal States. Known as the Donation of Pepin, no actual document has been preserved, but later 8th century sources quote from it.\nStephen anointed Pepin as king of the Franks at Saint-Denis in a memorable ceremony that was evoked in the coronation rites of French kings until the end of the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" in 1789. In return, in 756, Pepin and his Frankish army forced the Lombard king to surrender his conquests, and Pepin officially conferred upon the pope the territories belonging to Ravenna, even cities such as Forl\u00ec with their hinterlands, laying the Donation of Pepin upon the tomb of Saint Peter, according to traditional later accounts. The gift included Lombard conquests in the Romagna and in the duchies of Spoleto and Benevento, and the Pentapolis in the Marche (the \"five cities\" of Rimini, Pesaro, Fano, Senigallia and Ancona). For the first time, the Donation made the pope a temporal ruler over a strip of territory that extended diagonally across Italy from the Tyrrhenian to the Adriatic. Over these extensive and mountainous territories the medieval popes were unable to exercise effective sovereignty, given the pressures of the times, and the new Papal States preserved the old Lombard heritage of many small counties and marquisates, each centered upon a fortified \"rocca\".\nPepin confirmed his Donation in Rome in 756, and in 774 Charlemagne confirmed the donation of his father. Stephen II died on 26 April 757 and was succeeded by his brother Paul I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23814", "revid": "45790626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23814", "title": "Pantheon", "text": "Pantheon may refer to:\nPantheon may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23815", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23815", "title": "Pope Joan", "text": "Legendary medieval woman pope\nPope Joan (; 855\u2013857) is a woman who purportedly reigned as popess (female pope) for two years during the Middle Ages. Her story first appeared in chronicles in the 13th century and subsequently spread throughout Europe. The story was widely believed for centuries, but most modern scholars regard it as fictional.\nMost versions of her story describe her as a talented and learned woman who disguised herself as a man, often at the behest of a lover. In the most common accounts, owing to her abilities she rose through the church hierarchy and was eventually elected pope. Her sex was revealed when she gave birth during a procession and she died shortly after, either through murder or natural causes. The accounts state that later church processions avoided this spot and that the Vatican removed the female pope from its official lists and crafted a ritual to ensure that future popes were male.\nPope Joan's existence was generally accepted as true until the 16th century, when several religious groups called the story into question. Until then, Joan was used as an \"exemplum\" in Dominican preaching and figured in books published in the Papal States. The Siena Cathedral, finished in 1263, featured a bust of Joan among other popes until 1600, when her depiction was repurposed into that of a male pope.\nJean de Mailly's chronicle, written around 1250, contains the first known mention of an unnamed female pope and inspired several more accounts over the next several years. The most popular and influential version is that interpolated into Martin of Opava's \"Chronicon Pontificum et Imperatorum\" later in the 13th century. Martin introduced details that the female pope's birth name was John Anglicus of Mainz, that she reigned in the 9th century and that she entered the church to follow her lover. The existence of Pope Joan was used in the defence of Walter Brut in his trial of 1391. Her existence was generally accepted as true until the 16th century, when a widespread debate among Catholic and Protestant writers called the story into question: various writers noted the implausibly long gap between Joan's supposed lifetime and her first appearance in texts. Protestant scholar David Blondel ultimately demonstrated the impossibility of the story in his 1647 treatise on the issue. Pope Joan is now widely considered fictional, though the legend remains influential in cultural depictions.\nEarly mentions.\nThe earliest mention of a female pope appears in the Dominican Jean de Mailly's chronicle of Metz, \"Chronica Universalis Mettensis\", written in the early 13th century. In his telling the female pope is not named and the events are set in 1099. According to Jean:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Concerning a certain Pope or rather female Pope, who is not set down in the list of popes or Bishops of Rome, because she was a woman who disguised herself as a man and became, by her character and talents, a curial secretary, then a Cardinal and finally Pope. One day, while mounting a horse, she gave birth to a child. Immediately, by Roman justice she was bound by the feet to a horse's tail and dragged and stoned by the people for half a league, and, where she died, there she was buried, and at the place is written: \"Petre, Pater Patrum, Papisse Prodito Partum\" [Oh Peter, Father of Fathers, Betray the childbearing of the woman Pope]. At the same time, the four-day fast called the \"fast of the female Pope\" was first established.\u2014\u200a\nJean de Mailly's story was picked up by his fellow Dominican Stephen of Bourbon, who adapted it for his work on the \"Seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost\". However the legend gained its greatest prominence when it appeared in the third \"recension\" (edited revision) of Martin of Opava's \"Chronicon Pontificum et Imperatorum\" later in the 13th century. This version, which may have been by Martin himself, is the first to attach a name to the figure, indicating that she was known as John Anglicus or John of Mainz. It also changes the date from the 11th to the 9th century, indicating that Joan reigned between Leo IV and Benedict III in the 850s. According to the \"Chronicon\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;John Anglicus, born at Mainz, was Pope for two years seven months and four days and died in Rome, after which there was a vacancy in the Papacy of one month. It is claimed that this John was a woman, who as a girl had been led to Athens dressed in the clothes of a man by a certain lover of hers. There she became proficient in a diversity of branches of knowledge, until she had no equal, and, afterward in Rome, she taught the liberal arts and had great masters among her students and audience. A high opinion of her life and learning arose in the city; and she was chosen for Pope. While Pope, however, she became pregnant by her companion. Through ignorance of the exact time when the birth was expected, she was delivered of a child while in procession from St. Peter's to the Lateran, in a lane once named Via Sacra (the sacred way) but now known as the \"shunned street\" between the Colosseum and St Clement's church. After her death, it is said she was buried in that same place. The Lord Pope always turns aside from the street, and it is believed by many that this is done because of abhorrence of the event. Nor is she placed on the list of the Holy Pontiffs, both because of her female sex and on account of the foulness of the matter.\u2014\u200a\nOne version of the \"Chronicon\" gives an alternative fate for the female pope: she did not die immediately after her exposure but was confined and deposed, after which she did many years of penance. Her son from the affair eventually became Bishop of Ostia and ordered her entombment in his cathedral when she died.\nOther references to the female pope are attributed to earlier writers, though none appears in manuscripts that predate the \"Chronica\". The one most commonly cited is Anastasius Bibliothecarius (d. 886), a compiler of \"Liber Pontificalis\", who was a contemporary of the female Pope by the \"Chronicon\"'s dating. However the story is found in only one unreliable manuscript of Anastasius. This manuscript, in the Vatican Library, bears the relevant passage inserted as a footnote at the bottom of a page. It is out of sequence and in a different hand, one that dates from after the time of Martin of Opava. This 'witness' to the female pope is likely to be based on Martin's account and not a possible source for it. The same is true of Marianus Scotus's \"Chronicle of the Popes\", a text written in the 11th century. Some of its manuscripts contain a brief mention of a female pope named Johanna (the earliest source to attach to her the female form of the name), but all these manuscripts are later than Martin's work. Earlier manuscripts do not contain the legend.\nSome versions of the legend suggest that subsequent popes were subjected to an examination whereby, having sat on a so-called \"sedia stercoraria\" or 'dung chair' containing a hole, a cardinal had to reach up and establish that the new pope had testicles before announcing \"Duos habet et bene pendentes\" (\"He has two and they dangle nicely\"), or \"habet\" (\"he has them\") for short.\nThere were associated legends as well. In the 1290s, the Dominican Robert of Uz\u00e8s recounted a vision in which he saw the seat \"where, it is said, the pope is proved to be a man\". Pope Joan has been associated with marvelous happenings. Petrarch (1304\u20131374) wrote in his \"Chronica de le Vite de Pontefici et Imperadori Romani\" that after Pope Joan had been revealed as a woman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... in Brescia it rained blood for three days and nights. In France there appeared marvelous locusts, which had six wings and very powerful teeth. They flew miraculously through the air, and all drowned in the British Sea. The golden bodies were rejected by the waves of the sea and corrupted the air, so that a great many people died.\u2014\u200a\nHowever the attribution of this work to Petrarch may be incorrect.\nLater development.\nFrom the mid-13th century onward the story of the female pope was widely disseminated and believed. Joan was used as an \"exemplum\" in Dominican preaching. Bartolomeo Platina, the scholar who was prefect of the Vatican Library, wrote his \"Vit\u00e6 Pontificum Platin\u00e6 historici liber de vita Christi ac omnium pontificum qui hactenus ducenti fuere et XX\" in 1479 at the behest of his patron, Pope Sixtus IV. The book contains the following account of the female Pope:\nPope John VIII: John, of English extraction, was born at Mentz (Mainz) and is said to have arrived at popedom by evil art; for disguising herself like a man, whereas she was a woman, she went when young with her paramour, a learned man, to Athens, and made such progress in learning under the professors there that, coming to Rome, she met with few that could equal, much less go beyond her, even in the knowledge of the scriptures; and by her learned and ingenious readings and disputations, she acquired so great respect and authority that upon the death of Pope Leo IV (as Martin says) by common consent she was chosen pope in his room. As she was going to the Lateran Church between the Colossean Theatre (so called from Nero's Colossus) and St. Clement's her travail came upon her, and she died upon the place, having sat two years, one month, and four days, and was buried there without any pomp. This story is vulgarly told, but by very uncertain and obscure authors, and therefore I have related it barely and in short, lest I should seem obstinate and pertinacious if I had admitted what is so generally talked. I had better mistake with the rest of the world, though it be certain, that what I have related may be thought not altogether incredible.\nReferences to the female Pope abound in the later Middle Ages and Renaissance. Jans der Enikel (1270s) was the first to tell the story in German. Giovanni Boccaccio wrote about her in \"De Mulieribus Claris\" (1353). The \"Chronicon\" of Adam of Usk (1404) gives her a name, Agnes, and furthermore mentions a statue in Rome that is said to be of her. This statue had never been mentioned by any earlier writer anywhere; presumably it was an actual statue that came to be taken to be of the female pope. A late-14th-century edition of the \"Mirabilia Urbis Romae\", a guidebook for pilgrims to Rome, tells readers that the female Pope's remains are buried at St. Peter's. It was around this time that a long series of busts of past Popes was made for the Duomo of Siena, which included one of the female pope, named as \"Johannes VIII, Foemina de Anglia\" and included between Leo IV and Benedict III.\nAt his trial in 1415 Jan Hus argued that the Church did not necessarily need a pope because, during the pontificate of \"Pope Agnes\" (as he also called her), it got on quite well. Hus's opponents at the trial insisted that his argument proved no such thing about the independence of the Church but they did not dispute that there had been a female pope at all.\nDuring the Reformation.\nIn 1587 Florimond de Raemond, a magistrate in the parlement de Bordeaux and an antiquary, published his first attempt to deconstruct the legend, \"Erreur Populaire de la Papesse Jeanne\" (also subsequently published under the title \"L'Anti-Papesse\"). The tract applied humanist techniques of textual criticism to the Pope Joan legend, with the broader intent of supplying sound historical principles to ecclesiastical history, and the legend began to come apart, detail by detail. Raemond's \"Erreur Populaire\" went through successive editions, reaching a fifteenth as late as 1691.\nIn 1601, Pope Clement VIII declared the legend of the female pope to be untrue. The famous bust of her, inscribed \"Johannes VIII, Femina ex Anglia,\" which had been carved for the series of papal figures in the Duomo di Siena about 1400 and was noted by travelers, was either destroyed or recarved and relabeled, replaced by a male figure, that of Pope Zachary.\nThe legend of Pope Joan was \"effectively demolished\" by David Blondel, a mid-17th-century Protestant historian, who suggested that Pope Joan's tale may have originated in a satire against Pope John XI, who died in his early 20s. Blondel, through detailed analysis of the claims and suggested timings, argued that no such events could have happened.\nThe 16th-century Italian historian Onofrio Panvinio, commenting on one of Bartolomeo Platina's works that refer to Pope Joan, theorized that the story of Pope Joan may have originated from tales of Pope John XII; John reportedly had many mistresses, including one called Joan, who was very influential in Rome during his pontificate.\nAt the time of the Reformation, various Protestant writers took up the Pope Joan legend in their anti-Catholic writings, and the Catholics responded with their own polemic. According to Pierre Gustave Brunet, Various authors, in the 16th and 17th centuries, occupied themselves with Pope Joan, but it was from the point of view of the polemic engaged in between the partisans of Lutheran or Calvinist reform and the apologists of Catholicism.\nAn English writer, Alexander Cooke, wrote a book entitled \"Pope Joane: A Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist\", which purported to prove the existence of Pope Joan by reference to Catholic traditions. It was republished in 1675 as \"A Present for a Papist: Or the Life and Death of Pope Joan, Plainly Proving Out of the Printed Copies, and Manscriptes of Popish Writers and Others, That a Woman called Joan, Was Really Pope of Rome, and Was There Deliver'd of a Bastard Son in the Open Street as She Went in Solemn Procession\". The book gives an account of Pope Joan giving birth to a son in plain view of all those around, accompanied by a detailed engraving showing a rather surprised looking baby peeking out from under the Pope's robes. Even in the 19th century, authors such as Ewaldus Kist and Karl Hase discussed the story as a real occurrence. However, other Protestant writers, such as David Blondel and Gottfried Leibniz, rejected the story.\nRecent analysis and critique.\nMost scholars of the 20th and 21st centuries have dismissed Pope Joan as a medieval legend. British historian John Julius Norwich dismissed the myth with a logical assessment of evidence. In the \"Oxford Dictionary of Popes\", J. N. D. Kelly declares the legend \"Scarcely needs painstaking refutation today, for not only is there no contemporary evidence for a female Pope at any of the dates suggested for her reign, but the known facts of the respective periods make it impossible to fit one in.\" The appendix entry also cites chronological and material differences in the instances of the legend's telling, suggests an origin, and points to the Protestant historian David Blondel, who \"effectively demolished it in treatises published at Amsterdam in 1647 and 1657.\"\nThe 1910 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" elaborated on the historical timeline problem:\nBetween Leo IV and Benedict III, where Martinus Polonus places her, she cannot be inserted, because Leo IV died 17 July 855, and immediately after his death Benedict III was elected by the clergy and people of Rome; but, owing to the setting up of an Antipope, in the person of the deposed Cardinal Anastasius, he was not consecrated until 29 September. Coins exist which bear both the image of Benedict III and of Emperor Lothair, who died 28 September 855; therefore Benedict must have been recognized as pope before the last-mentioned date. On 7 October 855, Benedict III issued a charter for the Abbey of Corvey. Hincmar, Archbishop of Reims, informed Nicholas I that a messenger whom he had sent to Leo IV learned on his way of the death of this Pope, and therefore handed his petition to Benedict III, who decided it (Hincmar, ep. xl in P.L., CXXXVI, 85). All these witnesses prove the correctness of the dates given in the lives of Leo IV and Benedict III, and there was no interregnum between these two Popes, so that at this place there is no room for the alleged Popess.\nIt has also been noted that enemies of the papacy in the 9th century make no mention of a female Pope. For example, Photios I of Constantinople, who became Patriarch of Constantinople in 858 and was deposed by Pope Nicholas I in 863, had a contentious relationship with the Pope. He strongly defended his own authority as patriarch and opposed the influence of the Pope in Rome and would have likely highlighted any scandals of that time regarding the papacy; but he never mentions the story once in any of his voluminous writings. Indeed, at one point he mentions \"Leo and Benedict, successively great priests of the Roman Church\".\nRosemary and Darroll Pardoe, authors of \"The Female Pope: The Mystery of Pope Joan\", theorize that if a female pope did exist, a more plausible time frame is 1086 and 1108, when there were several antipopes; during this time the reign of the legitimate popes Victor III, Urban II, and Paschal II was not always established in Rome, since the city was occupied by Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor, and later sacked by the Normans. This also agrees with the earliest known version of the legend, by Jean de Mailly, as he places the story in the year 1099. De Mailly's account was acknowledged by his companion Stephen of Bourbon.\nPeter Stanford, a British writer and former editor of \"The Catholic Herald\", concluded in \"The Legend of Pope Joan: In Search of the Truth\" (2000) \"Weighing all th[e] evidence, I am convinced that Pope Joan was an historical figure, though perhaps not all the details about her that have been passed on down the centuries are true\". Stanford's work has been criticised as \"credulous\" by one mainstream historian, Vincent DiMarco. Against the lack of historical evidence to her existence, the question remains as to why the Pope Joan story has been popular and widely believed. Philip Jenkins in \"\" suggests that the periodic revival of what he calls this \"anti-papal legend\" has more to do with feminist and anti-Catholic wishful thinking than historical accuracy.\nThe \"sedes stercoraria\", the throne with a hole in the seat, now at St. John Lateran (the formal residence of the popes and center of Catholicism), is to be considered. This and other toilet-like chairs were used in the consecration of Pope Pascal II in 1099. In fact, one is still in the Vatican Museums, another at the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre. The reason for the configuration of the chair is disputed. It has been speculated that they originally were Roman bidets or imperial birthing stools, which because of their age and imperial links were used in ceremonies by Popes intent on highlighting their own imperial claims (as they did also with their Latin title, \"Pontifex Maximus\").\nAlain Boureau quotes the humanist Jacopo d'Angelo de Scarparia, who visited Rome in 1406 for the enthronement of Gregory XII. The pope sat briefly on two \"pierced chairs\" at the Lateran: \"... the vulgar tell the insane fable that he is touched to verify that he is indeed a man\", a sign that this corollary of the Pope Joan legend was still current in the Roman street.\nMedieval popes, from the 13th century onward, did indeed avoid the direct route between the Lateran and St Peter's, as Martin of Opava claimed. However, there is no evidence that this practice dated back any earlier. The origin of the practice is uncertain, but it is quite likely that it was maintained because of widespread belief in the Joan legend, and it was thought genuinely to date back to that period.\nAlthough some medieval writers referred to the female pope as \"John VIII\", a genuine Pope John VIII reigned between 872 and 882. Due to the scarcity of records in the Early Middle Ages, confusion often reigns in the evaluation of events. The Pope Joan legend is also conflated with the gap in the numbering of the Johns. In the 11th century, Pope John XIV was mistakenly counted as two popes. When Petrus Hispanus was elected pope in 1276, he believed that there had already been twenty popes named John, so he skipped the number XX and numbered himself John XXI.\nIn 2018, Michael E. Habicht, an archaeologist at Flinders University, published new evidence in support of an historical Pope Joan. Habicht and grapho-analyst Marguerite Spycher analyzed papal monograms on medieval coins and found that there were two significantly different monograms attributed to Pope John VIII. Habicht argues that the earlier monogram, which he dates from 856 to 858, belongs to Pope Joan, while the latter monogram, which he dates to after 875, belongs to Pope John VIII.\nIn fiction.\nPope Joan has remained a popular subject for fictional works across artistic forms.\nPlays featuring or referencing her include Ludwig Achim von Arnim's \"P\u00e4pstin Johanna\" (1813), a fragment by Bertolt Brecht (in \"Werke\" Bd 10), a monodrama, \"Pausin Johanna\", by Cees van der Pluijm (1996), and Caryl Churchill's 1982 play, \"Top Girls\", which featured Pope Joan as a character. In July 2019 a theatrical show, \"Pope Joan\", was held in Malta at Mdina ditch featuring her as the main character.\nShe has also appeared widely in novels.\nThe Greek author Emmanuel Rhoides' 1866 novel, \"The Papess Joanne\", was admired by Mark Twain and Alfred Jarry and freely translated by Lawrence Durrell as \"The Curious History of Pope Joan\" (1954). The legend also inspired Jarry's final written work before his death, \"The Pope's Mustard-Maker\" (1907), an operetta about a female pope known as Jane of Eggs, who operates under the papal name John VIII.\nThe American Donna Woolfolk Cross's 1996 historical romance, \"Pope Joan\" (later produced as a German musical and 2009 film). Other novels include Wilhelm Smets' \"Das M\u00e4hrchen von der P\u00e4pstin Johanna auf\u2019s Neue er\u00f6rtert\" (1829), Marjorie Bowen's \"Black Magic\" (1909), Ludwig Gorm's \"P\u00e4pstin Johanna\" (1912), Yves Bichet's \"La Papesse Jeanne\" (2005) and Hugo N. Gerstl's \"Scribe: The Story of the Only Female Pope\" (2005). Howard Pyle's \"The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood\" contains a reference. In the 2016 novel by Robert Harris, \"Conclave\" (later filmed), a liberal candidate to the Papacy states that his regnal name would be \"John\", foreshadowing a twist with parallels to the legend of Pope Joan. Emily Maguire\u2019s 2024 historical fiction novel, \"Rapture\", is a retelling of the legend of Pope Joan. Alexander Pushkin left a plan of a play, written in French and entitled \"La Papesse Jeanne\", which was never finished \nThere have been two films based on the story of Pope Joan. In 1972, Michael Anderson directed \"Pope Joan\" (1972; released as \"The Devil's Imposter\" in the US; re-released in 2009 as \"She ... Who Would Be Pope\"). And in 2009, Cross's novel was filmed as \"Pope Joan\".\nAdditionally, Pope Joan has featured in video games. She appears as a Ruler class Servant in the 2015 mobile game \"Fate/Grand Order\", and is the inspiration for Johanna, one of Makoto Niijima's titular personas (manifestations of the soul used by humans to battle demons), in the 2016 video game \"Persona 5\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23816", "revid": "49987385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23816", "title": "Pierre Allix", "text": "French Protestant pastor and author\nPierre Allix (1641 \u2013 3 March 1717) was a French Protestant pastor and author. In 1690 Allix was created Doctor of Divinity by Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and was given the treasurership and a canonry in Salisbury Cathedral by Bishop Gilbert Burnet. He discovered that Codex Ephraemi is a palimpsest.\nLife.\nBorn in 1641 in Alen\u00e7on, France, he became a pastor first at Saint-Agobile Champagne, and then at Charenton, near Paris. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 compelled him to take refuge in London. There he set up a church in Jewin Street, Aldersgate. He was the most celebrated Huguenot preacher of the 1680s in England, closely associated with Charles Le C\u00e8ne, and known to advocate religious toleration.\nIn 1690 Allix was created Doctor of Divinity by Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and was given the treasurership and a canonry in Salisbury Cathedral by Bishop Gilbert Burnet.\nAllix discovered that Codex Ephraemi is a palimpsest. He died in London. He had a large personal library which was sold by retail sale upon his death. \nWorks.\nThe numerous works of Allix were in French, Latin, and English. They are chiefly of apologetic character. Against Jacques-Benigne Bossuet he published \"Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont\" (1690), and \"Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of the Albigenses\" (1692), with the idea of showing that the Albigensians were not Manichaeans, but historically identical with the Waldenses. They were as follows:\nExternal links.\n incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "23819", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23819", "title": "Prospero Alpini", "text": "Venetian physician and botanist\nProspero Alpini (also known as Prosper Alpinus, Prospero Alpinio and Latinized as Prosperus Alpinus) (23 November 1553\u00a0\u2013 6 February 1617) was a Venetian physician and botanist. He travelled around Egypt and served as the fourth prefect in charge of the botanical garden of Padua. He wrote several botanical treatises which covered exotic plants of economic and medicinal value. His description of coffee and banana plants are considered the oldest in European literature. The ginger-family genus \"Alpinia\" was named in his honour by Carolus Linnaeus.\nBiography.\nBorn at Marostica, a town near Vicenza, the son of Francesco, a physician, Alpini served in his youth for a time in the Milanese army, but in 1574 he went to study medicine at Padua. After taking his doctor's degree in 1578, he settled as a physician in Campo San Pietro, a small town in the Paduan territory. But his tastes were botanical and influenced by Melchiorre Guilandino, and to extend his knowledge of exotic plants he travelled to Egypt in 1580 as physician to Giorgio Emo, the Venetian consul in Cairo. The position was obtained with help from Antonio Morosini. From 1587 to 1590 he worked in Venice, Bassano and then at Genoa as physician to Giovanni Andrea Doria.\nIn Egypt he spent three years, and from a practice in the management of datepalms, which he observed in that country, he learned of sexual difference in plants, which was later to become important in the foundation of the Linnaean taxonomy system. He says that \"the female date-trees or palms do not bear fruit unless the branches of the male and female plants are mixed together; or, as is generally done, unless the dust found in the male sheath or male flowers is sprinkled over the female flowers\".\nOn his return, he resided for some time at Genoa as physician to Andrea Doria, and in 1593 he was appointed professor of botany at Padua. In 1603, following the death of Giacomo Antonio Cortuso (1513-1603), he was appointed prefect for the botanical garden at Padua. His knowledge of medicinal plants made him a much sought after physician consulted by others such as Fabrici of Acquapendente and Alessandro Massaria. Towards the end of his life he suffered from arthritis, skin inflammation and receptive aphasia. He died on 6 February 1617 and is buried in the Basilica of Saint Antonio. He was succeeded in the botanical chair by his son Alpino Alpini (died 1637).\nBooks.\nAlpini's best-known botanical work is \"De Plantis Aegypti liber\" (Venice, 1592). This work introduced a number of plant species previously unknown to European botanists including \"Abrus, Abelmoschus, Lablab,\" and \"Melochia,\" each of which are native to tropical areas and were cultivated with artificial irrigation in Egypt at the time. Other species included \"Sesban\" \"Sesbania sesban\" and the baobab tree (which he spelled \"bahobab\"). Early adopters of Alpini's new botanical names included the botanists Carolus Clusius (died 1609), Johann Bauhin (died 1613), Caspar Bauhin (died 1624) and Johann Veslingius (visited Egypt in the 1620s; died 1649).\nProspero Alpini's ' was published in 1629 after his death. It has an expansion of the material in ' plus some other material. His \"De Plantis Aegypti liber\" is said to contain the first account of the coffee plant published in Europe although the German traveller Leonhard Rauwolf tasted coffee at Aleppo in 1573 and described its effects in 1582. His book \"De balsamo dialogus\" (1581, 1592) was among the first books to specialize on a single group of plants. He wrote on the prognosis of diseases in his \"De praesagienda vita et morti aegrotanti\" (1601) which led Kurt Sprengel to consider him as a modern father of diagnostic science. Another work that took nearly a decade was the \"De medicina methodica libri tredecim\" (1611) which sought a revival of the Methodic school of medicine. His works \"De plantis exoticis\" and the \"Rerum Aegyptiarum libri IV\" were published posthumously.\nThe genus \"Alpinia\", belonging to the order Zingiberaceae (ginger family), was named after him by Linnaeus.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Alpino is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23821", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23821", "title": "Prague Spring", "text": "Liberalisation in Czechoslovakia in 1968\nThe Prague Spring (; ) was a period of political liberalization and mass protest in \nthe Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. It began on 5 January 1968, when reformist Alexander Dub\u010dek was elected First Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KS\u010c), and continued until 21 August 1968, when the Soviet Union and three other Warsaw Pact members (Bulgaria, Hungary and Poland) invaded the country to suppress the reforms.\nThe Prague Spring reforms were an attempt by Dub\u010dek to grant additional rights to the citizens of Czechoslovakia in an act of partial decentralization of the economy and democratization. The freedoms granted included a loosening of restrictions on the media, speech and travel. After national discussion of dividing the country into a federation of three republics, Bohemia, Moravia\u2013Silesia and Slovakia, Dub\u010dek oversaw the decision to split into two, the Czech Socialist Republic and Slovak Socialist Republic. This dual federation was the only formal change that survived the invasion.\nThe reforms, especially the decentralization of administrative authority, were not received well by the soviet of USSR, who, after failed negotiations, sent half a million Warsaw Pact troops and tanks to occupy the country. \"The New York Times\" cited reports of 650,000 men equipped with the most modern and sophisticated weapons in the Soviet military catalogue. A massive wave of emigration ensued. Resistance throughout the country included attempted fraternization, sabotage of street signs, defiance of curfews, etc. While the Soviet military had predicted that it would take four days to subdue the country, the resistance held out for almost eight months until diplomatic maneuvers finally circumvented it. It became a high-profile example of civilian-based defense; there were sporadic acts of violence and several protest suicides by self-immolation (the most famous being that of Jan Palach), but no military resistance. Czechoslovakia remained a Soviet satellite state until 1989 when the Velvet Revolution peacefully ended the communist regime; the last Soviet troops left the country in 1991.\nAfter the invasion, Czechoslovakia entered a period known as \"normalization\" (, ), in which new leaders attempted to restore the political and economic values that had prevailed before Dub\u010dek gained control of the KS\u010c. Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k, who replaced Dub\u010dek as First Secretary and also became President, reversed almost all of the reforms. The Prague Spring inspired music and literature including the work of V\u00e1clav Havel, Karel Husa, Karel Kryl and Milan Kundera's novel \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\".\nBackground.\nThe process of de-Stalinization in Czechoslovakia had begun under Anton\u00edn Novotn\u00fd in the late 1950s and early 1960s, but had progressed more slowly than in most other states of the Eastern Bloc. Following the lead of Nikita Khrushchev, Novotn\u00fd proclaimed the \"completion of socialism\", and the new constitution accordingly adopted the name change from \"Czechoslovak Republic\" to \"Czechoslovak Socialist Republic\". The pace of de-Stalinization, however, was sluggish; the rehabilitation of Stalin-era victims, such as those convicted in the Sl\u00e1nsk\u00fd trial, may have been considered as early as 1963, but did not take place until 1967.\nIn the early 1960s, Czechoslovakia underwent an economic downturn. The Soviet model of industrialization applied poorly to Czechoslovakia since the country was already quite industrialized before World War II while the Soviet model mainly took into account less developed economies. Novotn\u00fd's attempt at restructuring the economy, the 1965 \"New Economic Model\", spurred increased demand for political reform as well.\nThe liberalization of 1960s enabled a partial reclaiming of the political and cultural legacy of the First Czechoslovak Republic and its figures such as Tom\u00e1\u0161 Masaryk, which was ideologically suppressed in the Stalin era as bourgeois nationalist and liberal capitalist. This reclamation can be seen in the success of publications such as \"Tom\u00e1\u0161 G. Masaryk\" (1968) by Milan Machovec.\n1963 Liblice Conference.\nIn May 1963, some Marxist intellectuals organized the \"Liblice Conference\" that discussed Franz Kafka's life, marking the beginning of the cultural democratization of Czechoslovakia which ultimately led to the 1968 \"Prague Spring\", an era of political liberalization. This conference was unique because it symbolized Kafka's rehabilitation in the Eastern Bloc after having been heavily criticized, led to a partial opening up of the regime and influenced the relaxation of censorship. It also had an international impact as a representative from all Eastern Bloc countries were invited to the Conference; only the Soviet Union did not send any representative. This conference had a revolutionary effect and paved the way for the reforms while making Kafka the symbol of the renaissance of Czechoslovak artistic and intellectual freedom.\n1967 Writers' Congress.\nAs the strict regime eased its rules, the \"Union of Czechoslovak Writers\" () cautiously began to air discontent. In \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed noviny\", the union's previously hard-line communist weekly, members suggested that literature should be independent of the Communist Party doctrine.\nIn June 1967, a small fraction of the union sympathized with radical socialists, especially Ludv\u00edk Vacul\u00edk, Milan Kundera, Jan Proch\u00e1zka, Anton\u00edn Jaroslav Liehm, Pavel Kohout and Ivan Kl\u00edma.\nA few months later, at a meeting of Party leaders, it was decided that administrative actions against the writers who openly expressed support of reformation would be taken. Since only a small group of the union held these beliefs, the remaining members were relied upon to discipline their colleagues. Control over \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed noviny\" and several other publishers was transferred to the Ministry of Culture, and even some leaders of the Party who later became major reformers\u2014including Dub\u010dek\u2014endorsed these moves.\nDub\u010dek's rise to power.\nAs President Anton\u00edn Novotn\u00fd was losing support, Alexander Dub\u010dek, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Slovakia, and economist Ota \u0160ik challenged him at a meeting of the Central Committee of the Party. Novotn\u00fd then invited the Secretary General of the Communist Party of Soviet Union, Leonid Brezhnev, to Prague that December, seeking support; Brezhnev, however, was surprised at the extent of the opposition to Novotn\u00fd and so he rather supported his removal. Dub\u010dek replaced Novotn\u00fd as First Secretary on 5 January 1968. On 22 March, Novotn\u00fd resigned and was replaced by Ludv\u00edk Svoboda, who later gave consent to the reforms.\nLiter\u00e1rn\u00ed listy.\nEarly signs of change were few. In an interview with KS\u010c Presidium member Josef Smrkovsk\u00fd published in the Party newspaper \"Rud\u00e9 Pr\u00e1vo\" with the title \"What Lies Ahead\", he insisted that Dub\u010dek's appointment at the January Plenum would further the goals of socialism and maintain the \"working class\" nature of the Party.\nHowever, right after Dub\u010dek assumed power, the scholar Eduard Goldst\u00fccker became chairman of the \"Union of Czechoslovak Writers\" and thus editor-in-chief of \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed noviny\", which under Novotn\u00fd had been filled with party loyalists. Goldst\u00fccker tested the boundaries of Dub\u010dek's devotion to freedom of the press when on 4 February he appeared in a television interview as the new head of the union. During the interview he openly criticized Novotn\u00fd, exposing all of Novotn\u00fd's previously unreported policies and explaining how they were preventing progress in Czechoslovakia.\nGoldst\u00fccker suffered no repercussions, Dub\u010dek instead began to build a sense of trust among the media, the government, and the citizens. It was under Goldst\u00fccker that the journal's name was changed to \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed listy\", and on 29 February, the Union published the first copy of the censor-free journal. By August, \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed listy\" had a circulation of 300,000, making it the most published periodical in Europe.\nSocialism with a human face.\nAction Programme.\nAt the 20th anniversary of Czechoslovakia's \"Victorious February\", Dub\u010dek delivered a speech explaining the need for change following the triumph of socialism. He emphasized the need to \"enforce the leading role of the party more effectively\" In April, Dub\u010dek launched an \"Action Programme\" of liberalizations, which included increasing freedom of the press, freedom of speech, and freedom of movement, with economic emphasis on consumer goods and the possibility of a multiparty government. The programme was based on the view that \"Socialism cannot mean only liberation of the working people from the domination of exploiting class relations, but must make more provisions for a fuller life of the personality than any bourgeois democracy.\" It would limit the power of the secret police and provide for the federalization of the \u010cSSR into two equal nations. The programme also covered foreign policy, including both the maintenance of good relations with Western countries and cooperation with the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc nations. It spoke of a ten-year transition through which democratic elections would be made possible and a new form of democratic socialism would replace the status quo. Those who drafted the Action Programme were careful not to criticize the actions of the post-war Communist regime, only to point out policies that they felt had outlived their usefulness. Although it was stipulated that reform must proceed under KS\u010c direction, popular pressure mounted to implement reforms immediately. Radical elements became more vocal: anti-Soviet polemics appeared in the press on 26 June 1968, and new unaffiliated political clubs were created. Party conservatives urged repressive measures, but Dub\u010dek counselled moderation and re-emphasized KS\u010c leadership. At the Presidium of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in April, Dub\u010dek announced a political programme of \"socialism with a human face\". At the time of the Prague Spring, Czechoslovak exports were declining in competitiveness, and Dub\u010dek's reforms planned to solve these troubles by mixing planned and market economies. Dub\u010dek continued to stress the importance of economic reform proceeding under Communist Party rule.\nMedia reactions.\nFreedom of the press opened the door for the first look at Czechoslovakia's past by Czechoslovakia's people. Many of the investigations centered on the country's history under communism, especially in the instance of the Stalinist-period. In another television appearance, Goldst\u00fccker presented both doctored and undoctored photographs of former communist leaders who had been purged, imprisoned, or executed and thus erased from communist history. The Writers' Union also formed a committee in April 1968, headed by the poet Jaroslav Seifert, to investigate the persecution of writers after the Communist takeover in February 1948 and rehabilitate the literary figures into the Union, bookstores and libraries, and the literary world. Discussions on the current state of communism and abstract ideas such as freedom and identity were also becoming more common; soon, non-party publications began appearing, such as the trade union daily \"Pr\u00e1ce\" (Labour). This was also helped by the Journalists' Union, which by March 1968 had already persuaded the Central Publication Board, the government censor, to allow editors to receive uncensored subscriptions to foreign papers, allowing for a more international dialogue around the news.\nThe press, the radio, and the television also contributed to these discussions by hosting meetings where students and young workers could ask questions of writers such as Goldst\u00fccker, Pavel Kohout, and Jan Proch\u00e1zka and political victims such as Josef Smrkovsk\u00fd, Zden\u011bk Hejzlar, and Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k. Television also broadcast meetings between former political prisoners and the communist leaders from the secret police or prisons where they were held. Most importantly, this new self-called freedom and the introduction of television into the lives of everyday Czechoslovak citizens moved the political dialogue from the intellectual to the popular sphere.\nSoviet reaction.\nInitial reaction within the Communist Bloc was mixed. Hungary's J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r was highly supportive of Dub\u010dek's appointment in January, but Leonid Brezhnev and the hardliners grew concerned about the reforms, which they feared might weaken the position of the Bloc in the Cold War.\nAt a meeting in Dresden, East Germany on 23 March, the leaders of the \"Warsaw Five\" (USSR, Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and East Germany) questioned the Czechoslovak delegation over the planned reforms, suggesting any talk of \"democratization\" was a veiled criticism of the Soviet model. The Polish Party leader W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka and J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r were less concerned with the reforms themselves than with the growing criticisms levelled by the Czechoslovak media, and worried that the situation might be \"similar to...the 'Hungarian counterrevolution'.\" Some of the language in the Action Programme may have been chosen to assert that no \"counterrevolution\" was planned, but Kieran Williams suggests that Dub\u010dek was perhaps surprised at, but not resentful of, Soviet suggestions.\nIn May, the KGB initiated Operation Progress, which involved Soviet agents infiltrating Czechoslovak pro-democratic organizations, such as the Socialist and Christian Democrat parties.\nThe Soviet leadership tried to stop, or at least limit, the changes in the \u010cSSR through a series of negotiations. The Soviet Union agreed to bilateral talks with Czechoslovakia from 29 July to 1 August at \u010cierna nad Tisou, near the Soviet border. The Soviets were represented by almost the full Politburo that met for the first time outside the territory of the Soviet Union; also the Czechoslovak delegation included the full membership of the Presidium, but the main agreements were reached at the meetings of the \"fours\" \u2013 Brezhnev, Alexei Kosygin, Nikolai Podgorny, Mikhail Suslov \u2013 Dub\u010dek, Ludv\u00edk Svoboda, Old\u0159ich \u010cern\u00edk, Josef Smrkovsk\u00fd.\nAt the meeting Dub\u010dek defended the proposals of the KS\u010c's reformist wing while pledging commitment to the Warsaw Pact and Comecon. The KS\u010c leadership, however, was divided between vigorous reformers (Smrkovsk\u00fd, \u010cern\u00edk, and Franti\u0161ek Kriegel) and hardliners (Vasil Bi\u013eak, Drahom\u00edr Kolder, and Old\u0159ich \u0160vestka) who adopted an anti-reformist stance.\nBrezhnev decided on compromise. The KS\u010c delegates reaffirmed their loyalty to the Warsaw Pact and promised to curb \"anti-socialist\" tendencies, prevent the revival of the Czechoslovak Social Democratic Party and control the press more effectively. The Soviets agreed to withdraw their armed forces still in Czechoslovakia after manoeuvres in June and permit the 9 September \"Party Congress\".\nOn 3 August representatives from the \"Warsaw Five\" and Czechoslovakia met in Bratislava and signed the Bratislava Declaration. The declaration affirmed unshakable fidelity to Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism, declared an implacable struggle against \"bourgeois\" ideology and all \"anti-socialist\" forces. The Soviet Union expressed its intention to intervene in any Warsaw Pact country if a \"bourgeois\" system\u2014a pluralist system of several political parties representing different factions of the \"capitalist classes\"\u2014was ever established. After the conference, the Soviet troops left Czechoslovak territory but remained along its borders.\nSoviet invasion.\nAs these talks proved unsatisfactory, the Soviets began to consider a military alternative. The Soviet policy of compelling the socialist governments of its satellite states to subordinate their national interests to those of the Eastern Bloc (through military force if needed) became known as the Brezhnev Doctrine. On the night of 20\u201321 August, Eastern Bloc armies from four Warsaw Pact countries\u2014the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Poland and Hungary\u2014invaded the \u010cSSR.\nThat night, 165,000 troops and 4,600 tanks entered the country. They first occupied the Ruzyn\u011b International Airport, where air deployment of more troops was arranged. The Czechoslovak forces were confined to their barracks, which were surrounded until the threat of a counter-attack was assuaged. By the morning of 21 August Czechoslovakia was occupied.\nRomania and Albania refused to take part in the invasion. Soviet command refrained from drawing upon East German troops for fear of reviving memories of the Nazi invasion in 1938. During the invasion 72\u00a0Czechs and Slovaks were killed (19 of those in Slovakia), 266 severely wounded and another 436 slightly injured. Alexander Dub\u010dek called upon his people not to resist. Nevertheless, there was scattered resistance in the streets. Road signs in towns were removed or painted over\u2014except for those indicating the way to Moscow. Many small villages renamed themselves \"Dub\u010dek\" or \"Svoboda\"; thus, without navigational equipment, the invaders were often confused.\nOn the night of the invasion the \"Czechoslovak Presidium\" declared that Warsaw Pact troops had crossed the border without the knowledge of the \u010cSSR government, but the Soviet Press printed an unsigned request\u2014allegedly by Czechoslovak party and state leaders\u2014for \"immediate assistance, including assistance with armed forces\". At the \"14th KS\u010c Party Congress\" (conducted secretly, immediately following the intervention), it was emphasized that no member of the leadership had invited the intervention. More recent evidence suggests that conservative KS\u010c members (including Bi\u013eak, \u0160vestka, Kolder, Indra, and Anton\u00edn Kapek) did send a request for intervention to the Soviets. The invasion was followed by a previously unseen wave of emigration, which was stopped shortly thereafter. An estimated 70,000 citizens fled the country immediately with an eventual total of some 300,000.\nUntil recently there was some uncertainty as to what provocation, if any, occurred to make the Warsaw Pact armies invade. Preceding the invasion was a rather calm period without any major events taking place in Czechoslovakia.\nReactions to the invasion.\nIn Czechoslovakia, especially in the week following the invasion, popular opposition was expressed in numerous spontaneous acts of nonviolent resistance. Civilians purposely gave wrong directions to invading soldiers, while others identified and followed cars belonging to the secret police. On 16 January 1969, student Jan Palach set himself on fire in Prague's Wenceslas Square to protest against the renewed suppression of free speech.\nThe generalized resistance caused the Soviet Union to abandon its original plan to oust the First Secretary. Dub\u010dek, who had been arrested on the night of 20 August, was taken to Moscow for negotiations. There, under heavy psychological pressure from Soviet politicians, Dub\u010dek and all the highest-ranked leaders but Franti\u0161ek Kriegel signed the Moscow Protocol. It was agreed that Dub\u010dek would remain in office and a programme of moderate reform would continue.\nOn 25 August citizens of the Soviet Union who did not approve of the invasion protested in Red Square; seven protesters opened banners with anti-invasion slogans. The demonstrators were brutally beaten and arrested by security forces, and later punished by a secret tribunal; the protest was dubbed \"anti-Soviet\" and several people were detained in psychiatric hospitals.\nA more pronounced effect took place in Romania, where Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu, General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party, already a staunch opponent of Soviet influences and a self-declared Dub\u010dek supporter, gave a public speech in Bucharest on the day of the invasion, depicting Soviet policies in harsh terms. Albania withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in opposition, calling the invasion an act of \"social imperialism\". In Finland, a country under some Soviet political influence, the occupation caused a major scandal.\nLike the Italian and French Communist parties, the majority of the Communist Party of Finland denounced the occupation. Nonetheless, Finnish president Urho Kekkonen was the first Western politician to officially visit Czechoslovakia after August 1968; he received the highest Czechoslovak honours from the hands of President Ludv\u00edk Svoboda, on 4 October 1969. A schism occurred between the East German communist Socialist Unity Party of Germany and the Icelandic Socialist Party because of the latter's disapproval of the invasion and occupation of Czechoslovakia, causing relations between Iceland and East Germany to deteriorate. The Portuguese communist secretary-general \u00c1lvaro Cunhal was one of few political leaders from western Europe to have supported the invasion for being counter-revolutionary, along with the Luxembourg party and conservative factions of the Greek party.\nMost countries offered only vocal criticism following the invasion. The night of the invasion, Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom, and the United States requested a meeting of the United Nations Security Council. At the meeting, the Czechoslovak ambassador Jan Mu\u017e\u00edk denounced the invasion. Soviet ambassador Jacob Malik insisted the Warsaw Pact actions were \"fraternal assistance\" against \"antisocial forces\".\nThe British government strongly condemned the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, although it cautiously avoided making any diplomatic moves that may have provoked a Soviet counter-response and a jeopardisation of d\u00e9tente. The United Kingdom's foreign policy toward the Soviet Union was minimally impacted in the long-term, and quickly reverted to the status quo that existed prior to the Prague Spring following the brief period of intense criticism.\nOne of the nations that most vehemently condemned the invasion was China, which objected furiously to the so-called \"Brezhnev Doctrine\" that declared the Soviet Union alone had the right to determine what nations were properly Communist and could invade those Communist nations whose communism did not meet the Kremlin's approval. Mao Zedong saw the Brezhnev Doctrine as the ideological basis for a Soviet invasion of China, and launched a massive propaganda campaign condemning the invasion of Czechoslovakia, despite his own earlier opposition to the Prague Spring. Speaking at a banquet at the Romanian embassy in Beijing on 23 August 1968, the Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai denounced the Soviet Union for \"fascist politics, great power chauvinism, national egoism and social imperialism\", going on to compare the invasion of Czechoslovakia to the American war in Vietnam and more pointedly to the policies of Adolf Hitler towards Czechoslovakia in 1938\u201339. Zhou ended his speech with a barely veiled call for the people of Czechoslovakia to wage guerrilla war against the Red Army.\nThe next day, several countries suggested a United Nations resolution condemning the intervention and calling for immediate withdrawal. Eventually, a UN vote was taken with ten members supporting the motion; Algeria, India, and Pakistan abstained; the USSR (with veto power) and Hungary opposed. Canadian delegates immediately introduced another motion asking for a UN representative to travel to Prague and work toward the release of the imprisoned Czechoslovak leaders.\nBy 26 August, a new Czechoslovak representative requested the whole issue be removed from the Security Council's agenda. Shirley Temple Black visited Prague in August 1968 to prepare for becoming the US Ambassador for reformed Czechoslovakia. However, after the 21 August invasion, she became part of a U.S. Embassy-organized convoy of vehicles that evacuated U.S. citizens from the country. In August 1989, she returned to Prague as U.S. Ambassador, three months before the Velvet Revolution that ended 41 years of Communist rule.\nThe United States, West Germany and NATO maintained a low-key response to the invasion. After 1968 the U.S. recognized Soviet dominance in Eastern Europe, a development that was in the interests of the United States according to some analysts.\nAftermath.\nIn April 1969, Dub\u010dek was replaced as first secretary by Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k, and a period of \"normalization\" began. Dub\u010dek was expelled from the KS\u010c and given a job as a forestry official.\nHus\u00e1k reversed Dub\u010dek's reforms, purged the party of its liberal members, and dismissed from public office professional and intellectual elites who openly expressed disagreement with the political transformation. (Many of those purged would later become the dissidents of Czechoslovak underground culture, active in Charter 77 and related movements which eventually met success in the Velvet Revolution.) Hus\u00e1k worked to reinstate the power of the police and strengthen ties with the rest of the Communist bloc. He also sought to re-centralize the economy, as a considerable amount of freedom had been granted to industries during the Prague Spring. Commentary on politics was forbidden in mainstream media, and political statements by anyone not considered to have \"full political trust\" were also banned. The only significant change that survived was the federalization of the country, which created the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic in 1969.\nIn 1987, the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev acknowledged that his liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika owed a great deal to Dub\u010dek's \"socialism with a human face\". When asked what the difference was between the Prague Spring and Gorbachev's own reforms, a Foreign Ministry spokesman replied, \"Nineteen years.\"\nDub\u010dek lent his support to the Velvet Revolution of December 1989. After the collapse of the Communist regime that month, Dub\u010dek became chairman of the federal assembly under the Havel administration. He later led the Social Democratic Party of Slovakia, and spoke against the dissolution of Czechoslovakia before his death in November 1992.\nNormalization and censorship.\nThe Warsaw Pact invasion included attacks on media establishments, such as Radio Prague and Czechoslovak Television, almost immediately after the initial tanks rolled into Prague on 21 August 1968. While both the radio station and the television station managed to hold out for at least enough time for initial broadcasts of the invasion, what the Soviets did not attack by force they attacked by reenacting party censorship. In reaction to the invasion, on 28 August 1968, all Czechoslovak publishers agreed to halt production of newspapers for the day to allow for a \"day of reflection\" for the editorial staffs. Writers and reporters agreed with Dub\u010dek to support a limited reinstitution of the censorship office, as long as the institution was to only last three months. Finally, by September 1968, the Czechoslovak Communist Party plenum was held to instate the new censorship law. In the words of the Moscow-approved resolution, \"The press, radio, and television are first of all the instruments for carrying into life the policies of the Party and state.\"\nWhile that was not yet the end of the media's self-called freedom after the Prague Spring, it was the beginning of the end. During November, the Presidium, under Husak, declared that the Czechoslovak press could not make any negative remarks about the Soviet invaders or they would risk violating the agreement they had come to at the end of August. When the weeklies \"Reporter\" and \"Politika\" responded harshly to this threat, even going so far as to not so subtly criticize the Presidium itself in \"Politika\", the government banned \"Reporter\" for a month, suspended \"Politika\" indefinitely, and prohibited any political programs from appearing on the radio or television.\nThe intellectuals were stuck at an impasse; they recognized the government's increasing normalization, but they were unsure whether to trust that the measures were only temporary or demand more. For example, still believing in Dubcek's promises for reform, Milan Kundera published the article \"Cesky udel\" (Our Czech Destiny) in \"Literarni listy\" on 19 December. He wrote: \"People who today are falling into depression and defeatism, commenting that there are not enough guarantees, that everything could end badly, that we might again end up in a marasmus of censorship and trials, that this or that could happen, are simply weak people, who can live only in illusions of certainty.\"\nIn March 1969, however, the new Soviet-backed Czechoslovak government instituted full censorship, effectively ending the hopes that normalization would lead back to the freedoms enjoyed during the Prague Spring. A declaration was presented to the Presidium condemning the media as co-conspirators against the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact in their support of Dubcek's liberalization measures. Finally, on 2 April 1969, the government adopted measures \"to secure peace and order\" through even stricter censorship, forcing the people of Czechoslovakia to wait until the thawing of Eastern Europe for the return of a free media.\nFormer students from Prague, including Constantine Menges, and Czech refugees from the crisis, who were able to escape or resettle in Western Countries continued to advocate for human rights, religious liberty, freedom of speech and political asylum for Czech political prisoners and dissidents. Many raised concerns about the Soviet Union and Soviet Army's continued military occupation of Czechoslovakia in the 1970s and 1980s, before the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of Communism in Moscow and Eastern Europe.\nCultural impact.\nThe Prague Spring deepened the disillusionment of many Western leftists with Soviet views. It contributed to the growth of Eurocommunist ideas in Western communist parties, which sought greater distance from the Soviet Union and eventually led to the dissolution of many of these groups. A decade later, a period of Chinese political liberalization became known as the Beijing Spring. It also partly influenced the Croatian Spring in Communist Yugoslavia. In a 1993 Czech survey, 60% of those surveyed had a personal memory linked to the Prague Spring while another 30% were familiar with the events in another form. The demonstrations and regime changes taking place in North Africa and the Middle East from December 2010 have frequently been referred to as an \"Arab Spring\".\nThe event has been referenced in popular music, including the music of Karel Kryl, Lubo\u0161 Fi\u0161er's \"Requiem\", and Karel Husa's \"Music for Prague 1968\".\nThe Israeli song \"Prague\", written by Shalom Hanoch and performed by Arik Einstein at the Israel Song Festival of 1969, was a lamentation on the fate of the city after the Soviet invasion and mentions Jan Palach's Self-immolation.\n\"They Can't Stop The Spring\", a song by Irish journalist and songwriter John Waters, represented Ireland in the Eurovision Song Contest in 2007. Waters has described it as \"a kind of Celtic celebration of the Eastern European revolutions and their eventual outcome\", quoting Dub\u010dek's alleged comment: \"They may crush the flowers, but they can't stop the Spring.\" \"The Old Man's Back Again (Dedicated to the Neo-Stalinist Regime)\", a song featured in the American-English singer-songwriter Scott Walker's fifth solo album Scott 4 also refers to the invasion.\nThe Prague Spring is featured in several works of literature. Milan Kundera set his novel \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\" during the Prague Spring. It follows the repercussions of increased Soviet presence and the dictatorial police control of the population. A film version was released in 1988. \"The Liberators\", by Viktor Suvorov, is an eyewitness description of the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia, from the point of view of a Soviet tank commander. \"Rock 'n' Roll\", a play by award-winning Czech-born English playwright Tom Stoppard, references the Prague Spring, as well as the 1989 Velvet Revolution. Heda Margolius Kov\u00e1ly also ends her memoir \"Under a Cruel Star\" with a first hand account of the Prague Spring and the subsequent invasion, and her reflections upon these events.\nIn film there has been an adaptation of \"The Unbearable Lightness of Being\", and also the movie \"Pel\u00ed\u0161ky\" from director Jan H\u0159ebejk and screenwriter Petr Jarchovsk\u00fd, which depicts the events of the Prague Spring and ends with the invasion by the Soviet Union and their allies. The Czech musical film, \"Rebelov\u00e9\" from Filip Ren\u010d, also depicts the events, the invasion and subsequent wave of emigration.\nThe number \"68\" has become iconic in the former Czechoslovakia. Ice hockey player Jarom\u00edr J\u00e1gr, whose grandfather died in prison during the rebellion, wears the number because of the importance of the year in Czechoslovak history. A former publishing house based in Toronto, 68 Publishers, that published books by exiled Czech and Slovak authors, took its name from the event.\nMemory.\nPlaces and historical sites.\nThe photographs that were taken in Vinohradsk\u00e1 Avenue and Wenceslas Square are widely represented in the photographic archive of the 1968 invasion while other sites of protests are missing. The memory of the Prague Spring is marked by the Czech Republic's and Slovakia's desire to avoid unpleasant collective memories leading to a process of historical amnesia and narrative whitewashing. Photographs taken by Josef Koudelka portray memories of the invasion such as a memorial to the victims set up in Wenceslas Square. There are many omnipresent signs of memorial of the Soviet invasion in the city of Prague.\nDuring the invasion, protesters set up several memorials to record the location of the victims' death. The Jan Palach memorial is a monument remembering the suicide of a student in 1969. This place is often called the \"boulevard of history.\" Palach was the first to kill himself in Wenceslas Square but was not the last, he was belonging to a student pact of resistance. There is also (at \u00dajezd, at the bottom of Petrin hill) the memorial for the victims of communism in Prague: a narrowing staircase along which seven male bronze silhouettes descend. The first one, the one at the bottom, is complete, while the others gradually disappear. It aims at representing the same person at different phases of the destruction caused by communist ideology.\nConflicted memories.\nThe Prague Spring has deeply marked the history of communism in Eastern Europe even though its outcomes were modest. Rather than remembering the cultural democratization, the opening of the press and its impact on the emergence of a new form of socialism, history textbooks consider Prague Spring as one of the major crises of Socialism in the Soviet bloc. The memory has acquired a negative significance as marking disillusion of political hopes within Eastern European communism. Indeed, long hidden and rejected from the collective memory, the Prague Spring of 1968 is rarely commemorated in Prague and is often considered a painful defeat, a symbol of disappointed hope and surrender that heralds twenty years of 'normalisation'. It was not until the 2000s, following the publication of texts dating from 1968, such as Milan Kundera, \"\u010cesk\u00fd \u00fad\u011bl\" (The Czech Fate), and V\u00e1clav Havel, \"\u010cesk\u00fd \u00fad\u011bl?\" published in 2007 in the weekly magazine \"Liter\u00e1rn\u00ed Noviny (52/1)\", that the debate on the Prague Spring resumed. Indeed, the posterity of the Prague Spring remains first and foremost the memory of the military intervention of the Warsaw Pact as well as the failure of reform within a communist regime, which definitely discredited the Dubcekian \"revisionist\" perspective in the East. The memory of the Prague Spring is thus largely obscured and often overviewed. Indeed, the Prague Spring also deeply impacted the Czech society and should also be remembered for the cultural momentum that accompanied and illustrated this movement, of which there are still films, novels, and plays. The Prague Spring also influenced a renewal of the Prague artistic and cultural scene as well as a liberalization of society which deeply marked the following years. The 1960s indeed saw the emergence of a major shift in Czechoslovakia with cultural changes and movement coming from the West, notably rock music and sub-cultural movements which are the symbol of cultural renewal for Czechoslovakia. The Czech sixties were thus a process of emancipation of culture from the constraints of existing political structures and were the prelude to the upheavals of 1968. In fact, the regime's political crisis did not begin with Dubcek's election as party leader on 5 January 1968, but with the break-up speeches delivered at the Writers' Congress in June 1967 by Ludv\u00edk Vacul\u00edk, Milan Kundera and Anton\u00edn Liehm. In addition, the revitalization of society was also an essential component of the Prague Spring. Indeed, the great achievements of the Prague Spring, i. e. the abolition of censorship, the restoration of individual and collective freedoms... have revitalized society, which has begun to express itself more freely. Although the Prague Spring only restored what had existed thirty years earlier in Czechoslovakia, the spring of 1968 had a profound and long-lasting impact on the society. \nRecently, the anniversary of the 50 years of the conflict raised the question of the memory of the Prague Spring. The European Commission Vice-president Maro\u0161 \u0160ef\u010dovi\u010d, himself a Slovak, reminded us on the occasion that \"\"we should never tolerate a breach of international law, crushing people's legitimate yearning for freedom and democracy\".\" The European justice commissioner V\u011bra Jourov\u00e1 also made a speech. However, the memory is still very conflicted as demonstrated when the Czech Republic's pro-Russian President Milo\u0161 Zeman refused to attend any ceremony remembering the Prague Spring and didn't give any speech in memory of the numerous deaths.\nThe memory of the Prague Spring is also transmitted through testimonies of former Czechoslovak citizens. In a 2018 article, Radio Free Europe collected testimonies of four women who witnessed the Warsaw Pact troops invasion and bravely acted. Stanislava Draha who volunteered to help some of the 500 wounded testifies says that the invasion had a major impact on her life. Besides, Vera Homolova, a radio reporter broadcasting the invasion from a covert studio testifies \"I experienced the Soviet-led troops shooting recklessly into the Czechoslovak Radio's building, into windows.\" In the aftermath, Vera Roubalova, who reacted as a student to the occupation by demonstrating posters, that tensions were still present towards the countries that occupied Czechoslovakia. On the night of 20\u201321 August, 137 Czechoslovaks died during the invasion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23822", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23822", "title": "Prayer Book rebellion", "text": ""}
{"id": "23823", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23823", "title": "Princetown", "text": "Village in Devon, England\nPrincetown is a village located within Dartmoor national park in the English county of Devon. It is the principal settlement of the civil parish of Dartmoor Forest. At the 2021 census, the village had a population of 1,443.\nThe village has its origins in 1785, when Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt, then secretary to the Prince of Wales, leased a large area of moorland from the Duchy of Cornwall estate, hoping to convert it into good farmland. He encouraged people to live in the area and suggested that a prison be built there. He called the settlement Princetown after the Prince of Wales.\nPrincetown is the site of Dartmoor Prison. At around 1,430\u00a0feet (435\u00a0m) above sea level, it is the highest settlement on the moor, and one of the highest in the United Kingdom. It is also the largest settlement located on the high moor. The Princetown Railway, closed in 1956, was also the highest railway line in England: its Princetown terminus was also 1,430\u00a0feet above sea level.\nHistory.\nIn 1780, a farm was reclaimed on the site of an ancient tenement near the Two Bridges, and in 1785, Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt set about improving the moor at a place which he named Tor Royal (present day Tor Royal Farm), about south-east of Princetown. The Plume of Feathers Inn also bears this date on its sign. He made an estate and built a house in 1798. Later, the road from Tavistock to Princetown was built, as well as the other roads that now cross the moor.\nHe also proposed that a prison be built on Dartmoor to house the thousands of captives of the Napoleonic Wars and the later War of 1812, who had become too numerous to lodge in the prisons and prison-ships at Plymouth. The site was given by the Prince of Wales, who held the lands of the Duchy of Cornwall to which the whole moor belonged. This is why the settlement is named Princetown. Dartmoor Prison was built in 1806 at a cost of \u00a3130,000. At one time it had a capacity of between 7,000 and 9,000 prisoners, but its operational capacity in 2015 was 660.\nA small town grew up near the prison. Two large inns were built during the war \u2013 the current Prince of Wales and the former Devil's Elbow / Railway Inn (now the Ramblers' Rest Guesthouse). Many of the prisoners had prize money to come from their own country; many others made their own money in their hammocks at night, even forging Bank of England and local bank notes, which they passed off in the great daily market held in the prison. With the closing of the prison in 1816, the town almost collapsed, but the completion of the Princetown Railway in 1823 brought back many people to the granite quarries. The prison remained derelict until 1851, when it was reopened for prisoners serving long sentences. It has since been considerably extended and although other Victorian era prisons are to remain in service, Dartmoor prison was scheduled to close in 2023, but an extension lease was signed to keep it open beyond that date. The prison closed temporarily in 2024 for radon mitigation and investigation works.\nIn the 1880s an Officers' Club building was constructed as a rest room for officers and their families. It was extended during the 1970s and remained in use until closure in 2001, largely because very few prison officers lived in Princetown by that date, but commuted in from Plymouth or Tavistock in the main.\nThe terrace of houses now called Moor Crescent was constructed in 1912 as housing for prison officers of fairly senior rank, in which role it served until the 1980s. After falling into near-derelict condition, it was renovated and is now private housing. Hessary Terrace, which backs onto Moor Crescent, was also constructed as housing for prison officers, as was Heather Terrace.\nThere is a sports field, now used by Princetown Football Club and known as Legend Park, which formerly belonged to the prison. The sports field and pavilion (now Princetown Pavilion Youth Club) date from the 1890s and were constructed for use by the prison warders. A tennis pavilion was laid out in the 1920s as a base for the tennis court for officers and their families. It was demolished in the 1960s due to its poor state. The bowling green and pavilion were built around the turn of the century and visiting teams of prison staff played matches on many occasions. This was also demolished in the 1960s.\nGeography.\nThe village is located on the B3212 road between Yelverton and Two Bridges and is surrounded by moorland. Several footpaths across the moor pass through the village, including one leading west to Sampford Spiney and one leading south to Nun's Cross and Erme Head.\nTor Royal Lane is a dead end road which leads down from the village to the site of the disused Whiteworks tin mine, about 2 miles or 3\u00a0km to the south-east, which overlooks Fox Tor Mires, the presumed site of the Grimpen Mire to be found in Arthur Conan Doyle's tale \"The Hound of the Baskervilles.\" Conan Doyle stayed at the former Duchy Hotel whilst writing and researching the story with his friend, Bertram Fletcher Robinson. The hotel has long since closed and the building now houses the National Park Visitor Centre which is an all-weather centre and activity hub, with interactive displays, films, exhibitions and a children's discovery area.\nOther points of interest in the village include the prison museum which was formerly the prison dairy and behind the prison, two cemeteries \u2013 one for French prisoners of war and the other for American prisoners of war who died in the prison when it was a war depot during the Napoleonic War in the 19th century. The cemetery around the Church of St Michael and All Angels includes the graves of convicts who died during their incarceration in the prison. The Church of St Michael has the distinction of being the only one in England constructed by POWs and is dedicated, as are many churches in high locations, to St. Michael. It was taken out of use due to structural problems and damp and is now maintained by the Churches Conservation Trust, although the building has been stabilised and made safe. The United Church of Princetown can be found at the other end of the village.\nThe village is overlooked from the north-west by North Hessary Tor upon which is a tall transmitting mast that provides a useful guide point for walkers from miles around.\nDemography.\nThe village is mainly made up of white British people living in a mix of social and private housing. There are currently 74 children enrolled at the primary school which was rated 'Good' by Ofsted in 2019. The school itself was constructed in 1874 for the children of prison officers. A further 17 children attend the pre-school, which is contained within the Community Centre in its own purpose-built wing. In 2016 the official population estimate was 1447, with a further 640 inmates of the prison. Most people living in Princetown commute to work in Plymouth or Tavistock, but with the expansion of the brewery a few more jobs have been created locally. The population is projected to keep increasing in the future mainly due to the improved amenities within the village itself and the relatively high percentage of young people living there. \nPrincetown is undergoing significant regeneration and expansion, with new private housing built at several sites in the village and a football pitch with car parking built behind the Community Centre. High Moorland Visitor Centre has been renamed as the National Park Visitor Centre, and the area outside the centre altered to include artwork and new seating areas.\nEconomy.\nIn terms of tourism, Princetown is a popular destination and hub for people traversing the moors, and the sight of large groups of hikers, walkers and cyclists is especially common during the summer months. A bunkhouse and camping facilities are available in the village and there are also a handful of local shops. The Dartmoor Ultra Marathon takes place annually, as does the charity Tour de Moor cycle race. The annual Dartmoor Classic cycling sportive regularly passes through Princetown, and the Tour of Britain has passed though as it went across Dartmoor\nPrincetown has a brewery which used to be housed in the Prince of Wales pub, but now occupies a modern purpose-built building on the edge of the village, close to the former railway. The other pub is the Plume of Feathers (the Railway Inn \u2013 \"The Devils Elbow\" \u2013 closed as a pub in 2009 \u2013 now the Ramblers' Rest Guesthouse). In April 2017 the go-ahead was given for the construction of a whisky distillery, which invoked controversy due to the destruction of buildings that this would entail. These are the 'Pocket Power Station' (the world's first unmanned power station, demolished in 2021) and the older power station building that was in use until 1947, and now sits derelict after prior use as a business. As of early 2024, the building is near completion.\nIn recent years Princetown has seen the opening of both the Princetown Centre for Creativity in Duchy Square, on the site of the former village supermarket, which closed in 2011 but has now re-opened as the Duchy Square Centre, housing business tenants, and a new village community centre opened in 2008, which also houses a GP surgery, library and pre-school.\nClimate.\nPrincetown, like the rest of Dartmoor, experiences colder and wetter weather than most of Devon, especially because of its high altitude. Snow is uncommon but is usually heavy when it does fall. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification the climate would be classified as Cfb bordering on Cfc.\nTransport.\nA summer bus service, the Transmoor link (no. 82 bus) between Plymouth and Exeter, used to pass through the village but was axed, but in 2021 the Dartmoor Explorer started operation, running across the moor to Moretonhampstead and onwards to Exeter. There is a daytime service (no. 98 bus) linking Princetown to Yelverton and Tavistock, but only three times a day.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23824", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23824", "title": "PostgreSQL", "text": "Free and open-source object relational database management system\nPostgreSQL ( ) also known as Postgres, is a free and open-source relational database management system (RDBMS) emphasizing extensibility and SQL compliance. PostgreSQL features transactions with atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability (ACID) properties, automatically updatable views, materialized views, triggers, foreign keys, and stored procedures.\nIt is supported on all major operating systems, including Windows, Linux, macOS, FreeBSD, and OpenBSD, and handles a range of workloads from single machines to data warehouses, data lakes, or web services with many concurrent users.\nThe PostgreSQL Global Development Group focuses only on developing a database engine and closely related components.\nThis core is, technically, what comprises PostgreSQL itself, but there is an extensive developer community and ecosystem that provides other important feature sets that might, traditionally, be provided by a proprietary software vendor. These include special-purpose database engine features, like those needed to support a geospatial or temporal database or features which emulate other database products. \nAlso available from third parties are a wide variety of user and machine interface features, such as graphical user interfaces or load balancing and high availability toolsets.\nThe large third-party PostgreSQL support network of people, companies, products, and projects, even though not part of The PostgreSQL Development Group, are essential to the PostgreSQL database engine's adoption and use and make up the PostgreSQL ecosystem writ large.\nPostgreSQL was originally named POSTGRES, referring to its origins as a successor to the Ingres database developed at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1996, the project was renamed &lt;q&gt;PostgreSQL&lt;/q&gt; to reflect its support for SQL. After a review in 2007, the development team decided to keep the name PostgreSQL and the alias Postgres.\nHistory.\nIngres and University POSTGRES (1982\u20131994).\nPostgreSQL evolved from the Ingres project at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1982, the leader of the Ingres team, Michael Stonebraker, left Berkeley to make a proprietary version of Ingres. He returned to Berkeley in 1985, and began a post-Ingres project to address the problems with contemporary database systems that had become increasingly clear during the early 1980s. He won the Turing Award in 2014 for these and other projects, and techniques pioneered in them.\nThe new project, POSTGRES, aimed to add the fewest features needed to completely support data types. These features included the ability to define types and to fully describe relationships\u00a0\u2013 something used widely, but maintained entirely by the user. In POSTGRES, the database understood relationships, and could retrieve information in related tables in a natural way using \"rules\". POSTGRES used many of the ideas of Ingres, but not its code.\nStarting in 1986, published papers described the basis of the system, and a prototype version was shown at the 1988 ACM SIGMOD Conference. The team released version 1 to a small number of users in June 1989, followed by version 2 with a re-written rules system in June 1990. Version 3, released in 1991, again re-wrote the rules system, and added support for multiple storage managers and an improved query engine. By 1993, the number of users began to overwhelm the project with requests for support and features. After releasing version 4.2 on June 30, 1994\u00a0\u2013 primarily a cleanup\u00a0\u2013 the project ended. Berkeley released POSTGRES under an MIT License variant, which enabled other developers to use the code for any use. At the time, POSTGRES used an Ingres-influenced POSTQUEL query language interpreter, which could be interactively used with a console application named monitor. \nPostgres95 (1994\u20131996).\nIn 1994, Berkeley graduate students Andrew Yu and Jolly Chen replaced the POSTQUEL query language interpreter with one for the SQL query language, creating Postgres95. The monitor console was also replaced by psql. Yu and Chen announced the first version (0.01) to beta testers on May 5, 1995. Version 1.0 of Postgres95 was announced on September 5, 1995, with a more liberal license that enabled the software to be freely modifiable.\nOn July 8, 1996, Marc Fournier at Hub.org Networking Services provided the first non-university development server for the open-source development effort. With the participation of Bruce Momjian and Vadim B. Mikheev, work began to stabilize the code inherited from Berkeley.\nPostgreSQL (1996\u2013present).\nIn 1996, the project was renamed to PostgreSQL to reflect its support for SQL. The online presence at the website PostgreSQL.org began on October 22, 1996. The first PostgreSQL release formed version 6.0 on January 29, 1997. Since then developers and volunteers around the world have maintained the software as The PostgreSQL Global Development Group.\nThe project continues to make releases available under its free and open-source software PostgreSQL License. Code comes from contributions from proprietary vendors, support companies, and open-source programmers.\nMultiversion concurrency control (MVCC).\nPostgreSQL manages concurrency through multiversion concurrency control (MVCC), which gives each transaction a \"snapshot\" of the database, allowing changes to be made without affecting other transactions. This largely eliminates the need for read locks, and ensures the database maintains ACID principles. PostgreSQL offers four levels of transaction isolation: Read Uncommitted, Read Committed, Repeatable Read and Serializable. Because PostgreSQL is immune to dirty reads, requesting a Read Uncommitted transaction isolation level provides read committed instead. PostgreSQL supports full serializability via the serializable snapshot isolation (SSI) method. The PostgreSQL MVCC implementation is prone to performance issues that require tuning when under a heavy write load which updates existing rows.\nStorage and replication.\nReplication.\nPostgreSQL includes built-in binary replication based on shipping the changes (write-ahead logs (WAL)) to replica nodes asynchronously, with the ability to run read-only queries against these replicated nodes. This allows splitting read traffic among multiple nodes efficiently. Earlier replication software that allowed similar read scaling normally relied on adding replication triggers to the master, increasing load.\nPostgreSQL includes built-in synchronous replication that ensures that, for each write transaction, the master waits until at least one replica node has written the data to its transaction log. Unlike other database systems, the durability of a transaction (whether it is asynchronous or synchronous) can be specified per-database, per-user, per-session or even per-transaction. This can be useful for workloads that do not require such guarantees, and may not be wanted for all data as it slows down performance due to the requirement of the confirmation of the transaction reaching the synchronous standby.\nStandby servers can be synchronous or asynchronous. Synchronous standby servers can be specified in the configuration which determines which servers are candidates for synchronous replication. The first in the list that is actively streaming will be used as the current synchronous server. When this fails, the system fails over to the next in line.\nPostgreSQL's replication can trigger conflicts between the primary and standby servers, particularly whenever tuples are prematurely deleted from the standby server despite ongoing queries accessing them. To address this, PostgreSQL includes a feedback flag where the standby server proactively informs the primary server of any ongoing queries to mitigate this type of conflict.\nSynchronous multi-master replication is not included in the PostgreSQL core. Postgres-XC which is based on PostgreSQL provides scalable synchronous multi-master replication. It is licensed under the same license as PostgreSQL. A related project is called Postgres-XL. Postgres-R is yet another fork. Bidirectional replication (BDR) is an asynchronous multi-master replication system for PostgreSQL.\nTools such as repmgr make managing replication clusters easier.\nSeveral asynchronous trigger-based replication packages are available. These remain useful even after introduction of the expanded core abilities, for situations where binary replication of a full database cluster is inappropriate:\nIndexes.\nPostgreSQL includes built-in support for regular B-tree and hash table indexes, and four index access methods: generalized search trees (GiST), generalized inverted indexes (GIN), Space-Partitioned GiST (SP-GiST) and Block Range Indexes (BRIN). In addition, user-defined index methods can be created, although this is quite an involved process. Indexes in PostgreSQL also support the following features:\nSchemas.\nPostgreSQL schemas are namespaces, allowing objects of the same kind and name to co-exist in a single database.\nThey are not to be confused with a\ndatabase schema\u2014the abstract, structural, organizational specification which defines how every table's data relates to data within other tables.\nAll PostgreSQL database objects, except for a few global objects such as roles and tablespaces, exist within a schema.\nThey cannot be nested, schemas cannot contain schemas. \nThe permission system controls access to schemas and their content.\nBy default, newly created databases have only a single schema called \"public\" but other schemas can be added and the public schema isn't mandatory.\nA setting determines the order in which PostgreSQL checks schemas for unqualified objects (those without a prefixed schema). By default, it is set to ( refers to the currently connected database user). This default can be set on a database or role level, but as it is a session parameter, it can be freely changed (even multiple times) during a client session, affecting that session only.\nNon-existent schemas, or other schemas not accessible to the logged-in user, that are listed in search_path are silently skipped during object lookup.\nNew objects are created in whichever valid schema (one that can be accessed) appears first in the search_path.\nData types.\nA wide variety of native data types are supported, including:\nIn addition, users can create their own data types which can usually be made fully indexable via PostgreSQL's indexing infrastructures\u00a0\u2013 GiST, GIN, SP-GiST. Examples of these include the geographic information system (GIS) data types from the PostGIS project for PostgreSQL.\nThere is also a data type called a \"domain\", which is the same as any other data type but with optional constraints defined by the creator of that domain. This means any data entered into a column using the domain will have to conform to whichever constraints were defined as part of the domain.\nA data type that represents a range of data can be used which are called range types. These can be discrete ranges (e.g. all integer values 1 to 10) or continuous ranges (e.g., any time between 10:00 am and 11:00 am). The built-in range types available include ranges of integers, big integers, decimal numbers, time stamps (with and without time zone) and dates.\nCustom range types can be created to make new types of ranges available, such as IP address ranges using the inet type as a base, or float ranges using the float data type as a base. Range types support inclusive and exclusive range boundaries using the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;[] and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Kbd/styles.css\"&gt;&lt;/templatestyles&gt;() characters respectively. (e.g., represents all integers starting from and including 4 up to but not including 9.) Range types are also compatible with existing operators used to check for overlap, containment, right of etc.\nUser-defined objects.\nNew types of almost all objects inside the database can be created, including:\nInheritance.\nTables can be set to inherit their characteristics from a \"parent\" table. Data in child tables will appear to exist in the parent tables, unless data is selected from the parent table using the ONLY keyword, i.e. . Adding a column in the parent table will cause that column to appear in the child table.\nInheritance can be used to implement table partitioning, using either triggers or rules to direct inserts to the parent table into the proper child tables.\nThis feature is not fully supported. In particular, table constraints are not currently inheritable. All check constraints and not-null constraints on a parent table are automatically inherited by its children. Other types of constraints (unique, primary key, and foreign key constraints) are not inherited.\nInheritance provides a way to map the features of generalization hierarchies depicted in entity\u2013relationship diagrams (ERDs) directly into the PostgreSQL database.\nControl and connectivity.\nForeign data wrappers.\nPostgreSQL can link to other systems to retrieve data via foreign data wrappers (FDWs).\nThese can take the form of any data source, such as a file system, another relational database management system (RDBMS), or a web service. This means that regular database queries can use these data sources like regular tables, and even join multiple data-sources together.\nInterfaces.\nPostgreSQL supports a binary communication protocol that allows applications to connect to the database server. The protocol is versioned (currently 3.0, as of PostgreSQL 7.4) and has a detailed specification.\nThe official client implementation of this communication protocol is a C API, libpq. In addition, the officially supported ECPG tool allows SQL commands to be embedded in C code. Both are part of the standard PostgreSQL distribution.\nThird-party libraries for connecting to PostgreSQL are available for many programming languages, including C++, Java, Julia, Python, Node.js, Go, and Rust.\nProcedural languages.\nProcedural languages allow developers to extend the database with custom subroutines (functions), often called \"stored procedures\". These functions can be used to build database triggers (functions invoked on modification of certain data) and custom data types and aggregate functions. Procedural languages can also be invoked without defining a function, using a DO command at SQL level.\nLanguages are divided into two groups: Procedures written in \"safe\" languages are sandboxed and can be safely created and used by any user. Procedures written in \"unsafe\" languages can only be created by superusers, because they allow bypassing a database's security restrictions, but can also access sources external to the database. Some languages like Perl provide both safe and unsafe versions.\nPostgreSQL has built-in support for three procedural languages:\nIn addition, PostgreSQL allows procedural languages to be loaded into the database through extensions. Three language extensions are included with PostgreSQL to support Perl, Tcl, and Python. For Python, the current Python 3 is used, and the discontinued Python 2 is no longer supported as of PostgreSQL 15. Both were supported previously, defaulting to Python 2, while old and new versions couldn't be used in the same session. External projects provide support for many other languages, including PL/Java, JavaScript (PL/V8), PL/Julia,&lt;ref name=\"PL/Julia\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; PL/R, PL/Ruby, and others.\nTriggers.\nTriggers are events triggered by the action of SQL data manipulation language (DML) statements. For example, an INSERT statement might activate a trigger that checks if the values of the statement are valid. Most triggers are only activated by either INSERT or UPDATE statements.\nTriggers are fully supported and can be attached to tables. Triggers can be per-column and conditional, in that UPDATE triggers can target specific columns of a table, and triggers can be told to execute under a set of conditions as specified in the trigger's WHERE clause. Triggers can be attached to views by using the INSTEAD OF condition. Multiple triggers are fired in alphabetical order. In addition to calling functions written in the native PL/pgSQL, triggers can also invoke functions written in other languages like PL/Python or PL/Perl.\nAsynchronous notifications.\nPostgreSQL provides an asynchronous messaging system that is accessed through the NOTIFY, LISTEN and UNLISTEN commands. A session can issue a NOTIFY command, along with the user-specified channel and an optional payload, to mark a particular event occurring. Other sessions are able to detect these events by issuing a LISTEN command, which can listen to a particular channel. This functionality can be used for a wide variety of purposes, such as letting other sessions know when a table has updated or for separate applications to detect when a particular action has been performed. Such a system prevents the need for continuous polling by applications to see if anything has yet changed, and reducing unnecessary overhead. Notifications are fully transactional, in that messages are not sent until the transaction they were sent from is committed. This eliminates the problem of messages being sent for an action being performed which is then rolled back.\nMany connectors for PostgreSQL provide support for this notification system (including libpq, JDBC, Npgsql, psycopg and node.js) so it can be used by external applications.\nPostgreSQL can act as an effective, persistent \"pub/sub\" server or job server by combining LISTEN with FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED.\nRules.\nRules allow the \"query tree\" of an incoming query to be rewritten; they are an, automatically invoked, macro language for SQL. \"Query Re-Write Rules\" are attached to a table/class and \"Re-Write\" the incoming DML (select, insert, update, and/or delete) into one or more queries that either replace the original DML statement or execute in addition to it. Query Re-Write occurs after DML statement parsing and before query planning.\nThe functionality rules provide was, in almost every way, later duplicated with the introduction of newer types of triggers.\nThe use of triggers is usually preferred over rules as it is easier to reason about trigger behavior and interactions than when equivalent rules are used.\nConcurrency model.\nPostgreSQL server is process-based (not threaded), and uses one operating system process per database session. Multiple sessions are automatically spread across all available CPUs by the operating system. Many types of queries can also be parallelized across multiple background worker processes, taking advantage of multiple CPUs or cores. Client applications can use threads and create multiple database connections from each thread.\nSecurity.\nPostgreSQL manages its internal security on a per-role basis. A role is generally regarded to be a user (a role that can log in), or a group (a role of which other roles are members). Permissions can be granted or revoked on any object down to the column level, and can allow or prevent the visibility/creation/alteration/deletion of objects at the database, schema, table, and row levels.\nPostgreSQL's SECURITY LABEL feature (extension to SQL standards), allows for additional security; with a bundled loadable module that supports label-based mandatory access control (MAC) based on Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux) security policy.\nPostgreSQL natively supports a broad number of external authentication mechanisms, including:\nThe GSSAPI, SSPI, Kerberos, peer, ident and certificate methods can also use a specified \"map\" file that lists which users matched by that authentication system are allowed to connect as a specific database user.\nThese methods are specified in the cluster's host-based authentication configuration file (pg_hba.conf), which determines what connections are allowed. This allows control over which user can connect to which database, where they can connect from (IP address, IP address range, domain socket), which authentication system will be enforced, and whether the connection must use Transport Layer Security (TLS).\nStandards compliance.\nPostgreSQL claims high, but not complete, conformance with the latest SQL standard (\"as of the version 17 release in September 2024, PostgreSQL conforms to at least 170 of the 177 mandatory features for Core conformance\", and no other databases fully conformed to it). One exception is the handling of unquoted identifiers like table or column names. In PostgreSQL they are folded, internally, to lower case characters whereas the standard says that unquoted identifiers should be folded to upper case. Thus, should be equivalent to not according to the standard. Other shortcomings concern the absence of temporal tables allowing automatic logging of row versions during transactions with the possibility of browsing in time (FOR SYSTEM TIME predicate), although relatively SQL compliant third-party extensions are available.\nBenchmarks and performance.\nMany informal performance studies of PostgreSQL have been done. Performance improvements aimed at improving scalability began heavily with version 8.1. Simple benchmarks between version 8.0 and version 8.4 showed that the latter was more than ten times faster on read-only workloads and at least 7.5 times faster on both read and write workloads.\nThe first industry-standard and peer-validated benchmark was completed in June 2007, using the Sun Java System Application Server (proprietary version of GlassFish) 9.0 Platform Edition, UltraSPARC T1-based Sun Fire server and PostgreSQL 8.2. This result of 778.14 SPECjAppServer2004 JOPS@Standard compares favourably with the 874 JOPS@Standard with Oracle 10 on an Itanium-based HP-UX system.\nIn August 2007, Sun submitted an improved benchmark score of 813.73 SPECjAppServer2004 JOPS@Standard. With the system under test at a reduced price, the price/performance improved from $84.98/JOPS to $70.57/JOPS.\nThe default configuration of PostgreSQL uses only a small amount of dedicated memory for performance-critical purposes such as caching database blocks and sorting. This limitation is primarily because older operating systems required kernel changes to allow allocating large blocks of shared memory. PostgreSQL.org provides advice on basic recommended performance practice in a wiki.\nIn April 2012, Robert Haas of EnterpriseDB demonstrated PostgreSQL 9.2's linear CPU scalability using a server with 64 cores.\nMatloob Khushi performed benchmarking between PostgreSQL 9.0 and MySQL 5.6.15 for their ability to process genomic data. In his performance analysis he found that PostgreSQL extracts overlapping genomic regions eight times faster than MySQL using two datasets of 80,000 each forming random human DNA regions. Insertion and data uploads in PostgreSQL were also better, although general searching ability of both databases was almost equivalent.\nPlatforms.\nPostgreSQL is available for the following operating systems: Linux (all recent distributions), 64-bit ARM and x86-64 installers available and tested for macOS version 10.14 and newer, Windows (with installers available and tested for 64-bit Windows Server 2022 and 2016), FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, DragonFlyBSD, and these without official (though unofficial likely available) binary executables, Solaris, and illumos.\nPostgreSQL can be expected to work on any of the following instruction set architectures (and operating systems): 64-bit x86-64 and 32-bit x86 on Windows and other operating systems; these are supported on other than Windows: 64-bit ARM and the older 32-bit ARM, including older such as ARMv6 in Raspberry Pi), RISC-V, z/Architecture, S/390, PowerPC (incl. 64-bit Power ISA), SPARC (also 64-bit), MIPS and PA-RISC. It was also known to work on some other platforms (while not been tested on for years, i.e. for latest versions).\nDatabase administration.\nOpen source front-ends and tools for administering PostgreSQL include:\nA number of companies offer proprietary tools for PostgreSQL. They often consist of a universal core that is adapted for various specific database products. These tools mostly share the administration features with the open source tools but offer improvements in data modeling, importing, exporting or reporting.\nNotable users.\nNotable organizations and products that use PostgreSQL as the primary database include:\nService implementations.\nSome notable vendors offer PostgreSQL as software as a service:\nRelease history.\nLegend:UnsupportedSupportedLatest versionPreview versionFuture version&lt;templatestyles src=\"Version/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEcosystem and Derivatives.\nDue to its permissive open-source license and extensible architecture, a broad ecosystem has developed around PostgreSQL. This includes numerous companies offering dedicated support and hosting, as well as several forks and derivative databases that adapt PostgreSQL for specific workloads. Notable derivatives include:\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23825", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23825", "title": "Pope Adrian II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 867 to 872\nPope Adrian II (; also Hadrian II; 792\u00a0\u2013 14 December 872) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 867 to his death on 14 December 872. He continued the policy of his predecessor, Nicholas I. Despite seeking good relations with Louis II of Italy, he was placed under surveillance, and his wife and daughters were killed by Louis' supporters.\nFamily.\nAdrian was a member of a noble Roman family, related to Popes Stephen IV and Sergius II. In his youth, he married a woman named Stephania and had a daughter with her. Adrian later became a priest after having already been married. Catholic priests had been required to abstain from all further sexual relations since the 4th century at the latest.\nAdrian was selected to become pope on 14 December 867. He was already at an advanced age (75), and objected to assuming the papacy. His wife, Stephania, and daughter moved with him to the Lateran Palace, but were soon kidnapped by Eleutherius, who had wed the latter, and murdered both upon being discovered. \nPontificate.\nAdrian II maintained, but with less energy, the policies of his predecessor, Nicholas I. King Lothair II of Lotharingia, who died in 869, left Adrian to mediate between the Frankish kings with a view to secure the imperial inheritance to Lothair's brother, Louis II of Italy. Adrian sought to maintain good relations with Louis, since the latter's campaigns in southern Italy had the potential to free the papacy from the threat posed by the Muslims.\nPatriarch Photius I of Constantinople, shortly after the council in which he had pronounced sentence of deposition against Pope Nicholas I, was driven from the patriarchate by a new Byzantine emperor, Basil the Macedonian, who favoured Photius' rival, Ignatius. The Fourth Council of Constantinople was convoked to decide this matter. At this council, Adrian was represented by legates who presided at the condemnation of Photius as a heretic, but did not succeed in coming to an understanding with Ignatius on the subject of jurisdiction over the Bulgarian Church.\nAdrian supported the work of Cyril and Methodius in Moravia, and authorized the use of the new Slavic liturgy. He subsequently ordained Methodius a priest. In 869, he consecrated Methodius archbishop and Metropolitan of Sirmium.\nLike Nicholas I, Adrian was forced to submit in temporal affairs to the interference of Emperor Louis II, who placed him under the surveillance of Bishop Arsenius of Orte, his confidential adviser, and Arsenius' nephew, Anastasius the Librarian. Arsenius' son Eleutherius married Adrian's daughter, having withheld the fact that he was already espoused to another. In 868, he abducted and murdered Adrian's wife and daughter. Eleutherius was condemned to death for his crimes.\nAdrian died on 14 December 872, after exactly five years of pontificate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23826", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23826", "title": "Pope Adrian III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 884 to 885\nPope Adrian III or Hadrian III ( or \"Hadrianus\"; died 8 July 885) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 17 May 884 to his death on 8 July 885. He served for little more than a year, during which he worked to help the people of Italy in a very troubled time of famine and war.\nBackground.\nAdrian III was born in Rome. According to Jean Mabillon, his birth name was Agapitus. Reginald L. Poole believes that Mabillon confused Adrian III, who succeeded Marinus I, with Agapetus II, who succeeded Marinus II a century later. \nPontificate.\nAdrian laboured hard to alleviate the misery of the people of Italy, prey to famine and to continuous war. He is also known to have written a letter condemning the Christians of both Muslim-ruled and Christian-ruled parts of Spain for being too friendly with the Jews in these lands. Adrian also sent Theodosius, the bishop of Brindisi and Oria, to Constantinople to deliver a synodal letter about faith and the filioque to patriarch Photius I.\nAdrian died in July 885 at San Cesario sul Panaro (Modena), not long after embarking on a trip to Worms, in the Rhineland. The purpose of the journey was to attend an Imperial Diet after being summoned by Emperor Charles the Fat to settle the imperial succession and discuss the rising power of the Saracens.\nAdrian's death and subsequent burial in the church of San Silvestro Nonantola Abbey near Modena is commemorated in the sculpted reliefs (c.\u20091122) that frame the doorway of this church. His relics are found near the high altar, and his tomb at once became a popular place of pilgrimage. His cult was confirmed by Pope Leo XIII on 2 June 1891, and his feast day is celebrated on 8 July. Orthodox Feasts dates are 8 and 30 July.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23827", "revid": "42928558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23827", "title": "Pope Agapetus II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 946 to 955\nPope Agapetus II (died 8 November 955) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 10 May 946 to his death. A nominee of the princeps of Rome, Alberic II of Spoleto, his pontificate occurred during the period known as the \"Saeculum obscurum\".\nPontificate.\nHe was elected pope on 10 May 946 after the death of Marinus II. The existence of an independent republic of Rome, ruled by Alberic II of Spoleto, meant that Agapetus was prevented from exercising any temporal or secular power in Rome and the Papal States. The struggle between Berengar II and Otto I for the Kingdom of Italy allowed Alberic to exercise complete control over Rome and Agapetus, meaning the pope was largely limited to managing internal church affairs. Even Agapetus\u2019 invitation to Otto to intervene in Italian affairs in 951 was done at the instigation of Alberic, who was growing concerned at Berengar's growing power. However, when Otto's envoys, the bishops of Mainz and Chur, were sent to the pope to discuss Otto's reception in Rome and other more important questions, they were turned away by Alberic.\nAgapetus was forced to intervene in the dispute over the occupancy of the See of Reims. He ordered a synod to be held at Ingelheim in June 948 to resolve the rights of the rival claimants, Hugh of Vermandois and Artald of Reims. He sent his legate Marinus of Bomarzo to act on his behalf, while Agapetus wrote to a number of bishops, asking them to be present at the council. Through his legate the pope indicated his support for King Louis IV of France, and gave his support for reinstalling Artald as bishop of Reims. This council was followed up by another one at Trier, where Agapetus was again represented by Marinus of Bomarzo. In 949, Agapetus held a synod in Rome, which confirmed the rulings of the two councils. It condemned the former bishop Hugh and it excommunicated his father, Count Herbert II of Vermandois, for his opposition to King Louis IV.\nAfter receiving requests from both Louis IV of France and Otto I of Germany, Agapetus granted privileges to monasteries and nunneries within their respective kingdoms. He also was sympathetic towards Otto's plans to restructure the bishoprics within Germany, which were eventually aborted due to pressure exerted by William of Mainz. Around 948, Agapetus granted the Archbishop of Hamburg the right of consecrating bishops in Denmark and other northern European countries instead of the pope. The pope was also allegedly asked by a Danish king named Frode, now considered mythical, to send missionaries to his kingdom.\nAgapetus was also asked to intervene in a dispute between Herhold, archbishop of Salzburg and Gerard, bishop of Lauriacum, who both claimed the title of metropolitan of all Pannonia. Agapetus dispatched a letter to the two claimants, in which he stated that the diocese of Lauriacum had been the metropolitan church of all Pannonia before the invasion of the Huns. However, following the ravages inflicted by them, the metropolitan had transferred his see to another city, and since that time Salzburg had been raised to an archbishopric. Consequently, both lawfully occupied their respective sees, and both were to retain their rank and diocese. Agapetus ruled that jurisdiction over western Pannonia would rest with Herhold, while the eastern part, along with the regions occupied by the Avars and the Moravians, would fall under Gerard.\nIn Italy, Agapetus wrote to the dukes of Beneventum and Capua, demanding that monasteries be returned to the monks whom they had displaced. He also deposed the bishops of Termoli and Trivento who were accused of simony. Hoping to rejuvenate the religious life of the clerics in Italy, Agapetus, with the blessing of Alberic, asked for the abbot of Gorze Abbey to send some of his monks down and join the monastic community attached to the church of Saint Paul Outside the Walls.\nAgapetus died on 8 November 955, and was succeeded by Alberic's son, Octavian, who took the papal name of John XII. He was buried in the Lateran basilica, behind the apse, and close to the tombs of Leo V and Paschal II. Agapetus was noted for his caution and for the sanctity with which he led his life.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23828", "revid": "46823728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23828", "title": "Pope Adrian IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1154 to 1159\nPope Adrian (or Hadrian) IV (; born Nicholas Breakspear (or Brekespear); c.\u20091100\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1159) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 4 December 1154 until his death in 1159. He is the only pope to have been born in England and the first pope from the Anglosphere.\nAdrian was born in Hertfordshire, England, but little is known of his early life. Although he does not appear to have received a great degree of schooling, while still a youth he travelled to the south of France where he was schooled in Arles, studying law. He then travelled to Avignon, where he joined the Abbey of Saint-Ruf. There he became a canon regular and was eventually appointed abbot. He travelled to Rome several times, where he appears to have caught the attention of Pope Eugene III, and was sent on a mission to Catalonia where the Reconquista was attempting to reclaim land from the Muslim Al-Andalus. Around this time his abbey complained to Eugene that Breakspear was too heavy a disciplinarian, and in order to make use of him as a papal legate as well as to pacify his monks, he was appointed Bishop of Albano some time around 1149.\nAs bishop, Breakspear was soon sent on another diplomatic mission, this time to Scandinavia. At the outset of the Civil war era in Norway, Breakspear reorganised the Church in Norway and then moved on to Sweden. Here, he was very much acclaimed by the people, and when he left, chroniclers called him a saint. Breakspear returned to Rome in 1154; Eugene's successor Pope Anastasius IV had died only a few weeks previously.\nFor reasons now unknown, but possibly at his predecessor's request, Breakspear was elected next pope by the cardinals. He was unable to complete his coronation service, however, because of the parlous state of politics in Rome, which also at the time was considered a den for 'heresy' and republicanism. Adrian decisively restored the papal authority there, but his other major policy issue\u2014relations with the newly crowned Holy Roman emperor, Frederick I\u2014started off badly and got progressively worse. Each party, as a result of a particular aggravating incident, found something to condemn the other for. As a result, Adrian entered into an alliance with the Byzantine emperor, Manuel I Komnenos, who was keen to re-assert his authority in the south of Italy, but was unable to do so due to the Norman kings' occupation of the region, now under William I of Sicily.\nAdrian's alliance with the Byzantine emperor came to nothing, as William decisively defeated Manuel and forced Adrian to come to terms at the Treaty of Benevento. This alienated Emperor Frederick even more, as he saw it as a repudiation of their existing treaty. Relations soured further when Frederick laid claim to a large swathe of territory in northern Italy. Adrian's relations with his country of birth, however, seem to have remained generally good. Certainly, he showered St Albans Abbey with privileges, and he appears to have forwarded King Henry II's policies where he could. Most famously, in 1158 Adrian is supposed to have granted Henry the papal bull \"Laudabiliter\", which is thought to have authorised Henry to invade Ireland. Henry did not do so, however, for another 14 years, and scholars are uncertain whether the bull ever existed.\nFollowing Adrian's death at Anagni, there was uncertainty as to who to succeed him, with both pro- and anti-imperial cardinals voting for different candidates. Although Pope Alexander III officially took over, the subsequent election of an antipope led to a 22-year-long schism. Scholars have debated Adrian's pontificate widely. Much of a positive nature\u2014his building programme and reorganisation of papal finances, for example\u2014has been identified, particularly in the context of such a short reign. He was also up against powerful forces out of his control, which, while he never overcame them, he managed effectively.\nEarly life.\nThe son of Richard Breakspear, his family was a relatively humble one. The exact year of his birth is unknown but he was probably around 55 years old on his election. Little is known of his background, and that which is, comments Brooke, \"savour[s] of gossip rather than sober history.\" He was probably born in or around the Hertfordshire town of St Albans. As a result, much of that is thought to be known may well be mythological \"tradition woven at the great abbey\" there. Much of what is known is brought to historians by the writings of Cardinal Boso and William of Newburgh, both of whom were, however, writing over 30 years after Breakspear's death. As a result, notes Poole, there is a dearth of information\u2014and especially dates\u2014for Breakspear's life until his election as pope, and \"all that can be said is that the dates commonly given are in every instance wrong\". The English chronicler Matthew Paris says he came from Abbots Langley, although Paris mistakenly ascribes to his father the name Robert de Camera. Robert may have been a clerk although Sayers suggests that Paris' claim that Robert was a priest is probably correct, as is the likelihood that he later became a monk. As such, there are grounds for believing Nicholas to have been illegitimate. Nicholas had a brother called either Ranulf or Randall, a clerk in Feering, Essex. Paris is also the source for Nicholas' surname being Breakspear.\nParis recounts a story that Nicholas was rejected by Abbot Robert de Gorron from taking his novitiate at the abbey, although as Poole points out, the story is demonstrably incorrect as Robert did not become abbot until 1151. Sayers, suggests that, true or not, during and after Breakspear's pontificate, \"certainly St Albans fed upon the story of the local boy who had made good\". William of Newburgh reports that Nicholas was too poor to receive anything more than a rudimentary education, and Brooke speculates that he travelled to France to learn the skills of a clerk. This was, he notes, a normal path to preferment in the 12th century, although it was more unusual for those that did so to have Breakspear's inauspicious background. He may have become a canon at the Augustinian priory in Merton, Surrey. Poole subscribes to this theory, citing a letter to Breakspear when pope in which he is reminded that \"your worship was wont to speak\" of Merton in conversation.\nMove to France, promotion, mission to Catalonia.\nThe next point at which Breakspear can be positively identified is in the Southern French town of Arles, where he continued his studies in canon law, and probably under the masters of Roman law also. On completion of his studies he became a canon regular at the Abbey of Saint-Ruf in Avignon. He was soon appointed prior and then abbot of St Ruf, where the monks complained he was overly strict.\nWhile at St Ruf, Breakspear attracted the attention of Pope Eugenius III. Around this time, Breakspear met John of Salisbury, who would become his good friend. Eugenius appointed Breakspear as Cardinal-Bishop of Albano, only the second time an Englishman had been promoted to that rank. in which capacity he attended the Council of Reims in November 1148.\nEugenius selected Breakspear for a mission to Catalonia, possibly as a kind of unofficial legate to the crusaders. He was likely present at the Siege of Lleida. Around mid-1152, he was despatched to Scandinavia as Papal legate.\nVisit to Scandinavia, 1152.\nFormer Canon residentiary of St Albans Abbey, Andes Bergquist has described Breakspear's journey to northern Europe as \"one of the better documented\" of his career. It is possible that Boso\u2014from whom much of the information comes\u2014was in his entourage, although this is not certain. On his arrival, Norway was in a state of civil war and the authority of the King, Inge I, was neither strong nor respected. Breakspear reconciled the warring factions\u2014albeit temporarily\u2014and restored the monarchy. Although no official record of his instructions survives, Bergquist suggests that they can be inferred from his actions: to divide the existing Archbishopric of Lund\u2014which covered both Norway and Sweden\u2013into two distinct national metropolitans, to arrange payment of Peter's Pence and to generally reorganise the church along Italian and European lines.\nBreakspear may have travelled to Norway via France and England\u2014where, Sayers speculates, he could have recruited merchant contacts who knew the region. His mission may have been kept quiet, as Bergquist notes his arrival seems to have been unexpected: Archbishop Eskil of Lund had recently left to visit France, and the King of Norway was on a military campaign. His first stop was Norway. At some point, Breakspear presided over a council at Nidaros. This council, says Robinson, \"strengthened the economic position of the church and the social status of the clergy\". Its timing though is difficult to ascertain, says Bergquist: Autumn 1152 seems to allow too little time to organise such a major council following his arrival, yet much later and the depth of a Norwegian winter is even more unlikely.\nThe focal point of the cult of St Olaf, Nidaros had until that point been only an episcopate. Adrian's council was intended to promulgate canons. To this end Breakspear made Nidaros a geographically extensive ecclesiastical province, covering the whole of Norway, Iceland and Greenland, as well as the Faroe, Orkney and Shetland Islands. Breakspear also authorised the expansion of what was to become Europe's most northerly medieval cathedral, and its largest. While in Norway he founded three cathedral schools, at Nidaros in 1152 and two more at Bergen and Hamar the following year. His work in Norway earned him the praise of contemporary Icelandic writer and politician, Snorri Sturluson.\nIf the Council of Nidaros was held in the early months of 1153, suggests Bergquist, then it appears that Breakspear sailed to Sweden as soon as it was concluded. His activities in Sweden followed a similar course to those in Norway. He called another council, this time at Link\u00f6ping, which reorganised the Swedish church under the Archbishop of Lund (it had previously been subject to German patriarchy). He also received permission from the Swedish monarchy to introduce Peter's pence and to reduce the influence of the lay community on the church generally. His visit to Sweden was recorded by contemporary chroniclers and published in the 13th century. Similarly to what he had done in Norway with Trondheim, Adrian attempted to create an archiepiscopal see in Sweden. The Swedes and the Geats could not come into an agreement on the location of the see, and the venture came to nothing. According to Bergquist, Breakspear \"was taken aback by this unseemly conflict, and declared that neither people deserved this highest ecclesiastical honour\". Indeed, he suggests that it is possible that Breakspear's plans fell through thanks to the machinations of the recently returned Archbishop Eskil. Eskil, having discovered that he had lost half his archiepiscopate in his absence, may have stirred up the Swedes' and Geats' rivalries to ensure against losing any more. In the event, Breakspear appears to have repaired relations with Eskil, assuring him that Eskil would receive far more than he had lost. As a result, he placed Eskil in charge of the new Swedish metropolitan.\nDuggan describes Adrian's legation in the north as a \"diplomatic triumph\", being so successful, says Sayers, \"that he was later seen as the apostle of Scandinavia\". Boso later lauded how Breakspear brought \"peace to the kingdoms, law to the barbarians, tranquillity to the monasteries, order to the churches, discipline to the clergy and a people pleasing to God, devoted to good works\". He successfully introduced a new Scandinavian tythe\u2014the \"denarium sancti Petri\", or payment to St Peter\u2014a financial acknowledgement by the Scandinavian church of Papal primacy. Breakspear, argues the scholar Andrew Beck, \"gave the Swedish church its hierarchy and its attachment to Rome\". He left Scandinavia in autumn 1154; he seems to have left a generally good impression in the region: A later saga refers to Breakspear as \"the good cardinal...now considered a saint\". On his return to Rome he found Pope Eugenius had died the previous year, and that his successor had followed him only a few weeks before; the College of Cardinals was seeking a successor.\nPolitical background.\nDiscussing the broader political context of the time, the historian Anne Duggan argues that \"the Pope was not master of his own house\". Likewise, Walter Ullmann has argued that the age was a radical one, in which the temporal power\u2014specifically, the \"educated lay element\"\u2014was encroaching upon traditional spiritual realms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The age in which Adrian took office was one that witnessed profound changes in all spheres of life, and change always brings in its train restlessness, crises, stress and tension, caused by the attempted displacement of the old by the new. New forces were released which had hitherto had no opportunity of asserting themselves and which challenged the traditional scheme of things vigorously.\nEugenius had died in July 1153. His successor, Anastasius IV, had been already elderly when elected to succeed him, and only ruled for a year. Comparing the two, the popular historian John Julius Norwich comments that the former \"was old and ineffectual, concerned chiefly with his own self-glorification\"; Adrian, though, was \"a man of very different calibre\". Anastasius died on 3 December 1154, and by which time, Breakspear had returned to Rome. Even before the death of Eugenius, argues Barber, \"a new and formidable figure had appeared\" on the political scene. The Hohenstaufen Frederick Barbarossa had been elected Holy Roman Emperor on 4 March 1152. Barbarossa and Eugenius had contracted, at the Treaty of Constance, to unite against both William of Sicily and the Roman Commune.\nUllmann has identified four major areas of concern for Adrian at the beginning of his pontificate: the city of Rome under Arnold of Brescia, the new emperor who was marching towards Rome for his coronation, his counterpart in the east whose army had recently invaded southern Italy, and restlessness among the Pope's own vassals in his patrimony. By the time of Adrian's consecration, the city of Rome was a major player in Papal-Aristocratic regional politics. Under the governance of a republican commune since 1144, Pope Eugenius had recognised it the following year. While the city was usually happy to acknowledge the feudal lordship of the Pope, it was\u2014even compared to other Italian city states\u2014both \"unusually self-aware, and also unusually idiosyncratic\" compared to others. The commune was hostile to the Papacy. \nThe Papacy was weak in the city of Rome. The heretic, Arnold of Brescia, had ruled since 1146 and was popular. He also had the support of the Roman Commune. The popularity of Arnold directly translated into hostility towards the popes. Chichele Professor Chris Wickham describes the relationship between the Pope and the lords of his Patrimony as one in which, because \"their lords did not by any means all look to Rome [they] had to be coaxed back or brought back by force\". Papal politics was beset by problems at home and abroad. The election of Adrian IV as Pope, comments the papal scholar Ian S. Robinson\u2014and, indeed, the elections of his immediate predecessors\u2014\"took place in the shadow of the communal revolution in Rome\".\nFrom Eugenius, Adrian inherited what Walter Ullmann has called a \"mutual assistance pact\" with the Emperor, the Treaty of Constance, signed the year of Eugenius' death. For the popes, its most important aspect was the stipulation that the crowning of the next emperor was contingent on expelling Arnold of Brescia from Rome. It also assured each party of the other's support against both King William in Sicily and the Byzantine Empire when necessary. The treaty was confirmed by Adrian in January 1155. Eugenius was a believer in the Gregorian doctrine of Papal supremacy, stating that Christ \"gave to St Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the power of both the earthly and the heavenly empire\". From the beginning of his reign, Barbarossa sought to present himself as the heir to a long, established line of Roman Emperors, and likewise that his empire was a continuation of theirs. The historian Anne A. Latowsky explains how this was the cause of tension in the European polity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite grandiose allusions to the German inheritance of the universal dominion of Augustus, the Roman Empire continued to be, as it had been for centuries, a primarily theoretical concept based on an idealized notion of the protection of all Christendom...such claims often clashed with papal pretensions to the primary role as guardians of a unified and universal Christendom\nNorwich argues that, by now, whatever the public statements of either Papal or Imperial party, they were mutually antagonistic, and had been for many years. Even before Adrian's pontificate, he says, no peace treaty was strong enough to unite them for long: \"The days when it had been realistic to speak of the two swords of Christendom were gone\u2014gone since Gregory VII and Henry IV had hurled depositions and anathemas at each other nearly a hundred years before\". The situation, suggest Duggan, was \"a minefield\", for the Pope, and Adrian had to negotiate it.\nIt was the ambition of the Emperor of the Eastern Empire, Manuel I Kommenus, to reunite both Empires under one crown, and, as such, he wished to be crowned by the Pope in Rome, as Western emperors were. The death of Roger II presented Manuel with an opportunity he could not afford to let by, argues Professor Paul Magdalino. The Kingdom of Sicily had been recognised by Innocent II in 1143, notes the Italianist Graham Loud, but \"relations with the Papacy remained fraught\". The previous King of Sicily, Roger II, had ruled his kingdom with an iron fist, and his nobility chafed, particularly the large number he had effectively dispossessed. His son was less interested than his father in the minutiae of government, and when Roger died in 1154 they took advantage of the new king and rebelled. This was of interest to the Papacy as the rebels were willing to ally themselves with anyone for their purpose.\nElection, 1154.\nIt was Breakspear's being \"in the right place at the right time\", suggests the Papal librarian Bradford Lee Eden, that led to his election as pope on Saturday, 4 December 1154, although Duggan argues that he must also have had exceptional qualities, both to reach the rank he had and as seen in his Scandinavian trip\u2014or as William of Newburgh later wrote, \"raised as if from the dust to sit in the midst of princes. Events moved rapidly: the period was one of great crisis for the papacy. Adrian was enthroned on the 5th and crowned in St Peter's on the 6th. His election, said Boso, \"happened\u2014not without divine council\u2014that they unanimously agreed\" on Adrian. To date, Adrian has been the only English pope. He was the first pope from a predominantly English-speaking country and the last until the 2025 election of Pope Leo XIV, who was born in the United States. Adrian was one of the few popes of his era who did not need consecrating on his election, as he was already a bishop.\nAccording to Boso, Breakspear had to be forced \"against his will\" into the Papal throne. He took the name Adrian IV, possibly in honour of Adrian I, who revered St Alban and first granted the abbey of that name its privileges. It was, suggests Julius Norwich, a \"wise choice, for energy and force were desperately needed\". Although he had been elected unanimously from among the cardinals, the role of the Roman people was ignored. Thus relations between the Pope and his city were poor from the beginning, as were relations between Adrian and the King of Sicily, who controlled much of southern Italy. Relations with the commune were so bad that Adrian was forced to remain in the Leonine City and was thus unable to immediately complete the enthronement ceremony, as tradition dictated, by making his \"adventus\" into Rome itself. In the event, Adrian was required to remain there for the next four months. As a result, although he had been consecrated, he had not been crowned in the ceremony \"dies coronae\" at the Lateran which gave him not his title but gave him feudal title of the papal lands. It is probable that, due to problematic relations with the Romans, he did not receive his crown until the following Easter.\nPacification of Rome.\nDue to Arnold's presence in Rome, there were a number of acts of religious significance that it was impossible to perform, such as the ceremony of the , the physical claiming of the curule seats of Saints Peter and Paul. Soon after Adrian's election, a cardinal was badly beaten up by Roman republicans. Adrian was no more popular with the people or Commune of Rome than his immediate predecessors, so at Easter the next year he departed for Viterbo. His \"primary task\", argues Sayers, \"was to control the Emperor\" Frederick Barbarossa. Barbarossa had only recently been elected to the Imperial throne and for their own reasons, Pope and Emperor needed each other. Adrian needed Barbarossa's military support against William (known as \"The Bad\"), King of Sicily, who was threatening the Papal patrimony. For his part, the Emperor needed Adrian to perform the traditional imperial coronation service.\nAdrian took a hard line against the Roman commune. He threatened to place the city under interdict for protecting Arnold, whom the hierarchy condemned as a heretic. This strategy successfully drove a wedge between the commune and Arnold, who was expelled. He followed through with this threat following the beating of one of his cardinals. Norwich has called this \"an act of breath-taking courage\", considering that Adrian was a foreign Pope of only a few weeks' tenure, who \"knew the city and its increasingly xenophobic inhabitants hardly at all and was able to rely on little or no popular support\" on the Via Sacra. Rome was forced to submit to the Pope, and Arnold of Brescia was expelled. Although he had managed to restore Papal authority in the city, he was unable to eradicate the principle of republicanism, and the commune remained as the governing body.\nCapture of Arnold.\nAdrian angled for the support of the Emperor in capturing the heretic Arnold. Arnold was captured by Imperial troops in summer 1155. Arrested and tried in a Papal court for rebellion rather than heresy, he was hanged and his body burnt. Adrian claimed that Arnold's execution had been on the initiative of the prefect of Rome, but some contemporary observers, such as Gerhoh of Reichersberg, suspected Adrian of ordering the execution himself. The Emperor's willingness to assist the Pope in his own city, and help him crush his enemies, was an explicit recognition from Barbarossa of the Pope's possession of Rome. Papal relations with the lords of Campania were already tense, as they, in the Pope's view, were little more than robber barons, who both fought among each other and robbed pilgrims from the south on their way to Rome.\nImperial trouble at Sutri, late 1155.\nBarbarossa had received the Iron Crown of Lombardy\u2014as King of Italy\u2014in Pavia, but also wished to receive his Imperial Crown from the Pope. Adrian originally saw the Emperor as protector and defender of the church. Both parties, notes Ullmann, were unpopular in Rome:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because of fear of Roman hostility and disturbances the imperial coronation on 18 June 1155 had to be performed secretly on a Saturday (instead of on a Sunday as usual) in order to mislead the Romans, all this being somewhat incongruous for \"the lord of the world and master of Rome\" who was there with his armed forces. \nTo this end, Adrian and Barbarossa met at Sutri in early June 1155. This soon, says Sayers, \"turned out to be a spectacular contest between the two to gain propagandist supremacy\". Adrian, reports an Imperial chronicler, was there \"with the entire Roman Church, met us joyfully, paternally offered us holy consecration and complained to us of the injuries he had suffered at the hands of the Roman populace\". Barbarossa later recalled the ceremony in a letter to the Eastern Emperor in 1189:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For in the city of Rome, which is known as the lady and head of the world, we received the crown and rule over all of Christianity from the altar of St Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and were solemnly anointed with the oil of majesty by the lord Pope Adrian, the successor to St Peter, before our fellows, and our name is held to be famous and glorious because of this\".\nAdrian may have been caught off-balance by the Emperor's swift entry into Italy and the speed with which he approached Rome. The dispute was sparked by Barbarossa's unwillingness to act as the Pope's strator; lead the Pope's horse by the bridle\u2014or to assist Adrian in dismounting\u2014as was traditionally expected. In response, the Pope refused the Emperor the kiss of peace; the Emperor was still willing to perform the duty of kissing Adrian's feet, though. These were minor affronts at best, says Barber, \"but in an age so highly conscious of symbolic acts\", took on a greater political import.\nThe confusion at Sutri may have been accidental, but Frederick also took offence at a mural in the Lateran of his predecessor Luthar which described the Emperor as a liegeman of the Pope. The painting was inscribed with the verse\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;The king comes before the gates, first swearing to\n uphold the rights of the city.\nThen he becomes the liegeman of the pope;\n he accepts the crown, which the pope gives.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIndignant, Barbarossa made a \"friendly reproach\" to the Pope. In a letter to a German bishop, he explained, \"it began with a picture. The picture became an inscription. The inscription seeks to become an authoritative utterance. We shall not endure it, we shall not submit to it.\" Adrian told Barbarossa he would have it removed, \"lest so trifling a matter might afford the greatest men in the world an occasion for dispute and discord. In the event, Adrian did not, and by 1158 Imperial commentators were describing the matter of the painting and its inscription as the fundamental cause of the dispute between Pope and Emperor. Adrian, says Freed, was \"perplexed\" at the Emperor's refusal to offer him squire service: he \"dismounted and seated himself on a folding stool\". Barbarossa, if he wished to be crowned, had limited options against the Pope. He took advice from councillors based on records of \"the more ancient princes and especially those who had come with King Lothar to Pope Innocent\". An entire day was spent inspecting both \"old documents\", and hearing from those of his entourage who had been present at the 1131 ceremony. The Pope's party saw this as a sign of aggression, and deserted Adrian for the security of a nearby castle.\nImperial coronation, 1155.\nThe Emperor was, though, eventually persuaded, performed the necessary services. He was eventually crowned in Nepi on 18 June. Peace was maintained at Nepi, however, and both Pope and Emperor dined together, wearing their crowns in a joint celebration of the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul. There was much rejoicing, and contemporaries went so far as to proclaim that \"a single state had been created from two princely courts\". Ullmann, on the other hand, argues that, not only was the Emperor's power clearly derivative of the Pope but that Adrian himself had further diluted it in his rendition of the coronation ceremony. Nor was there an official enthronement for the new emperor.\nThis ceremony, says Sayers, was arguably a new version of the traditional one, which now \"highlight[ed] the difference between the anointing of a mere layman and that of a priest\". Previously, Emperors had been anointed on the head, as a priest was; this time, Adrian anointed Barbarossa between the shoulders. Further, the Pope invested him with a sword, which emphasised the Emperor's role\u2014as Adrian saw it\u2014as the defender of the Papacy and its privileges. Adrian, on the other hand, disallowed his chancery from addressing the Emperor by either of his preferred titles, \"augustus semper\" or \"semper augustus\". It may be that Adrian had been frightened by the Emperor's decisive approach on Rome\u2014Duggan notes he \"impos[ed] obedience on recalcitrant cities and proclaim[ed] the resumption of Imperial rights\" as he did. If so, that may have led him to over-reacting the face of a perceived slight, however small.\nFollowing the Imperial coronation, both sides appear to have taken extra care to ensure they abided by the Treaty of Constance. Barbarossa, for example, refused to entertain an embassy from the Roman commune. He did not, however, further perform as Adrian hoped, and did not defend the Papacy. Indeed, he stayed in Rome only enough time to be crowned, and then left immediately: \"dubious protection\" for the Pope, comments Barber. Before he left, however, his army was drawn into a bloody clash with Rome's citizens, incensed at what they saw as a display of Imperial authority in their city. Over 1,000 Romans died. The Senate continued revolting in Rome and William of Sicily remained entrenched in the Patrimony. Adrian was trapped between King and Emperor. Freed suggests that Barbarossa's failure to suppress the Roman commune for Adrian led the Pope to believe the Emperor had broken the Treaty of Constance. Further, on the Emperor's march north, his army sacked and razed the town of Spoleto. Adrian left Rome also, as his relations with the commune were still too fragile for him to be able to guarantee his safety following the Emperor's departure. As a result, the Pope was left in \"virtual exile\" in Viterbo, and relations between the two declined further.\nNormans, Greeks and Apulians.\nProbably as a result, he responded positively to overtures from the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I, and also the native barons of Southern Italy, who saw in Adrian's support a chance for them to overthrow William, whom Adrian had recently excommunicated for invading the Papal patrimony. The rebellion had started off promisingly, with rebel victories at Bari, Trani and Andria. They had already found themselves a powerful ally in Manuel, the Byzantine Emperor, and welcomed anyone\u2014including Adrian\u2014who was hostile to William. Their leader, Count Robert of Loritello, had been charged with treason by William but had managed to escape north. William was temporarily struck down with an unknown illness, as the scholar Joshua C. Birk explains, \"this brought the enemies of the kingdom of Sicily out of the woodwork\"; among them, Adrian excommunicated William. By 1154, William had captured important towns in the Patrimony. In summer 1155 rebellion broke out in southern Italy by the native nobility against their lord, the King of Sicily. One group of rebels, having gained the support of Emperor Manuel, overran Ancona. By winter 1155, suggests Norwich, few contemporaries \"would have held out much hope for the future of the Sicilian monarchy\". According to Boso, the rebels asked Adrian to come to them as their feudal lord, to act as their spiritual advisor and bless them in their endeavours. Adrian, believing that William's kingdom would collapse imminently, tried to exploit William's weakness and allied with the rebels in September. As it turned out, this was a miscalculation. William had already asked Adrian for a peace conference, which the Pope had (\"scornfully\") rejected.\nAlliance with Manuel I, 1156.\nEmperor Manuel I had launched his own military operation against William in southern Italy in 1154. He found Adrian a willing ally. The Russian historian Alexander Vasiliev notes that Adrian \"expressed his desire 'to help in bringing all the brethren into one church' and compared the eastern church with lost \"drachma\", wandering sheep, and the dead Lazarus\". Adrian's isolation led directly to his concordat with the Eastern Empire in 1156, although Duggan emphasises that he was reacting to external political pressures rather than deliberately initiating a new policy. As a result, says Barber, he \"became involved in a fruitless Byzantine plan to overcome the Normans which ended, as so often before when the popes had ventured south in arms, in Norman victory\". Adrian\u2014as if, says Partner, \"the unhappy experiences of at least three popes has taught the papacy nothing\"\u2014organised a papal army comprising Roman and Campagnan nobility and crossed the border into Apulia in September 1155.\nAlthough it has been suggested that Manuel offered to pay Adrian a large sum of money in return for ceding him certain Apulian cities, it seems unlikely that this was ever actioned; certainly, notes Duggan, Adrian was wholly against the creation of a Byzantine kingdom on his own doorstep. This was in spite of Manuel deliberately not pressing his Empire's historical claim on South Italy as a whole, and was interested primarily in the coastal areas. Initially, his campaign succeeded, and by 1155 he had annexed Ancona, and had occupied Salento, namely the area from Brindisi to Taranto. Byzantine funding enabled Adrian to temporarily restore his vassal Robert, Count of Loritello, although on one occasion William was able to capture of gold from Manuel that had been destined for the Pope's war chest. There was some discussion of an alliance between Roman pope and Eastern emperor, and Adrian despatched Anselm of Havelberg east to arrange it, although in the event negotiations came to nothing. Magdalino argues that Adrian would not have been interested in an alliance \"without the lure of Byzantine gold\". Although the Byzantine Emperor had sent his army to support the Pope in Italy\u2014and indeed, had subdued the troublesome region of the Balkans\u2014Adrian, argues Sayers, \"could not accept any power for the emperor that was not dependent on the pope\". Ullmann argues that although Adrian was receptive to Manuel's ambition of uniting the Eastern and Western Roman Empires, he did not appreciate the manner in which the offer was made. He was particularly averse to Manuel's suggestion that the pope's sword was merely a spiritual force, and, suggests Ullmann, \"received Manuel's overtures with that scepticism which they deserved\". Adrian, though, while agreeing on the basic tenet of a single emperor and a single church, believed that it was not a case of the Western church joining that of the East, but the latter returning to the former with the \"obedience due to a mother\", as he put it in a letter to Manuel. In other words, all Christians, East or West, should be subjugated to the church of St Peter.\nNorman victory.\nStrategically, King William's position was not looking good, and he offered Adrian large sums in financial compensation for the Pope to withdraw his forces. However, the majority of Adrian's curia were averse to holding negotiations with the Sicilians, and the King's offer was rejected somewhat haughtily. This turned out to be a bad mistake. William soon won decisive victories over both Greek and Apulian armies in mid-1156, culminating in the final defeat of the Eastern Empire at the Battle of Brindisi. When William soundly defeated the rebels, Adrian\u2014who was by now, even more, bogged down in the problem of Rome and without allies\u2014had to sue for peace on the King's terms. This was yet another external event\u2014indeed, probably the single most important event of the pontificate she argues\u2014that Adrian had had no way of influencing but had to deal with its consequences, notes Duggan. He was effectively captured and forced to come to terms at Benevento three weeks later. This one event, says Duggan, changed Adrian's policy for good, whether or not he liked it. As a result, at the Concordat of Benevento, Adrian had to invest William with the lands he claimed in southern Italy, symbolised by the presentation of the Pope's own pennoned lances and the kiss of peace. The Pope was accepted as William's feudal overlord, while being forbidden from entering Sicily without an invitation from the King, thereby granting William effectively Legatine authority over the church in his own land. For his part, William gave the Pope his homage and contracted to pay an annual tribute and provide military support on request. The treaty conferred extended powers on the Kings of Sicily that they would enjoy for at least the next 40 years, and included powers over ecclesiastical appointments traditionally held by the Popes as the region's feudal lord. Adrian's treaty with William angered the Emperor, who took it as a personal slight that Adrian had treated with the two Imperial rivals to Italy and confirmed his view of Adrian's Papal arrogance. This, suggests Robinson, sowed the seeds of the disputed election following Adrian's death.\nThe defeat of Manuel's army left the Pope vulnerable, and in June 1156 Adrian was forced to come to terms with the Sicilian King. This was, however, suggests Robinson, on generous terms, including \"homage and fealty, reparation for the recent encroachments on the papal patrimony, help against the Romans, freedom from royal control for the Sicilian church\". Adrian's new alliance with William exacerbated relations with Barbarossa, who believed that Adrian had broken the Treaty of Constance twice over, by allying with both King William and the Byzantine Emperor. Relations between Pope and Emperor were, argues Latowsky, \"irreparably damaged. Adrian probably acted as mediator the following year in concluding a peace treaty between William and Manuel. The Emperor attempted to prevent the treaty by sending his most experienced diplomat, Abbot Wibald to intervene, as he probably saw a Sicilian\u2013Byzantine alliance as being directed against him.\nThe alliance with William had probably been strengthened by the Pope's belief that Barbarossa had already broken the Treaty of Constance. At the Treaty of Benevento, Adrian was represented by the Cardinals Ubald, Julius and Roland; the Papacy was forced to cede much valuable land, rights and income to William. The Emperor felt personally betrayed: according to the contemporary chronicler Geoffrey of Viterbo, the Pope, \"wish[ed] to be an enemy of Caesar\". Duggan, however, suggests that the Imperial alliance with the papacy had only ever been a flag of convenience, \"ready to be discarded when it had served its purpose\". Bolton, meanwhile, suggests that, as Benevento was an Imperial town, the fact that following the treaty he stayed there for eight more months indicates that Adrian was asserting his power.\nProblems in translation, 1157.\nBy 1157, suggests Whalen, having secured the border with the south (by his alliance with Sicily) and the commune as peaceful as it had been for some time, Adrian was able to reside in Rome again and \"stood in a more secure position than any of his predecessors had for decades\". They were made worse in 1157 when, in a letter to the Emperor, Adrian referred to the Empire by the Latin term \"beneficium\", which some of Barbarossa's councillors translated as fief, rather than benefice. This, they claimed, implied that the Pope saw the empire as subordinate to the papacy. The Emperor had to personally hold back Otto of Wittelsbach from assaulting the Pope's messengers. Ullmann, however, argues that Adrian's use of the word was \"harmless enough...that he conferred the Imperial crown as a favour\". Duggan too describes the incident as \"at best a diplomatic incident\u2014a \"faux pas\"\u2014which suggests carelessness on the part of the drafter\". Historians have disagreed as to the degree of deliberation behind the use of the word. Peter Munz, for example, believes it to have been a deliberate provocation, engineered by an anti-Imperial faction within the curia, designed to justify Adrian's treaty with King William. Anne Duggan, on the other hand, suggests this view is \"scarcely credible\": not only was Adrian in no position of strength from which to threaten Frederick, but he was also aware that the Emperor was planning a campaign against Milan for the following year, and would hardly wish to provoke him into marching on towards the Papal States.\nIn October 1157, Barbarossa was celebrating his wedding in Besan\u00e7on with an Imperial Diet, when he was visited by Papal legates Roland and Bernard. Theirs was an important mission bringing personal letters from Adrian, and they were met \"with honour and kindness, claiming (as they did) to be the bearers of good tidings\". The Pope complained about the lack of activity in discovering who attacked Eskil, Archbishop of Lund while he travelled through Imperial territory. Eskil, complained Adrian, had been captured somewhere \"in the German lands...by certain godless and infamous men\", and Frederick had made no attempt to secure his release. Adrian's letter, suggests Godman, both upbraids the Emperor for \"dissimulation\" and \"negligence\" while accusing Rainald of Dassel of being a \"wicked counsellor \", although Duggan describes it more as a \"mild rebuke\". Barber comments that \"the tone is that of one who is surprised and a little hurt that, having treated Frederick so affectionately and honourably, he had not had a better response, but the actual words used to express these sentiments gave rise to immediate offence\". Adrian's defence of Eskil of Lund contributed further to the decline in his relationship with Barbarossa. Adrian's choice of occasion on which to rebuke the Emperor was bound to offend him, argues Norwich. But even if unintentional, argues Freed, the Pope should have instructed his delegates to meet with Barbarossa privately rather than in the open. Equally provocative, Freed suggests, was Adrian's later assertion that letters which criticised the Emperor's behaviour were somehow to his advantage. Adrian's \"sharp\" words also contributed to the Emperor's advisors increasing discontent with his messengers. The Pope had also ordered that, before any negotiations took place, the Emperor's council would accept Adrian's letters \"without any hesitation...as though proceeding from our mouth\". The cardinals appear to have worsened their reception by calling Frederick \"brother\".\nThe Emperor was also exasperated to find, on ordering the legates' quarters searched, blank parchments with the Papal seal attached. This he understood to mean that the legates had intended to present supposedly direct instructions from the Pope when they felt it necessary. Barbarossa claimed that he held his crowns directly from God and that Adrian \"did not understand his Petrine commission if he thought otherwise\". Following promulgation of Adrian' letter, says Godman, \"there was uproar\". Worse, says Barbarossa's contemporary chronicler Otto of Freising, the legates compounded the insult by asking those present \"from whom the does he have the empire, if not from our lord the pope?\" The two ecclesiasts were then nearly beaten up, but the Emperor enabled their swift escape.\nRetranslation.\nIn June 1158, representatives of both sides met in the Imperial town of Augsburg. Adrian attempted to pacify the Emperor and claimed that he meant, not \"fief\", but \"good deed\": \"Among us \"beneficium\" means not a fief but a good deed\", he wrote. Barber suggests, though, that \"his explanation was far from convincing\". On the other hand, notes the Emperor's biographer John Freed, Barbarossa was illiterate, and required everything translated. He was thus in constant danger of relying on mistranslations, and it is possible that this happened at Besan\u00e7on. Taken at face value, this phrase appeared to assert that Adrian was the Emperor's feudal overlord.\nLatowsky argues that the mistranslation was a deliberate ploy by Barbarossa's Archchancellor Rainald of Dassel\u2014whom she describes as a \"multilingual provocateur\"\u2014whose Chancery was waging a propaganda war against Adrian. The Pope had earlier condemned Rainald's election as Archbishop of Cologne, believing Rainald to be nothing less than the Devil's agent.\nLatowsky suggests that Rainald had intended to cause trouble between Emperor and Pope. If this was the case, he succeeded, as Barbarossa was only just restrained from sending an army against Adrian. The Emperor did make a public declaration against Adrian, though, calling for his deposition on the grounds that, as the son of a priest, he was an uncanonical pope. Ullmann notes that canonicity \"was indubitably a double-edged weapon; if Adrian was an uncanonical pope, then Frederick was an uncanonical emperor, and that seems the only reason why this point was not pressed further\". Duggan summarises Adrian's Augsburg letter as being concomitant to one's interpretation of the original offence, noting that \"the context...determines everything\". While Munz views the Augsburg outcome as a \"humiliating\" retreat by Adrian, Duggan argues that, if one does not view the Besan\u00e7on letter as deliberately provocative, \"then there was no withdrawal from that provocation\".\nAdrian's choice of words may also have been a \"calculated ambiguity\", suggests Abulafia, and in the event, Adrian never publicly acknowledged which of the interpretations he had actually intended. This would have allowed him to suggest the Emperor has misunderstood him while allowing the Pope to intimate to his own church that the Emperor was indeed a Papal vassal. Adrian \"trivialised\" Barbarossa's anger with irony, commenting that \"this should not have vexed the heart of even one in lowly station, to say nothing of so great a man\". The Augsburg meeting seems to have improved relations between pope and emperor. As Freed notes, though, \"the fundamental question...remained unresolved\", and any improvement in relations was temporary, as they fell out again later that year over the appointment of the next Archbishop of Ravenna. This revived the question of their respective roles, as the nominations were split between each sides' preferences; in the event, the Imperial candidate\u2014Guido of Biandrate\u2014was elected against Adrian's wishes. There was also increasing disagreement over the traditional \"fodrum\" Imperial taxation levied in north Italy.\nImperial claims to north Italy.\nAdrian's opposition to Guido of Biandrate's appointment had so incensed the Emperor that he no longer placed the Pope's name before his own in their correspondence, as had been a traditional sign of honour. Furthermore, he began aggressively asserting his claims over Lombardy, and in 1159 the Diet of Roncaglia issued a series of decrees claiming extensive lands in north Italy. This caused sufficient concern that the cities of Milan\u2014which Barbarossa had already \"half-destroyed\", says Ullmann\u2014Brescia, Piacenza and Crema (which had also suffered a \"brutal siege\", notes Duggan) approached Adrian for aid. Since the lands concerned were part of the Papal fiefdom, Adrian, in Bologna, rejected Barbarossa's claim and gave him 40 days in which to withdraw them, on pain of excommunication. However, Adrian's intervention in a quarrel between the Emperor and the Lombard towns may, suggests the classicist Peter Partner, \"may have been inevitable, but it was to be one of the most explosive issues of its age\".\nDuggan has emphasised the severity of the situation facing Adrian: accepting Frederick's claims, she says, would have entailed Adrian effectively \"abandoning the whole Italian church\". Adrian also had counter-demands. Frederick was to desist from sending envoys to Rome without papal permission, that he should only be paid the Imperial tax from his Italian lands while in Italy and that those papal lands in north Italy be returned to the church. Adrian, says Duggan, \"received short thrift\". In the event Adrian died before his 40-day term expired. As relations between Emperor and Pope worsened, Barbarossa took to placing his own name before that of Adrian in their correspondence, as well as addressing the Pope in the singular. By now, suggests Duggan, Adrian was viewed with contempt by the Emperor.\nRelations with England.\nPope Adrian, comments Sayers, \"was not unmindful of the interests and well-being of his English homeland\", and Robinson identifies his pontificate as \"the period in which\nEnglish influence was strongest in the papal curia\". Adrian remained faithful to the cult of St Alban and often promoted King Henry's political ambitions when he could. For example, suggests Brooke, following his lengthy stay with Adrian, John of Salisbury seems to have acquired the belief that he would at some point receive a cardinalate. However, John fell out with King Henry for a now-unknown reason, and Adrian\u2014probably wishing to promote his friend but essentially a diplomat and a realist\u2014could not afford to alienate his only major supporter in northern Europe. Adrian also favourably received at least two curial embassies from St Albans in 1156 and 1157. In 1156 Adrian ordered King Henry II to appoint an otherwise unknown Hugh to a London prebend. He wrote to Roger, Archbishop of York two months after Adrian's election confirming the Papal Legates in their offices.\nAdrian had been absent from England since 1120, and it should not be assumed that he bore an automatic affection for the country which, in Richard Southern's words, had given him \"no reasons to cherish warm feelings\" about it. However, in 1156, when John of Salisbury\u2014\"in circumstances which otherwise remain obscure\"\u2014had fallen into disgrace with the English King, Adrian regularly petitioned Henry for his friend's reinstatement. This was eventually won, but had taken a year to achieve. Anne Duggan, of King's College, London, describes Anglo-Papal relations at this time as \"not so much to a policy, perhaps, but to persistent intervention...and to a degree of acceptance, willing or not, on the part of Church authorities\". However, Adrian was willing to intervene in English church affairs when it suited, as in February 1156 when he threatened Nigel, Bishop of Ely with suspension from office over what the art historian C. R. Dodwell has called Nigel's having \"stripped-down, sold, or used as security, a quite astounding number of Ely's monastic treasures\".\nAmong other patronages, he confirmed the nuns of St Mary's Priory, Neasham in possession of their church. and granted St Albans Abbey \"a large dossier of privileges and directives\" exempting it from the jurisdiction of its episcopal master, Robert de Chesney, Bishop of Lincoln. He also confirmed the primacy of the Archbishop of York over Scottish bishops and his independence from the Archbishop of Canterbury. He also granted papal protection\u2014\"free and immune from all subjection except to the Roman pontiff\"\u2014to Scottish towns, such as that of Kelso in 1155. He also, on occasion, sent his young prot\u00e9g\u00e9s to the court of King Henry to learn the aristocratic arts of hunting, falconry and the martial arts.\nPersonal philosophy and religious views.\nAdrian was keen to emphasise the superiority of the Western Church over that of the East, and lost no opportunity to tell members of that body so.{{sfn|Sayers|2004}} \nPersonality.\nAdrian's chamberlain, Boso\u2014who later wrote Adrian's \"Vita\"{{sfn|Eden|2006|p=292}}\u2014described the Pope as \"mild and kindly in bearing, of high character and learning, famous as a preacher, and renowned for his fine voice\".{{sfn|Sayers|2004}} Julius Norwich describes Adrian as being eloquent, able and with \"outstanding good looks\".{{sfn|Norwich|1970|p=172}} The German antiquarian Ferdinand Gregorovius believed that by nature Adrian was \"as firm and as unyielding as the granite of his tomb\", while Norwich tempers this suggestion, believing that, at least after Benevento, he must have been far more open to the possibilities of change.{{sfn|Norwich|1970|p=186}} Duggan wonders whether he deliberately utilised these traits to forward his career. Boso's characterisation, she suggests, \"could imply that he was ready to ingratiate himself with the powerful, to make friends and influence people by accommodation and charm\".{{sfn|Duggan|2003b|p=198}} Sayers also suggests that something similar is detectable in the accounts from John of Salisbury,{{sfn|Sayers|2004}} a close friend to the Pope since the days of Adrian's curial visits.{{sfn|Egger|2003|p=20}}{{refn|Indeed, R. L. Poole has asserted that John had an illegitimate son, which he named Adrian in the Pope's honour, and that, had the child been a girl, he was going to name her Adriana.{{sfn|Poole|1969|p=271}}|group=note}}{{Quote box\nDeath.\nPope Adrian died in Anagni{{sfn|Freed|2016|p=258}}\u2014to whence he had retired for security against the Emperor{{sfn|McBrien|1997}}\u2014from quinsy{{citation needed|date=July 2021}}{{refn|The 16th-century martyrologist John Foxe later said that this had been caused by the Pope choking on a fly.{{sfn|Oliver|1945|p=392}}|group=note}} on 1 September 1159. He was buried in St Peter's on 4 September 1159.\nLegacy and assessment.\nFor nearly nine centuries, Adrian was the only pope from the Anglosphere until the 2025 election of American-born Leo XIV."}
{"id": "23829", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23829", "title": "Pope Adrian V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 1276\nPope Adrian V (; c.\u20091210/1220 \u2013 18 August 1276), born Ottobuono de' Fieschi, was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 11 July 1276 to his death on 18 August 1276. He was an envoy of Pope Clement IV sent to England in May 1265 who successfully completed his task of resolving disputes between King Henry III of England and his barons. Adrian V was elected pope following the death of Innocent V, but died of natural illness before being ordained to the priesthood.\nIn the \"Divine Comedy\", Dante meets Adrian V in the fifth terrace of \"Purgatorio\" where Adrian V cleanses for the vice of avarice.\nBiography.\nOttobuono belonged to a feudal family of Liguria, the Fieschi, counts of Lavagna. His first clerical position came in 1243, when he was created a papal chaplain. Subsequently, he received several ecclesiastical benefices, becoming archdeacon in Bologna (1244) and Parma (1244/48\u20131255), canon and chancellor of the cathedral chapter in Reims (1243\u20131250), canon and dean of the chapter in Piacenza (c. 1247) and canon of the cathedral chapter in Paris (1244/45\u20131270). In December 1251, he was created Cardinal Deacon of San Adriano by his uncle Pope Innocent IV. He was also archpriest of the patriarchal Liberian Basilica (attested from 1262).\nHe was sent to England in 1265 by Pope Clement IV to mediate between King Henry III of England and his barons, and to preach the Crusades. Fieschi was related distantly, by affinity, to Henry III; his sister had married Thomas II of Savoy, who was a cousin of Henry's wife, Eleanor of Provence.\nHe remained in England for several years as the papal legate, serving from October 1265 to July 1268. His diplomatic position was such that his name is still on the oldest extant piece of English statute law, the Statute of Marlborough of 1267, where the formal title mentions as a witness \"the Lord Ottobon, at that time legate in England\". (Also on this legation was a young diplomat, the future Boniface VIII.) In April 1268 he issued a set of canons, which formed the basis of church law in England until the Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century.\nUnder the influence of Charles I of Anjou, he was elected pope to succeed Innocent V on 11 July 1276 but died at Viterbo on 18 August 1276 from illness without ever having been ordained to the priesthood. He is buried there in the church of San Francesco alla Rocca. His funeral monument is attributed to Arnolfo di Cambio. Adrian V was the third pope in the \"Year of Four Popes\" of 1276.\nHe annulled Pope Gregory X's bull on the holding of papal conclaves, but died before enacting new regulations.\nIn literature.\nPope Adrian V in Dante's \"Divine Comedy\".\nIn the \"Divine Comedy\", Dante Alighieri meets Pope Adrian V in the fifth terrace of \"Purgatorio\" (reserved for the avaricious and the prodigal) where Adrian V cleanses for the vice of avarice (\"Purgatorio\" 19.79-145). Since the souls in this terrace purge their vices by facing down on earth and fixing their eyes on the ground, Adrian V\u2019s identity is not revealed by facial recognition but through indirect inference. His papal identity is inferred from his Latin phrase, \"scias quod ego fui successor Petri\" (\"I was Peter\u2019s successor,\" \"Purgatorio\" 19.99), and by his words \"fui\" \"roman pastore\" (\"I was a Roman shepherd,\" \"Purgatorio\" 19.107). These phrases reveal the papal identity of Adrian V, given that popes are successors of the first pope, Saint Peter, and shepherds of the church in the teachings of the Catholic Church. Adrian V also describes his family name as being descended from those that reside between Sestri and Chiavari (\"Purgatorio\" 19.100-102). This reveals his family title, Fieschi, as the family held extensive land between the two cities.\nThere exists a lack of historical evidence about Adrian V\u2019s avaricious behavior. Some scholars believe that Dante\u2019s view of Adrian V emanated from reading excerpts from John of Salisbury's \"Policraticus\", in which the author anonymously attributed the behavior of avarice to Adrian IV. Dante likely interpreted the excerpts as referring to Adrian V instead of Adrian IV.\nDespite the possible misinterpretation of Adrian V\u2019s character, his presence in the \"Comedy\" help to understand Dante\u2019s views about the Church and the role of women in achieving man\u2019s salvation. Pope Adrian V\u2019s representation of avarice reflects the zealous ambition for earthly power and goods. Adrian V describes that he had to detach himself from the love of worldly things that came to be after he was assigned the papal sit in the short period he was a pope (\"Purgatorio\" 19.106-114). This symbolizes Dante\u2019s view of how avarice was at the heart of the church and popes in the Middle Ages were excessively drawn to earthly things and preoccupied with exercising power. Moreover, Adrian V outlines not only his avarice but also the corrupt nature of his family, with the exception of his niece, Alagia Fieschi (\"Purgatorio\" 19.142-145). In a melancholic tone, Adrian V expresses how Alagia is the only remaining virtuous woman whose extension of prayer can help his journey of salvation. Alagia's portrayal reflects Dante\u2019s view of how Christian women play a miraculous role in men\u2019s achievement of salvation through their prayer."}
{"id": "23830", "revid": "31685261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23830", "title": "Pope John XXI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1276 to 1277\nPope John XXI (, , ; c.\u20091215 \u2013 20 May 1277), born Pedro Juli\u00e3o (), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 September 1276 to his death in May 1277. He is the only ethnically Portuguese pope in history. He is sometimes identified with the logician and herbalist Peter of Spain (; ), which would make him the only pope to have been a physician.\nEarly life.\nPedro Juli\u00e3o was born in Lisbon between 1210 and 1220 to Juli\u00e3o Pais and Mor Mendes. His father was chancellor of Afonso Henriques and Sancho I. He started his studies at the episcopal school of Lisbon Cathedral and later joined the University of Paris, although some historians claim that he was educated at Montpellier. Wherever he studied, he concentrated on medicine, theology, logic, physics, metaphysics, and Aristotle's dialectic. He is traditionally and usually identified with the medical author Peter of Spain, an important figure in the development of logic and pharmacology. Peter of Spain taught at the University of Siena in the 1240s and his \"\" was used as a university textbook on Aristotelian logic for the next three centuries. At the court in Lisbon, he was the councilor and spokesman for King Afonso III in church matters. Later, he became prior of Guimar\u00e3es.\nHe was Archdeacon of Vermoim (Vermuy) in the Archdiocese of Braga. He tried to become bishop of Lisbon but was defeated. Instead, he became the Master of the school of Lisbon. Peter became the physician of Pope Gregory X (1271\u20131276) early in his reign. In March 1273, he was elected Archbishop of Braga, but did not assume that post; instead, on 3 June 1273, Pope Gregory X created him Cardinal Bishop of Tusculum (Frascati).\nPapacy.\nAfter the death of Pope Adrian V on 18 August 1276, Peter was elected pope on 8 September. He was crowned a week later on 20 September. One of John XXI's few acts during his brief reign was the reversal of a decree recently passed at the Second Council of Lyon (1274); the decree had not only confined cardinals in solitude until they elected a successor pope, but also progressively restricted their supplies of food and wine if their deliberations took too long. Though much of John XXI's brief papacy was dominated by the powerful Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini, who succeeded him as Pope Nicholas III, John attempted to launch a crusade for the Holy Land, pushed for a union with the Eastern church, and did what he could to maintain peace between the Christian nations.\nAmong his other acts, he excommunicated Afonso III of Portugal for interfering with episcopal elections and sent legates to Kublai Khan. He also launched a mission to convert the Tatars, but he died before it could start.\nTo secure the necessary quiet for his medical studies, he had an apartment added to the papal palace at Viterbo, to which he could retire when he wished to work undisturbed. On 14 May 1277, while the pope was alone in this apartment, the ceiling collapsed; John was rescued alive from beneath the rubble; however, he died of his serious injuries on 20 May, possibly an early recorded case of crush syndrome.\nHe was buried in the Duomo di Viterbo, where his tomb can still be seen. The original porphyry sarcophagus was destroyed during the cathedral's 16th-century refurbishment, and was replaced with a more modest one in stone with the pope's effigy. In the 19th century, the Duke of Saldanha, as Portuguese Ambassador to the Holy See, had the pope's remains transferred to a new sarcophagus sculpted by . In 2000, the Lisbon City Council, led by Mayor Jo\u00e3o Soares, successfully had a new funeral monument built in lioz stone, topped by the original stone effigy of the pope, placed in a more condign location in the transept.\nLegacy.\nAfter his death, it was rumored that John XXI had actually been a necromancer, a suspicion frequently directed towards the few scholars among medieval popes (see, e.g., Sylvester II). It was also said that his death had been an act of God, stopping him from completing a heretical treatise. Since the works of \"Peter of Spain\" continued to be studied and appreciated, however, Dante Alighieri placed \"Pietro Spano\" in his \"Paradiso's\" with the spirits of other great religious scholars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "23831", "revid": "982329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23831", "title": "Pope Adrian VI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1522 to 1523\nPope Adrian VI (; ; ; ), born Adriaan Florensz Boeyens (2 March 1459\u00a0\u2013 14 September 1523), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 9 January 1522 until his death on 14 September 1523. The only Dutchman to become pope, he was the last non-Italian pope until the Polish John Paul II 455 years later.\nBorn in the Episcopal principality of Utrecht of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, Adrian studied at the University of Leuven in the Low Countries, where he rose to the position of professor of theology, also serving as its rector (the equivalent of president or vice-chancellor). In 1507, he became the tutor of the future Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, who later trusted him as both his emissary and his regent. In 1516, Charles, now King of Castile and Aragon, appointed Adrian bishop of Tortosa, Spain, and soon thereafter Grand Inquisitor of the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile. Pope Leo X made him a cardinal in 1517 and after Leo's death he was elected pope in 1522 as a compromise candidate.\nAdrian came to the papacy in the midst of one of its greatest crises, threatened not only by Lutheranism to the north but also by the advance of the Ottoman Turks to the east. He refused to compromise with Lutheranism theologically, demanding Luther's condemnation as a heretic. However, he is noted for having attempted to reform the Catholic Church administration in response to the Protestant Reformation. Adrian's admission that the Roman Curia itself was at fault for the turmoil in the Church was read at the 1522\u20131523 Diet of Nuremberg.\nHis efforts at reform proved fruitless, as they were resisted by most of his contemporaries, and he did not live long enough to see his efforts through to their conclusion. He was succeeded by the second Medici pope, Clement VII. Adrian VI and Marcellus II are the only popes of the modern era to retain their baptismal names after their election. Adrian VI is the last pope to date to take on the pontifical name \"Adrian\".\nEarly life.\nAdriaan Florensz was born on 2 March 1459 in the city of Utrecht, which was then the capital of the Prince-Bishopric of Utrecht, a part of the Burgundian Netherlands in the Holy Roman Empire. He was born into modest circumstances as the son of Florens Boeyensz, also born in Utrecht, and his wife Geertruid. He had three older brothers, Jan, Cornelius, and Claes. Adrian consistently signed with \"Adrianus Florentii\" or \"Adrianus de Traiecto\" (\"Adrian of Utrecht\") in later life, suggesting that his family did not yet have a surname but used patronymics only.\nAdrian was probably raised in a house on the corner of the Brandstraat and Oude Gracht that was owned by his grandfather Boudewijn (Boeyen, for short). His father, a carpenter and likely shipwright, died when Adrian was 10 years or younger. Adrian studied from a very young age under the Brethren of the Common Life, either at Zwolle or Deventer and was also a student of the Latin school (now \"Gymnasium Celeanum\") in Zwolle.\nLeuven.\nIn June 1476, he started his studies at the University of Leuven, where he pursued philosophy, theology and Canon Law, thanks to a scholarship granted by Margaret of York, Duchess of Burgundy. In 1478 he had the title of \"Primus Philosophiae\", as well as that of \"Magister Artium\" (that is, he took his undergraduate degree). In 1488 he was chosen by the Faculty of Arts to be their representative on the Council of the university.\nOn 30 June 1490, Adrian was ordained a priest.\nAfter the regular 12 years of study, Adrian became a Doctor of Theology in 1491. He had been a teacher at the university since 1490, was chosen vice-chancellor of the university in 1493, and Dean of St. Peter's in 1498. In the latter function he was permanent vice-chancellor of the university and de facto in charge of hiring. His lectures were published, as recreated from his students' notes; among those who attended was the young Erasmus. Adrian offered him a professorate in 1502, but Erasmus refused.\nIn November 1506 Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy, became Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands and chose Adrian as her advisor. The next year Emperor Maximilian I appointed him also tutor to his seven-year-old grandson, and Margaret's nephew, who in 1519 became Emperor Charles V. By 1512 Adrian was Charles's advisor, and his court obligations were so time-consuming that he quit his positions at the university.\nSpain.\nIn 1515, Charles sent Adrian to Spain to convince his maternal grandfather, Ferdinand II of Aragon, that the Spanish lands should come under his rule, and not Charles's Spanish-born younger brother Ferdinand, whom his grandfather had in mind. Adrian succeeded in that just before Ferdinand's death in January 1516. Ferdinand of Aragon, and subsequently Charles V, appointed Adrian Bishop of Tortosa, which was approved by Pope Leo X on 18 August 1516. He was consecrated by Bishop Diego Ribera de Toledo.\nOn 14 November 1516 the King commissioned him Inquisitor General of Aragon.\nIn his fifth Consistory for the creation of cardinals, on 1 July 1517, Pope Leo X (1513\u201321) named thirty-one cardinals, among whom was Adrianus de Traiecto, naming him Cardinal-Priest of the Basilica of Santi Giovanni e Paolo on the Caelian Hill.\nDuring the minority of Charles V, Adrian was named to serve with Cardinal Francisco Jimenez de Cisneros as co-regent of Spain. After the death of Jimenez, Adrian was appointed (14 March 1518) General of the Reunited Inquisitions of Castile and Aragon, in which capacity he acted until his departure for Rome. When Charles V left Spain for the Netherlands in 1520, he appointed Cardinal Adrian Regent of Spain, during which time he had to deal with the Revolt of the Comuneros.\nPapal election.\nIn the conclave after the death of the Medici Pope Leo X, Leo's cousin, Cardinal Giulio de' Medici, was the leading figure. With Spanish and French cardinals in a deadlock, the absent Adrian was proposed as a compromise and on 9 January 1522 he was elected by an almost unanimous vote. Charles V was delighted upon hearing that his tutor had been elected to the papacy but soon realised that Adrian VI was determined to reign impartially. Francis I of France, who feared that Adrian would become a tool of the Emperor, and had uttered threats of a schism, later relented and sent an embassy to present his homage.\nFears of a Spanish Avignon based on the strength of his relationship with the Emperor as his former tutor and regent proved baseless, and Adrian, having notified the College of Cardinals of his acceptance, left for Italy after six months of preparations and trying to decide which route to take, making his solemn entry into Rome on 29 August. He had forbidden elaborate decorations, and many people stayed away for fear of the plague that was raging. Pope Adrian was crowned at St. Peter's Basilica on 31 August 1522, at the age of 63.\nPapacy.\nHe immediately entered upon the path of the reformer. The 1908 edition of the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" characterised the task that faced him:\n\"\"To extirpate inveterate abuses; to reform a court which thrived on corruption, and detested the very name of reform; to hold in leash young and warlike princes, ready to bound at each other's throats; to stem the rising torrent of revolt in Germany; to save Christendom from the Turks, who from Belgrade now threatened Hungary, and if Rhodes fell would be masters of the Mediterranean - these were herculean labours for one who was in his sixty-third year, had never seen Italy, and was sure to be despised by the Romans as a 'barbarian'.\"\nHis plan was to attack notorious abuses one by one; however, in his attempt to improve the system of indulgences he was hampered by his cardinals. He found reduction of the number of matrimonial dispensations to be impossible, as the income had been farmed out for years in advance by Pope Leo X.\nAdrian VI was not successful as a peacemaker among Christian princes, whom he hoped to unite in a war against the Turks. In August 1523 he was forced into an alliance with the Empire, England, and Venice against France; meanwhile, in 1522 Suleiman the Magnificent (1520\u201366) had conquered Rhodes.\nIn his reaction to the early stages of the Lutheran revolt, Adrian VI did not completely understand the gravity of the situation. At the Diet of Nuremberg, which opened in December 1522, he was represented by Francesco Chieregati, whose private instructions contain the frank admission that the disorder of the Church was perhaps the fault of the Roman Curia itself, and that it should be reformed. However, the former professor and Inquisitor General was strongly opposed to any change in doctrine, and demanded that Martin Luther be punished for teaching heresy.\nAdrian VI held no beatifications in his pontificate but canonized Saints Antoninus of Florence and Benno of Meissen on 31 May 1523.\nHe made only one cardinal in the course of his pontificate, Willem van Enckevoirt, who was made a cardinal-priest in a consistory held on 10 September 1523.\nCharles V's ambassador in Rome, Juan Manuel, lord of Belmonte, wrote that he was worried that Charles's influence over Adrian waned after Adrian's election, writing \"The Pope is 'deadly afraid' of the College of Cardinals. He does whatever two or three cardinals write to him in the name of the college.\"\nDeath.\nAdrian VI died in Rome on 14 September 1523, after one year, eight months and six days as pope. Most of his official papers were lost after his death. He published \"Quaestiones in quartum sententiarum praesertim circa sacramenta\" (Paris, 1512, 1516, 1518, 1537; Rome, 1522), and \"Quaestiones quodlibeticae XII.\" (1st ed., Leuven, 1515). He is buried in the Santa Maria dell'Anima church in Rome.\nHe bequeathed property in the Low Countries for the foundation of a college at the University of Leuven that became known as Pope's College.\nIn popular culture.\nThe first series of engravings used to educate Dutch school children at the turn of the 18th century includes Adrian VI in its woodcut on 'Famous Dutch Men and Women' with the following poem:\n\"In Utrecht wijst men nog dit huis den vreemdeling aan, \"\n\"En noemt het om zijn naam 't huis van Paus Adriaan,\"\n\"Nog praalt 's mans borstbeeld in den gevel. Min verheven\"\n\"Was 't het stamhuis van dien Paus, een schuitemakers zoon,\"\n\"Zijn naam blijft nog vol lof op duizend tongen zweeven,\"\n\"Kort droeg hij, maar met roem, de pauselijke kroon.\"'\n\"In Utrecht they still point out this house to strangers,\"\n\"And name it after him: the house of pope Adrian,\"\n\"Still his bust stands in its fa\u00e7ade. Less elevated\"\n\"Was the ancestry of this pope, the son of a boat builder,\"\n\"His name is still proudly spoken by thousands of tongues,\"\n\"Only briefly, but with honor, he wore the papal crown.\"\nPope Adrian VI appears as a character in Christopher Marlowe's stage drama \"The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus\" (1604).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23833", "revid": "49222050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23833", "title": "Pope Anastasius III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 911 to 913\nPope Anastasius III (c. 865 \u2014 June 913) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from April 911 to his death.\nAnastasius was a Roman by birth. A Roman nobleman, Lucian, is sometimes recognized as his father, although other sources assert that he was the illegitimate son of his predecessor, Pope Sergius III.\nAlmost nothing is recorded of Pope Anastasius III, his pontificate falling in the period when Rome and the papacy were in the power of Theophylact I of Tusculum and Theodora, who approved Anastasius III's candidacy. Under his reign, the Normans of Rollo were evangelized. Anastasius III's papacy faced renewed threats from the Saracens, after they established themselves on the Garigliano river. He was buried in St. Peter's Basilica.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23834", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23834", "title": "Pope Anastasius IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1153 to 1154\nPope Anastasius IV (c.\u20091073 \u2013 3 December 1154), born Corrado Demetri della Suburra, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 July 1153 to his death in 1154. He is the most recent pope to take the name \"Anastasius\" upon his election.\nEarly life.\nHe was a Roman, son of Benedictus de Suburra, probably of the family of Demetri, and became a secular clerk. He was created cardinal-priest of S. Pudenziana by Pope Paschal II no later than in 1114. In 1127 or 1128, Pope Honorius II promoted him to the suburbicarian See of Sabina. He was probably given this position for siding with Honorius II during a dispute over the appointment of a new abbot of Farfa. He had taken part in the double papal election of 1130, had been one of the most determined opponents of Antipope Anacletus II and, when Pope Innocent II fled to France, had been left behind as his vicar in Italy. At the time of his election to the papacy in July 1153, he was Dean of the College of Cardinals and probably the oldest member of that body.\nPontificate.\nDuring his short pontificate, he played the part of a peacemaker; he came to terms with the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa in the vexing question of the appointment to the See of Magdeburg and closed the long quarrel, which had raged through four pontificates, about the appointment of William Fitzherbert (commonly known as Saint William of York) to the see of York by sending him the pallium in spite of the continued opposition of the powerful Cistercian order. Anastasius IV also devoted much time and expenses on the Lateran Basilica and Palace back at Rome.\nAnastasius IV died on 3 December 1154 and was succeeded by Cardinal Nicholas Breakspear as Pope Adrian IV. Anastasius IV was laid to rest within the Helena sarcophagus which was brought out and reused as his tomb.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23835", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23835", "title": "Pope Anastasius II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 496 to 498\nPope Anastasius II (died 19 November 498) was the bishop of Rome from 24 November 496 to his death on 19 November 498. He was an important figure in trying to end the Acacian schism, but his efforts resulted in the Laurentian schism, which followed his death. Anastasius was born in Rome, the son of a priest, and is buried in St. Peter's Basilica.\nPope Anastasius II is one of only two popes in the first 500 years of church history not to be canonized a saint in the Catholic Church. Pope Liberius is also omitted from sainthood in the Catholic Church, although he is considered a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nAcacian schism and conciliation.\nThe church had been in a serious doctrinal dispute since 484, between the Eastern and Western churches of Christianity, known as the Acacian schism. Popes Felix III (483\u2013492) and Gelasius I (492\u2013496) had generally taken hardline stances towards the Eastern church and had excommunicated many of the major religious figures including Patriarch Acacius of Constantinople. Efforts at reducing the problem by Zeno were not recognized by Felix III or Gelasius I and so there was a large schism between the churches. Upon the death of Gelasius I, Anastasius II was named pope largely with support from a faction that wanted to improve relations between the West and the Eastern churches and end the schism.\nUpon being named pope, Anastasius II immediately sent two bishops to Constantinople to meet with the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I, who had the same name as the pope, and work on an agreement to end the Acacian schism. Anastasius II indicated in a letter that he was willing to accept the baptisms that had been performed by Acacius and to let the issue be decided by the divine rather than by church authorities and Anastasius I seemed similarly willing to cooperate but wanted acceptance of the \"Henotikon\", the compromise position developed by Zeno. As a signal of attempting to reduce the tension, Anastasius II was rumored to have given communion to Photinus of Thessalonica, an associate of Acacius.\nThe result of these conciliatory gestures was to outrage many of the bishops and clergy in Rome and to create a clear division between those who supported moderation toward the Monophysites in the Byzantine Empire and those who opposed such moderation. Because of the communion with Photinus, many in Rome refused to receive communion from Anastasius II and the situation grew to a crisis point.\nDeath and legacy.\nAt the peak of the tension created by these attempts to improve relations between the East and the West, Anastasius II unexpectedly died. For those who opposed his attempts at remedying the schism his death in 498 was seen as divine retribution. The factions that had formed during his rule as pope split decisively from one another and each appointed a rival pope. The faction against conciliation was able to name Symmachus as the pope to follow Anastasius II. However, the important Roman Senator Rufius Postumius Festus, who had been a major instigator for the conciliation attempts of Anastasius II and may have led to his naming as pope, supported a rival papal claim of Laurentius. The Roman church then had its own schism between different factions which made efforts at reducing the schism between the church in Rome and the church in Constantinople impossible.\nDuring the medieval period, Anastasius II was often considered a traitor to the Catholic Church and an apostate. The writer of the \"Liber Pontificalis\", supporting the opponents to Anastasius' efforts, argued that Anastasius II's death was divine retribution and that he had broken with the church. Similarly, the \"Decretum Gratiani\" writes of the pope that \"Anastasius, reproved by God, was smitten by divine command.\" This medieval view is described by modern commentators as a \"legend\", a \"misinterpretation\", a \"confused tradition\", and \"manifestly unjust.\"\nDante placed Anastasius II in the sixth circle of hell: \"Anastasio papa guardo, lo qual trasse Fotin de la via dritta\" (\"I guard Pope Anastasius, he whom Photinus drew from the straight path\"). However, modern Dante scholars consider this to be a mistake: the person Dante intended to put at that level was the Byzantine emperor of the time, Anastasius I.\nAnastasius II is, with Pope Liberius, one of only two of the first 50 popes not to be canonized. However, Liberius is mentioned in the Greek Menology and is recognized as a saint within the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23836", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23836", "title": "Pope Anastasius I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 399 to 401\nPope Anastasius I was the bishop of Rome from 27 November 399 to his death on 19 December 401.\nAnastasius was born in Rome, and was the son of Maximus. He succeeded Siricius as pope and condemned the writings of the Alexandrian theologian Origen shortly after their translation into Latin. He fought against these writings throughout his papacy, and in 400 he called a council to discuss them. The council agreed that Origen was not faithful to the Church.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If Origen has put forth any other writings, you are to know that they and their author are alike condemned by me. The Lord have you in safe keeping, my lord and brother deservedly held in honour.\u2014\u200a\nDuring his reign, he also encouraged Christians in North Africa to fight Donatism. He instructed priests to stand and bow their head as they read from the gospels. Among his friends were Augustine, Jerome, and Paulinus. Jerome speaks of him as a man of great holiness who was rich in his poverty. He died in Rome and was eventually buried in the Catacomb of Pontian together with his immediate successor, Innocent I. Jerome also referred to Anastasius as Innocent's father, although scholars have argued this was displaying a hierarchical relationship rather than a biological one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23840", "revid": "24309115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23840", "title": "List of Pok\u00e9mon", "text": "The \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise features 1,025 fictional species of collectible creatures, each with unique designs, skills, and powers. Conceived by Satoshi Tajiri in early 1989, Pok\u00e9mon (or Pocket Monsters) are fictional creatures that inhabit the fictional Pok\u00e9mon World. The designs for the multitude of species can draw inspiration from anything, such as animals, plants, and legendary creatures. Many Pok\u00e9mon are capable of evolving into more powerful species, while others can undergo form changes and achieve similar results. Originally, only a handful of artists, led by Ken Sugimori designed Pok\u00e9mon. However, by 2013 a team of 20 artists worked together to create new species designs. Sugimori and Hironobu Yoshida lead the team and determine the final designs.\nThe vast array of creatures is commonly divided into \"generations\", with each division primarily encompassing new titles in the main video game series and often a change of handheld platform. Generation I with 151 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Red\", \"Blue\", and \"Yellow\"; generation II with 100 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Gold\", \"Silver\", and \"Crystal\"; generation III with 135 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Ruby\", \"Sapphire\", \"FireRed\", \"LeafGreen\", and \"Emerald\"; generation IV with 107 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Diamond\", \"Pearl\", \"Platinum\", \"HeartGold\", and \"SoulSilver\"; generation V with 156 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Black\", \"White\", \"Black 2\", and \"White 2\"; generation VI with 72 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"X\", \"Y\", \"Omega Ruby\", and \"Alpha Sapphire\"; generation VII with 88 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Sun\", \"Moon\", \"Ultra Sun\", \"Ultra Moon\", ; generation VIII with 96 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Sword\", \"Shield\", \"Brilliant Diamond\", \"Shining Pearl\", and ; and generation IX with 120 Pok\u00e9mon refers to \"Scarlet\", \"Violet\", and .\nDue to the large number of Pok\u00e9mon, a listing of each species is divided into articles by generation. The 1025 Pok\u00e9mon are organized by their number in the National Pok\u00e9dex\u2014an electronic encyclopedia that provides various information on Pok\u00e9mon. The National Pok\u00e9dex is subdivided into regional Pok\u00e9dex series, each revolving around species introduced at the time of their respective generations along with older generations. For example, the Johto Pok\u00e9dex, generation II, covers the 100 species introduced in \"Gold\" and \"Silver\" in addition to the original 151 species. The encyclopedias follow a general ordering: first partner Pok\u00e9mon are listed first, followed by species obtainable early in the respective games, and are concluded with Legendary and Mythical Pok\u00e9mon. Generation V is the sole exception, as Victini is the first Pok\u00e9mon in the Unova Pok\u00e9dex.\nConcept.\nSatoshi Tajiri\u2014who later founded Game Freak\u2014conceived the premise of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" in general in 1989, when the Game Boy was released. The creatures that inhabit the world of \"Pok\u00e9mon\" are also called Pok\u00e9mon. The word \"Pok\u00e9mon\" is a romanized contraction of the Japanese brand . The concept of the Pok\u00e9mon universe, in both the video games and the general fictional world of Pok\u00e9mon, stems most notably from Tajiri's childhood hobby of insect collecting. Other influences on the concept include Ultraman, anime, and playing video games in general. Throughout his early life, Tajiri saw his rural, nature-filled hometown transform into an urban centre. The urbanization of his town drove away wildlife, and he and others living in the area were eventually unable to collect insects. Through Pok\u00e9mon, Tajiri sought to bring back this outdoor pastime and share it with the world. The first games in the franchise, \"Red\" and \"Green\", were released on 27 February 1996 in Japan for the Game Boy. The games were internationally released as \"Red\" and \"Blue\" in September 1998. The ability to capture, battle, trade, and care for numerous creatures catapulted Pok\u00e9mon to international popularity, and it has become a multibillion-dollar franchise and the second-best selling video game series after the Mario franchise.\nAt the start of a main series Pok\u00e9mon game, the player character receives one of three Pok\u00e9mon to become their first partner, with which they can battle and catch other Pok\u00e9mon. Each Pok\u00e9mon has one or two \"types\", such as Fire, Water, or Grass. In battle, certain types are strong against other types. For example, a Fire-type attack will do more damage to a Grass-type Pok\u00e9mon, rather than a Water-type attack. This form of gameplay is frequently compared to that of rock-paper-scissors, though players have to strategize which Pok\u00e9mon and which of their attacks to use against various opponents.\nMany species of Pok\u00e9mon can evolve into a larger and more powerful creature. The change is accompanied by stat changes\u2014generally a modest increase\u2014and access to a wider variety of attacks. There are multiple ways to trigger an evolution, including reaching a particular level, using a special stone, or learning a specific attack. For example, at level 16, Bulbasaur can evolve into Ivysaur. Most notably, the Normal-type Eevee can evolve into eight different Pok\u00e9mon: Jolteon (Electric), Flareon (Fire), Vaporeon (Water), Umbreon (Dark), Espeon (Psychic), Leafeon (Grass), Glaceon (Ice), and Sylveon (Fairy). In generation VI, the games introduced a new mechanic called Mega Evolution, as well as a subset of Mega Evolution called Primal Reversion. Unlike normal evolution, Mega Evolution and Primal Reversion last only for the duration of a battle during the generation VI and VII games, with the Pok\u00e9mon reverting to its normal form at the end. In the 2025 generation IX game \"\", Mega Evolution can last through multiple battles, and runs out after a period of time. As of \"Pok\u00e9mon Legends: Z-A\", 73 Pok\u00e9mon can undergo Mega Evolution or Primal Reversion. In contrast, some species such as Castform, Rotom, Unown, and Lycanroc undergo form changes, which may provide stat buffs or changes and type alterations but are not considered new species. Some Pok\u00e9mon have differences in appearance due to gender. Pok\u00e9mon can be male or female, male-only, female-only, or of an unknown gender.\nThe \"Pok\u00e9mon\" franchise is primarily intended for younger players. However, each Pok\u00e9mon has various complex attributes such as natures, characteristic traits, Individual Values (IVs) and Effort Values (EVs). These are intended for people \"who enjoy battling and want to go more in depth\", according to Game Freak Board Director Junichi Masuda. These individual statistics were also included, because the basic concept of the franchise is to train one's Pok\u00e9mon. Designer Takeshi Kawachimaru stated that IVs and EVs \"help to make each Pok\u00e9mon in the game individual\", as it adds unique aspects to them. Each \"Pok\u00e9mon\" game introduces a few \"Legendary\" and \"Mythical\" Pok\u00e9mon that are powerful, rare, and hard to catch. \"Pok\u00e9mon Sun\" and \"Moon\" introduced \"Ultra Beasts\", which are described as \"beings from another dimension\" that appeared in the Alola region, and are similarly powerful and rare.\nDesign and development.\nThroughout development of \"Red\" and \"Green\", all Pok\u00e9mon were designed by Ken Sugimori who was a long-time friend of Tajiri, and by a team of fewer than ten people, including Atsuko Nishida who is credited as the designer of Pikachu. By 2013, a team of 20 artists worked together to create new species designs. A committee of five people determine which designs are incorporated into the games, with Sugimori and Hironobu Yoshida finalizing the look of each creature. Sugimori is also responsible for the \"Box Art\" Legendary Pok\u00e9mon and all of the official artwork for the games. According to Yoshida, the number of rejected Pok\u00e9mon designs is five to ten times more than the number that are finalized in each game. In rare cases, rejected designs are brought back and released in a later generation. Shigeru Ohmori, director of \"Sun\" and \"Moon\", admitted that creating new Pok\u00e9mon has become a difficult task with the sheer number of creatures designed over the franchise's 20-year history. Each iteration of the series has brought both praise and criticism over the numerous creatures.\nThe designs for Pok\u00e9mon are often highly analogous to real-life creatures but also encompass inanimate objects. Director Junichi Masuda and graphic designer Takao Unno have stated that inspiration for Pok\u00e9mon designs can come from anything. The variety of animals and culture around the world provide the basis for having countless ideas incorporated into the franchise. The environment that a Pok\u00e9mon would live in is taken into account when they are designed. The lei-like Comfey fits appropriately in the Hawaii-inspired Alola region of \"Sun\" and \"Moon\". Masuda has stated that each element of a design has a functioning reason. In some cases, the design team creates a footprint that a Pok\u00e9mon could make and designs a creature around that. Some designers look to game mechanics for inspiration and see where particular typing combinations could be interesting. Typing assignment varies during the design process; sometimes a Pok\u00e9mon receives a type after it is created and other times they are designed around a particular type. Each Pok\u00e9mon has a specific height and weight.\nThe simpler roots of designs in generation I prompted greater complexity in later games. Designs in general have become increasingly complex and thematic in newer games. Sneasel, for example, draws inspiration from the Japanese y\u014dkai kamaitachi, mythical creatures with fast, razor-sharp claws that hunt in packs. These elements are all found in Sneasel's design and characteristics. New Pok\u00e9mon introduced in generation VI, for example, are heavily influenced by the culture and fauna of Europe (namely France). However, by the release of \"X\" and \"Y\" in 2013, Sugimori stated that he wishes for Pok\u00e9mon design to return to the simpler roots of the franchise.\nMasuda considers the first partner Pok\u00e9mon among the most important in the franchise. Yoshida goes further and calls them \"the face of that generation\" and says that \"they're the ones that should be on the packaging\". The three Pok\u00e9mon players start out with in each generation are always Grass-, Water-, and Fire-types, a trio that Masuda considers the easiest to understand for new players. Their designs are based on recognizable animals and made to stand out from pre-existing Pok\u00e9mon. Each are also given distinct personalities to further define them. In an interview with \"GamesRadar\" in 2009, Masuda stated that simple Pok\u00e9mon take around six months to design and develop, and that Pok\u00e9mon that play a more important part in the games may take over a year. Masuda added, \"We also want the designer to have as much freedom as possible; we don't want to narrow their imagination by saying, 'We want this kind of Pokemon.' When we talk to the designer we always stress that they shouldn't think of Pokemon necessarily, but should instead just be as creative as they can.\" After the Pok\u00e9mon is designed, it is sent to the \"Battle Producer\", who decides which moves and stats the Pok\u00e9mon should have.\nList of Pok\u00e9mon.\nGlitch species.\nIn the Game Boy \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games, \"Pok\u00e9mon Red\", \"Green\", \"Blue\", and \"Yellow\", players were able to access a set of 105 glitch Pok\u00e9mon. These species were not designed by the games' designers but could be encountered via the use of several glitches. Among them is a glitch dubbed MissingNo., which became highly notorious.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23842", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23842", "title": "Planets beyond Neptune", "text": "Hypothetical planets further than Neptune\nFollowing the discovery of the planet Neptune in 1846, there was considerable speculation that another planet might exist beyond its orbit. The search began in the mid-19th century and continued at the start of the 20th with Percival Lowell's quest for Planet X. Lowell proposed the Planet\u00a0X hypothesis to explain apparent discrepancies in the orbits of the giant planets, particularly Uranus and Neptune, speculating that the gravity of a large unseen ninth planet could have perturbed Uranus enough to account for the irregularities.\nClyde Tombaugh's discovery of Pluto in 1930 appeared to validate Lowell's hypothesis, and Pluto was officially named the ninth planet. In 1978, Pluto was conclusively determined to be too small for its gravity to affect the giant planets, resulting in a brief search for a tenth planet. The search was largely abandoned in the early 1990s, when a study of measurements made by the \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft found that the irregularities observed in Uranus's orbit were due to a slight overestimation of Neptune's mass. After 1992, the discovery of numerous small icy objects with similar or even wider orbits than Pluto led to a debate over whether Pluto should remain a planet, or whether it and its neighbours should, like the asteroids, be given their own separate classification. Although a number of the larger members of this group were initially described as planets, in 2006 the International Astronomical Union (IAU) reclassified Pluto and its largest neighbours as dwarf planets, leaving Neptune the farthest known planet in the Solar System.\nWhile the astronomical community widely agrees that Planet\u00a0X, as originally envisioned, does not exist, the concept of an as-yet-unobserved planet has been revived by a number of astronomers to explain other anomalies observed in the outer Solar System. As of March 2014, observations with the WISE telescope have ruled out the possibility of a Saturn-sized object (95 Earth masses) out to 10,000 AU, and a Jupiter-sized (\u2248318 Earth masses) or larger object out to 26,000 AU.\nIn 2014, based on similarities of the orbits of a group of recently discovered extreme trans-Neptunian objects, astronomers hypothesized the existence of a super-Earth or ice giant planet, 2 to 15 times the mass of the Earth and beyond 200 AU with possibly a highly inclined orbit at some 1,500 AU. In 2016, further work showed this unknown distant planet is likely to be on an inclined, eccentric orbit that goes no closer than about 200 AU and no farther than about 1,200 AU from the Sun. The orbit is predicted to be anti-aligned to the clustered extreme trans-Neptunian objects. Because Pluto is no longer considered a planet by the IAU, this new hypothetical object has become known as Planet Nine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly speculation.\nIn the 1840s, the French mathematician Urbain Le Verrier used Newtonian mechanics to analyse perturbations in the orbit of Uranus, and hypothesised that they were caused by the gravitational pull of a yet-undiscovered planet. Le Verrier predicted the position of this new planet and sent his calculations to German astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle. On 23 September 1846, the night following his receipt of the letter, Galle and his student Heinrich d'Arrest discovered Neptune, exactly where Le Verrier had predicted. There remained some slight discrepancies in the giant planets' orbits. These were taken to indicate the existence of yet another planet orbiting beyond Neptune.\nEven before Neptune's discovery, some speculated that one planet alone was not enough to explain the discrepancy. On 17 November 1834, the British amateur astronomer the Reverend Thomas John Hussey reported a conversation he had had with French astronomer Alexis Bouvard to George Biddell Airy, the British Astronomer Royal. Hussey reported that when he suggested to Bouvard that the unusual motion of Uranus might be due to the gravitational influence of an undiscovered planet, Bouvard replied that the idea had occurred to him, and that he had corresponded with Peter Andreas Hansen, director of the Seeberg Observatory in Gotha, about the subject. Hansen's opinion was that a single body could not adequately explain the motion of Uranus, and postulated that two planets lay beyond Uranus.\nIn 1848, Jacques Babinet raised an objection to Le Verrier's calculations, claiming that Neptune's observed mass was smaller and its orbit larger than Le Verrier had initially predicted. He postulated, based largely on simple subtraction from Le Verrier's calculations, that another planet of roughly 12 Earth masses, which he named \"Hyperion\", must exist beyond Neptune. Le Verrier denounced Babinet's hypothesis, saying, \"[There is] absolutely nothing by which one could determine the position of another planet, barring hypotheses in which imagination played too large a part.\"\nIn 1850 James Ferguson, Assistant Astronomer at the United States Naval Observatory, noted that he had \"lost\" a star he had observed, GR1719k, which Lt. Matthew Maury, the superintendent of the Observatory, claimed was evidence that it must be a new planet. Subsequent searches failed to recover the \"planet\" in a different position, and in 1878, CHF Peters, director of the Hamilton College Observatory in New York, showed that the star had not in fact vanished, and that the previous results had been due to human error.\nIn 1879, Camille Flammarion noted that the comets 1862 III and 1889 III had aphelia of 47 and 49\u00a0AU, respectively, suggesting that they might mark the orbital radius of an unknown planet that had dragged them into an elliptical orbit. Astronomer George Forbes concluded on the basis of this evidence that two planets must exist beyond Neptune. He calculated, based on the fact that four comets possessed aphelia at around 100\u00a0AU and a further six with aphelia clustered at around 300\u00a0AU, the orbital elements of a pair of hypothetical trans-Neptunian planets. These elements accorded suggestively with those made independently by another astronomer named David Peck Todd, suggesting to many that they might be valid. However, sceptics argued that the orbits of the comets involved were still too uncertain to produce meaningful results. Some have considered Forbes's hypothesis a precursor to Planet Nine.\nIn 1900 and 1901, Harvard College Observatory director William Henry Pickering led two searches for trans-Neptunian planets. The first was begun by Danish astronomer Hans Emil Lau who, after studying the data on the orbit of Uranus from 1690 to 1895, concluded that one trans-Neptunian planet alone could not account for the discrepancies in its orbit, and postulated the positions of two planets he believed were responsible. The second was launched when Gabriel Dallet suggested that a single trans-Neptunian planet lying at 47\u00a0AU could account for the motion of Uranus. Pickering agreed to examine plates for any suspected planets. In neither case were any found.\nIn 1902, after observing the orbits of comets with aphelia beyond Neptune, Theodor Grigull of M\u00fcnster, Germany proclaimed the existence of a Uranus-sized planet at 50 AU with a 360-year period, which he named Hades, cross-checking with the deviations in the orbit of Uranus. In 1921, Grigull revised his orbital period to 310\u2013330 years, to better fit the observed deviations.\nIn 1909, Thomas Jefferson Jackson See, an astronomer with a reputation as an egocentric contrarian, opined \"there is certainly one, most likely two and possibly three planets beyond Neptune\". Tentatively naming the first planet \"Oceanus\", he placed their respective distances at 42, 56 and 72 AU from the Sun. He gave no indication as to how he determined their existence, and no known searches were mounted to locate them.\nIn 1911, Indian astronomer Venkatesh P. Ketakar suggested the existence of two trans-Neptunian planets, which he named after the Hindu gods Brahma and Vishnu, by reworking the patterns observed by Pierre-Simon Laplace in the planetary satellites of Jupiter and applying them to the outer planets. The three inner Galilean moons of Jupiter, Io, Europa and Ganymede, are locked in a complicated 1:2:4 resonance called a Laplace resonance. Ketakar suggested that Uranus, Neptune and his hypothetical trans-Neptunian planets were also locked in Laplace-like resonances. This is incorrect; Uranus and Neptune, while in a near-2:1 resonance, are not in full resonance. His calculations predicted a mean distance for Brahma of 38.95\u00a0AU and an orbital period of 242.28 Earth years (3:4 resonance with Neptune). When Pluto was discovered 19 years later, its mean distance of 39.48\u00a0AU and orbital period of 248 Earth years were close to Ketakar's prediction (Pluto in fact has a 2:3 resonance with Neptune). Ketakar made no predictions for the orbital elements other than mean distance and period. It is not clear how Ketakar arrived at these figures, and his second planet, Vishnu, was never located.\nPlanet X.\nIn 1894, with the help of William Pickering, Percival Lowell (a wealthy Bostonian) founded the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona. In 1906, convinced he could resolve the conundrum of Uranus's orbit, he began an extensive project to search for a trans-Neptunian planet, which he named \"Planet\u00a0X\", a name previously used by Gabriel Dallet. The \"X\" in the name represents an unknown and is pronounced as the letter, as opposed to the Roman numeral for 10 (at the time, Planet\u00a0X would have been the ninth planet). Lowell's hope in tracking down Planet\u00a0X was to establish his scientific credibility, which had eluded him due to his widely derided belief that channel-like features visible on the surface of Mars were canals constructed by an intelligent civilization.\nLowell's first search focused on the ecliptic, the plane encompassed by the zodiac where the other planets in the Solar System lie. Using a 5-inch photographic camera, he manually examined over 200 three-hour exposures with a magnifying glass, and found no planets. At that time Pluto was too far above the ecliptic to be imaged by the survey. After revising his predicted possible locations, Lowell conducted a second search from 1914 to 1916. In 1915, he published his \"Memoir of a Trans-Neptunian Planet\", in which he concluded that Planet\u00a0X had a mass roughly seven times that of Earth\u2014about half that of Neptune\u2014and a mean distance from the Sun of 43\u00a0AU. He assumed Planet\u00a0X would be a large, low-density object with a high albedo, like the giant planets. As a result, it would show a disc with diameter of about one arcsecond and an apparent magnitude between 12 and 13\u2014bright enough to be spotted.\nSeparately, in 1908, Pickering announced that, by analysing irregularities in Uranus's orbit, he had found evidence for a ninth planet. His hypothetical planet, which he termed \"Planet\u00a0O\" (because it came after \"N\", i.e. Neptune), possessed a mean orbital radius of 51.9\u00a0AU and an orbital period of 373.5 years. Plates taken at his observatory in Arequipa, Peru, showed no evidence for the predicted planet, and British astronomer P. H. Cowell showed that the irregularities observed in Uranus's orbit virtually disappeared once the planet's displacement of longitude was taken into account. Lowell himself, despite his close association with Pickering, dismissed Planet\u00a0O out of hand, saying, \"This planet is very properly designated \"O\", [for it] is nothing at all.\" Unbeknownst to Pickering, four of the photographic plates taken in the search for \"Planet O\" by astronomers at the Mount Wilson Observatory in 1919 captured images of Pluto, though this was only recognised years later. Pickering went on to suggest many other possible trans-Neptunian planets up to the year 1932, which he named \"P\", \"Q\", \"R\", \"S\", \"T\", and \"U\"; none were ever detected.\nDiscovery of Pluto.\nLowell's sudden death in 1916 temporarily halted the search for Planet\u00a0X. Failing to find the planet, according to one friend, \"virtually killed him\". Lowell's widow, Constance, engaged in a legal battle with the observatory over Lowell's legacy which halted the search for Planet\u00a0X for several years. In 1925, the observatory obtained glass discs for a new wide-field telescope to continue the search, constructed with funds from Abbott Lawrence Lowell, Percival's brother. In 1929 the observatory's director, Vesto Melvin Slipher, summarily handed the job of locating the planet to Clyde Tombaugh, a 22-year-old Kansas farm boy who had only just arrived at the Lowell Observatory after Slipher had been impressed by a sample of his astronomical drawings.\nTombaugh's task was to systematically capture sections of the night sky in pairs of images. Each image in a pair was taken two weeks apart. He then placed both images of each section in a machine called a blink comparator, which by exchanging images quickly created a time lapse illusion of the movement of any planetary body. To reduce the chances that a faster-moving (and thus closer) object be mistaken for the new planet, Tombaugh imaged each region near its opposition point, 180 degrees from the Sun, where the apparent retrograde motion for objects beyond Earth's orbit is at its strongest. He also took a third image as a control to eliminate any false results caused by defects in an individual plate. Tombaugh decided to image the entire zodiac, rather than focus on those regions suggested by Lowell.\nBy the beginning of 1930, Tombaugh's search had reached the constellation of Gemini. On 18 February 1930, after searching for nearly a year and examining nearly 2\u00a0million stars, Tombaugh discovered a moving object on photographic plates taken on 23 January and 29 January of that year. A lesser-quality photograph taken on January 21 confirmed the movement. Upon confirmation, Tombaugh walked into Slipher's office and declared, \"Doctor Slipher, I have found your Planet\u00a0X.\" The object was just six degrees from one of two locations for Planet\u00a0X Lowell had suggested; thus it seemed he had at last been vindicated. After the observatory obtained further confirmatory photographs, news of the discovery was telegraphed to the Harvard College Observatory on March 13, 1930. The new object was later precovered on photographs dating back to 19 March 1915. The decision to name the object \"Pluto\" was intended in part to honour Percival Lowell, as his initials made up the word's first two letters. After discovering Pluto, Tombaugh continued to search the ecliptic for other distant objects. He found hundreds of variable stars and asteroids, as well as two comets, but no further planets.\nPluto loses Planet X title.\nTo the observatory's disappointment and surprise, Pluto showed no visible disc; it appeared as a point, no different from a star, and, at only 15th magnitude, was six times dimmer than Lowell had predicted, which meant it was either very small, or very dark. Because of Lowell's predictions, astronomers thought that Pluto would be massive enough to perturb planets. This led them to assume that its albedo could be no less than 0.07 (meaning that, at minimum, it would reflect 7% of the light that hit it), which would have made Pluto about as dark as asphalt, and similar in reflectivity to the least reflective planet, which is Mercury. This would have given Pluto an estimated mass of no more than 70% that of Earth. Observations also revealed that Pluto's orbit was very elliptical, far more than that of any other planet.\nAlmost immediately, some astronomers questioned Pluto's status as a planet. Barely a month after its discovery was announced, on April 14, 1930, in an article in \"The New York Times\", Armin O. Leuschner suggested that Pluto's dimness and high orbital eccentricity made it more similar to an asteroid or comet: \"The Lowell result confirms the possible high eccentricity announced by us on April 5. Among the possibilities are a large asteroid greatly disturbed in its orbit by close approach to a major planet such as Jupiter, or it may be one of many long-period planetary objects yet to be discovered, or a bright cometary object.\" In that same article, Harvard Observatory director Harlow Shapley wrote that Pluto was a \"member of the Solar System not comparable with known asteroids and comets, and perhaps of greater importance to cosmogony than would be another major planet beyond Neptune.\" In 1931, after examining the structure of the residuals of Uranus' longitude using a trigonometric formula, Ernest W. Brown asserted (in agreement with E. C. Bower) that the presumed irregularities in the orbit of Uranus could not be due to the gravitational effect of a more distant planet, and thus that Lowell's supposed prediction was \"purely accidental\".\nThroughout the mid-20th century, estimates of Pluto's mass were revised downward. In 1931, Nicholson and Mayall calculated its mass, based on its supposed effect on the giant planets, as roughly that of Earth; a value somewhat in accord with the 0.91 Earth mass calculated in 1942 by Lloyd R. Wylie at the US Naval Observatory, using the same assumptions. In 1949, Gerard Kuiper's measurements of Pluto's diameter with the 200-inch telescope at Mount Palomar Observatory led him to the conclusion that it was midway in size between Mercury and Mars and that its mass was most probably about 0.1 Earth mass.\nIn 1973, based on the similarities in the periodicity and amplitude of brightness variation with Triton, Dennis Rawlins conjectured Pluto's mass must be similar to Triton's. In retrospect, the conjecture turns out to have been correct; it had been argued by astronomers Walter Baade and E.C. Bower as early as 1934. However, because Triton's mass was then believed to be roughly 2.5% of the Earth\u2013Moon system (more than ten times its actual value), Rawlins's determination for Pluto's mass was similarly incorrect. It was nonetheless a meagre enough value for him to conclude Pluto was not Planet X. In 1976, Dale Cruikshank, Carl Pilcher, and David Morrison of the University of Hawaii analysed spectra from Pluto's surface and determined that it must contain methane ice, which is highly reflective. This meant that Pluto, far from being dark, was in fact exceptionally bright, and thus was probably no more than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100\u00a0Earth mass.\nPluto's size was finally determined conclusively in 1978, when American astronomer James W. Christy discovered its moon Charon. This enabled him, together with Robert Sutton Harrington of the U.S. Naval Observatory, to measure the mass of the Pluto\u2013Charon system directly by observing the moon's orbital motion around Pluto. They determined Pluto's mass to be 1.31\u00d71022\u00a0kg; roughly one five-hundredth that of Earth or one-sixth that of the Moon, and far too small to account for the observed discrepancies in the orbits of the outer planets. Lowell's prediction had been a coincidence: If there was a Planet\u00a0X, it was not Pluto.\nFurther searches for Planet X.\nAfter 1978, a number of astronomers kept up the search for Lowell's Planet\u00a0X, convinced that, because Pluto was no longer a viable candidate, an unseen tenth planet must have been perturbing the outer planets.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Robert Harrington led a search to determine the real cause of the apparent irregularities. He calculated that any Planet\u00a0X would be at roughly three times the distance of Neptune from the Sun; its orbit would be highly eccentric, and strongly inclined to the ecliptic\u2014the planet's orbit would be at roughly a 32-degree angle from the orbital plane of the other known planets. This hypothesis was met with a mixed reception. Noted Planet\u00a0X skeptic Brian G. Marsden of the Minor Planet Center pointed out that these discrepancies were a hundredth the size of those noticed by Le Verrier, and could easily be due to observational error.\nIn 1972, Joseph Brady of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory studied irregularities in the motion of Halley's Comet. Brady claimed that they could have been caused by a Jupiter-sized planet beyond Neptune at 59 AU that is in a retrograde orbit around the Sun. However, both Marsden and Planet\u00a0X proponent P. Kenneth Seidelmann attacked the hypothesis, showing that Halley's Comet randomly and irregularly ejects jets of material, causing changes to its own orbital trajectory, and that such a massive object as Brady's Planet\u00a0X would have severely affected the orbits of known outer planets.\nAlthough its mission did not involve a search for Planet\u00a0X, the IRAS space observatory made headlines briefly in 1983 due to an \"unknown object\" that was at first described as \"possibly as large as the giant planet Jupiter and possibly so close to Earth that it would be part of this Solar System\". Further analysis revealed that of several unidentified objects, nine were distant galaxies and the tenth was \"interstellar cirrus\"; none were found to be Solar System bodies.\nIn 1988, A. A. Jackson and R. M. Killen studied the stability of Pluto's resonance with Neptune by placing test \"Planet X-es\" with various masses and at various distances from Pluto. Pluto and Neptune's orbits are in a 3:2 resonance, which prevents their collision or even any close approaches, regardless of their separation in the z axis. It was found that the hypothetical object's mass had to exceed 5 Earth masses to break the resonance, and the parameter space is quite large and a large variety of objects could have existed beyond Pluto without disturbing the resonance. Four test orbits of a trans-Plutonian planet have been integrated forward for four million years in order to determine the effects of such a body on the stability of the Neptune\u2013Pluto 3:2 resonance. Planets beyond Pluto with masses of 0.1 and 1.0 Earth masses in orbits at 48.3 and 75.5 AU, respectively, do not disturb the 3:2 resonance. Test planets of 5 Earth masses with semi-major axes of 52.5 and 62.5 AU disrupt the four-million-year libration of Pluto's argument of perihelion.\nPlanet X disproved.\nHarrington died in January 1993, without having found Planet X. Six months before, E. Myles Standish had used data from \"Voyager 2\"'s 1989 flyby of Neptune, which had revised the planet's total mass downward by 0.5%\u2014an amount comparable to the mass of Mars\u2014to recalculate its gravitational effect on Uranus. When Neptune's newly determined mass was used in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory Developmental Ephemeris (JPL DE), the supposed discrepancies in the Uranian orbit, and with them the need for a Planet\u00a0X, vanished. There are no discrepancies in the trajectories of any space probes such as \"Pioneer 10\", \"Pioneer 11\", \"Voyager 1\", and \"Voyager 2\" that can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a large undiscovered object in the outer Solar System. Today, most astronomers agree that Planet\u00a0X, as Lowell defined it, does not exist.\nDiscovery of further trans-Neptunian objects.\nAfter the discovery of Pluto and Charon, no more trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) were found until 15760 Albion in 1992. Since then, thousands of such objects have been discovered. Most are now recognized as part of the Kuiper belt, a swarm of icy bodies left over from the Solar System's formation that orbit near the ecliptic plane just beyond Neptune. Though none were as large as Pluto, some of these distant trans-Neptunian objects, such as Sedna, were initially described in the media as \"new planets\".\nIn 2005, astronomer Mike Brown and his team announced the discovery of 2003 UB313 (later named Eris after the Greek goddess of discord and strife), a trans-Neptunian object then thought to be just barely larger than Pluto. Soon afterwards, a NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory press release described the object as the \"tenth planet\".\nEris was never officially classified as a planet, and the 2006 definition of planet defined both Eris and Pluto not as planets but as dwarf planets because they have not cleared their neighbourhoods. They do not orbit the Sun alone, but as part of a population of similarly sized objects. Pluto itself is now recognized as being a member of the Kuiper belt and the largest dwarf planet, larger than the more massive Eris.\nA number of astronomers, most notably Alan Stern, the head of NASA's \"New Horizons\" mission to Pluto, contend that the IAU's definition is flawed, and that Pluto and Eris, and all large trans-Neptunian objects, such as Makemake, Sedna, Quaoar, Gonggong and Haumea, should be considered planets in their own right. However, the discovery of Eris did not rehabilitate the Planet\u00a0X theory because it is far too small to have significant effects on the outer planets' orbits.\nSubsequently proposed trans-Neptunian planets.\nAlthough most astronomers accept that Lowell's Planet\u00a0X does not exist, a number have revived the idea that a large unseen planet could create observable gravitational effects in the outer Solar System. These hypothetical objects are often referred to as \"Planet\u00a0X\", although the conception of these objects may differ considerably from that proposed by Lowell.\nOrbits of distant objects.\nSedna's orbit.\nWhen Sedna was discovered, its extreme orbit raised questions about its origin. Its perihelion is so distant (approximately ) that no currently observed mechanism can explain Sedna's eccentric distant orbit. It is too far from the planets to have been affected by the gravity of Neptune or the other giant planets and too bound to the Sun to be affected by outside forces such as the galactic tides. Hypotheses to explain its orbit include that it was affected by a passing star, that it was captured from another planetary system, or that it was tugged into its current position by a trans-Neptunian planet. The most obvious solution to determining Sedna's peculiar orbit would be to locate a number of objects in a similar region, whose various orbital configurations would provide an indication as to their history. If Sedna had been pulled into its orbit by a trans-Neptunian planet, any other objects found in its region would have a similar perihelion to Sedna (around ).\nExcitement of Kuiper belt orbits.\nIn 2008, Tadashi Mukai and Patryk Sofia Lykawka suggested a distant Mars- or Earth-sized planet, currently in a highly eccentric orbit between 100 and and orbital period of 1000 years with an inclination of 20\u00b0 to 40\u00b0, was responsible for the structure of the Kuiper belt. They proposed that the perturbations of this planet excited the eccentricities and inclinations of the trans-Neptunian objects, truncated the planetesimal disk at 48\u00a0AU, and detached the orbits of objects like Sedna from Neptune. During Neptune's migration this planet is posited to have been captured in an outer resonance of Neptune and to have evolved into a higher perihelion orbit due to the Kozai mechanism leaving the remaining trans-Neptunian objects on stable orbits.\nElongated orbits of group of Kuiper belt objects.\nIn 2012, Rodney Gomes modelled the orbits of 92 Kuiper belt objects and found that six of those orbits were far more elongated than the model predicted. He concluded that the simplest explanation was the gravitational pull of a distant planetary companion, such as a Neptune-sized object at 1,500 AU. This Neptune-sized object would cause the perihelia of objects with semi-major axes greater than 300 AU to oscillate, delivering them into planet-crossing orbits like those of and or detached orbits like Sedna's.\nPlanet Nine.\nPlanet Nine is a hypothetical ninth planet in the outer region of the Solar System. Its gravitational effects could explain the peculiar clustering of orbits for a group of extreme trans-Neptunian objects (ETNOs)\u2014bodies beyond Neptune that orbit the Sun at distances averaging more than 250\u00a0times that of the Earth, over 250\u00a0astronomical units (AU). \nIn 2014, astronomers announced the discovery of , a large object with a Sedna-like 4,200-year orbit and a perihelion of roughly 80 AU, which led them to suggest that it offered evidence of a potential trans-Neptunian planet. Trujillo and Sheppard argued that the orbital clustering of arguments of perihelia for 2012 VP113 and other extremely distant TNOs suggests the existence of a \"super-Earth\" of between 2 and 15 Earth masses beyond 200 AU and possibly on an inclined orbit at 1,500 AU.\nIn 2014 astronomers at the Universidad Complutense in Madrid suggested that the available data actually indicates more than one trans-Neptunian planet; subsequent work further suggests that the evidence is robust enough but rather than connected with the longitudes of the ascending nodes and the arguments of perihelia, semi-major axes and nodal distances could be the signposts. Additional work based on improved orbits of 39 objects still indicates that more than one perturber could be present and that one of them could orbit the Sun at 300-400 AU.\nOn January 20, 2016, Brown and Konstantin Batygin published an article corroborating Trujillo and Sheppard's initial findings; proposing a super-Earth (dubbed Planet Nine) based on a statistical clustering of the arguments of perihelia (noted before) near zero and also ascending nodes near 113\u00b0 of six distant trans-Neptunian objects. They estimated it to be ten times the mass of Earth (about 60% the mass of Neptune) with a semimajor axis of approximately 400\u20131500 AU.\nProbability.\nEven without gravitational evidence, Mike Brown, the discoverer of Sedna, has argued that Sedna's 12,000-year orbit means that probability alone suggests that an Earth-sized object exists beyond Neptune. Sedna's orbit is so eccentric that it spends only a small fraction of its orbital period near the Sun, where it can be easily observed. This means that unless its discovery was a freak accident, there is probably a substantial population of objects roughly Sedna's diameter yet to be observed in its orbital region. Mike Brown noted that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, Brown notes that even though it might approach or exceed Earth in size, should such an object be found it would still be a \"dwarf planet\" by the current definition, because it would not have cleared its neighbourhood sufficiently.\nKuiper cliff and \"Planet Ten\".\nAdditionally, speculation of a possible trans-Neptunian planet has revolved around the so-called \"Kuiper cliff\". The Kuiper belt terminates suddenly at a distance of from the Sun. Brunini and Melita have speculated that this sudden drop-off may be attributed to the presence of an object with a mass between those of Mars and Earth located beyond 48\u00a0AU.\nThe presence of an object with a mass similar to that of Mars in a circular orbit at leads to a trans-Neptunian object population incompatible with observations. For instance, it would severely deplete the plutino population. Astronomers have not excluded the possibility of an object with a mass similar to that of Earth located farther than with an eccentric and inclined orbit. Computer simulations by Patryk Lykawka of Kobe University have suggested that an object with a mass between 0.3~0.7\u00a0M\ud83d\udf28 and diameter of 10,000 to 16,000\u00a0km, ejected outward by Neptune early in the Solar System's formation and currently in an elongated orbit between from the Sun, could explain the Kuiper cliff and the peculiar detached objects such as Sedna and . In a 2023 follow-up paper, Lykawka gave his trans-Neptunian planet, which he dubbed the \"Kuiper Belt planet\", a mass of 1.5 to 3\u00a0M\ud83d\udf28, a semi-major axis between 250 and 500 AU, and an orbital inclination of 30 degrees, but did not attribute the Kuiper cliff (or the putative orbital clustering attributed to Planet Nine) to its existence.\nAlthough some astronomers, such as Renu Malhotra and David Jewitt, have cautiously supported these claims, others, such as Alessandro Morbidelli, have dismissed them as \"contrived\". Malhotra &amp; Volk (2017) argued that an unexpected variance in inclination for KBOs farther than the cliff at provided evidence of a possible Mars-sized planet, with an upper mass limit up to 2.4\u00a0M\ud83d\udf28, residing at the edge of the Solar System, which many news sources began referring to as \"Planet\u00a0Ten\". Shortly after it was proposed, Lorenzo Iorio showed that the hypothetical planet's existence cannot be ruled out by Cassini ranging data.\nStarting in 2018, several surveys have discovered multiple objects located beyond the Kuiper Cliff. Some of these new discoveries are close to the heliopause (120 AU) or well beyond it (, , , ). An analysis of the TNO data available prior to September 2023 shows that there is a gap at about 72 AU, far from any mean-motion resonances with Neptune. Such a gap may have been induced by a massive perturber located further away.\nIn August 2025, a scientific team led by Amir Siraj determined the likelihood of a perturber planet being responsible for the gap and its 15-degree-inclination at more than 95%. They assume the perturber they refer to as \"Planet Y\" to be of a size between Mercury's and Earth's and at a distance of 100-200 AU from the Sun.\nCaptured rogue planets.\nRogue planets are planets not gravitationally bound to any star or stellar remnant. Simulations by A. Siraj in 2023, looking at the possibility of the Solar System having captured a rogue planet earlier in its history and based on a mass function of terrestrial-mass rogue planets, suggest that the expected number of captured rogue planets in the outer Solar System with masses greater than that of Mars (a tenth the mass of the Earth) is 1.2, while 2.7 with masses comparable to Mars and 5.2 with masses comparable to Mercury (5.5% the mass of Earth) may exist. These captured planets would have a medium distance of 1,400 AU with roughly half of them existing in the range of 600 to 3,500 AU. Assuming these rogue planets have albedos of 0.2, it is expected that the Legacy Survey of Space and Time may discover 0.9 Mars-sized captured rogue planets and 1.4 Mercury-sized ones.\nOther proposed planets.\nTyche was a hypothetical gas giant proposed to be located in the Solar System's Oort cloud. It was first proposed in 1999 by astrophysicists John Matese, Patrick Whitman and Daniel Whitmire of the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. They argued that evidence of Tyche's existence could be seen in a supposed bias in the points of origin for long-period comets. In 2013, Matese and Whitmire re-evaluated the comet data and noted that Tyche, if it existed, would be detectable in the archive of data that was collected by NASA's Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) telescope. In 2014, NASA announced that the WISE survey had ruled out any object with Tyche's characteristics, indicating that Tyche as hypothesized by Matese, Whitman, and Whitmire does not exist.\nConversely, in 1999, British astronomer John Murray theorized the existence of a Jupiter-sized planet similar to Tyche 32,000 astronomical units away from the Sun in a retrograde orbit. Murray estimates that the planet would be located in the constellation of Delphinus. These parameters, also based on the orbits of various long-period comets, are different from those originally hypothesized by Matese, Whitman, and Whitmire for Tyche, and hence signify a different object. Unlike Tyche, this putative planet lies outside the 26,000 AU limit set by mid-infrared observations by the \"WISE\" telescope, but this limit can be as high as 82,000 AU based on albedo. A brown dwarf, for instance, would have a smaller albedo than a Jupiter analog.\nThe oligarch theory of planet formation states that there were hundreds of planet-sized objects, known as oligarchs, in the early stages of the Solar System's evolution. In 2005, astronomer Eugene Chiang speculated that although some of these oligarchs became the planets we know today, most would have been flung outward by gravitational interactions. Some may have escaped the Solar System altogether to become free-floating planets, whereas others would be orbiting in a halo around the Solar System, with orbital periods of millions of years. This halo would lie at between from the Sun, or between a third and a thirtieth the distance to the Oort cloud.\nIn December 2015, astronomers at the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) detected a brief series of 350\u00a0GHz pulses that they concluded must either be a series of independent sources, or a single, fast moving source. Deciding that the latter was the most likely, they calculated based on its speed that, were it bound to the Sun, the object, which they named \"Gna\" after a fast-moving messenger goddess in Norse mythology, would be about 12\u201325 AU distant and have a dwarf planet-sized diameter of 220 to 880\u00a0km. However, if it were a rogue planet not gravitationally bound to the Sun, and as far away as 4000 AU, it could be much larger. The paper was never formally accepted, and has been withdrawn until the detection is confirmed. Scientists' reactions to the notice were largely sceptical; Mike Brown commented that, \"If it is true that ALMA accidentally discovered a massive outer Solar System object in its tiny, tiny, tiny, field of view, that would suggest that there are something like 200,000 Earth-sized planets in the outer Solar System ... Even better, I just realized that this many Earth-sized planets existing would destabilize the entire Solar System and we would all die.\"\nConstraints on additional planets.\nAs of 2023 the following observations severely constrain the mass and distance of any possible additional Solar System planet:"}
{"id": "23843", "revid": "35915815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23843", "title": "Plutino", "text": "In astronomy, a dynamical group of trans-Neptunian objects\nIn astronomy, the plutinos are a dynamical group of trans-Neptunian objects that orbit in 2:3 mean-motion resonance with Neptune. This means that for every two orbits a plutino makes, Neptune orbits three times. The dwarf planet Pluto is the largest member as well as the namesake of this group. The next largest members are Orcus, Achlys, and Ixion. Plutinos are named after mythological creatures associated with the underworld.\nPlutinos form the inner part of the Kuiper belt and represent about a quarter of the known Kuiper belt objects. They are also the most populous known class of resonant trans-Neptunian objects \"(also see adjunct box with hierarchical listing)\". The first plutino after Pluto itself, (385185) 1993 RO, was discovered on 16 September 1993.\nOrbits.\nOrigin.\nIt is thought that the objects that are currently in mean orbital resonances with Neptune initially followed a variety of independent heliocentric paths. As Neptune migrated outward early in the Solar System's history (see origins of the Kuiper belt), the bodies it approached would have been scattered; during this process, some of them would have been captured into resonances. The 3:2 resonance is a low-order resonance and is thus the strongest and most stable among all resonances. This is the primary reason it has a larger population than the other Neptunian resonances encountered in the Kuiper Belt. The cloud of low-inclination bodies beyond 40 AU is the cubewano family, while bodies with higher eccentricities (0.05 to 0.34) and semi-major axes close to the 3:2 Neptune resonance are primarily plutinos.\nOrbital characteristics.\nWhile the majority of plutinos have relatively low orbital inclinations, a significant fraction of these objects follow orbits similar to that of Pluto, with inclinations in the 10\u201325\u00b0 range and eccentricities around 0.2\u20130.25; such orbits result in many of these objects having perihelia close to or even inside Neptune's orbit, while simultaneously having aphelia that bring them close to the main Kuiper belt's outer edge (where objects in a 1:2 resonance with Neptune, the twotinos, are found).\nThe orbital periods of plutinos cluster around 247.3 years (1.5 \u00d7 Neptune's orbital period), varying by at most a few years from this value.\nUnusual plutinos include:\nSee also the comparison with the distribution of the cubewanos.\nLong-term stability.\nPluto's influence on the other plutinos has historically been neglected due to its relatively small mass. However, the resonance width (the range of semi-axes compatible with the resonance) is very narrow and only a few times larger than Pluto's Hill sphere (gravitational influence). Consequently, depending on the original eccentricity, some plutinos will eventually be driven out of the resonance by interactions with Pluto. Numerical simulations suggest that the orbits of plutinos with an eccentricity 10%\u201330% smaller or larger than that of Pluto are not stable over billion-year timescales.\nBrightest objects.\nThe plutinos brighter than HV=6 include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23844", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23844", "title": "Prague", "text": "Capital and largest city of the Czech Republic\nPrague ( ; ) is the capital and largest city of the Czech Republic and the historical capital of Bohemia. Prague, located on the Vltava River, has a population of about 1.4 million, while its metropolitan area is home to approximately 2.3 million people.\nPrague is a historical city with Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, and Baroque architecture. It was the capital of the Kingdom of Bohemia and residence of several Holy Roman Emperors, most notably Charles IV (r.\u00a01346\u20131378) and Rudolf II (r.\u00a01575\u20131611). It was an important city to the Habsburg monarchy and Austria-Hungary. The city played major roles in the Bohemian and the Protestant Reformation, the Thirty Years' War, and in 20th-century history as the capital of Czechoslovakia between the World Wars and the post-war Communist era.\nPrague is home to a number of cultural attractions including Prague Castle, Charles Bridge, Old Town Square with the Prague astronomical clock, the Jewish Quarter, Pet\u0159\u00edn hill, and Vy\u0161ehrad. Since 1992, the historic center of Prague has been included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.\nThe city has more than ten major museums, along with numerous theatres, galleries, cinemas, and other historical exhibits. An extensive modern public transportation system connects the city. It is home to a wide range of public and private schools, including Charles University in Prague, the oldest university in Central Europe.\nPrague is classified as a \"Beta+\" global city according to GaWC studies. In 2019, the PICSA Index ranked the city as 13th most livable city in the world. Its rich history makes it a popular tourist destination, and as of 2017, the city receives more than 8.5\u00a0million international visitors annually. In 2017, Prague was listed as the fifth most visited European city after London, Paris, Rome, and Istanbul.\nNames and etymologies.\nThe Czech name \"Praha\" is derived from an old Slavic word, , which means \"ford\" or \"rapid\", referring to the city's origin at a crossing point of the Vltava river.\nAnother view to the origin of the name is also related to the Czech word (with the meaning of a threshold), and a legendary etymology connects the name of the city with princess Libu\u0161e, prophetess and a wife of the mythical founder of the P\u0159emyslid dynasty. She is said to have ordered the city \"to be built where a man hews a threshold of his house\". The Czech might thus be understood to refer to rapids or fords in the river, the edge of which could have acted as a means of fording the river\u00a0, thus providing a \"threshold\" to the castle.\nAnother derivation of the name \"Praha\" is suggested from \"na praz\u011b\", the original term for the shale hillside rock upon which the original castle was built. At that time, the castle was surrounded by forests, covering the nine hills of the future city\u00a0\u2013 the Old Town on the opposite side of the river, as well as the Lesser Town beneath the existing castle, appeared only later.\nThe English spelling of the city's name is borrowed from French. In the 19th and early 20th centuries it was pronounced in English to rhyme with \"vague\", and it was so pronounced by Lady Diana Cooper (born 1892) on the \"Desert Island Discs\" in 1969. It is written to rhyme with \"vague\" in a verse of \"The Beleaguered City\" by Longfellow (1839), and also in the limerick \"There was an Old Lady of Prague\" by Edward Lear (1846).\nPrague is also called the \"City of a Hundred Spires,\" based on a count by 19th-century mathematician Bernard Bolzano; today's count is estimated by the Prague Information Service at 500. Nicknames for Prague have also included: the Golden City, the Mother of Cities and the Heart of Europe.\nThe local Jewish community, which belongs to one of the oldest continuously existing in the world, has described the city as \"Ir va-em be-yisrael\", \"The city and mother in Israel\".\nHistory.\nPrague has grown from a settlement stretching from Prague Castle in the north to the fort of Vy\u0161ehrad in the south, to become the capital of a modern European country. With archaeological deposits over 10m deep, the city serves as a model for the implementation of comprehensive regulations for the protection of archaeological heritage throughout the Czech Republic.\nEarly history.\nThe region was settled as early as the Paleolithic age. Jewish chronicler David Solomon Ganz, citing Cyriacus Spangenberg, claimed that the city was founded as Boihaem in c.\u20091306 BC by an ancient king, Boyya.\nAround the fifth and fourth century BC, a Celtic tribe appeared in the area, later establishing settlements, including the largest Celtic oppidum in Bohemia, Z\u00e1vist, in a present-day south suburb Zbraslav in Prague, and naming the region of Bohemia, which means \"home of the Boii people\". In the last century BC, the Celts were slowly driven away by Germanic tribes (Marcomanni, Quadi, Lombards and possibly the Suebi), leading some to place the seat of the Marcomanni king, Maroboduus, in Z\u00e1vist. Around the area where present-day Prague stands, the 2nd century map drawn by Roman geographer Ptolemaios mentioned a Germanic city called \"Casurgis\".\nIn the late 5th century AD, during the great Migration Period following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, the Germanic tribes living in Bohemia moved westwards and, probably in the 6th century, the Slavic tribes settled the Central Bohemian Region. In the following three centuries, the Czech tribes built several fortified settlements in the area, most notably in the \u0160\u00e1rka valley, Butovice, and Lev\u00fd Hradec.\nThe construction of what came to be known as Prague Castle began near the end of the 9th century, expanding a fortified settlement that had existed on the site since the year 800. The first masonry under Prague Castle dates from the year 885 at the latest. The other prominent Prague fort, the P\u0159emyslid fort Vy\u0161ehrad, was founded in the 10th century, some 70 years later than Prague Castle. Prague Castle is dominated by the cathedral, which began construction in 1344, but was not completed until the 20th century.\nThe legendary origins of Prague attribute its foundation to the 8th-century Czech duchess and prophetess Libu\u0161e and her husband, P\u0159emysl, founder of the P\u0159emyslid dynasty. Legend says that Libu\u0161e, prophesied from her castle at Vy\u0161ehrad, came out on a rocky cliff high above the Vltava and prophesied: \"I see a great city whose glory will touch the stars\". She ordered a castle and a town called Praha to be built on the site.\nThe region became the seat of the dukes, and later kings of Bohemia. Under Duke of Bohemia Boleslaus II the Pious the area became a bishopric in 973. Until Prague was elevated to archbishopric in 1344, it was under the jurisdiction of the Archbishopric of Mainz.\nPrague was an important seat for trading where merchants from across Europe settled, including many Jews, as recalled in 965 by the Hispano-Jewish merchant and traveler Abraham ben Jacob. The Old New Synagogue of 1270 still stands in the city. Prague was also once home to a slave market.\nAt the site of the ford in the Vltava river, King Vladislaus I had the first bridge built in 1170, the Judith Bridge (Juditin most), named in honor of his wife Judith of Thuringia. This bridge was destroyed by a flood in 1342, but some of the original foundation stones of that bridge remain in the river. It was rebuilt and named the Charles Bridge.\nIn 1257, under King Ottokar II, Mal\u00e1 Strana (\"Lesser Quarter\") was founded in Prague on the site of an older village in what would become the Hrad\u010dany (Prague Castle) area. This was the district of the German people, who had the right to administer the law autonomously, pursuant to Magdeburg rights. The new district was on the bank opposite of the Star\u00e9 M\u011bsto (\"Old Town\"), which had borough status and was bordered by a line of walls and fortifications.\nLate Middle Ages.\nPrague flourished during the 14th-century reign (1346\u20131378) of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and the king of Bohemia of the new Luxembourg dynasty. As King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor, he transformed Prague into an imperial capital. In the 1470s, Prague had around 70,000 inhabitants and with an area of 360 ha (~1.4 square miles) it was the third-largest city in the Holy Roman Empire.\nCharles IV ordered the building of the New Town (Nov\u00e9 M\u011bsto) adjacent to the Old Town and laid out the design himself. The Charles Bridge, replacing the Judith Bridge destroyed in the flood just before his reign, was erected to connect the east bank districts to the Mal\u00e1 Strana and castle area. In 1347, he founded Charles University, the oldest university in Central Europe.\nHis father John of Bohemia began construction of the Gothic Saint Vitus Cathedral, within the largest of the Prague Castle courtyards, on the site of the Romanesque rotunda. Prague was elevated to an archbishopric in 1344, the year the cathedral was begun.\nThe city had a mint and was a center of trade for German and Italian bankers and merchants. The social order, however, became more turbulent due to the rising power of the craft guilds (themselves often torn by internal conflicts), and the increasing number of poor.\nThe Hunger Wall, a substantial fortification wall south of Mal\u00e1 Strana and the castle area, was built during a famine in the 1360s. The work is reputed to have been ordered by Charles IV as a means of providing employment and food to the workers and their families.\nCharles IV died in 1378. During the reign of his son, King Wenceslaus IV (1378\u20131419), a period of intense turmoil ensued. During Easter 1389, members of the Prague clergy announced that Jews had desecrated the host (Eucharistic wafer), and the clergy encouraged mobs to pillage, ransack, and burn the Jewish quarter. Nearly the entire Jewish population of Prague (ca 750 people) was murdered.\nJan Hus, a theologian and rector at Charles University, preached in Prague. In 1402, he began giving sermons in the Bethlehem Chapel. Inspired by John Wycliffe, these sermons focused on what were seen as radical reforms of a corrupt Church. Having become too dangerous for the political and religious establishment, Hus was summoned to the Council of Constance, put on trial for heresy, and burned at the stake in Konstanz in 1415.\nFour years later, Prague experienced its first defenestration, when the people rebelled under the command of the Prague priest Jan \u017delivsk\u00fd. Hus' death, coupled with Czech proto-nationalism and proto-Protestantism, had spurred the Hussite Wars. Peasant rebels, led by the general Jan \u017di\u017eka, along with Hussite troops from Prague, defeated Emperor Sigismund in the Battle of V\u00edtkov Hill in 1420.\nDuring the Hussite Wars, when Prague was attacked by \"Crusader\" and mercenary forces, the city militia fought bravely under the Prague Banner. This swallow-tailed banner is approximately , with a red field sprinkled with small white fleurs-de-lis, and a silver old Town Coat-of-Arms in the center. The words \"P\u00c1N B\u016eH POMOC NA\u0160E\" (The Lord is our Relief/Help) appeared above the coat-of-arms, with a Hussite chalice centered on the top. Near the swallow-tails is a crescent-shaped golden sun with rays protruding.\nOne of these banners was captured by Swedish troops during the Battle of Prague (1648) when they captured the western bank of the Vltava river and were repulsed from the eastern bank; it was placed in the Royal Military Museum in Stockholm. Although this flag still exists, it is in very poor condition. They also took the Codex Gigas and the Codex Argenteus. The earliest evidence indicates that a gonfalon with a municipal charge painted on it was used for the Old Town as early as 1419. Since this city militia flag was in use before 1477 and during the Hussite Wars, it is the oldest still preserved municipal flag of Bohemia.\nIn the following two centuries, Prague strengthened its role as a merchant city. Many noteworthy Gothic buildings were erected and Vladislav Hall of the Prague Castle was added.\nHabsburg era.\nIn 1526, the Bohemian estates elected Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg. The fervent Catholicism of its members brought them into conflict in Bohemia, and then in Prague, where Protestant ideas were gaining popularity. These problems were not preeminent under Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II, elected King of Bohemia in 1576, who chose Prague as his home. He lived in Prague Castle, where his court welcomed not only astrologers and magicians but also scientists, musicians, and artists. Rudolf was an art lover as well, and Prague became the capital of European culture. This was a prosperous period for the city: famous people living there in that age include the astronomers Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler, the painter Arcimboldo, the alchemists Edward Kelley and John Dee, the poet Elizabeth Jane Weston, and others.\nIn 1618, the famous second defenestration of Prague provoked the Thirty Years' War, a particularly harsh period for Prague and Bohemia. Ferdinand II of Habsburg was deposed, and his place as King of Bohemia taken by Frederick V, Elector Palatine; however, his army was crushed in the Battle of White Mountain (1620) not far from the city. Following this, in 1621, was the execution of 27 Czech Protestant leaders (involved in the uprising) in Old Town Square and the exile of many others. Prague was forcibly converted back to Roman Catholicism, followed by the rest of the Czech lands. The city suffered subsequently during the war under an attack by Electorate of Saxony (1631) and during the Battle of Prague (1648). Prague began a steady decline, which reduced the population from the 60,000 it had had in the years before the war to 20,000. In the second half of the 17th century, Prague's population began to grow again. Jews had been in Prague since the end of the 10th century and, by 1708, they accounted for about a quarter of Prague's population.\nIn 1689, a great fire devastated Prague, which spurred a renovation and a rebuilding of the city. In 1713\u201314, a major outbreak of plague hit Prague one last time, killing 12,000 to 13,000 people.\nIn 1744, during the Austrian War of Succession, Frederick the Great of Prussia invaded Bohemia. He took Prague after a severe and prolonged siege in the course of which a large part of the town was destroyed. Empress Maria Theresa expelled the Jews from Prague in 1745; though she rescinded the expulsion in 1748, the proportion of Jewish residents in the city never recovered. In 1757, during the Seven Years' War, Prussian bombardment destroyed more than one-quarter of the city and heavily damaged St. Vitus Cathedral. However, a month later, Frederick the Great was defeated and forced to retreat from Bohemia.\nThe economy of Prague continued to improve during the 18th century. The population increased to 80,000 inhabitants by 1771. Many rich merchants and nobles enhanced the city with a host of palaces, churches, and gardens full of art and music, creating a Baroque city renowned throughout the world to this day.\nIn 1784, under Joseph II, the four municipalities of Mal\u00e1 Strana, Nov\u00e9 M\u011bsto, Star\u00e9 M\u011bsto, and Hrad\u010dany were merged into a single entity. The Jewish district, called Josefov, was included only in 1850. The Industrial Revolution produced great changes and developments in Prague, as new factories could take advantage of the coal mines and ironworks of the nearby regions. The first suburb, Karl\u00edn, was created in 1817, and twenty years later the population exceeded 100,000.\nThe revolutions in Europe in 1848 also touched Prague, but they were fiercely suppressed. In the following years, the Czech National Revival began its rise, until it gained the majority in the town council in 1861. Prague had a large number of German speakers in 1848, but by 1880 the number of German speakers had decreased to 14% (42,000), and by 1910 to 6.7% (37,000), due to a massive increase in the city's overall population caused by the influx of Czechs from the rest of Bohemia and Moravia and the increasing prestige and importance of the Czech language as part of the Czech National Revival. In 1891, the city council ordered that all German inscriptions be removed in Prague, while Czechs at the same time demanded equal status for the Czech and German languages in Bohemia and Moravia.\n20th century.\nFirst Czechoslovak Republic.\nWorld War I ended with the defeat of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the creation of Czechoslovakia. Prague was chosen as its capital and Prague Castle as the seat of the president Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk. At this time, Prague was a true European capital with a highly developed industry. By 1930, the population had risen to 850,000.\nSecond World War.\nHitler ordered the German Army to enter Prague on 15 March 1939, and from Prague Castle proclaimed Bohemia and Moravia a German protectorate. For most of its history, Prague had been a multi-ethnic city with important Czech, German and (mostly native German-speaking) Jewish populations. From 1939, when the country was occupied by Nazi Germany, Hitler took over Prague Castle. During the Second World War, most Jews were deported and killed by the Germans. In 1942, Prague was witness to the assassination of one of the most powerful men in Nazi Germany\u2014Reinhard Heydrich\u2014during Operation Anthropoid, accomplished by Czechoslovak national heroes Jozef Gab\u010d\u00edk and Jan Kubi\u0161. Hitler ordered bloody reprisals.\nIn February 1945, Prague suffered several bombing raids by the US Army Air Forces. 701 people were killed, more than 1,000 people were injured and some buildings, factories and historic landmarks (Emmaus Monastery, Faust House, Vinohrady Synagogue) were destroyed. Many historic structures in Prague, however, escaped the destruction of the war and the damage was small compared to the destruction of many other cities in that time. According to American pilots, it was the result of a navigational mistake. In March, a deliberate raid targeted military factories in Prague, killing about 370 people.\nOn 5 May 1945, two days before Germany capitulated, an uprising against Germany occurred. Several thousand Czechs were killed in four days of bloody street fighting, with many atrocities committed by both sides. Fought concurrently with the Prague uprising, the Prague offensive significantly helped the liberation of Czechoslovakia. At daybreak on 9 May, the 3rd Shock Army of the Red Army took the capital city almost unopposed. The majority (about 50,000 people) of the German population of Prague either fled or were expelled by the Bene\u0161 decrees in the aftermath of the war.\nCold War.\nPrague was a city in a country under the military, economic, and political control of the Soviet Union (see Iron Curtain and COMECON). The world's largest Stalin Monument was unveiled on Letn\u00e1 hill in 1955 and destroyed in 1962. The 4th Czechoslovak Writers' Congress, held in the city in June 1967, took a strong position against the regime. On 31 October 1967 students demonstrated at Strahov. This spurred the new secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, Alexander Dub\u010dek, to proclaim a new deal in his city's and country's life, starting the short-lived season of the \"socialism with a human face\". It was the Prague Spring, which aimed at the renovation of political institutions in a democratic way. The other Warsaw Pact member countries, except Romania and Albania, were led by the Soviet Union to repress these reforms through the invasion of Czechoslovakia and the capital, Prague, on 21 August 1968. The invasion, chiefly by infantry and tanks, effectively suppressed any further attempts at reform. The military occupation of Czechoslovakia by the Red Army would end only in 1991. Jan Palach and Jan Zaj\u00edc committed suicide by self-immolation in January and February 1969 to protest against the \"normalization\" of the country.\nAfter the Velvet Revolution.\nIn 1989, after riot police beat back a peaceful student demonstration, the Velvet Revolution crowded the streets of Prague, and the capital of Czechoslovakia benefited greatly from the new mood. In 1992, the Historic Centre of Prague and its monuments were inscribed as a cultural UNESCO World Heritage Site. In 1993, after the Velvet Divorce, Prague became the capital city of the new Czech Republic. Since the 1990s, high-rise buildings have been built in Prague in large quantities. In the late 1990s, Prague again became an important cultural center of Europe and was notably influenced by globalisation. In 2000, the IMF and World Bank summits took place in Prague and anti-globalization riots took place here. In 2002, Prague suffered from widespread floods that damaged buildings and its underground transport system.\nIn 2012, Prague's main airport, Prague Ruzyn\u011b International Airport was renamed V\u00e1clav Havel Airport, in honour of the Czech Republic's former first president V\u00e1clav Havel, who died previously in late 2011. \nPrague launched a bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics, but failed to make the candidate city shortlist. In June 2009, as the result of financial pressures from the global recession, Prague's officials chose to cancel the city's planned bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics.\nOn 21 December 2023, a mass shooting took place at Charles University in central Prague. Fifteen people were killed and 25 were injured. It was the deadliest mass murder in the history of the Czech Republic.\nGeography.\nPrague is situated on the Vltava River. The Berounka flows into the Vltava in the suburbs of Lahovice. There are 99 watercourses in Prague with a total length of . The longest streams are Rokytka and Boti\u010d.\nThere are 4 reservoirs, 47 fishponds, 33 retention reservoirs, and dry polders in the city. The largest pond is Velk\u00fd Po\u010dernick\u00fd rybn\u00edk with . The largest body of water is Hostiva\u0159 Reservoir with .\nIn terms of geomorphological division, most of Prague is located in the Prague Plateau. In the south, the city's territory extends into the Ho\u0159ovice Uplands, in the north it extends into the Central Elbe Table lowland. The highest point is the top of the hill Tele\u010dek on the western border of Prague, at above sea level. Notable hills in the centre of Prague are Pet\u0159\u00edn with and V\u00edtkov with . The lowest point is the Vltava in Suchdol at the place where it leaves the city, at .\nPrague is located approximately at . Prague is approximately at the same latitude as Frankfurt, Germany; Paris, France; and Vancouver, Canada. The northernmost point is at , the southernmost point is at , the westernmost point is at , and the easternmost point is at . Farthest geographical points of the city territory are marked physically by so-called Prague Poles.\nClimate.\nPrague has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dobk\") bordering on a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"), defined as such by the isotherm. The winters are relatively cold with average temperatures at about freezing point (0\u00a0\u00b0C), and with very little sunshine. Snow cover can be common between mid-November and late March, although snow accumulations of more than are infrequent. There are also a few periods of mild temperatures in winter. Summers usually bring plenty of sunshine and temperatures around , but there has been a considerable increase in days with over in later years. Nights can be quite cool even in summer, though. Precipitation in Prague is low by Czech standards (about 500 mm per year) since it is located in the rain shadow of the Sudetes and other mountain ranges. The driest season is usually winter, while late spring and summer can bring quite heavy rain, especially in the form of thundershowers. The number of hours of average sunshine has increased over time. Temperature inversions are relatively common between mid-October and mid-March, bringing foggy, cold days and sometimes moderate air pollution. Prague is also a windy city with common sustained western winds and an average wind speed of that often helps break temperature inversions and clear the air in cold months. \nAdministration and politics.\nAdministrative division.\nPrague is the capital of the Czech Republic and, as such, is the regular seat of its central authorities. Since 24 November 1990, it is \"de facto\" again a statutory city, but has a specific status of the municipality and the region at the same time. Prague also houses the administrative institutions of the Central Bohemian Region.\nUntil 1949, all administrative districts of Prague were formed by the whole one or more cadastral units, municipalities, or towns. Since 1949, there has been a fundamental change in the administrative division. Since then, the boundaries of many urban districts, administrative districts, and city districts are independent of the boundaries of cadastral territories, and some cadastral territories are thus divided into administrative and self-governing parts of the city. Cadastral area (for example, Vinohrady and Sm\u00edchov) are still relevant, especially for the registration of land and real estate and house numbering.\nPrague is divided into 10 municipal districts (1\u201310), 22 administrative districts (1\u201322), 57 municipal parts, and 112 cadastral areas.\nCity government.\nPrague is administered by the autonomous Prague City Assembly, which consists of 65 members and is elected through municipal elections. As of Dec. 20, 18 members of the council were from the centre-right Together Prague group, which governs the city in conjunction with 12 members of the Pirates (centre to centre-left) and 5 members of the Mayors and Independents group (centre to centre-right). Thus, the governing coalition has a comfortable majority in the assembly with 35 of 65 seats. Opposition parties include ANO 2011 (right-wing populist) with 14 members, Prague Together (centre) with 11 votes, Freedom and Direct Democracy (right-wing to far-right) with 3 members, and 2 unaffiliated Independents.\nThe executive body of Prague, elected by the Assembly, is Prague City Council. The municipal office of Prague is at Prague City Hall and has 11 members, including the mayor. It prepares proposals for the Assembly meetings and ensures that adopted resolutions are fulfilled. The Mayor of Prague is Civic Democratic Party member Bohuslav Svoboda.\nDemographics.\n2011 census.\nEven though the official population of Prague hovers around 1.3 million as of the 2011 census, the city's real population is much higher due to only 65% of its residents having registered in the city. Data taken from mobile phone movements around the city suggest that the real population of Prague is closer to 1.9 or 2.0 million, with an additional 300,000 to 400,000 commuters coming to the city on weekdays for work, education, or commerce.\nAbout 14% of the city's residents were born outside the Czech Republic, the highest ratio anywhere in the country. However, 64.8% of the city's population self-identified as ethnically Czech, which is slightly higher than the national average of 63.7%. Almost 29% of respondents declined to answer the question on ethnicity at all, so it may be assumed that the real percentage of ethnic Czechs in Prague is considerably higher. The largest ethnic minority are Slovaks, followed by Ukrainians and Russians.\nPrague's population is the oldest and best-educated in the country. It has the lowest proportion of children. Only 10.8% of census respondents claimed adherence to a religion; the majority of these were Roman Catholics.\nHistorical population.\nDevelopment of the Prague population since 1378 (since 1869 according to the censuses within the limits of present-day Prague):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nForeign residents.\nAs of 31 March 2025, there were 351,734 foreign residents in Prague, of whom 132,170 had permanent residence in Prague. The following nationalities are the most numerous:\nAdditionally, K\u0142odzko is sometimes referred to as \"Little Prague\" (). Although now in Poland, it had been traditionally a part of Bohemia until 1763 when it became part of Silesia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23845", "revid": "41412902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23845", "title": "Prism", "text": "Prism usually refers to:\nPrism may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23848", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23848", "title": "Pomeranian language", "text": "Language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe Pomeranian language ( or ; or ) is in the Pomeranian group of Lechitic languages (; ) within the West Slavic languages.\nIn medieval contexts, it refers to the dialects spoken by the Slavic Pomeranians. In modern contexts, the term is sometimes used synonymously with \"Kashubian\" and may also include extinct Slovincian.\nThe name \"Pomerania\" comes from Slavic , which means \"[land] by the sea\".\nAncient Pomeranian.\nDuring the early medieval Slavic migrations, the area between the Oder and Vistula rivers was settled by tribes grouped as Pomeranians. Their dialects, sometimes referred to as Ancient Pomeranian, had a transitory character between the Polabian dialects spoken west of Pomerania and the Old Polish dialects spoken to the southeast. The earliest text written in Pomerania comes from 1304, published in 1881-1882 in https://.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Universis Christi fidelibus, ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit, Wi\u0119cek prawy kur[ri]wi syn de Sul[ech]owo, felicitatem in domino sempiternam.\nSlovincian and Kashubian.\nDuring the High Middle Ages, German immigration and assimilation of the Slavic Pomeranians () introduced Low German East Pomeranian, Central Pomeranian, and dialects, which became dominant in Pomerania except for some areas in the east, where the populace remained largely Slavic and continued to use the Slavic Pomeranian language. This was especially the case in Pomerelia, where the Slavic population became known as Kashubians and their language accordingly as Kashubian. An insular Slavic Pomeranian dialect spoken northwest of Kashubia until the 20th century became known as Slovincian. It is disputed whether Slovincian may be regarded as a dialect of Kashubian or a separate language. Likewise, it is disputed whether Kashubian may be regarded as a dialect of Polish or a separate language. Stefan Ramu\u0142t (1859\u20131913) was fascinated by Florian Ceynowa and decidedly supported giving Kashubian the status of a full-fledged standard language.\nInfluence on other dialects.\nThe Pomeranian language influenced the formation of other Polish language dialects, such as the Kociewski, Borowiacki and Krajniacki dialects. Undoubtedly, they belong to the Polish language, but they also have some features in common with the Pomeranian language, which proves their character was transitional.\nFriedrich Lorentz supposed that the Kociewski and Borewiacki dialects first belonged to the Pomeranian language and were then Polonized as a result of the Polish colonization of these territories. According to Lorentz, the Krajniacki dialect most probably was originally a part of the Polish language.\nThe common feature of the Kociewski dialects and the Kashubian language is, for example, the partial preservation of the so-called \"TarT\" group and a part of its lexis. For the Borowiacki dialects and the Pomeranian language, the common feature was affrication of dorsal consonants.\nThe Pomeranian language also influenced the Low German dialects, which were used in Pomerania. After Germanisation, the population of Western Pomerania started to use the Low German dialects. Those dialects, though, were influenced by the Pomeranian language (Slavic). Most words originating from Pomeranian can be found in vocabulary connected with fishery and farming. The word / may serve as an example. It describes a kind of a fishing net and is still known in the Low German dialects of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern today. The word comes from the old Pomeranian word of the same meaning: . It moved to Kashubian and Slovincian dialects through Low German, and appeared in Pomeranian dictionaries as meaning \"flounder and perch fishing net\". Thus, it is a \"reverse loan-word\" as the Pomeranian language borrowed the word from Low German in which it functioned as a \"Pomoranism\" (a borrowing from the Pomeranian language).\nA borrowing from the Pomeranian language which has been used in everyday German language and has appeared in dictionaries is the phrase \"\" (it means: come on, come on). It moved to the German language through the German dialects of West Prussia, and is also present in the Kashubian language (spelled: ).\nAssessment.\nThe classification of the Pomeranian ethnolect is problematic. It was classified by Aleksander Br\u00fcckner as one of the Old Polish dialects. At the same time, he classified the extant Kashubian and Slovincian dialects as belonging to the Modern Polish language. Other linguists relate the Pomeranian language to the Polabian group of dialects (forming the Pomeranian-Polabian group).\nAfter Slovincian and all the Pomeranian dialects (except Kashubian) became extinct, the Kashubian language is the term most often used in relation to the language spoken by the Pomeranians. However, it is still not clear from where the words \"Kashubians\" and \"Kashubian\" ( and , and ) originated and how they were brought from the area near Koszalin to Pomerelia. None of the theories proposed has been widely accepted so far. There is also no indication that Pomeranians wandered from the area of Koszalin to Pomerelia.\nWhile Western Pomerania was being Germanized, the Germans (both colonizers and Germanized descendants of Slavic Pomeranians) started using the words \"Pomeranian\" (; ) and \"Pomeranians\" (; ) referring to their own population. The part of the Pomeranian population which kept their Slavic language was called the Wends () or the Kashubians (). As the West lost its Slavic character, those two terms were more often used in the East. In 1850, in the preface to his Kashubian-Russian dictionary, Florian Ceynowa wrote about the language of Baltic Slavic peoples: \"Usually it is called the 'Kashubian language', although the 'Pomeranian-Slovenian dialect' would be a more proper term.\"\nThe word dialect was probably used by Ceynowa because he was a follower of Pan-Slavism, according to which all the Slavic languages were dialects of one Slavic language. In his later works, though, he called his language .\nIn 1893, Stefan Ramu\u0142t, the Jagiellonian University linguist, referred to the early history of Pomerania, publishing the \"Dictionary of the Pomoranian i.e. Kashubian Language\". In the preface, Ramu\u0142t wrote:\n As Kashubians are the direct descendants of Pomeranians, it is right to use the words Pomeranian and Kashubian as synonyms. Especially as there are other reasons for it as well...\nand\n Kashubians and Slavs are what remains of the once powerful Pomeranian tribe and they are the only inheritors of the name Pomeranians.\nFriedrich Lorentz (the author of \"Pomeranian Grammar\" and \"The History of Pomeranian/Kashubian Language\") referred in his works to Ramu\u0142t's dictionary. After Lorentz died, Friedhelm Hinze published a Pomeranian dictionary in five volumes (), which was based on Lorentz's writing.\nModern status of Kashubian.\nThe Pomeranian language, and its only surviving form, Kashubian, traditionally have not been recognized by the majority of Polish linguists, and have been treated in Poland as \"the most distinct dialect of Polish\". However, there have also been some Polish linguists who treated Pomeranian as a separate language. The most prominent of them were Stefan Ramu\u0142t, and Alfred Majewicz, who overtly called Kashubian a language in the 1980s.\nFollowing the collapse of communism in Poland, attitudes on the status of Kashubian have been gradually changing. It is increasingly seen as a fully-fledged language, as it is taught in state schools and has some limited usage on public radio and television. A bill passed by the Polish parliament in 2005 recognizes it as a regional language in the Republic of Poland and provides for its use in official contexts in 10 communes where its speakers constitute at least 20% of the population.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23850", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23850", "title": "Peace of Westphalia", "text": "1648 treaties ending the Thirty Years' War and Eighty Years' War\nThe Peace of Westphalia (, ) is the collective name for two peace treaties signed in October 1648 in the Westphalian cities of Osnabr\u00fcck and M\u00fcnster. They ended the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) and brought peace to the Holy Roman Empire, closing a calamitous period of European history that killed approximately eight million people. Ferdinand III, Holy Roman Emperor, the kingdoms of France and Sweden, and their respective allies among the princes of the Holy Roman Empire, participated in the treaties.\nThe negotiation process was lengthy and complex. Talks took place in two cities, because each side wanted to meet on territory under its own control. A total of 109 delegations arrived to represent the belligerent states, but not all delegations were present at the same time. Two treaties were signed to end the war in the Empire: the Treaty of M\u00fcnster and the Treaty of Osnabr\u00fcck. These treaties ended the Thirty Years' War in the Holy Roman Empire, with the Habsburgs (rulers of Austria and Spain) and their Catholic allies on one side, battling the Protestant powers (Sweden and certain Holy Roman principalities) allied with France (though Catholic, strongly anti-Habsburg under King Louis XIV).\nSeveral scholars of international relations have identified the Peace of Westphalia as the origin of principles crucial to modern international relations, collectively known as Westphalian sovereignty. However, some historians have argued against this, suggesting that such views emerged during the nineteenth and twentieth century in relation to concerns about sovereignty during that time.\nBackground.\nEurope had been battered by both the Thirty Years' War and the overlapping Eighty Years' War (begun c. 1568), exacting a heavy toll in money and lives. The Eighty Years' War was a prolonged struggle for the independence of the Protestant-majority Dutch Republic (the modern Netherlands), supported by Protestant-majority England, against Catholic-dominated Spain and Portugal. The Thirty Years' War was the most deadly of the European wars of religion, centered on the Holy Roman Empire. The war, which developed into four phases, included a large number of domestic and foreign players, siding either with the Catholic League or the Protestant Union (later Heilbronn League). The Peace of Prague (1635) ended most religious aspects of the war, and the French\u2013Habsburg rivalry took over prominence. With between 4.5 million and 8 million dead in the Thirty Years' War alone, and decades of constant warfare, the need for peace became increasingly clear.\nLocations.\nPeace negotiations between France and the Habsburg Emperor began in Cologne in 1636. These negotiations were initially blocked by Cardinal Richelieu of France, who insisted on the inclusion of all his allies, whether fully sovereign countries or states within the Holy Roman Empire. In Hamburg, Sweden, France, and the Holy Roman Empire negotiated a preliminary peace in December 1641. They declared that the preparations of Cologne and the Treaty of Hamburg were preliminaries of an overall peace agreement.\nThe main peace negotiations took place in Westphalia, in the neighbouring cities of M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck. Both cities were maintained as neutral and demilitarized zones for the negotiations.\nIn M\u00fcnster, negotiations took place between the Holy Roman Empire and France, as well as between the Dutch Republic and Spain who on 30 January 1648 signed a peace treaty ending the Eighty Years' War that was not part of the Peace of Westphalia. M\u00fcnster had been, since its re-Catholicism in 1535, a strictly mono-denominational community. It housed the Chapter of the Prince-Bishopric of M\u00fcnster. Only Roman Catholic worship was permitted, while Calvinism and Lutheranism were prohibited.\nSweden preferred to negotiate with the Holy Roman Empire in Osnabr\u00fcck, which was controlled by Protestant forces. Osnabr\u00fcck was a bi-denominational Lutheran and Catholic city, with two Lutheran churches and two Catholic churches. The city council was exclusively Lutheran, and the burghers mostly so, but the city also housed the Catholic Chapter of the Prince-Bishopric of Osnabr\u00fcck and had many other Catholic inhabitants. Osnabr\u00fcck had been subjugated by troops of the Catholic League from 1628 to 1633 and was then taken by Lutheran Sweden.\nDelegations.\nThe peace negotiations had no exact beginning or end, because the 109 delegations never met in a plenary session. Instead, various delegations arrived between 1643 and 1646 and left between 1647 and 1649. The largest number of diplomats were present between January 1646 and July 1647.\nDelegations had been sent by 16 European states, 66 Imperial States representing the interests of 140 Imperial States, and 27 interest groups representing 38 groups.\nTreaties.\nTwo separate treaties constituted the peace settlement:\nResults.\nWestphalia pertaining to the Holy Roman Empire.\nMuch of the Peace of Westphalia focused on reorganizing the Holy Roman Empire, the main battleground of the Thirty Years' War.\nA common idea is that Emperor Ferdinand III was stripped of power, and said power was given to the rulers of the Imperial estates. The extent to which Ferdinand's power was diminished is now challenged by modern research, with some saying that Ferdinand's loss of influence was overstated by older literature. The emperor still maintained significant power in the Imperial Diet, for example. Central authority was still maintained through institutions like the Aulic Council.\nWestphalia guaranteed the right to practice any of the recognized denominations: Catholicism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism. The last was finally given legal recognition as an official religion. The independence of the Dutch Republic, which practiced religious tolerance, also provided a safe haven for European Jews.\nContrary to common belief, the Peace of Westphalia did not necessarily reconfirm the status of the Peace of Augsburg (particularly the principle of ). Rather, it provided a reinterpretation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRather than confirming the Augsburg settlement's policy of (in which subjects were to follow their ruler's religion), Westphalia replaced it with an interpretation that sovereign rulers such as princes could no longer dictate the religion of their subjects. \"Whatever sovereignty the electors, princes, and estates of the Holy Roman Empire enjoyed in their territories, the private exercise of religion was no longer subject to this sovereignty but had effectively been removed from the sovereign domain.\"\nThe Holy See was very displeased at the settlement, with Pope Innocent X calling it \"null, void, invalid, iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all time\" in the papal brief .\nThe Peace of Westphalia also set up new rules for the (Imperial Chamber Court), and stipulated that half its judges must be Protestant. Westphalia also called for 50 judges to be appointed, but this number was rarely reached due to financial issues.\nTenets.\nThe main tenets of the Peace of Westphalia were:\n*To escape incorporation into Swedish Bremen-Verden, the city of Bremen had claimed Imperial immediacy. The emperor had granted this request and separated the city from the surrounding Bishopric of Bremen. Sweden launched the Swedish-Bremen wars in 1653/54 in a failed attempt to take the city.\n*The treaty did not decide the Swedish-Brandenburgian border in the Duchy of Pomerania. At Osnabr\u00fcck, both Sweden and Brandenburg had claimed the whole duchy, which had been under Swedish control since 1630 despite legal claims of Brandenburgian succession. While the parties settled for a border in 1653, the underlying conflict continued.\n*The treaty ruled that the Dukes of Mecklenburg, owing their re-investiture to the Swedes, cede Wismar and the Mecklenburgian port tolls. While Sweden understood this to include the tolls of all Mecklenburgian ports, the Mecklenburgian dukes as well as the emperor understood this to refer to Wismar only.\n*Wildeshausen, a petty exclave of Bremen-Verden and fragile basis for Sweden's seat in the Westphalian circle diet, was also claimed by the Prince-Bishopric of M\u00fcnster.\nLegacy.\nThe treaties did not entirely end conflicts arising out of the Thirty Years' War. Fighting continued between France and Spain until the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659. The Dutch-Portuguese War that had begun during the Iberian Union between Spain and Portugal, as part of the Eighty Years' War, went on until 1663. The Portuguese Restoration War also continued until 1668. Nevertheless, the Peace of Westphalia did settle many outstanding European issues of the time.\nWestphalian sovereignty.\nSome scholars of international relations have identified the Peace of Westphalia as the origin of principles crucial to modern international relations, including the inviolability of borders and non-interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign states. This system became known in the literature as Westphalian sovereignty. Most modern historians have challenged the association of this system with the Peace of Westphalia, calling it the \"Westphalian myth\". They have challenged the view that the modern European states system originated with the Westphalian treaties. The treaties do not contain anything in their text about religious freedom, sovereignty, or balance of power that can be construed as international law principles. Constitutional arrangements of the Holy Roman Empire are the only context in which sovereignty and religious equality are mentioned in the text, but they are not new ideas in this context. While the treaties do not contain the basis for the modern laws of nations themselves, they do symbolize the end of a long period of religious conflict in Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23851", "revid": "35488920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23851", "title": "Pope Damasus I", "text": "Bishop of Rome from 366 to 384\nPope Damasus I (; c. 305 \u2013 11 December 384), also known as Damasus of Rome, was the bishop of Rome from October 366 to his death in 384. He presided over the Council of Rome of 382 that determined the canon or official list of sacred scripture. \nDamasus spoke out against major heresies (including Apollinarianism and Macedonianism), thus solidifying the faith of the Catholic Church, and encouraged production of the Vulgate Bible with his support for Jerome. He helped reconcile the relations between the Church of Rome and the Church of Antioch, and encouraged the veneration of martyrs.\nAs well as various prose letters and other pieces Damasus was the author of Latin verse. Alan Cameron describes his epitaph for a young girl called Projecta (of great interest to scholars as the Projecta Casket in the British Museum may have been made for her) as \"a tissue of tags and clich\u00e9s shakily strung together and barely squeezed into the meter\". Damasus has been described as \"the first society Pope\", and was possibly a member of a group of Hispanic Christians, largely related to each other, who were close to the Hispanic Theodosius I.\nA number of images of \"DAMAS\" in gold glass cups probably represent him and seem to be the first contemporary images of a pope to survive, though there is no real attempt at a likeness. \"Damas\" appears with other figures, including a Florus who may be Projecta's father. It has been suggested that Damasus or another of the group commissioned and distributed these to friends or supporters, as part of a programme \"insistently inserting his episcopal presence in the Christian landscape\".\nHe is recognized as a saint by the Catholic Church; his feast day is 11 December.\nBackground.\nHis life coincided with the rise of Emperor Constantine I and the reunion and re-division of the Western and Eastern Roman Empires, which is associated with the legitimization of Christianity and its later adoption as the official religion of the Roman state in 380.\nThe reign of Gratian, which coincided with Damasus' papacy, forms an important epoch in ecclesiastical history, since during that period (359\u2013383), Catholic Christianity for the first time became dominant throughout the empire. Under the influence of Ambrose, Gratian refused to wear the insignia of the \"pontifex maximus\" as unbefitting a Christian, removed the Altar of Victory from the Senate at Rome, despite protests from the pagan members of the Senate. Emperor Gratian also forbade legacies of real property to the Vestals and abolished other privileges belonging to them and to the pontiffs.\nEarly life.\nPope Damasus I was either born in Rome, or in Hispania around 305, before moving to Rome at a young age with his parents. Damasus' parents were Antonius, who became a priest at the Church of St. Lawrence (San Lorenzo) in Rome, and his wife Laurentia. Both parents originally came from the region of Lusitania. Damasus began his ecclesiastical career as a deacon in his father's church, where he went on to serve as a priest. This later became the basilica of Saint Lawrence outside the Walls in Rome.\nDamasus was archdeacon of the Roman church when Pope Liberius was banished by Emperor Constantius II to Berea in 354. Damasus followed Liberius into exile, though he immediately returned to Rome. During the period before Liberius' return, Damasus had a great share in the government of the church.\nSuccession crisis.\nIn the early Church, bishops were customarily elected by the clergy and the people of the diocese. While this simple method worked well in a small community of Christians unified by persecution, as the congregation grew in size, the acclamation of a new bishop was fraught with division, and rival claimants and a certain class hostility between patrician and plebeian candidates unsettled some episcopal elections. At the same time, 4th-century emperors expected each new pope-elect to be presented to them for approval, which sometimes led to state domination of the Church's internal affairs.\nFollowing the death of Pope Liberius on 24 September 366, Damasus succeeded to the Papacy amidst factional violence. The deacons and laity supported Liberius' deacon Ursinus. The upper-class former partisans of Felix, who had ruled during Liberius' exile, supported the election of Damasus.\nThe two were elected simultaneously (Damasus' election was held in San Lorenzo in Lucina). J. N. D. Kelly states that Damasus hired a gang of thugs that stormed the Julian Basilica, carrying out a three-day massacre of the Ursinians. Thomas Shahan says details of this scandalous conflict are related in the highly prejudiced \"Libellus precum ad Imperatores\" (P.L., XIII, 83\u2013107), a petition to the civil authority on the part of Faustinus and Marcellinus, two anti-Damasan presbyters. Such was the violence and bloodshed that the two prefects of the city were called in to restore order, and after a first setback, when they were driven to the suburbs and a massacre of 137 was perpetrated in the basilica of Sicininus (the modern Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore), the prefects banished Ursinus to Gaul. There was further violence when he returned, which continued after Ursinus was exiled again.\nAnother ancient narrative of events, the \"Gesta\" (dated to 368\u00a0AD), provides more detail. It describes Ursinus as being the valid successor to Liberius, and Damasus as following a heretical interloper, Felix. This account also records that an armed force instigated by Damasus broke into the Basilica of Julius and a three-day slaughtering of those assembled there took place. After gaining control of the Lateran basilica Damasus was then ordained as bishop in the cathedral of Rome. However, Damasus was accused of bribing the urban officials of Rome to have Ursinus and chief supporters exiled, including some presbyters. As a result of this attempt, some of the (apparently quite numerous) supporters of Ursinus interrupted this process and rescued the presbyters, taking them to the Basilica of Liberius (identified as the \"basilica of Sicinnius\"), the apparent headquarters of the Ursinian sect. Damasus then responded by ordering an attack against the Liberian basilica, resulting in another massacre: \"They broke down the doors and set fire underneath it, then rushed in...and killed a hundred and sixty of the people inside, both men and women.\" Damasus next sent a final assault against some Ursinian supporters who had fled to the cemetery of Saint Agnes, slaying many.\nChurch historians such as Jerome and Rufinus championed Damasus. At a synod in 378, Ursinus was condemned and Damasus exonerated and declared the true pope. The former antipope continued to intrigue against Damasus for the next few years and unsuccessfully attempted to revive his claim on Damasus's death. Ursinus was among the Arian party in Milan, according to Ambrose.\nPapacy.\nDamasus faced accusations of murder and adultery in his early years as pope. The accuracy of these claims has come into question with some suggesting that the accusations were motivated by the conflict with the supporters of Arianism.\nDamasus I was active in defending the Catholic Church against the threat of schisms. In two Roman synods (368 and 369) he condemned Apollinarianism and Macedonianism, and sent legates to the First Council of Constantinople that was convoked in 381 to address these heresies.\nCouncil of Rome of 382 and the Biblical canon.\nOne of the important works of Pope Damasus was to preside in the Council of Rome of 382, which determined the canon or official list of Sacred Scripture. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church states:\nA council probably held at Rome in 382 under Damasus gave a complete list of the canonical books of both the Old Testament and the New Testament (also known as the 'Gelasian Decree' because it was reproduced by Gelasius in 495), which is identical with the list given at Trent. American Catholic priest and historian William Jurgens stated: \"The first part of this decree has long been known as the Decree of Damasus, and concerns the Holy Spirit and the seven-fold gifts. The second part of the decree is more familiarly known as the opening part of the Gelasian Decree, in regard to the canon of Scripture: It is now commonly held that the part of the Gelasian Decree dealing with the accepted canon of Scripture is an authentic work of the Council of Rome of 382 A.D. and that Gelasius edited it again at the end of the fifth century, adding to it the catalog of the rejected books, the apocrypha. It is now almost universally accepted that these parts one and two of the Decree of Damasus are authentic parts of the Acts of the Council of Rome of 382 A.D.\"\nJerome, the Vulgate and the Canon.\nPope Damasus appointed Jerome of Stridon as his confidential secretary. Invited to Rome originally to a synod of 382 convened to end the schism of Antioch, he made himself indispensable to the pope, and took a prominent place in his councils. Jerome spent three years (382\u2013385) in Rome in close intercourse with Pope Damasus and the leading Christians. Writing in 409, Jerome remarked: \"A great many years ago when I was helping Damasus, bishop of Rome with his ecclesiastical correspondence, and writing his answers to the questions referred to him by the councils of the east and west...\"\nIn order to put an end to the marked divergences in the western texts of that period, Damasus encouraged the highly respected scholar Jerome to revise the available Old Latin versions of the Bible into a more accurate Latin on the basis of the Greek New Testament and the Septuagint, resulting in the Vulgate. According to Protestant biblical scholar, F.F. Bruce, the commissioning of the Vulgate was a key moment in fixing the biblical canon in the West. Nonetheless, as the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Latin Church, all through the Middle Ages we find evidence of hesitation about the character of the deuterocanonicals. There is a current friendly to them, another one distinctly unfavourable to their authority and sacredness, while wavering between the two are a number of writers whose veneration for these books is tempered by some perplexity as to their exact standing, and among those we note St. Thomas Aquinas. Few are found to unequivocally acknowledge their canonicity. \nThe prevailing attitude of Western medieval authors is substantially that of the Greek Fathers. The chief cause of this phenomenon in the West is to be sought in the influence, direct and indirect, of St. Jerome's depreciating Prologus.\nSignificant scholarly doubts and disagreements about the nature of the Apocrypha continued for centuries and even into Trent, which provided the first infallible definition of the Catholic canon in 1546.\nJerome devoted a very brief notice to Damasus in his \"De Viris Illustribus\", written after Damasus' death: \"he had a fine talent for making verses and published many brief works in heroic metre. He died in the reign of the emperor Theodosius at the age of almost eighty\". Damasus may be the author of the anonymous \"Carmen contra paganos\" (song against the pagans).\nLetter of Jerome to Damasus.\nThe letters from Jerome to Damasus are examples of the primacy of the See of Peter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yet, though your greatness terrifies me, your kindness attracts me. From the priest I demand the safe-keeping of the victim, from the shepherd the protection due to the sheep. Away with all that is overweening; let the state of Roman majesty withdraw. My words are spoken to the successor of the fisherman, to the disciple of the cross. As I follow no leader save Christ, so I communicate with none but your blessedness, that is with the chair of Peter. For this, I know, is the rock on which the church is built! This is the house where alone the paschal lamb can be rightly eaten. This is the ark of Noah, and he who is not found in it shall perish when the flood prevails. But since by reason of my sins I have betaken myself to this desert which lies between Syria and the uncivilized waste, I cannot, owing to the great distance between us, always ask of your sanctity the holy thing of the Lord. Consequently I here follow the Egyptian confessors who share your faith, and anchor my frail craft under the shadow of their great argosies. I know nothing of Vitalis; I reject Meletius; I have nothing to do with Paulinus. He that gathers not with you scatters; he that is not of Christ is of Antichrist.\nRelations with the Eastern Church.\nThe Eastern Church, in the person of Basil of Caesarea, earnestly sought the aid and encouragement of Damasus against an apparently triumphant Arianism. Damasus, however, harbored some degree of suspicion against the great Cappadocian Doctor of the Church. In the matter of the Meletian Schism at Antioch, Damasus \u2013 together with Athanasius of Alexandria, and his successor, Peter II of Alexandria \u2013 sympathized with the party of Paulinus as more sincerely representative of Nicene orthodoxy. On the death of Meletius he sought to secure the succession for Paulinus and to exclude Flavian. During his papacy, Peter II of Alexandria sought refuge in Rome from the persecuting Arians. He was received by Damasus, who supported him against the Arians.\nDamasus supported the appeal of the Christian senators to Emperor Gratian for the removal of the altar of Victory from the Senate House, and lived to welcome the famous edict of Theodosius I, \"De fide Catholica\" (27 February 380), which proclaimed as the religion of the Roman State that doctrine which Peter had preached to the Romans.\nDevotion to the martyrs.\nDamasus also did much to encourage the veneration of the Christian martyrs, restoring and creating access to their tombs in the Catacombs of Rome and elsewhere, and setting up tablets with verse inscriptions composed by himself, several of which survive or are recorded in his \"Epigrammata\".\nDamasus rebuilt or repaired his father's church named for Laurence, known as San Lorenzo fuori le Mura (\"St Lawrence outside the walls\"), which by the 7th century was a station on the itineraries of the graves of the Roman martyrs. Damasus' regard for the Roman martyr is attested also by the tradition according to which the Pope built a church devoted to Laurence in his own house, San Lorenzo in Damaso.\nDamasus was pope for eighteen years and two months. His feast day is 11 December. He was buried beside his mother and sister in a \"funerary basilica ... somewhere between the Via Appia and Via Ardeatina\", the exact location of which is lost.\nSince 2011, this saint has given its name to the San Damaso Ecclesiastical University, a Catholic center of higher education belonging to the Archbishopric of Madrid, in Spain, where theology, Canon Law, Religious Sciences, Christian and Classical Literature, and Philosophy can be studied.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23852", "revid": "45061525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23852", "title": "Pope Honorius I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 625 to 638\nPope Honorius I (born in Campania; died 12 October 638) was the bishop of Rome from his consecration on 27 October 625 until his death. He actively supported the Christianisation of the Anglo-Saxons, notably by sending Saint Birinus to convert the West Saxons and bestowing the pallium on the archbishops of York and Canterbury, and worked to persuade the Irish and British churches to adopt the Roman Easter computus. He is most noted for his correspondence concerning Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople, in which he engaged with the Monoenergism controversy and the associated Monothelite doctrines. Honorius was posthumously anathematized by the Third Council of Constantinople (681) for following the Monothelites and confirming their doctrines. This condemnation was confirmed by Pope Leo II, who charged him with failing to extinguish the heresy. The anathema against Honorius I became a primary argument cited by opponents of the definition of papal infallibility during the First Vatican Council (1870).\nEarly life.\nHonorius I was a wealthy aristocrat born in Campania. His father was Petronius, who held the honorary title of consul. Little is known about Honorius I's life before he was elected pope on 27 October 625. He was consecrated two days after the death of his predecessor, Boniface V. The vacancy was short, a fact historians suggest was due to the presence in Rome of Isaac the Armenian, who, as the imperial exarch of Italy, was empowered to confirm the election.\nPapacy.\nAs pope, Honorius I modeled his papacy after Gregory I and employed monks rather than secular clergy in the administration of the Lateran Palace. He supported Adaloald, the deposed Catholic king of the Lombards, but established diplomatic relations with Adaloald's Arian rival, Arioald. He did not succeed in resolving the Schism of the Three Chapters in Venetia and Istria, but attempted to appease the archbishops of Ravenna, who were dissatisfied with their subordination to Rome. Honorius actively supported the Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England and sent Birinus to convert the West Saxons, but was less successful in convincing the Celtic clergy to abandon their divergent Paschal cycle. At the Sixth Council of Toledo, Honorius urged the Visigothic bishops to persevere in their policies regarding the Jews, referencing the precedents set by Gregory I.\nHonorius intervened in early discussions regarding the controversy of Monoenergism, the teaching that Christ has only one energy, and the subsequent doctrine of Monothelitism, which posits that Christ has only one will; these stand in contrast to the Dyothelite teaching that he has two energies and two wills, both human and divine. Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople wrote to Honorius regarding the Monoenergism controversy, asking him to endorse a policy of silence to prevent endangering Church unity through disputes over whether Christ possessed one energy or two. Sergius argued that the doctrine of two energies could lead to what he considered the erroneous belief that Jesus has two conflicting wills. Pope Honorius's reply in 635 endorsed the view that discussions over energies should cease. He agreed that Jesus does not have two conflicting wills, but one will, reasoning that Jesus did not assume the \"vitiated\" (corrupted by sin) human nature tainted by Adam's fall, but rather human nature as it existed prior to the fall.\nDefenders of Honorius maintain that he did not endorse Monothelitism, as his later accusers would charge him with. His secretary and the scribe of the letter, Abbot John Symponus, later testified that the text referred to the human will alone, stating: \"When we spoke of a single will in the Lord, we did not have in view His double nature, divine and human, but His humanity only.\"\nHonorius's successor, Pope John IV, defended him by stating that Honorius spoke \"only of the human and not also of the divine nature\" when using the phrase \"one will.\" St. Maximus the Confessor also defended Honorius's orthodoxy. In his ecclesiastical history, the Venerable Bede described Honorius as a holy pastor, a characterization later cited by theologians such as Robert Bellarmine to argue against charges of heresy. Honorius became aware of the rise of Islam and viewed the tenets of this emerging force as closely resembling those of the Arian heresy. \nLegacy.\nIn the XIII session of the Third Council of Constantinople on 28 March 681, the monothelites were anathematized by name, \"and with them Honorius, who was Bishop of Rome, as having followed them in all things.\" Citing his written correspondence with Sergius, Honorius was subsequently accused of having confirmed his impious doctrines. The XVI session reaffirmed the condemnation of the heretics, explicitly stating, \"To Honorius, the heretic, anathema!\" This concluded with the decree of the XVII session on 16 September 681, that Honorius had not stopped provoking scandal and error in the Body of the Church; for he had \"with unheard of expressions disseminated amidst the faithful people the heresy of the one will\", doing so \"in agreement with the insane false doctrine of the impious Apollinaris, Severus and Themistius.\" The Roman legates made no objection to his condemnation.\nPope Leo II's letter of confirmation of the Council commended it, stating that it had \"perfectly preached the definition of the true faith,\" and made reference to the condemnation of his predecessor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWithin the year, a Latin translation of the Acts of the council had been disseminated and signed by the Bishops throughout the West. The condemnation of Pope Honorius was reiterated by Pope Leo's successors and subsequent councils, and was included in the Roman Breviary lessons for the Feast of St. Leo II until the eighteenth century. As a result, Honorius would later be the subject of sustained criticism by opponents of papal infallibility in the discussions surrounding the First Vatican Council of 1870.\nIn the time surrounding the First Vatican Council, there was an attempt to re-evaluate the case of Honorius I. This was driven both by the historiographical controversy it generated during the debates on the definition of papal infallibility (since many opponents argued that the existence of a heretic Pope would contradict such Catholic dogma), and by the possibility of achieving his rehabilitation being freed from the anathema if it were proven that he did not believe in the Monothelite heresy and that his condemnation was a historical misunderstanding. That Honorius actually agreed with Sergius on the doctrine of monothelitism has given rise to much discussion. J. B. Bury argues that the most reasonable conclusion is that Honorius did not really apprehend the point at issue, considering it more a question of grammar than theology, for he placed \"one energy\" and \"two energies\" on exactly the same footing; in Bury's words, \"it was for the 'imprudent economy of silence' that he was condemned\". Louis Nazaire B\u00e9gin, whose work bore the Imprimatur of the Catholic Church, argued in the same way. He stated that Honorius was not a \"formal heretic\", but only a \"material heretic\" (or perhaps merely negligent but still orthodox) for tolerating the Monothelite heresy instead of believing and teaching it; thus, his condemnation was based on the guilt of negligence, and he could be exonerated from the anathema and excommunication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his first letter [from Honorius to Sergius] he repeats several times that \"the Scriptures clearly demonstrate that Jesus Christ is the same one who works in divine and human things\"; that \"Jesus Christ works in both natures, divine and human.\" Nothing could be clearer or more obvious. The heresy is immediately overthrown. It is therefore evident that Honorius confesses in Jesus Christ not only two natures, but also two wills and two operations. Thus, this Pontiff professes Catholic truth in his letters; he only rejects the new words used to express it, and this for reasons of prudence, so as not to appear to favor Nestorianism or Eutychianism, and also because Sergius astutely portrayed these new expressions as causing trouble in the Church and an obstacle to the return of the Monophysites to orthodoxy.\n...\u00a0I do not deny the condemnation; on the contrary, I accept it according to what I said a moment ago; but I distinguish the word \"heretic,\" which is quite imprecise and was even more so at the time of the councils in question. It designated not only those who knowingly and obstinately professed heresy, but also those who benefited from it in any way, whether by their silence and negligence when their responsibilities required them to act, by defending people or writings of heretics, or even by their communication with these heretics, or by having unwittingly accepted their doctrines.\n...\u00a0From this I conclude that Honorius could have been condemned as a heretic by these three councils, and that he in fact was, not for having taught error, but solely for not having exercised the necessary vigor in his duties as Head of the Church, for not having vigorously used his authority to suppress heresy, for having prescribed silence on the manner of expressing a truth, and thus having contributed to the spread of error.\nThis is the same conclusion reached by almost all those who dealt with this question during the Vatican Council. Dom Gu\u00e9ranger, Abbot of the Benedictines of Solesmes, said on this subject: \u201cThe true Sixth Council, the one to which the Roman Pontiff gave the necessary and canonical form, the one that requires the respect of the faithful, condemned Honorius only as an unfaithful guardian of the deposit of faith, but not as if he himself had been an adept of heresy. Justice and truth forbid us to go further.\u201d\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23853", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23853", "title": "Pope Honorius II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1124 to 1130\nPope Honorius II (9 February 1060 \u2013 13 February 1130), born Lamberto Scannabecchi, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 21 December 1124 to his death in 1130.\nAlthough from a humble background, his obvious intellect and outstanding abilities saw him promoted up through the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Attached to the Frangipani family of Rome, his election as pope was contested by a rival candidate, Celestine II, and force was used to guarantee his election.\nHonorius's pontificate was concerned with ensuring that the privileges the Roman Catholic Church had obtained through the Concordat of Worms were preserved and, if possible, extended. He was the first pope to confirm the election of the Holy Roman emperor. Distrustful of the traditional Benedictine order, he favoured new monastic orders, such as the Augustinians and the Cistercians, and sought to exercise more control over the larger monastic centres of Monte Cassino and Cluny Abbey. He also approved the new military order of the Knights Templar in 1128.\nHonorius II failed to prevent Roger II of Sicily from extending his power in southern Italy and was unable to stop Louis VI of France from interfering in the affairs of the French church. Like his predecessors, he managed the wide-ranging affairs of the church through Papal Legates. With his death in 1130, the Church was again thrown into confusion with the election of two rival popes, Innocent II and the antipope Anacletus II.\nEarly life.\nLamberto was of simple rural origins, hailing from Fiagnano in the Casalfiumanese commune, near Imola in present-day Italy. Entering into an ecclesiastical career, he soon became archdeacon of Bologna, where his abilities eventually saw him attract the attention of Pope Urban II, who presumably appointed him cardinal priest of an unknown church, in c. 1099, though S. Prassede has been discussed. His successor, Pope Paschal II, made Lamberto a Canon of the Lateran before elevating him to the position of cardinal bishop of Ostia in 1117. Lamberto was one of the cardinals who accompanied Pope Gelasius II into exile in 1118\u201319 and was at his bedside when Gelasius died.\nWith Gelasius's death at Cluny on 28 January 1119, Cardinal Lamberto and Cardinal Cono (Bishop of Palestrina) conducted the election of a new pope according to the canons. Cardinal Lamberto carried out the coronation of Guy de Bourgogne at Vienne on 9 February 1119, and became a close advisor of Pope Callixtus II. Accompanying Callixtus throughout France, he assisted Callixtus in his initial dealings with Holy Roman Emperor Henry V. As a well-known opponent of the emperor's right to select bishops in his territories (the Investiture Controversy), Lamberto was a natural choice for papal legate. He was sent in 1119 to deal with Henry V and delegated with powers to come to an understanding concerning the right of investiture.\nForceful and determined, Lamberto summoned the bishops of the Holy Roman Empire to attend an assembly at Mainz on 8 September 1122. He expected absolute obedience, so much so that it took the mediation of Archbishop Adalbert of Mainz to prevent the suspension of Saint Otto of Bamberg for non-attendance. The struggle came to a conclusion with the Concordat of Worms in 1122 and the \"Pactum Calixtinum\", almost entirely due to Lamberto's efforts, was effected on 23 September 1123.\nPontificate.\nConclave of 1124.\nPressures building within the Curia, together with ongoing conflicts among the Roman nobility, would erupt after the death of Callixtus II in 1124. The pontificates of Urban II and Paschal II saw an expansion in the College of Cardinals of Italian clerics that strengthened the local Roman influence. These cardinals were reluctant to meet with the batch of cardinals recently promoted by Callixtus II, who were mainly French or Burgundian. As far as the older cardinals were concerned, these newer cardinals were dangerous innovators, and they were determined to resist their increasing influence. The northern cardinals, led by Cardinal Aymeric de Bourgogne (the Papal Chancellor), were equally determined to ensure that the elected pope would be one of their candidates. Both groups looked towards the great Roman families for support.\nBy 1124, there were two great factions dominating local politics in Rome: the Frangipani family, which controlled the region around the fortified Colosseum and supported the northern cardinals, and the Pierleoni family, which controlled the Tiber Island and the fortress of the Theatre of Marcellus and supported the Italian cardinals. With Callixtus II's death on 13 December 1124, both families agreed that the election of the next pope should be in three days time, in accordance with the church canons. The Frangipani, led by Leo Frangipani, pushed for the delay in order that they could promote their preferred candidate, Lamberto, but the people were eager to see Saxo de Anagni, the Cardinal-Priest of San Stefano in Celiomonte elected as the next pope. Leo, eager to ensure a valid election, approached key members of every cardinal's entourage, promising each one that he would support their master when the voting for the election was underway.\nOn 16 December, all the cardinals, including Lamberto, assembled in the chapel of the monastery of St. Pancratius attached to the south of the Lateran basilica. There, at the suggestion of Jonathas, the cardinal-deacon of Santi Cosma e Damiano, who was a partisan of the Pierleoni family, the cardinals unanimously elected as Pope the Cardinal-Priest of Sant'Anastasia, Theobaldo Boccapecci, who took the name Celestine II. He had only just put on the red mantle and the \"Te Deum\" was being sung when an armed party of Frangipani supporters (in a move pre-arranged with Cardinal Aymeric) burst in, attacked the newly enthroned Celestine, who was wounded, and acclaimed Lamberto as Pope. Since Celestine had not been formally consecrated pope, the wounded candidate declared himself willing to resign, but the Pierleoni family and their supporters refused to accept Lamberto, who in the confusion had been proclaimed Pope under the name Honorius II.\nRome descended into factional infighting, while Cardinal Aymeric and Leo Frangipani attempted to win over the resistance of Urban, the City Prefect, and the Pierleoni family with bribes and extravagant promises. Eventually, Celestine's supporters abandoned him, leaving Honorius the only contender for the papal throne. Honorius, unwilling to accept the throne in such a manner, resigned his position before all of the assembled cardinals, but was immediately and unanimously re-elected and consecrated on 21 December 1124.\nPapacy.\nRelations with the Holy Roman Empire.\nHonorius immediately came into conflict with Emperor Henry V over imperial claims in Italy. In 1116, Henry had crossed the Alps to lay claim to the Italian territories of Matilda of Tuscany, which she had supposedly left to the papacy on her death. Henry had immediately begun appointing imperial vicars throughout the newly acquired province over the objections of both the Tuscan cities and the papacy. To maintain papal claims to Tuscany, Honorius appointed Albert, a papal marquis, to rule in the pope's name in opposition to the imperial Margrave of Tuscany, Conrad von Scheiern. In addition, Henry V made very little effort to implement the terms of the Concordant of Worms, to Honorius II's irritation. Local churches were forced to appeal to Rome to obtain restitution from the imperial bishops who had taken advantage of the Investiture Controversy to obtain property for their own benefit, as the Emperor turned a blind eye.\nThe death of Emperor Henry V on 23 May 1125 put an end to these squabbles, but soon Honorius was involved in a new power struggle in the Holy Roman Empire. Henry died childless and had nominated his nephew Frederick Hohenstaufen, Duke of Swabia, to succeed him as King of the Romans and Holy Roman Emperor. Of the German princes, the ecclesiastical faction was against any expansion of Hohenstaufen power, and they were determined to ensure that Frederick would not succeed Henry. Led by Archbishop Adalbert of Mainz, the archchancellor of the empire, and under the watchful gaze of two papal legates, Cardinals Gherardo and Romano, the clerical and lay nobles of the empire elected Lothair of Supplinburg, Duke of Saxony. At Lothair's request, Cardinal Gherardo and two bishops then sent word to Rome to obtain Honorius's confirmation of the election, which he granted. This was a coup for Honorius, as such a confirmation had never occurred before, and around July 1126 Honorius invited Lothair to Rome to obtain the imperial title. Lothair was keen to keep Honorius on his side, keeping to the terms of the Concordat of Worms by not attending episcopal elections, agreeing that the investiture should only occur after the bishop's consecration, and that the oath of homage be replaced with an oath of fidelity.\nLothair was unable to visit Rome immediately as Germany was rocked by the rebellion of the Hohenstaufen brothers, with Conrad Hohenstaufen elected anti-king in December 1127, followed by his descent into Italy and his crowning as King of Italy at Monza on 29 July 1128. The German bishops, again led by Adalbert of Mainz, excommunicated Conrad, an act that was confirmed by Honorius in a synod held in Rome at Easter (22 April 1128). Honorius also sent Cardinal John of Crema to Pisa to hold another synod that excommunicated Archbishop Anselm of Milan, who had crowned Conrad king. Conrad found little help in Italy and with Honorius's support, Lothair was able to keep his throne.\nOne of the key ecclesiastical advisors of Lothair III was Saint Norbert of Xanten, who travelled to Rome in early 1126 to seek the formal sanction from Honorius to establish a new monastic order, the Premonstratensian Order (also known as the Norbertines), which Honorius agreed to do.\nConcerns in Campania.\nOne of Honorius's first tasks in southern Italy was to deal with the barons in the Campania who were molesting farmers and travellers at will with their armed bands. In 1125, papal force brought to heel the lords of Ceccano. Papal armies took possession of various towns, including Maenza, Roccasecca and Trevi nel Lazio. In 1128, Honorius's forces successfully captured the town of Segni, which was also held by a local baron who died during its capture. Honorius, however, was most concerned about the former papal stronghold at Fumone, which the nobles, who held it in the pope's name, had decided to keep possession of. The town fell in July 1125 after a siege of ten weeks. When Honorius took possession of Fumone, he returned it, after taking safeguards, to its rebellious custodians and ordered that the Antipope Gregory VIII be transferred there from his previous lodgings at Monte Cassino. With that, Honorius turned his attention to the powerful and independent-minded abbot of Monte Cassino, Oderisio di Sangro.\nHonorius had a long-standing dislike of Oderisio going back to the time when Honorius was cardinal-bishop of Ostia. Honorius had asked for permission from the abbot to allow him and his entourage permission to stay in the church of Santa Maria in Pallara, which was a traditional privilege belonging to the bishops of Ostia. Oderisio refused, and Honorius never forgot the insult. These bad feelings were compounded in 1125, when Oderisio refused a request from Pope Honorius for some financial assistance after he had been enthroned. Oderisio also mocked Honorius's peasant background behind his back.\nUsing reports that the abbot had been lining his own pockets rather than spending it on his monastery, Honorius publicly denounced Oderisio, calling him a soldier and a thief, not a monk. When Atenulf, count of Aquino, brought accusations that Oderisio was aiming for the papacy, Honorius summoned Oderisio to Rome to answer the charges. Three times Oderisio refused to answer the summons and so during Lent of 1126, Honorius deposed the abbot. Oderisio refused to accept the deposition and continued to act as abbot, forcing Honorius to excommunicate him. Oderisio fortified the monastery, as the people of the town of Cassino forcibly entered the monastery, and after an armed struggle forced the monks to declare Oderisio deposed and to elect another abbot in his place. The monks elected Niccolo, the dean of the monastery.\nDetermined to bring the Benedictines to heel, Honorius insisted that the election of Niccolo was uncanonical, and demanded that Seniorectus, the provost of the monastery at Capua, be elected as abbot, to the fury of the Monte Cassino monks. In the meantime, open warfare was being waged between the supporters of Oderisio and Niccolo. Eventually, however, Honorius was able to secure not only the resignation of Oderisio, but he also excommunicated Niccolo for good measure. He reassured the monks of his intentions, and in September 1127, he personally installed Seniorectus as abbot. Honorius also insisted that the monks take an oath of fidelity to the papacy, but they strenuously objected.\nConflict with Roger II of Sicily.\nMatters to the south of Monte Cassino soon occupied Honorius's attention. In July 1127, William II, Duke of Apulia, died childless, and almost immediately his cousin King Roger II of Sicily sailed to the mainland to occupy the duchies of Apulia and Calabria. Roger claimed that William had nominated him his heir, while Honorius stated that William had left his territory to the Holy See. Honorius had just suffered a defeat at the hands of a local baron at Arpino in 1127 when Honorius received word that Roger had landed in Italy. He rushed to Benevento to prevent the local Normans from reaching an agreement with Roger. Roger in the meantime had rapidly overrun the duchy of Apulia and had sent Honorius lavish gifts, asking the Pope to recognise him as the new duke and promising to hand over Troia and Montefusco in exchange. Honorius, fearing the expansion of Norman power to the south under one dominating ruler, threatened to excommunicate Roger if he persisted. In the meantime, many of the local Norman nobles, fearful of Roger's power, allied themselves with Honorius, as Honorius formally excommunicated Roger in November 1127. Roger left his armies threatening Benevento, while he returned to Sicily for reinforcements. Honorius in the meantime entered into an alliance with the new Prince of Capua, Robert II. On 30 December 1127, Honorius preached a crusade against Roger II after having anointed Robert as Prince of Capua.\nRoger returned in May 1128 and continued to harass papal strongholds while avoiding any direct confrontation with Honorius's forces. In July 1128, the two armies came in contact with each other on the banks of the Bradano, but Roger refused to engage, believing that the papal armies would soon fall apart, and soon enough some of the Pope's allies began deserting to Roger. Trying to salvage something of the situation, Honorius sent his trusted advisor Cardinal Aymeric together with Cencio II Frangipane to negotiate with Roger secretly. Honorius agreed to invest Roger with the duchy of Apulia in exchange for an oath of faith and homage by Roger.\nHonorius travelled to Benevento, and after safeguarding the interests of Robert of Capua, he met Roger on the Pons Major, the bridge which crosses the Sabbato river near Benevento, on 22 August 1128. There, he formally invested Roger with the duchy of Apulia and both agreed to a peace between the Kingdom of Sicily and the Papal States. Unfortunately, Honorius had just returned to Rome when he was informed that the nobles of Benevento had overthrown and killed the rector (or papal governor) of the city and established a Commune. Furious, he declared he would wreak a terrible vengeance on the city, whereupon the residents asked Honorius for forgiveness and to send another governor. Honorius sent Cardinal Gherardo as the new rector, and in 1129 visited the city again, asking that the city allow the return of those they had banished during the formation of the Commune. They refused, and Honorius asked Roger II of Sicily to punish the city in May 1130, but Honorius died before action was taken.\nIntervention in France.\nAside from the Benedictines at Monte Cassino, Honorius was also determined to deal with the monks at Cluny Abbey under their ambitious and worldly abbot, Pons of Melgueil. He had just returned from the Levant after being forced out by his monks in 1122. In 1125, accompanied by an armed following, Pons took possession of Cluny Abbey, melted down the treasures stored in the monastery, and paid his followers, who continued to terrorise the monks and the villages dependent upon the abbey.\nHonorius, on hearing news of the disorders at Cluny, sent a legate to investigate with orders to excommunicate and denounce Pons and order him to present himself before Honorius. Pons eventually obeyed the summons, and was deposed by Honorius in 1126 before being imprisoned in the Septizodium, where he soon died. Honorius personally reinvested Peter the Venerable as Abbot of Cluny.\nHonorius soon became involved in the quarrel between King Louis VI of France and the French bishops. Stephen of Senlis, the Bishop of Paris, had been heavily influenced by the reforming zeal of Bernard of Clairvaux, and actively sought to remove royal influence in the French church. Louis confiscated Stephen's wealth and began harassing him so that he would cease his reforming activities. At the same time, Louis also had in his sights Henri Sanglier, the Archbishop of Sens, who had also joined the reformers. Charging Henri with simony, Louis attempted to remove another threat from within the French church. Bernard of Clairvaux wrote to Honorius asking him to intervene on behalf of both men and support church independence over the claims of royal jurisdiction and interference.\nRoyal pressure was also brought to bear on Hildebert of Lavardin, whom Honorius had transferred from the see of Le Mans to become the Archbishop of Tours in 1125. In 1126, Louis insisted on filling episcopal vacancies in the See of Tours with his own candidates over Hildebert's objections. Hildebert also complained to Honorius about the constant appeals to Rome whenever he made a ruling.\nIn response to the king's actions, the French bishops laid an interdict on the diocese of Paris, causing Louis to write to Honorius, who suspended the interdict in 1129. Although this incurred the wrath of Bernard of Clairvaux, who wrote to Honorius expressing his disgust, Honorius pressured Stephen of Senlis to become reconciled with King Louis in 1130. Henri Sanglier, on the other hand, continued in his role of archbishop without further interference from the king. By the end of his pontificate, Honorius had ended the conflict between Louis and his bishops.\nIn 1127, Honorius confirmed the acts of the Synod of Nantes, presided over by Archbishop Hildebert of Lavardin, which eradicated certain local abuses in Brittany. That same year, Honorius helped Conan III, Duke of Brittany, bring one of his rebellious vassals to heel. He also intervened on behalf of the monks of the L\u00e9rins Islands who were constantly harassed by Arab pirates, encouraging a crusade to help defend the monks.\nHonorius was also called to intervene in the affairs of Normandy, as Fulk of Anjou and King Henry I of England battled for domination. Henry objected to the marriage of Fulk's daughter Sibylla of Anjou to William Clito, the son of the duke of Normandy, on the grounds that they were too closely related by blood, being sixth cousins. They refused to divorce, and Honorius was forced to excommunicate Fulk and his son-in-law and to impose an interdict upon their territories.\nRelations with England and Spain.\nIn England, the ongoing dispute between the Sees of Canterbury and York over primacy continued unabated. On 5 April 1125, Honorius wrote to Thurstan, Archbishop of York, advising him that Honorius planned to settle the issue personally. He sent a legate, Cardinal John of Crema, to deal with the question of primacy, as well as other jurisdictional issues between Canterbury and Wales, and between York, Scotland and Norway. Honorius wrote to the clergy and nobles of England, directing them to treat his legate as if he were Honorius himself.\nIn Honorius's name, John of Crema convened the Synod of Roxburgh in 1125. In a letter written to King David I of Scotland, the king was asked to send the bishops of Scotland to the council, which discussed the claims of the Archbishop of York to have jurisdiction over the church in Scotland. Upholding the claims of York, Honorius was unsuccessful in forcing the Scottish bishops to obey Archbishop Thurstan.\nNext, John convened the Synod of Westminster in September 1125, which was attended by both the archbishops of Canterbury and York, together with twenty bishops and forty abbots. Although the synod issued rulings on the forbidding of simony and of holding multiple sees at the same time, it did not touch on the vexed question of primacy between Canterbury and York. Instead, John summoned the two prelates to travel with him to Rome to discuss the matter in person before Honorius. They arrived in late 1125 and were greeted warmly by Honorius, and they remained in Rome until early 1126. While there, Honorius ruled that the Bishop of St Andrews was to be subject to the Archbishop of York and in the more contentious issue, he attempted to circumvent his way around the problem by declaring that Thurstan was subject to William de Corbeil, not in his role as Archbishop of Canterbury, but as papal legate for England and Scotland. To emphasise this, Honorius decreed that the Archbishop of Canterbury could not ask for any oath of obedience from the Archbishop of York, and in the matter of honorary distinction, it was the Archbishop of Canterbury in his role as Legate that was the most elevated ecclesiastic in the kingdom.\nUrban of Llandaff also travelled to Rome on numerous occasions to meet with Honorius throughout 1128 and 1129, to plead his case that his diocese should not be subject to the see of Canterbury. Although he obtained numerous privileges for his see and Honorius always spoke encouragingly to him, Honorius avoided having to make a decision that might alienate the powerful archbishops of Canterbury.\nIn Spain, Honorius was deeply suspicious of the ambitions of Diego Gelm\u00edrez, the Archbishop of Compostela. Although Pope Callixtus II had made him Papal Legate of a number of Spanish provinces, Honorius informed Diego that he had been made aware of Diego's ambitions and subtly advised him to keep his ambition in check. Still hoping to be promoted to the office of Legate of Spain, Diego sent envoys to Rome, carrying with them 300 gold Almoravid coins, two hundred and twenty for Honorius and another eighty for the Curia. Honorius repeated that his hands were tied, as he had just appointed a cardinal for that post.\nNevertheless, Honorius was not prepared to completely alienate Diego, and when the Archbishop of Braga nominated a successor to the vacant See of Coimbra, Honorius reprimanded the archbishop for usurping the rights of Diego, who should have been the one to nominate a successor. Honorius also demanded that the Archbishop of Braga present himself before Honorius on the second Sunday after Easter in 1129 to answer for his actions. Honorius also ensured that Diego should play a leading role in the Synod of Carri\u00f3n (February 1130), having his legate approach Diego and ask for his assistance during the synod.\nHonorius also wished to promote the ongoing struggle against the Moors in Spain, and to that end he bestowed the city of Tarragona, which had been recently captured from the Moors, to Robert d'Aguil\u00f3. Robert travelled to Rome to receive the gift from Honorius in 1128.\nEstablishment of the Templars and affairs in the East.\nIn 1119, a new religious order had been established by some French noblemen. Called the Knights Templar, they were to protect Christian pilgrims entering the Holy Land and to defend the conquests of the Crusades. However, by the pontificate of Honorius II, they had not yet received any official sanction from the papacy. To rectify this situation, some members of the order appeared before the Council of Troyes in 1129, where the Council expressed its approval of the order and commissioned Bernard of Clairvaux to draw up the order's rules, which now included vows of poverty, chastity and obedience. The order and the rules were subsequently approved by Honorius.\nHonorius, as suzerain of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, re-confirmed the election of King Baldwin II of Jerusalem and established him as the royal patron of the Templars. Honorius tried to manage as best he could the rivalries of the different princes and high-ranking ecclesiastics that were destabilising the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem. Long-standing arguments over areas of jurisdiction between the Latin Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem were a constant source of irritation to Honorius. Honorius supported the claims of William of Malines, the new Archbishop of Tyre who claimed jurisdiction over some of the sees that had traditionally belonged to Bernard of Valence, the Patriarch of Antioch. Bernard refused to give up his claims to the sees, and William travelled to Rome and presented his case before Honorius. The pope sent a legate back to Palestine with instructions that Bernard was to acquiesce and that the various bishops were to submit to William of Malines within forty days. Bernard managed to resist implementing Honorius's instructions, and soon Honorius was too ill to do anything about it.\nDeath of Honorius II.\nAfter almost a year of suffering a painful illness, Honorius fell seriously ill in early 1130. Cardinal Aymeric and the Frangipani family began planning their next moves, and Honorius was taken to the San Gregorio Magno al Celio monastery, which was located in the territory controlled by the Frangipani. Supporters of the Pierleoni family, already preparing to back Pietro Pierleoni on a rumor that Honorius had died, stormed the monastery of the dying Honorius, hoping to force the election of Pietro. Only the sight of the still living Honorius in full pontifical robes forced them to disperse.\nNevertheless, Cardinal Aymeric's plans had not yet reached fruition when Honorius died on the evening of 13 February 1130. The cardinals supporting the Frangipani immediately closed the monastery gates and refused to allow anyone inside. The next day, and contrary to the usual customs, Honorius was quickly buried without any pomp or ceremony in the monastery, as the hand-picked cardinals got around to electing Gregorio Papareschi, who took the name Pope Innocent II. At the same time, the excluded cardinals, most of whom were supporters of the Pierleoni family, elected Pietro Pierleoni, who took the name Anacletus II, throwing the church once again into schism. Honorius eventually transferred from the monastery to the Lateran for reburial once Innocent II had been elected. He was buried in the south transept next to the body of Callixtus II.\nLegacy.\nThe way in which Honorius was elected meant that he became a creature, not only of Cardinal Aymeric, but also of the Frangipani family. Aymeric expanded his powerbase further, with Honorius elevating mostly non-Roman candidates to the college of cardinals, while papal legates were now chosen solely within the papal circle. Honorius favoured the newer monastic orders, such as the Augustinians, a departure from the policies of the older Gregorian popes who favoured traditional orders such as the Benedictines.\nAt the same time, he found himself drawn into the continued chaos of local Roman politics, as the Frangipani enjoyed their influence at the papal court, while the Pierleoni family continually fought against them and against Honorius. Their ceaseless infighting, repressed during the pontificate of Calixtus II, broke out again, and Honorius found he did not have the resources to suppress the Pierleoni, nor the authority to rein in the Frangipani. Honorius was required to engage in a number of petty wars in Rome, which wasted his time and were in the long haul unsuccessful in restoring order in the streets. The continued chaos would be instrumental in the events that saw the resurrection of Republican sentiment in the city and the eventual establishment of the Commune of Rome in the following decade.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23854", "revid": "1314083633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23854", "title": "Pope Honorius III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1216 to 1227\nPope Honorius III (c. 1150 \u2013 18 March 1227), born Cencio Savelli, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 18 July 1216 to his death. A canon at the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore, he came to hold a number of important administrative positions, including that of Camerlengo. In 1197, he became tutor to the young Frederick II. As pope, he worked to promote the Fifth Crusade, which had been planned under his predecessor, Innocent III. Honorius repeatedly exhorted King Andrew II of Hungary and Emperor Frederick II to fulfill their vows to participate. He also gave approval to the recently formed Dominican and Franciscan religious orders.\nEarly work.\nHe was born in Rome as a son of Aimerico, a member of the Roman Savelli family.\nFor a time canon at the church of Santa Maria Maggiore, he later became Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church on December 5, 1189 and Cardinal Deacon of Santa Lucia in Silice on 20 February 1193. Under Pope Clement III and Pope Celestine III he was treasurer of the Roman Church, compiling the \"Liber Censuum\", and served as acting Vice-Chancellor of the Holy Roman Church from 1194 until 1198.\nIn 1197 he became the tutor to the Sicilian king Frederick, future emperor, who had been given as ward to Pope Innocent III by his mother, Constance.\nInnocent III raised him to the rank of a cardinal priest in 1200, by which he obtained the \"Titulus\" of \"Ss. Ioannis et Pauli\". He was dismissed as Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church in 1198, but about the same time he assumed the post of Camerlengo of the Sacred College of Cardinals, post which he held until 1216.\nPapacy.\nElection.\nInnocent III died on 16 July 1216. Two days later, seventeen cardinals present at his death assembled to elect a new pope. The troubled state of affairs in Italy, the threatening attitude of the Tatars, and the fear of a schism induced the cardinals to agree to an election by compromise. Cardinals Ugolino of Ostia (afterwards Pope Gregory IX) and Guido Papareschi were empowered to appoint the new pope. Their choice fell upon Cencio Savelli, who accepted the tiara with reluctance and took the name of Honorius III. He was consecrated at Perugia on 24 July 1216 and was crowned at Rome on 31\u00a0August 1216. He took possession of the Lateran on 3 September 1216. The Roman people were greatly elated at the election, for Honorius III was himself a Roman and by his extreme kindness had endeared himself to the hearts of all.\nFifth Crusade.\nThe Fifth Crusade was endorsed by the Lateran Council of 1215, and Honorius started preparations for the crusade to begin in 1217. To procure the means necessary for this colossal undertaking, the Pope, and the cardinals were to contribute the tenth part of their income for three years. All other ecclesiastics were to contribute the twentieth part. Though the money thus collected was considerable, it was by no means sufficient for a general crusade as planned by Honorius III.\nFar-reaching prospects seemed to open before him when Honorius crowned Peter II of Courtenay as Latin Emperor of Constantinople in April 1217, but the new Emperor was captured on his eastward journey by the despot of Epirus, Theodore Komnenos Doukas, and died in confinement.\nIn July 1216, Honorius once again called upon Andrew II of Hungary to fulfill his father's vow to lead a crusade. (B\u00e9la III willed property and money to Andrew, obliging him to lead a crusade to the Holy Land.) Like many other rulers, his former pupil, the Emperor Frederick II of Germany, had taken an oath to embark for the Holy Land in 1217. But Frederick II hung back, and Honorius III repeatedly put off the date for the beginning of the expedition. In spite of the insistence of Honorius III, Frederick II still delayed, and the Egyptian campaign failed miserably with the loss of Damietta on 8 September 1221.\nMost rulers of Europe were engaged in wars of their own and could not leave their countries for any length of time. King Andrew II of Hungary and, somewhat later, a fleet of crusaders from the region along the Lower Rhine finally departed for the Holy Land. They took Damietta and a few other places in Egypt, but a lack of unity among the Christians and rivalry between their leaders and the papal legate Pelagius resulted in failure.\n24 June 1225 was finally fixed as the date for the departure of Frederick II, and Honorius III brought about his marriage to Queen Isabella II of Jerusalem with a view to binding him closer to the plan. But the Treaty of San Germano in July 1225 permitted a further delay of two years.\nFrederick II now made serious preparations for the crusade. In the midst of it, however, Pope Honorius III died in Rome on 18 March 1227 without seeing the achievement of his hopes. It was left to his successor, Pope Gregory IX, to insist upon their accomplishment.\nBesides the liberation of the Holy Land, Honorius III felt bound to forward the repression of Cathar heresy in the south of France, the war for the faith in the Spanish peninsula, the planting of Christianity in the lands along the Baltic Sea, and the maintenance of the unsustainable Latin empire in Constantinople.\nOf these projects, the rooting out of heresy lay nearest to Honorius III's heart. In the south of France, he carried on Innocent III's work, confirming Simon de Montfort, 5th Earl of Leicester in the possession of the lands of Raymond VI of Toulouse and succeeding, as Innocent III had not, in drawing the royal house of France into the conflict.\nThe most widely important event of this period was the siege and capture of Avignon in 1226. Both Honorius III and King Louis VIII of France turned a deaf ear to Frederick II's assertion of the claims of the Empire to that town.\nApproval of religious orders and other works.\nPope Honorius III approved the Dominican Order in 1216, the Franciscan Order in 1223, and the Carmelite Order's Rule of St. Albert of Jerusalem in 1226.\nIn 1219 Honorius III invited Saint Dominic and his companions to take up residence at the ancient Roman basilica of Santa Sabina, which they did by early 1220. Before that time the friars had only a temporary residence in Rome at the convent of San Sisto Vecchio, which Honorius had given to St. Dominic c. 1218, intending it to become a convent for a reformation of nuns in Rome under Dominic's guidance. The \"studium conventuale\" at Santa Sabina was the forerunner of the Dominican \"studium generale\" at Santa Maria sopra Minerva.\nIn 1217 Honorius III gave the title of King of Serbia to Stefan the First-Crowned.\nDuring his pontificate, many of the tertiary orders came into existence. He approved the Franciscan Brothers and Sisters of Penance Rule in 1221 with the bull \"Memoriale propositi\". He also approved the religious congregation \"Val des \u00c9coliers\" (valley of scholars), which had been founded by four pious professors of theology at the University of Paris, France.\nBeing a man of learning, Honorius insisted that the clergy receive a thorough education, especially in theology. In the case of a certain Hugh whom the chapter of Chartres had elected bishop, he withheld his approbation because the bishop-elect did not possess sufficient knowledge, \"quum pateretur in litteratura defectum\", as the Pope stated in a letter dated 8 January 1219. He even deprived another bishop of his office on account of illiteracy. Honorius bestowed various privileges upon the University of Paris and University of Bologna, the two greatest seats of learning during those times. In order to facilitate the study of theology in dioceses that were distant from the great centers of learning, he ordered in the bull \"Super specula Domini\" that some talented young men should be sent to a recognized theological school to study theology with the purpose of teaching it afterwards in their dioceses.\nWritings.\nHonorius III acquired some fame as an author. The most important of his writings is the \"Liber censuum Romanae ecclesiae\", which is the most valuable source for the medieval position of the Church in regard to property and also serves in part as a continuation of the \"Liber Pontificalis\". It comprises a list of the revenues of the Apostolic See, a record of donations received, privileges granted, and contracts made with cities and rulers. It was begun under Pope Clement III and completed in 1192 under Pope Celestine III. The original manuscript of the \"Liber Censuum\" is still in existence (\"Vaticanus latinus\" 8486).\nHonorius III also wrote a biography of Celestine III; a biography of Gregory VII; an \"Ordo Romanus\", which is a sort of ceremonial containing the rites of the Church for various occasions; and thirty-four sermons.\nHonorius is also purported to be the author of \"The Grimoire of Pope Honorius\". The text was likely forged near the end of the sixteenth century, roughly four hundred years after the death of its supposed author. According to A. E. Waite, \"[I]t is a malicious and somewhat clever imposture, which was undeniably calculated to deceive ignorant persons of its period who may have been magically inclined, more especially ignorant priests, since it pretends to convey the express sanction of the Apostolical Seat for the operations of Infernal Magic and Necromancy.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23855", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23855", "title": "Pope Honorius IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1285 to 1287\nPope Honorius IV (born Giacomo Savelli; c.\u20091210 \u2014 3 April 1287) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 2 April 1285 to his death on 3 April 1287. His election followed the death of Pope Martin IV and was notable for its speed; he was chosen unanimously on the first ballot. Honorius IV's papacy occurred during a tumultuous period marked by political strife and conflict in Sicily, where he sought to navigate complex relationships with various rulers while maintaining papal authority. During his pontificate he continued to pursue the pro-French political policy of his predecessor. He is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Honorius\" upon election, after his granduncle Pope Honorius III.\nEarly life and education.\nGiacomo Savelli was born in Rome into the rich and influential Savelli family. His father, Luca Savelli, was a senator of Rome who died in 1266. His mother Joanna belonged to the Aldobrandeschi family.\nGiacomo Savelli studied at the University of Paris, and held a prebend and a canonry at the cathedral of Ch\u00e2lons-sur-Marne. Later he obtained the benefice of rector at the church of Berton in the Diocese of Norwich in England, a nation he never visited.\nCareer.\nIn 1261, he was created Cardinal Deacon of Santa Maria in Cosmedin by Pope Urban IV, who also appointed him papal prefect in Tuscany and captain of the papal army. Cardinal Savelli pursued a diplomatic career. Pope Clement IV sent him and three other cardinals to invest Charles of Anjou as King of Sicily at Rome on 28 July 1265. After the long deadlocked vacancy in the papal see after the death of Clement IV, when the see of Rome was vacant for three years, he was one of the six cardinals who finally elected Pope Gregory X \"by compromise\" (a technical procedure) on 1 September 1271 in a conclave held at Viterbo because conditions in Rome were too turbulent.\nIn 1274 he accompanied Gregory X to the Council of Lyon, where it was established that only four mendicant orders were to be tolerated: Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustinians and Carmelites. In July 1276, he was one of the three cardinals whom Pope Adrian V sent to Viterbo with instructions to treat with the German King, Rudolf I of Habsburg, concerning his imperial coronation at Rome and his future relations towards Charles of Anjou, whom papal policy supported. The death of Adrian V in the following month rendered the negotiations with Rudolf fruitless.\nSavelli became Protodeacon of the Sacred College in November 1277 and as such, he crowned Popes Nicholas III on 26 December 1277 and Martin IV on 23 March 1281.\nAccording to John Julius Norwich, he was the last pope to be married before ordination.\nElection as pope.\nWhen Martin IV died on 28 March 1285, at Perugia, Cardinal Savelli was unanimously elected Pope on 2 April, on the first ballot, and took the name of Honorius IV. He remained at Perugia throughout April, but, once negotiations were completed, he travelled to Rome and took up residence in the family palace next to Santa Sabina on the Aventine Hill. He was ordained a priest by Cardinal Latino Malabranca Orsini on 19 May, and was consecrated a bishop and crowned pope on Trinity Sunday, 20 May in St. Peter's Basilica. Honorius IV was already advanced in age and so severely affected with gout (or arthritis) that he could neither stand nor walk. When saying Mass he was obliged to sit in a specially constructed chair, and at the elevation of the host his hands had to be raised by a mechanical contrivance.\nPapacy.\nSicilian Conflict.\nSicilian affairs required immediate attention from the new pope. Previously, under Martin IV, the Sicilians had rejected the rule of Charles of Anjou, taking Peter III of Aragon as their king without the consent and approval of the Pope.\nThe massacre of 31 March 1282 known as the Sicilian Vespers had precluded any reconciliation. Martin IV put Sicily and Peter III under an interdict, deprived Peter III of the Crown of Aragon, and gave it to Charles of Valois, the younger of the sons of King Philip III of France, whom he assisted in his attempts to recover Sicily by force of arms. The Sicilians not only repulsed the attacks of the combined French and Papal forces, but also captured the Angevin heir, Charles of Salerno. On 6 January 1285, Charles of Anjou died, leaving his captive son Charles as his natural successor. Honorius IV, more peaceably inclined than Martin IV, did not renounce the Church's support of the House of Anjou, nor did he set aside the severe ecclesiastical punishments imposed upon Sicily.\nHonorius did not approve of the tyrannical government the Sicilians had been subject to under Charles of Anjou. This is evident from legislation embodied in his constitution of 17 September 1285 (\"Constitutio super ordinatione regni Siciliae\"), in which he stated that no government can prosper that is not founded on justice and peace. He passed forty-five ordinances intended chiefly to protect the people of Sicily against their king and his officials.\nThe death of Peter III on 11 November 1285 changed the Sicilian situation in that his kingdoms were divided between his two oldest sons: Alfonso III of Aragon, who received the crown of Aragon, and James II of Aragon, who succeeded as King of Sicily. Honorius IV acknowledged neither the one nor the other: on 11 April 1286, he solemnly excommunicated King James II of Sicily and the bishops who had taken part in his coronation at Palermo on 2 February. Neither the king nor the bishops concerned themselves about the excommunication. The king even sent a hostile fleet to the Roman coast and destroyed the city of Astura by fire.\nCharles of Salerno, the Angevin pretender, who was still held captive by the Sicilians, finally grew tired of his long captivity and signed a contract on 27 February 1287 in which he renounced his claims to the kingdom of Sicily in favour of James II of Aragon and his heirs. Honorius IV, however, declared the contract invalid and forbade all similar agreements for the future.\nWhile Honorius IV was inexorable in the stand he had taken towards Sicily, his relations towards Alfonso III of Aragon became less hostile. Through the efforts of King Edward I of England, negotiations for peace were begun by Honorius IV and King Alfonso III. The Pope, however, did not live long enough to complete these negotiations, which finally resulted in a peaceful settlement of the Aragonese as well as the Sicilian question in 1302 under Pope Boniface VIII.\nRome.\nRome and the Papal States enjoyed a period of tranquillity during the reign of Honorius IV, the like of which they had not enjoyed for many years. He had the satisfaction of reducing the most powerful and obstinate enemy of papal authority, Count Guy of Montefeltro, who for many years had successfully resisted the papal troops. The authority of the pope was now recognized throughout the Papal States, which then comprised the Ravenna, the March of Ancona, the Duchy of Spoleto, the County of Bertinoro, the Mathildian lands, and the Pentapolis, i.e., the cities of Rimini, Pesaro, Fano, Senigallia, and Ancona. Honorius IV was the first pope to employ the great family banking houses of central and northern Italy for the collection of papal dues.\nThe Romans were greatly elated at the election of Honorius IV, for he was a citizen of Rome and a brother of Pandulf, a senator of Rome. The continuous disturbances in Rome during the pontificate of Martin IV had not allowed that pope to live in Rome, but now the Romans cordially invited Honorius IV to make Rome his permanent residence. During the first few months of his pontificate he lived in the Vatican, but in the autumn of 1285 he removed to the magnificent palace he had just erected on the Aventine.\nRelations with the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn his relations with the Holy Roman Empire, where no more danger was to be apprehended since the fall of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, Martin followed the moderate course taken by Gregory X. Rudolf I of Germany sent Bishop Henry of Basel to Rome to request coronation. Honorius IV appointed the envoy Archbishop of Mainz, fixed a date for the coronation, and sent Cardinal John of Tusculum to Germany to assist Rudolf I's cause. But general opposition showed itself to the papal interference; a council at W\u00fcrzburg (16\u201318 March 1287) protested energetically, and Rudolf I had to protect the legate from personal violence, so that both his plans and the Pope's failed.\nOther acts.\nHonorius IV inherited plans for another crusade, but confined himself to collecting the tithes imposed by the Council of Lyon, arranging with the great banking houses of Florence, Siena, and Pistoia to act as his agents.\nThe two largest religious orders received many new privileges from Honorius IV, documented in his \"Regesta\". He often appointed them to special missions and to bishoprics, and gave them exclusive charge of the Inquisition.\nHe also approved the privileges of the Carmelites and the Augustinian hermits and permitted the former to exchange their striped habit for a white one. He was especially devoted to the order founded by William X of Aquitaine and added numerous privileges to those they had already received from Alexander IV and Urban IV. Besides turning over to them some deserted Benedictine monasteries, he presented them with the monastery of St. Paul at Albano, which he himself had founded and richly endowed when he was still cardinal.\nSalimbene, the chronicler of Parma, asserted that Honorius IV was a foe to the religious orders. This may reflect the fact that he opposed the Apostolic Brethren, an order embracing evangelical poverty that had been started by Gerard Segarelli at Parma in 1260. On 11 March 1286 he issued a bull condemning them as heretics.\nAt the University of Paris he advocated the establishment of chairs for Eastern languages to teach these languages to those who would labour for the conversion of the Muslims and the reunion of the schismatic churches in the East.\nHe raised only one man to be cardinal, his cousin Giovanni Boccamazza, archbishop of Monreale, on 22 December 1285.\nThe tomb of Pope Honorius IV is in the church of Santa Maria in Aracoeli in Rome.\nContacts with the Mongols.\nThe Mongol ruler Arghun sent an embassy and a letter to Pope Honorius IV in 1285, a Latin translation of which is preserved in the Vatican. It mentions the links to Christianity of Arghun's family, and proposes a combined military conquest of Muslim lands:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"As the land of the Muslims, that is, Syria and Egypt, is placed between us and you, we will encircle and strangle (\"estrengebimus\") it. We will send our messengers to ask you to send an army to Egypt, so that us on one side, and you on the other, we can, with good warriors, take it over. Let us know through secure messengers when you would like this to happen. We will chase the Saracens, with the help of the Lord, the Pope, and the Great Khan.\"\u2014\u200a\nHonorius IV was hardly capable of acting on this invasion and could not muster the military support necessary to achieve this plan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23856", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23856", "title": "Paulinus of Nola", "text": "Christian bishop and saint\nPaulinus of Nola (; ; also anglicized as Pauline of Nola; c.\u2009354 \u2013 22 June 431) born Pontius Meropius Anicius Paulinus, was a Roman poet, writer, and senator who attained the ranks of suffect consul (c.\u2009377) and governor of Campania (c.\u2009380\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009381) but\u2014following the assassination of the emperor Gratian and under the influence of his Hispanic wife Therasia of Nola\u2014abandoned his career, was baptized as a Christian, and probably after Therasia's death became bishop of Nola in Campania. While there, he wrote poems in honor of his predecessor Saint\u00a0Felix and corresponded with other Christian leaders throughout the empire. He is credited with the introduction of bells to Christian worship and helped resolve the disputed election of Pope Boniface\u00a0I.\nHis renunciation of his wealth and station in favor of an ascetic and philanthropic life was held up as an example by many of his contemporaries\u2014including Augustine, Jerome, Martin, and Ambrose\u2014and he was subsequently venerated as a saint. His relics became a focus of pilgrimage, but were removed from Nola sometime between the 11th and 20th centuries. His feast day is observed on 22 June in both the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches. In Nola, the entire week around his feast day is celebrated as the Festival of the Lilies.\nLife.\nPontius Meropius Paulinus was born c.\u2009352 at Bordeaux, in southwestern France. He was from a notable senatorial family with estates in the Aquitaine province of France, northern Iberia, and southern Italy. Paulinus was a kinsman of Melania the Elder. He was educated in Bordeaux by his teacher, the poet Ausonius. \nAt some time during his boyhood he made a visit to the shrine of St Felix at Nola near Naples.\nHis normal career as a young member of the senatorial class did not last long. In 375, the Emperor Gratian succeeded his father Valentinian. Gratian made Paulinus suffect consul at Rome c.\u2009377, and appointed him governor of the southern Italian province of Campania c.\u2009380. Paulinus noted the Campanians' devotion to Saint Felix of Nola and built a road for pilgrims, as well as a hospice for the poor near the local shrine.\nIn 383 Gratian was assassinated at Lyon, France, and Paulinus went to Milan to attend the school of Ambrose. Around 384 he returned to Bordeaux. There he married Therasia, a Christian noblewoman from Barcelona. Paulinus was threatened with the charge of having murdered his brother. It is possible that an attempt was made to accuse him in order to confiscate his property. He was baptized by Bishop Delphinus of Bordeaux. He and his wife traveled to Iberia about 390. When they lost their only child eight days after birth they decided to withdraw from the world, and live a secluded religious life. Paulinus was close to both Pelagius and to the Pelagian writer Julian of Eclanum.\nIn 393 or 394, after some resistance from Paulinus, he was ordained a presbyter on Christmas Day by Lampius, Bishop of Barcelona. (This was similar to what had happened with Augustine of Hippo, who had been ordained against his protestations in the year 391 at the behest of a crowd cooperating with Bishop Valerius in the north African city of Hippo Regius.) However, there is some debate as to whether the ordination was canonical, since Paulinus received ordination \"at a leap\" (\"per saltum\"), without receiving minor orders first.\nPaulinus refused to remain in Barcelona, and in late spring of 395 he and his wife moved from Iberia to Nola in Campania where he remained until his death. Paulinus credited his conversion to Saint Felix, who was buried in Nola, and each year would write a poem in honor of him.\nThe great building works undertaken by Paulinus in 402\u2013403 were the crowning glory and ornament of the renovated Nola. He restored and improved the ancient basilica erected in the martyr's honour. He and Therasia also rebuilt a church commemorating Saint Felix, of great size and richly decorated, a monument of Christian art, with magnificent porticoes and fountains, for which a copious supply of water was brought from nearby Avella. Great crowds of pilgrims flocked to the martyr's tomb.\nIn January 406 following the peace after the defeat of Radagaisus, Paulinus invited a circle of guests including \nMelania the Younger and her husband and mother (Albina) and many other christians such as the Bishop of Beneventum, and where Melania wished to stay with all her household, though she left before 408.\nDuring these years Paulinus engaged in considerable epistolary dialogue with Jerome among others about monastic topics. \"Paulinus decided to invest his money for the poor and the church rather than rejecting it completely, which stands in contrast to other more severe contemporary views such as Jerome's\".\nTherasia died some time between 408 and 410, and shortly afterwards Paulinus received episcopal ordination. Around 410, Paulinus was chosen Bishop of Nola, where he served for twenty years. Like a growing number of aristocrats in the late 4th and early 5th centuries who were entering the clergy rather than taking up the more usual administrative careers in the imperial service, Paulinus spent a great deal of his money on his chosen church, city and ritual.\nPaulinus died at Nola on 22 June 431. The following year the presbyter Uranus wrote his \"On the Death of Paulinus\" (\"), an account of the death and character of Paulinus.\nInfluence.\nAs bishop of Nola, Paulinus is traditionally credited with the introduction of the use of bells in church services. One form of medieval handbell was known as the \" and medieval steeple bells were known as \"s\" from this supposed origin. However, Dr. Adolf Buse, professor at the Seminary of Cologne, showed that the use of bells in churches, an invention credited to Paulinus by tradition, is not due to him, nor even to the town of Nola.\nAlready during his governorship Paulinus had developed a fondness for the 3rd-century martyr, Felix of Nola. Felix was a minor saint of local importance and patronage whose tomb had been built within the local necropolis at Cimitile, just outside the town of Nola. As governor, Paulinus had widened the road to Cimitile and built a residence for travelers; it was at this site that Paulinus and Therasia took up residence. Nearby were a number of small chapels and at least one old basilica. Paulinus rebuilt the complex, constructing a brand new basilica to Felix and gathering to him a small monastic community. Paulinus wrote an annual hymn (\"natalicium\") in honor of Saint Felix for the feast day when processions of pilgrims were at their peak. In these hymns we can understand the personal relationship Paulinus felt between himself and Felix, his advocate in heaven. His poetry shares with much of the work of the early 5th century an ornateness of style that classicists of the 18th and 19th centuries found cloying and dismissed as decadent, though Paulinus' poems were highly regarded at the time and used as educational models.\nMany of Paulinus's letters to his contemporaries, including Ausonius and Sulpicius Severus in southern Gaul, Victricius of Rouen in northern Gaul, and Augustine in Africa, are preserved. Four letters from Paulinus to Augustine survive, and eight from Augustine to Paulinus. In one, Augustine invites Paulinus to visit Africa. As a publishing technique at that time, Augustine often sent copies of his works to Paulinus, to be copied and circulated in Italy.\nPaulinus may have been indirectly responsible for Augustine's \"Confessions\": Paulinus wrote to Alypius, Bishop of Thagaste and a close friend of Augustine, asking about his conversion and taking up of the ascetic life. Alypius's autobiographical response does not survive; Augustine's ostensible answer to that query is the \"Confessions\". Paulinus also wrote five letters to Delphinus and six to Amandus of Bordeaux.\n\"Paulinus' surviving letters and poems, many devoted to the feast day of Felix, reveal his attitudes and values, illuminate his social and spiritual relationships, preserve vivid traces of the literary and aesthetic evolution of Latin literature under the influence of Christian ideas, and document the emergence of the late antique cult of the saints.\"\nWe know about his buildings in honor of Saint Felix from literary and archaeological evidence, especially from his long letter to Sulpicius Severus describing the arrangement of the building and its decoration. He includes a detailed description of the apse mosaic over the main altar and gives the text for a long inscription he had written to be put on the wall under the image. By explaining how he intended the visitors to understand the image over the altar, Paulinus provided rare insight into the intentions of a patron of art in the later Empire. He explained his project in a Poem dedicated to another great catechist, St Nicetas of Remesiana, as he accompanied him on a visit to his basilicas: \"I now want you to contemplate the paintings that unfold in a long series on the walls of the painted porticos.\u00a0... It seemed to us useful to portray sacred themes in painting throughout the house of Felix, in the hope that when the peasants see the painted figure, these images will awaken interest in their astonished minds.\"\nIn later life Paulinus, by then a highly respected church authority, participated in multiple church synods investigating various ecclesiastical controversies of the time, including Pelagianism.\nLegend.\nGregory the Great recounts a popular story that alleges that when the Vandals raided Campania, a poor widow came to Paulinus for help when her only son had been carried off by the son-in-law of the Vandal king. Having exhausted his resources in ransoming other captives, Paulinus said, \"Such as I have I give thee\", and went to Africa to exchange places with the widow's son. There Paulinus was accepted in place of the widow's son, and employed as gardener. After a time the king found out that his son-in-law's slave was the great Bishop of Nola. He at once set him free, granting him also the freedom of all the captive townsmen of Nola. According to Pope Benedict XVI, \"the historical truth of this episode is disputed, but the figure of a Bishop with a great heart who knew how to make himself close to his people in the sorrowful trials of the barbarian invasions lives on.\"\nRelics.\nIn about 800 Prince Grimoald III of Benevento removed Paulinus's bones as relics.\nFrom the 11th century they rested at the church of Saint Adalbert, now Saint Bartholomew, on the island in the Tiber in Rome. In 1908 Pope Pius X permitted them to be translated to the new cathedral at Nola, where they were reinterred on 15 May 1909.\nThe bones are now found in the small Sicilian city of Sutera, where they dedicate a feast day, and conduct a procession for the saint at Easter each year.\nModern devotion to Saint Paulinus.\nThe people of modern-day Nola and the surrounding regions remain devoted to Saint Paulinus. His feast day is celebrated annually in Nola during \"La Festa dei Gigli\" (the Feast of the Lilies), in which Gigli and several large statues in honor of the saint, placed on towers, are carried upon the shoulders of the faithful around the city. In the United States the descendants of Italian immigrants from Nola and Brusciano continue the tradition in Brooklyn. This proud tradition is also kept alive in East Harlem, held on Giglio Way by the Giglio Society of East Harlem and on Long Island in West Hempstead with the Sons of San Paulino di Nola.\nPaulinus is also venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church, where his feast day commemorated on 23 January.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
