{"id": "21627", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21627", "title": "Nation state", "text": "Political term for a state that is based around a nation\nA nation state, or nation-state, is a political entity in which the state (a centralized political organization ruling over a population within a territory) and the nation (a community based on a common identity) are broadly or ideally congruent. \"Nation state\" is a more precise concept than \"country\" or \"state\", since a country or a state does not need to have a predominant national or ethnic group.\nA nation, sometimes used in the sense of a common ethnicity, may include a diaspora or refugees who live outside the nation-state; some dispersed nations (such as the Roma nation, for example) do not have a state where that ethnicity predominates. In a more general sense, a nation-state is simply a large, politically sovereign country or administrative territory. A nation-state may or may not be contrasted with:\nThis article mainly discusses the more specific definition of a nation-state as a typically sovereign country dominated by a particular ethnicity.\nComplexity.\nThe relationship between a nation (in the ethnic sense) and a state can be complex. The presence of a state can encourage ethnogenesis, and a group with a pre-existing ethnic identity can influence the drawing of territorial boundaries or argue for political legitimacy. This definition of a \"nation-state\" is not universally accepted. \"All attempts to develop terminological consensus around 'nation' failed\", concludes academic Valery Tishkov. Walker Connor discusses the impressions surrounding the characters of \"nation\", \"(sovereign) state\", \"nation-state\", and \"nationalism\". Connor, who gave the term \"ethnonationalism\" wide currency, also discusses the tendency to confuse nation and state and the treatment of all states as if nation states.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe origins and early history of nation-states are disputed. A major theoretical question is: \"Which came first, the nation or the nation-state?\" Scholars such as Steven Weber, David Woodward, Michel Foucault and Jeremy Black have advanced the hypothesis that the nation-state did not arise out of political ingenuity or an unknown undetermined source, nor was it a political invention; rather, it is an inadvertent by-product of 15th-century intellectual discoveries in political economy, capitalism, mercantilism, political geography, and geography combined with cartography and advances in map-making technologies. It was with these intellectual discoveries and technological advances that the nation-state arose.\nFor others, the nation existed first. Then nationalist movements arose for sovereignty, and the nation-state was created to meet that demand. Some \"modernization theories\" of nationalism see it as a product of government policies to unify and modernize an already existing state. Most theories see the nation-state as a 19th-century European phenomenon facilitated by developments such as state-mandated education, mass literacy, and mass media. However, historians also note the early emergence of a relatively unified state and identity in Portugal and the Dutch Republic, and some date the emergence of nations even earlier. Adrian Hastings, for instance, argued that Ancient Israel as depicted in the Hebrew Bible \"gave the world the model of nationhood, and even nation-statehood\"; however, after the fall of Jerusalem, the Jews lost this status for nearly two millennia, while still preserving their national identity until \"the more inevitable rise of Zionism\", in modern times, which sought to establish a nation-state.\nEric Hobsbawm argues that the establishment of a French nation was not the result of French nationalism, which would not emerge until the end of the 19th century, but rather the policies implemented by pre-existing French states. Many of these reforms were implemented since the French Revolution, at which time only half of the French people spoke some French\u00a0\u2013 with only a quarter of those speaking the version of it found in literature and places of learning. As the number of Italian speakers in Italy was even lower at the time of Italian unification, similar arguments have been made regarding the modern Italian nation, with both the French and the Italian states promoting the replacement of various regional dialects and languages with standardized dialects. The introduction of conscription and the Third Republic's 1880s laws on public instruction facilitated the creation of a national identity under this theory.\nSome nation-states, such as Germany and Italy, came into existence at least partly as a result of political campaigns by nationalists during the 19th century. In both cases the territory was previously divided among other states, some very small. At first, the sense of common identity was a cultural movement, such as in the \"V\u00f6lkisch\" movement in German-speaking states, which rapidly acquired a political significance. In these cases the nationalist sentiment and the nationalist movement precede the unification of the German and Italian nation-states.\nHistorians Hans Kohn, Liah Greenfeld, Philip White, and others have classified nations such as Germany or Italy, where they believe cultural unification preceded state unification, as \"ethnic nations\" or \"ethnic nationalities\". However, \"state-driven\" national unifications, such as in France, England, or China, are more likely to flourish in multiethnic societies, producing a traditional national heritage of \"civic nations\" or \"territory-based nationalities\".\nThe idea of a nation-state was and is associated with the rise of the modern system of states, often called the \"Westphalian system\", following the Treaty of Westphalia (1648). The balance of power, which characterized that system, depended for its effectiveness upon clearly defined, centrally controlled, independent entities, whether empires or nation states, which recognize each other's sovereignty and territory. The Westphalian system did not create the nation-state, but the nation-state meets the criteria for its component states (by assuming that there is no disputed territory). Before the Westphalian system, the closest geopolitical system was the \"Chanyuan system\" established in East Asia in 1005 through the Treaty of Chanyuan, which, like the Westphalian peace treaties, designated national borders between the independent regimes of China's Song dynasty and the semi-nomadic Liao dynasty. This system was copied and developed in East Asia in the following centuries until the establishment of the pan-Eurasian Mongol Empire in the 13th century.\nThe nation-state received a philosophical underpinning in the era of Romanticism, at first as the \"natural\" expression of the individual peoples (romantic nationalism: see Johann Gottlieb Fichte's conception of the \"Volk\", later opposed by Ernest Renan). The increasing emphasis during the 19th century on the ethnic and racial origins of the nation led to a redefinition of the nation-state in these terms. Racism, which in Boulainvilliers's theories was inherently antipatriotic and antinationalist, joined itself with colonialist imperialism and \"continental imperialism\", most notably in pan-Germanic and pan-Slavic movements.\nThe relationship between racism and ethnic nationalism reached its height in the 20th century through fascism and Nazism. The specific combination of \"nation\" (\"people\") and \"state\" expressed in such terms as the \"v\u00f6lkischer Staat\" and implemented in laws such as the 1935 Nuremberg laws made fascist states such as early Nazi Germany qualitatively different from non-fascist nation-states. Minorities were not considered part of the people (\"Volk\") and were consequently denied to have an authentic or legitimate role in such a state. In Germany, neither Jews nor the Roma were considered part of the people, and both were specifically targeted for persecution. German nationality law defined \"German\" based on German ancestry, excluding \"all\" non-Germans from the people.\nIn recent years, a nation-state's claim to absolute sovereignty within its borders has been criticized. A global political system based on international agreements and supra-national blocs characterized the post-war era. Non-state actors, such as international corporations and non-governmental organizations, are widely seen as eroding the economic and political power of nation-states.\nAccording to Andreas Wimmer and Yuval Feinstein, nation-states tended to emerge when power shifts allowed nationalists to overthrow existing regimes or absorb existing administrative units. Xue Li and Alexander Hicks link the frequency of nation-state creation to processes of diffusion that emanate from international organizations.\nBefore the nation-state.\nIn Europe, during the 18th century, the classic non-national states were the \"multiethnic\" empires, the Austrian Empire, the Kingdom of France (and its empire), the Kingdom of Hungary, the Russian Empire, the Portuguese Empire, the Spanish Empire, the Ottoman Empire, the British Empire, the Dutch Empire and smaller nations at what would now be called sub-state level. The multi-ethnic empire was a monarchy, usually absolute, ruled by a king, emperor or sultan. The population belonged to many ethnic groups, and they spoke many languages. The empire was dominated by one ethnic group, and their language was usually the language of public administration. The ruling dynasty was usually, but not always, from that group.\nThis type of state is not specifically European: such empires existed in Asia, Africa and the Americas. Chinese dynasties, such as the Tang dynasty, the Yuan dynasty, and the Qing dynasty, were all multiethnic regimes governed by a ruling ethnic group. In the three examples, their ruling ethnic groups were the Han-Chinese, Mongols, and the Manchus. In the Muslim world, immediately after Muhammad died in 632, Caliphates were established. Caliphates were Islamic states under the leadership of a political-religious successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad. These polities developed into multi-ethnic trans-national empires. The Ottoman sultan, Selim I (1512\u20131520) reclaimed the title of caliph, which had been in dispute and asserted by a diversity of rulers and \"shadow caliphs\" in the centuries of the Abbasid-Mamluk Caliphate since the Mongols' sacking of Baghdad and the killing of the last Abbasid Caliph in Baghdad, Iraq 1258.\nThe Ottoman Caliphate as an office of the Ottoman Empire was abolished under Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk in 1924 as part of Atat\u00fcrk's Reforms.\nSome of the smaller European states were not so ethnically diverse but were also dynastic states ruled by a royal house. Their territory could expand by royal intermarriage or merge with another state when the dynasty merged. In some parts of Europe, notably Germany, minimal territorial units existed. They were recognized by their neighbours as independent and had their government and laws. Some were ruled by princes or other hereditary rulers; some were governed by bishops or abbots. Because they were so small, however, they had no separate language or culture: the inhabitants shared the language of the surrounding region.\nIn some cases, these states were overthrown by nationalist uprisings in the 19th century. Liberal ideas of free trade played a role in German unification, which was preceded by a customs union, the Zollverein. However, the Austro-Prussian War and the German alliances in the Franco-Prussian War were decisive in the unification. The Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire broke up after the First World War, but the Russian Empire was replaced by the Soviet Union in most of its multinational territory after the Russian Civil War.\nA few of the smaller states survived: the independent principalities of Liechtenstein, Andorra, Monaco, and the Republic of San Marino. (Vatican City is a special case. All of the larger Papal States save the Vatican itself were occupied and absorbed by Italy by 1870. The resulting Roman Question was resolved with the rise of the modern state under the 1929 Lateran treaties between Italy and the Holy See.)\nCharacteristics.\n\"Legitimate states that govern effectively and dynamic industrial economies are widely regarded today [2004] as the defining characteristics of a modern nation-state.\"\nNation-states have their characteristics differing from pre-national states. For a start, they have a different attitude to their territory compared to dynastic monarchies: it is semisacred and nontransferable. No nation would swap territory with other states simply, for example, because the king's daughter married. They have a different type of border, in principle, defined only by the national group's settlement area. However, many nation-states also sought natural borders (rivers, mountain ranges). They are constantly changing in population size and power because of the limited restrictions of their borders.\nThe most noticeable characteristic is the degree to which nation-states use the state as an instrument of national unity in economic, social and cultural life.\nThe nation-state promoted economic unity by abolishing internal customs and tolls. In Germany, that process, the creation of the Zollverein, preceded formal national unity. Nation states typically have a policy to create and maintain national transportation infrastructure, facilitating trade and travel. In 19th-century Europe, the expansion of the rail transport networks was at first largely a matter for private railway companies but gradually came under the control of the national governments. The French rail network, with its main lines radiating from Paris to all corners of France, is often seen as a reflection of the centralised French nation-state, which directed its construction. Nation states continue to build, for instance, specifically national motorway networks. Specifically, transnational infrastructure programmes, such as the Trans-European Networks, are a recent innovation.\nThe nation-states typically had a more centralised and uniform public administration than their imperial predecessors: they were smaller, and the population was less diverse. (The internal diversity of the Ottoman Empire, for instance, was very great.) After the 19th-century triumph of the nation-state in Europe, regional identity was subordinate to national identity in regions such as Alsace-Lorraine, Catalonia, Brittany and Corsica. In many cases, the regional administration was also subordinated to the central (national) government. This process was partially reversed from the 1970s onward, with the introduction of various forms of regional autonomy, in formerly centralised states such as Spain or Italy.\nThe most apparent impact of the nation-state, as compared to its non-national predecessors, is creating a uniform national culture through state policy. The model of the nation-state implies that its population constitutes a nation, united by a common descent, a common language and many forms of shared culture. When implied unity was absent, the nation-state often tried to create it. It promoted a uniform national language through language policy. The creation of national systems of compulsory primary education and a relatively uniform curriculum in secondary schools was the most effective instrument in the spread of the national languages. The schools also taught national history, often in a propagandistic and mythologised version, and (especially during conflicts) some nation-states still teach this kind of history.\nLanguage and cultural policy was sometimes hostile, aimed at suppressing non-national elements. Language prohibitions were sometimes used to accelerate the adoption of national languages and the decline of minority languages (see examples: Anglicisation, Bulgarization, Croatization, Czechization, Dutchification, Francisation, Germanisation, Hellenization, Hispanicization, Italianization, Lithuanization, Magyarisation, Polonisation, Russification, Serbization, Slovakisation, Swedification, Turkification).\nIn some cases, these policies triggered bitter conflicts and further ethnic separatism. But where it worked, the cultural uniformity and homogeneity of the population increased. Conversely, the cultural divergence at the border became sharper: in theory, a uniform French identity extends from the Atlantic coast to the Rhine, and on the other bank of the Rhine, a uniform German identity begins. Both sides have divergent language policy and educational systems to enforce that model.\nIn practice.\nThe notion of a unifying \"national identity\" also extends to countries that host multiple ethnic or language groups, such as India. For example, Switzerland is constitutionally a confederation of cantons and has four official languages. Still, it also has a \"Swiss\" national identity, a national history and a classic national hero, Wilhelm Tell.\nInnumerable conflicts have arisen where political boundaries did not correspond with ethnic or cultural boundaries.\nAfter World War II in the Josip Broz Tito era, nationalism was appealed to for uniting South Slav peoples. Later in the 20th century, after the break-up of the Soviet Union, leaders appealed to ancient ethnic feuds or tensions that ignited conflict between the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, as well as Bosniaks, Montenegrins and Macedonians, eventually breaking up the long collaboration of peoples. Ethnic cleansing was carried out in the Balkans, destroying the formerly socialist republic and producing the civil wars in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992\u201395, resulting in mass population displacements and segregation that radically altered what was once a highly diverse and intermixed ethnic makeup of the region. These conflicts were mainly about creating a new political framework of states, each of which would be ethnically and politically homogeneous. Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks insisted they were ethnically distinct, although many communities had a long history of intermarriage.\nBelgium is a classic example of a state that is not a nation-state. The state was formed by secession from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1830, whose neutrality and integrity was protected by the Treaty of London 1839; thus, it served as a buffer state after the Napoleonic Wars between the European powers France, Prussia (after 1871 the German Empire) and the United Kingdom until World War I, when the Germans breached its neutrality. Currently, Belgium is divided between the Flemings in the north, the French-speaking population in the south, and the German-speaking population in the east. The Flemish population in the north speaks Dutch, the Walloon population in the south speaks either French or, in the east of Li\u00e8ge Province, German. The Brussels population speaks French or Dutch.\nThe Flemish identity is also cultural, and there is a strong separatist movement espoused by the political parties, the right-wing Vlaams Belang and the New Flemish Alliance. The Francophone Walloon identity of Belgium is linguistically distinct and regionalist. There is also unitary Belgian nationalism, several versions of a Greater Netherlands ideal, and a German-speaking community of Belgium annexed from Germany in 1920 and re-annexed by Germany in 1940\u20131944. However, these ideologies are all very marginal and politically insignificant during elections.\nChina covers a large geographic area and uses the concept of \"Zhonghua minzu\" or Chinese nationality, in the sense of ethnic groups. Still, it also officially recognizes the majority Han ethnic group which accounts for over 90% of the population, and no fewer than 55 ethnic national minorities.\nAccording to Philip G. Roeder, Moldova is an example of a Soviet-era \"segment-state\" (Moldavian SSR), where the \"nation-state project of the segment-state trumped the nation-state project of prior statehood. In Moldova, despite strong agitation from university faculty and students for reunification with Romania, the nation-state project forged within the Moldavian SSR trumped the project for a return to the interwar nation-state project of Greater Romania.\" See Controversy over linguistic and ethnic identity in Moldova for further details.\nSpecific cases.\nIsrael.\nEstablished in May 1948 as a homeland for the Jewish people, the State of Israel's Basic Laws defines itself as a center of Jewish cultural and national identity, while maintaining citizenship and legal rights for people of all religious and ethnic backgrounds. The (2018) explicitly specifies the nature of the State of Israel as the nation-state of the Jewish people. According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, 75.7% of Israel's population are Jews. Arabs, who make up 20.4% of the population, are the largest ethnic minority in Israel. Israel also has very small communities of Armenians, Circassians, Assyrians, Samaritans. There are also some non-Jewish spouses of Israeli Jews. However, these communities are very small, and usually number only in the hundreds or thousands.\nKingdom of the Netherlands.\nThe Kingdom of the Netherlands presents an unusual example in which one kingdom represents four distinct countries. The four countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands are:\nEach is expressly designated as a \"land\" in Dutch law by the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Unlike the German and the Austrian , is consistently translated as \"countries\" by the Dutch government.\nSpain.\nWhile historical monarchies often brought together different kingdoms/territories/ethnic groups under the same crown, in modern nation states political elites seek a uniformity of the population, leading to state nationalism. In the case of the Christian territories of the future Spain, neighboring Al-Andalus, there was an early perception of ethnicity, faith and shared territory in the Middle Ages (13th\u201314th centuries), as documented by the Chronicle of Muntaner in the proposal of the Castilian king to the other Christian kings of the peninsula: \"if these four Kings of Spain whom he named, who are of one flesh and blood, held together, little need they fear all the other powers of the world\". After the dynastic union of the Catholic Monarchs in the 15th century, the Spanish Monarchy ruled over different kingdoms, each with its own cultural, linguistic and political particularities, and the kings had to swear by the Laws of each territory before the respective Parliaments. Forming the Spanish Empire, at this time the Hispanic Monarchy had its maximum territorial expansion.\nAfter the War of the Spanish Succession, rooted in the political position of the Count-Duke of Olivares and the absolutism of Philip V, the assimilation of the Crown of Aragon by the Castilian Crown through the Decrees of Nueva Planta was the first step in the creation of the Spanish nation-state. As in other contemporary European states, political union was the first step in the creation of the Spanish nation-state, in this case not on a uniform ethnic basis, but through the imposition of the political and cultural characteristics of the dominant ethnic group, in this case the Castilians, over those of other ethnic groups, who became national minorities to be assimilated. In fact, since the political unification of 1714, Spanish assimilation policies towards Catalan-speaking territories (Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands, part of Aragon) and other national minorities, as Basques and Galicians, have been a historical constant.\nThe process of assimilation began with secret instructions to the corregidores of the Catalan territory: they \"will take the utmost care to introduce the Castilian language, for which purpose he will give the most temperate and disguised measures so that the effect is achieved, without the care being noticed.\" From there, actions in the service of assimilation, discreet or aggressive, were continued, and reached to the last detail, such as, in 1799, the Royal Certificate forbidding anyone to \"represent, sing and dance pieces that were not in Spanish.\" These nationalist policies, sometimes very aggressive, and still in force, have been, and still are, the seed of repeated territorial conflicts within the State.\nAlthough official Spanish history describes a \"natural\" decline of the Catalan language and increasing replacement by Spanish between the 16th and 19th centuries, especially among the upper classes, a survey of language usage in 1807, commissioned by Napoleon, indicates that except in the royal courts, Spanish is absent from everyday life. It is indicated that Catalan \"is taught in schools, printed and spoken, not only among the lower class, but also among people of first quality, also in social gatherings, as in visits and congresses\", indicating that it is spoken everywhere \"except in the royal courts\". He also indicates that Catalan is also spoken \"in the Kingdom of Valencia, in the islands of Mallorca, Menorca, Ibiza, Sardinia, Corsica and much of Sicily, in the Vall of Aran and Cerda\u00f1a\".\nThe nationalization process accelerated in the 19th century, in parallel to the origin of Spanish nationalism, the social, political and ideological movement that tried to shape a Spanish national identity based on the Castilian model, in conflict with the other historical nations of the State. Politicians of the time were aware that despite the aggressive policies pursued up to that time, the uniform and monocultural \"Spanish nation\" did not exist, as indicated in 1835 by Antonio Alcal\u00e0 Galiano, when in the Cortes del Estatuto Real he defended the effort \"To make the Spanish nation a nation that neither is nor has been until now.\" In 1906, the Catalanist party Solidaritat Catalana was founded to try to mitigate the economically and culturally oppressive treatment of Spain towards the Catalans. One of the responses of Spanish nationalism came from the military state with statements such as that of the publication La Correspondencia militar: \"The Catalan problem is not solved, well, by freedom, but by restriction; not by palliatives and pacts, but by iron and fire\". Another came from important Spanish intellectuals, such as Pio Baroja and Blasco Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez, calling the Catalans \"Jews\", considered a serious insult at that time when racism was gaining strength.\nBuilding the nation (as in France, it was the state that created the nation, and not the opposite process) is an ideal that the Spanish elites constantly reiterated, and, one hundred years later than Alcal\u00e1 Galiano, for example, we can also find it in the mouth of the fascist Jos\u00e9 Pemart\u00edn, who admired the German and Italian modeling policies:\"There is an intimate and decisive dualism, both in Italian fascism and in German National Socialism. On the one hand, the Hegelian doctrine of the absolutism of the state is felt. The State originates in the Nation, educates and shapes the mentality of the individual; is, in Mussolini's words, the soul of the soul\u00bb And will be found again two hundred years later, from the socialist Josep Borrell: The modern history of Spain is an unfortunate history that meant that we did not consolidate a modern State. Independenceists think that the nation makes the State. I think the opposite. The State makes the nation. A strong State, which imposes its language, culture, education. The turn of the 20th century, and the first half of that century, have seen the most ethnic violence, coinciding with a racism that even came to identify states with races; in the case of Spain, with a supposed Spanish race sublimated in Castilian, of which national minorities were degenerate forms, and the first of those that needed to be exterminated. There were even public proposals for the repression of whole Catalonia, and even the extermination of Catalans, such as that of Juan Pujol, Head of Press and Propaganda of the Junta de Defensa Nacional during the Spanish Civil War, in \"La Voz de Espa\u00f1a\", or that of Queipo de Llano, in a radio address in 1936, among others.\nThe influence of Spanish nationalism could be found in a pogrom in Argentina, during the Tragic Week, in 1919. It was called to attack Jews and Catalans indiscriminately, possibly because the influence of Spanish nationalism, which at the time described Catalans as a Semitic ethnicity.\nAlso, one can find discourses on the alienation of Catalan speakers, such as, for example, an article entitled \u00abCatalu\u00f1a biling\u00fce\u00bb, by Men\u00e9ndez Pidal, in which he defends the Romanones decree against the Catalan language, published in El Imparcial, on 15 December 1902:\u00ab\u2026 There they will see that the Courts of the Catalan-Aragonese Confederation never had Catalan as their official language; that the kings of Aragon, even those of the Catalan dynasty, used Catalan only in Catalonia, and used Spanish not only in the Cortes of Aragon, but also in foreign relations, the same with Castile or Navarre as with the infidel kings of Granada, from Africa or Asia, because even in the most important days of Catalonia, Spanish prevailed as the language of the Aragonese kingdom and Catalan was reserved for the peculiar affairs of the Catalan county...\"or the article \"Los Catalanes. A las Cortes Constituyentes \u00bb, appeared in several newspapers, among others: El Dia de Alicante, June 23, 1931, El Porvenir Castellano and El Noticiero de Soria, July 2, 1931, in the Heraldo de Almeria on June 4, 1931, sent by the \"Pro-Justice Committee\", with a post office box in Madrid:\"The Catalanists have recently declared that they are not Spanish, nor do they want to be, nor can they be. They have also been saying for a long time that they are an oppressed, enslaved, exploited people. It is imperative to do them justice... That they return to Phenicia or that they go wherever they want to admit them. When the Catalan tribes saw Spain and settled in the Spanish territory that is now occupied by the provinces of Barcelona, Gerona, L\u00e9rida and Tarragona, how little they imagined that the case of the captivity of the tribes of Israel in Egypt would be repeated there! !... Let us respect his most holy will. They are eternally inadaptable... Their cowardice and selfishness leaves them no room for fraternity... So, we propose to the Constituent Cortes the expulsion of the Catalanists... You are free! The Republic opens wide the doors of Spain, your prison. go away Get out of here. Go back to Phenicia, or go wherever you want, how big is the world.\"The main scapegoat of Spanish nationalism is the non-Spanish languages, which over the last three hundred years have been tried to be replaced by Spanish with hundreds of laws and regulations, but also with acts of great violence, such as during the civil war. For example, the statements of Queipo de Llano can be found in the article entitled \"Against Catalonia, the Israel of the Modern World\", published in the Diario Palentino on November 26, 1936, where it is dropped that in America Catalans are considered a race of Jews, because they use the same procedures that the Hebrews perform in all the nations of the Globe. And considering the Catalans as Hebrews and considering his anti-Semitism \"Our struggle is not a civil war, but a war for Western civilization against the Jewish world,\" it is not surprising that Queipo de Llano expressed his anti-Catalan intentions: \"When the war is over, Pompeu Fabra and his works will be dragged along the Ramblas\" (it was not talk to talk, the house of Pompeu Fabra, the standardizer of Catalan language, was raided and his huge personal library burned in the middle of the street. Pompeu Fabra was able to escape into exile).\nAnother example of fascist aggression towards the Catalan language is pointed out by Paul Preston in \"The Spanish Holocaust\", given that during the civil war it practically led to an ethnic conflict:\"In the days following the occupation of Lleida (\u2026), the republican prisoners identified as Catalans were executed without trial. Anyone who heard them speak Catalan was very likely to be arrested. The arbitrary brutality of the anti-Catalan repression reached such a point that Franco himself had to issue an order ordering that mistakes that could later be regretted be avoided \".\n\"There are examples of the murder of peasants for no other apparent reason than that of speaking Catalan\"After a possible attempt at ethnic cleansing, the biopolitical imposition of Spanish during the Franco dictatorship, to the point of being considered an attempt at cultural genocide, democracy consolidated an apparent asymmetric regime of bilingualism of sorts, wherein the Spanish government has employed a system of laws that favored Spanish over Catalan, which becomes the weaker of the two languages, and therefore, in the absence of other states where it is spoken, is doomed to extinction in the medium or short term. In the same vein, its use in the Spanish Congress is prevented, and it is prevented from achieving official status Europe, unlike less spoken languages such as Gaelic. In other institutional areas, such as justice, Plataforma per la Llengua has denounced Catalanophobia. The association Soberania i Just\u00edcia have also denounced it in an act in the European Parliament. It also takes the form of linguistic secessionism, originally advocated by the Spanish extreme right and which has finally been adopted by the Spanish government itself and state bodies.\nIn November 2005, Omnium Cultural organized a meeting of Catalan and Madrid intellectuals in the C\u00edrculo de bellas artes in Madrid to show support for ongoing reform of Catalan Statute of Autonomy, which sought to resolve territorial tensions, and among other things better protect the Catalan language. On the Catalan side, a flight was made with one hundred representatives of the cultural, civic, intellectual, artistic and sporting world of Catalonia, but on the Spanish side, except Santiago Carrillo, a politician from the Second Republic, did not attend any more. The subsequent failure of the statutory reform with respect to its objectives opened the door to the growth of Catalan sovereignty.\nApart from language discrimination by public officials, e.g. in the hospitals, the prohibition until September 2023 (47 years after Franco's death) of using the Catalan language in state institutions such as Court, despite being the former Crown of Aragon, with three Catalan-speaking territories, one of the co-founders of the current Spanish state, is nothing more than the continuation of the foreignization of Catalan-speaking people from the first third of the 20th century, in full swing of state racism and fascism. It also can be pointed the linguistic secessionism, originally advocated by the Spanish far right and which has finally been adopted by the Spanish government itself and state bodies. By fragmenting Catalan language into as many languages as territories, it becomes inoperative, economically suffocated, and becomes a political toy in the hands of territorial politicians.\nSusceptible to be classified as an ethnic democracy, the Spanish State currently only recognizes the Romani as a national minority, excluding Catalans (and, of course, Valencians and Balearic), Basques and Galicians. However, it is evident to any external observer that there are social diversities within the Spanish State that qualify as manifestations of national minorities, such as, for example, the existence of the main three linguistic minorities in their ancestral territories.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom is an unusual example of a nation state due to its \"countries within a country\". The United Kingdom is formed by the union of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, but it is a unitary state formed initially by the merger of two independent kingdoms, the Kingdom of England (which already included Wales) and the Kingdom of Scotland, but the Treaty of Union (1707) that set out the agreed terms has ensured the continuation of distinct features of each state, including separate legal systems and separate national churches.\nIn 2003, the British Government described the United Kingdom as \"countries within a country\". While the Office for National Statistics and others describe the United Kingdom as a \"nation state\", others, including a then Prime Minister, describe it as a \"multinational state\", and the term Home Nations is used to describe the four national teams that represent the four nations of the United Kingdom (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales). Some refer to it as a \"Union State\".\nMinorities.\nThe most obvious deviation from the ideal of \"one nation, one state\" is the presence of minorities, especially ethnic minorities, which are clearly not members of the majority nation. An ethnic nationalist definition of a nation is necessarily exclusive: ethnic nations typically do not have open membership. In most cases, there is a clear idea that surrounding nations are different, and that includes members of those nations who live on the \"wrong side\" of the border. Historical examples of groups who have been specifically singled out as \"outsiders\" are the Roma and Jews in Europe.\nNegative responses to minorities within the nation state have ranged from cultural assimilation enforced by the state, to expulsion, persecution, violence, and extermination. The assimilation policies are usually enforced by the state, but violence against minorities is not always state-initiated: it can occur in the form of mob violence such as lynching or pogroms. Nation states are responsible for some of the worst historical examples of violence against minorities not considered part of the nation.\nHowever, many nation states accept specific minorities as being part of the nation, and the term \"national minority\" is often used in this sense. The Sorbs in Germany are an example: for centuries they have lived in German-speaking states, surrounded by a much larger ethnic German population, and they have no other historical territory. They are now generally considered to be part of the German nation and are accepted as such by the Federal Republic of Germany, which constitutionally guarantees their cultural rights. Of the thousands of ethnic and cultural minorities in nation states across the world, only a few have this level of acceptance and protection.\nMulticulturalism is an official policy in some states, establishing the ideal of coexisting existence among multiple and separate ethnic, cultural, and linguistic groups. Other states prefer the interculturalism (or \"melting pot\" approach) alternative to multiculturalism, citing problems with latter as promoting self-segregation tendencies among minority groups, challenging national cohesion, polarizing society in groups that can't relate to one another, generating problems in regard to minorities and immigrants' fluency in the national language of use and integration with the rest of society (generating hate and persecution against them from the \"otherness\" they would generate in such a case according to its adherents), without minorities having to give up certain parts of their culture before being absorbed into a now changed majority culture by their contribution. Many nations have laws protecting minority rights.\nWhen national boundaries that do not match ethnic boundaries are drawn, such as in the Balkans and Central Asia, ethnic tension, massacres and even genocide, sometimes has occurred historically (see Bosnian genocide and 2010 South Kyrgyzstan ethnic clashes).\nIrredentism.\nIn principle, the border of a nation state would extend far enough to include all the members of the nation, and all of the national homeland. Again, in practice, some of them always live on the 'wrong side' of the border. Part of the national homeland may be there too, and it may be governed by the 'wrong' nation. The response to the non-inclusion of territory and population may take the form of irredentism: demands to annex \"unredeemed\" territory and incorporate it into the nation state.\nIrredentist claims are usually based on the fact that an identifiable part of the national group lives across the border. However, they can include claims to territory where no members of that nation live at present, because they lived there in the past, the national language is spoken in that region, the national culture has influenced it, geographical unity with the existing territory, or a wide variety of other reasons. Past grievances are usually involved and can cause revanchism.\nIt is sometimes difficult to distinguish irredentism from pan-nationalism, since both claim that all members of an ethnic and cultural nation belong in one specific state. Pan-nationalism is less likely to specify the nation ethnically. For instance, variants of Pan-Germanism have different ideas about what constituted Greater Germany, including the confusing term \"Grossdeutschland\", which, in fact, implied the inclusion of huge Slavic minorities from the Austro-Hungarian Empire.\nTypically, irredentist demands are at first made by members of non-state nationalist movements. When they are adopted by a state, they typically result in tensions, and actual attempts at annexation are always considered a \"casus belli\", a cause for war. In many cases, such claims result in long-term hostile relations between neighbouring states. Irredentist movements typically circulate maps of the claimed national territory, the \"greater\" nation state. That territory, which is often much larger than the existing state, plays a central role in their propaganda.\nIrredentism should not be confused with claims to overseas colonies, which are not generally considered part of the national homeland. Some French overseas colonies would be an exception: French rule in Algeria unsuccessfully treated the colony as a \"d\u00e9partement\" of France.\nFuture.\nIt has been speculated by both proponents of globalization and various science fiction writers that the concept of a nation state may disappear with the ever-increasing interconnectedness of the world. Such ideas are sometimes expressed around concepts of a world government. Another possibility is a move into communal anarchy or zero world government, in which nation states no longer exist.\nClash of civilizations.\nThe theory of the clash of civilizations lies in direct contrast to cosmopolitan theories about an ever more connected world that no longer requires nation states. According to political scientist Samuel P. Huntington, people's cultural and religious identities will be the primary source of conflict in the post\u2013Cold War world.\nThe theory was originally formulated in a 1992 lecture at the American Enterprise Institute, which was then developed in a 1993 \"Foreign Affairs\" article titled \"The Clash of Civilizations?\", in response to Francis Fukuyama's 1992 book, \"The End of History and the Last Man\". Huntington later expanded his thesis in a 1996 book \"The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order\".\nHuntington began his thinking by surveying the diverse theories about the nature of global politics in the post\u2013Cold War period. Some theorists and writers argued that human rights, liberal democracy and capitalist free market economics had become the only remaining ideological alternative for nations in the post\u2013Cold War world. Specifically, Francis Fukuyama, in \"The End of History and the Last Man\", argued that the world had reached a Hegelian \"end of history\".\nHuntington believed that while the age of ideology had ended, the world had reverted only to a normal state of affairs characterized by cultural conflict. In his thesis, he argued that the primary axis of conflict in the future will be along cultural and religious lines.\nAs an extension, he posits that the concept of different civilizations, as the highest rank of cultural identity, will become increasingly useful in analyzing the potential for conflict.\nIn the 1993 \"Foreign Affairs\" article, Huntington writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSandra Joireman suggests that Huntington may be characterised as a neo-primordialist, as, while he sees people as having strong ties to their ethnicity, he does not believe that these ties have always existed.\nHistoriography.\nHistorians often look to the past to find the origins of a particular nation state. Indeed, they often put so much emphasis on the importance of the nation state in modern times, that they distort the history of earlier periods in order to emphasize the question of origins. Lansing and English argue that much of the medieval history of Europe was structured to follow the historical winners\u2014especially the nation states that emerged around Paris and London. Important developments that did not directly lead to a nation state get neglected, they argue:\none effect of this approach has been to privilege historical winners, aspects of medieval Europe that became important in later centuries, above all the nation state... Arguably the liveliest cultural innovation in the 13th century was the Mediterranean, centered on Frederick II's polyglot court and administration in Palermo...Sicily and the Italian South in later centuries suffered a long slide into overtaxed poverty and marginality. Textbook narratives, therefore, focus not on medieval Palermo, with its Muslim and Jewish bureaucracies and Arabic-speaking monarch, but on the historical winners, Paris and London.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21628", "revid": "39150892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21628", "title": "Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille", "text": "French astronomer and geodesist\nAbb\u00e9 Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille (; 15 March 1713\u00a0\u2013 21 March 1762), formerly sometimes spelled de la Caille, was a French astronomer and geodesist who named 14 out of the 88 constellations. From 1750 to 1754, he studied the sky at the Cape of Good Hope in present-day South Africa. Lacaille observed over 10,000 stars using a refracting telescope.\nBiography.\nBorn at Rumigny in the Ardennes in eastern France, he attended school in Mantes-sur-Seine (now Mantes-la-Jolie). Afterwards, he studied rhetoric and philosophy at the and then theology at the Coll\u00e8ge de Navarre. He was left destitute in 1731 by the death of his father, who had held a post in the household of the duchess of Vend\u00f4me. However, he was supported in his studies by the Duc de Bourbon, his father's former patron.\nAfter he graduated, he did not accept ordination as a priest but took deacon's orders, becoming an Abb\u00e9. He concentrated thereafter on science, and, through the patronage of Jacques Cassini, obtained employment, first in surveying the coast from Nantes to Bayonne, then, in 1739, in remeasuring the French meridian arc, for which he is honoured with a pyramid at Juvisy-sur-Orge. The success of this difficult operation, which occupied two years, and achieved the correction of the anomalous result published by Jacques Cassini in 1718, was mainly due to Lacaille's industry and skill. He was rewarded by admission to the Royal Academy of Sciences and an appointment as professor of mathematics in the Mazarin college of the University of Paris, where he constructed a small observatory fitted for his own use. He was the author of a number of influential textbooks and a firm advocate of Newtonian gravitational theory. His students included Antoine Lavoisier and Jean Sylvain Bailly, both of whom were later guillotined during the French Revolution.\nVoyage to the Cape of Good Hope.\nHis desire to determine the distances of the planets trigonometrically, using the longest possible baseline, led him to propose, in 1750, an expedition to the Cape of Good Hope. This was officially sanctioned by Roland-Michel Barrin de La Galissoni\u00e8re. There, he constructed an observatory on the shore of Table Bay with the support of the Dutch Governor Ryk Tulbagh. The primary result of his two-year stay was the observations of nearly 10,000 southern stars, the production of which required observing every night for over a year. In the course of his survey he took note of 42 nebulous objects. He also achieved his aim of determining the lunar and solar parallaxes (Mars serving as an intermediary). This work required near-simultaneous observations from Europe which were carried out by J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande.\nHis southern catalogue, called \"Coelum Australe Stelliferum\", was published posthumously in 1763. He found it necessary to introduce 14 new constellations which have since become standard. One of these was Mons Mensae, the only constellation named after a terrestrial feature (the Table Mountain). An 1890 study of this catalogue by B. A. Gould found a considerable number of errors.\nWhile at the Cape, Lacaille performed an arc measurement to determine the radius of the Earth in the southern hemisphere. He set out a baseline in the Swartland plain north of present-day Darling. Using triangulation he then measured a 137\u00a0km arc of meridian between Cape Town and present-day Aurora, determining the astronomical latitudes of the end points by means of astronomical-geodetic observations. There is a memorial to his work at a location near Aurora, pictured here. His result suggested that the Earth was lengthened (prolate) instead of flattened (oblate) towards the south pole. George Everest, of the Indian Survey, while recuperating from an illness at the Cape nearly seventy years later, suggested that Lacaille's latitude observations had been affected by the deflection of the vertical, caused by gravitational attraction of Table Mountain at the southern end and by the Piketberg Mountain at the northern. In 1838, Thomas Maclear, who was Astronomer Royal at the Cape, repeated the measurements over a longer baseline (Maclear's arc measurement) and ultimately confirmed Everest's conjecture. Maclear's Beacon was erected on the Table Mountain in Cape Town to help with the verification.\nComputing.\nDuring his voyage to the southern hemisphere as a passenger on the vessel \"Le Glorieux\", captained by the noted hydrographer Jean-Baptiste d'Apr\u00e8s de Mannevillette, Lacaille became conscious of the difficulties in determining positions at sea. On his return to Paris he prepared the first set of tables of the Moon's position that was accurate enough to use for determining time and longitude by the method of 'Lunars' (Lunar distances) using the orbital theory of Clairaut. Lacaille worked hard at astronomical calculations; apart from constructing astronomical ephemerides and mathematical tables, he calculated a table of eclipses for 1800 years. Lalande said of him that, during his life, he had made more observations and calculations than all the astronomers of his time put together.\nLater life.\nOn his return to Paris in 1754, following a diversion to Mauritius, Lacaille was distressed to find himself an object of public attention. He resumed his work at the Mazarin College.\nIn 1757 he published his \"Astronomiae Fundamenta Novissimus\", containing a list of about 400 bright stars with positions corrected for aberration and nutation. He carried out calculations on comet orbits and was responsible for giving Halley's Comet its name. His last public lecture, given on 14 September 1761 at the Royal Academy of Sciences, summarised the improvements to astronomy that had occurred during his lifetime. His death, probably caused in part by over-work, occurred in 1762. He was buried in the vaults of the Mazarin College, now the Institut de France in Paris.\nHonours.\nIn 1754, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He was also an honorary member of the academies of Saint Petersburg and Berlin, the Royal Society of London and the Royal Society of G\u00f6ttingen, and the Institute of Bologna.\nLacaille has the honor of naming 14 different constellations:\nThe crater \"La Caille\" on the Moon is named after him. Asteroid 9135 Lacaille (AKA 7609 P-L and 1994 EK6), discovered on 17 October 1960 by Cornelis Johannes van Houten, Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld and Tom Gehrels at Palomar Observatory, was also named after him.\nIn honor of his contribution to the study of the southern hemisphere sky, a 60-cm telescope at R\u00e9union Island will be named the Lacaille Telescope.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21629", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21629", "title": "Nawaf Al Hazmi", "text": ""}
{"id": "21630", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21630", "title": "Nawaf al-Hazmi", "text": "Saudi terrorist and 9/11 hijacker (1976\u20132001)\nNawaf Muhammad Salim al-Hazmi (; 9 August 1976 \u2013 11 September 2001) was a Saudi terrorist hijacker who was one of five hijackers of American Airlines Flight 77, which they crashed into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks.\nAl-Hazmi and a long-time friend, Khalid al-Mihdhar, left their homes in Saudi Arabia in 1995 to fight for Muslims in the Bosnian War. Al-Hazmi later traveled to Afghanistan to fight with the Taliban against the Afghan Northern Alliance. He returned to Saudi Arabia in early 1999.\nAlready long-time affiliates of al-Qaeda with extensive fighting experience, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar were chosen by Osama bin Laden for an ambitious terrorist plot to pilot commercial airliners into designated targets in the United States. Al-Hazmi arrived in Los Angeles, California, on 15 January 2000, alongside al-Mihdhar. The two settled in San Diego, staying at the Parkwood Apartments until May 2000. While in San Diego, they attended its mosque, led by Anwar al-Awlaki. The two took flying lessons in San Diego, but due to their poor English skills they did not perform well during their flight lessons and their flight instructor regarded them as suspicious.\nAl-Mihdhar left al-Hazmi in California for Yemen in June 2000. Al-Hazmi stayed in California until he met up with Hani Hanjour in December 2000, and they both traveled to Phoenix, Arizona. They later moved to Falls Church, Virginia, in April 2001, where the rest of the hijackers began to join them. Al-Hazmi met frequently with Mohamed Atta, the ringleader of the attacks, during the summer of 2001. The CIA reportedly received al-Hazmi's name on a list of 19 persons suspected of planning an attack in the near future. Al-Hazmi was one of the four names on the list who were known for certain. A search for al-Hazmi and other suspected terrorists commenced, but they were not located until after the attacks.\nThe day before the 11 September attacks, al-Hazmi, al-Mihdhar, and Hanjour checked into a hotel in Herndon, Virginia. The next morning, al-Hazmi and four other terrorists, including al-Hazmi's younger brother, Salem al-Hazmi, boarded American Airlines Flight 77 at Dulles International Airport and hijacked the plane so that Hanjour could pilot and crash it into the Pentagon as part of the attacks. The crash killed all 64 passengers aboard the aircraft and 125 in the Pentagon. Following the attacks, al-Hazmi's participation was initially dismissed as that of a \"muscle hijacker\", but he was later revealed to have played a larger role in the operational planning than previously believed.\nEarly life and activities.\nNawaf al-Hazmi was born in Mecca in Saudi Arabia to Muhammad Salim al-Hazmi, a grocer. He traveled to Afghanistan as a teenager in 1993. CNN's preliminary report following the attacks claimed that an unnamed acquaintance relayed '\"He told me once that his father had tried to kill him when he was a child. He never told me why, but he had a long knife scar on his forearm\", and claimed that his older brother was a police chief in Jizan.\nIn 1995, he and his childhood friend, Khalid al-Mihdhar, joined a group that went to fight alongside Bosnian Muslims in the Bosnian War. Afterwards, Nawaf al-Hazmi returned to Afghanistan along with his brother Salem, and al-Mihdhar. In Afghanistan, they fought alongside the Taliban against the Afghan Northern Alliance, and joined up with al-Qaeda. Al-Hazmi returned to Saudi Arabia in early 1999.\nSelected for the 9/11 plot.\nOsama bin Laden held al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar in high respect, with their experience fighting during the 1990s in Bosnia and elsewhere. Al-Qaeda later referred to al-Hazmi as al-Mihdhar's \"Second-in-command\". When bin Laden committed to the \"planes operation\" plot in spring 1999, he personally selected al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar to be involved in the plot as pilot hijackers. In addition to al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar, two Yemenis were selected for a southeast Asia component of the plot, which was later scrapped for being too difficult to coordinate with the operations in the United States. Known as \"Rabi'ah al-Makki\" during the preparations, al-Hazmi had been so eager to participate in operations within the United States, he already had a US visa when bin Laden selected him. Al-Hazmi obtained a B-1/B-2 tourist visa on 3 April 1999, from the US consulate in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, using a new passport he acquired a few weeks earlier. Al-Hazmi's passport did have indicators of al-Qaeda association, but immigration inspectors were not trained to look for those.\nIn the autumn of 1999, these four attended the Mes Aynak training camp in Afghanistan, which provided advanced training. Al-Hazmi went with the two Yemenis, Tawfiq bin Attash (Khallad) and Abu Bara al Yemeni, to Karachi, Pakistan, where Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the plot's coordinator, instructed him on western culture, travel, as well as taught some basic English phrases. Al-Mihdhar did not go with him to Karachi, but instead left for Yemen. Khalid Sheikh Mohammed then sent al-Hazmi and the other men to Malaysia for a meeting. Before leaving for Malaysia, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed doctored al-Hazmi's Saudi passport in order to conceal his travel to Pakistan and Afghanistan, and make it appear that al-Hazmi had come to Malaysia from Saudi Arabia via Dubai.\nAfter the attacks, the Associated Press would re-publish a \"bizarre\" story by the \"Cody Enterprise\" that quoted witnesses stating that al-Hazmi entered the United States during the autumn of 1999, crossing along the Canada\u2013US border as one of two men delivering skylights to the local high school in Cody, Wyoming. Leaving the city 45 minutes later with the remaining cardboard boxes, the men allegedly asked \"how to get to Florida\".\nMalaysia summit.\nBased on information uncovered by the FBI in the 1998 United States embassy bombings case, the National Security Agency (NSA) began tracking the communications of al-Mihdhar's father-in-law, Ahmad Muhammad Ali al-Hada, who was facilitating al-Qaeda communications, in 1999. Authorities also became aware of al-Hazmi, as a friend and associate of al-Mihdhar. Saudi Intelligence was also aware that Hazmi was associated with al-Qaeda, and associated with the 1998 African embassy bombings and attempts to smuggle arms into the kingdom in 1997. He also said that he revealed this to the CIA, saying \"What we told them was these people were on our watch list from previous activities of al-Qaeda\" The CIA strongly denies having received any such warning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n'[W]e've got to tell the Bureau about this. These guys clearly are bad. One of them, at least, has a multiple-entry visa to the U.S. We've got to tell the FBI.' And then [the CIA officer] said to me, 'No, it's not the FBI's case, not the FBI's jurisdiction.'\nMark Rossini, \"The Spy Factory\"\nIn late 1999, the NSA informed the CIA of an upcoming meeting in Malaysia, which al-Hada mentioned would involve \"Khalid\", \"Nawaf\", and \"Salem\". On 5 January, al-Hazmi arrived in Kuala Lumpur, where he met up with al-Mihdhar, bin Attash, and Abu Bara. The group was in Malaysia to meet with Hambali for the 2000 al-Qaeda Summit, during which key details of the attacks may have been arranged. At this time, there was an East Asia component to the 11 September attacks plot, but bin Laden later canceled it for being too difficult to coordinate with operations in the United States. Ramzi bin al-Shibh was also at the summit, and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed possibly attended the summit. In Malaysia, the group stayed with Yazid Sufaat, a local member of Jemaah Islamiyah, who provided accommodations at request of Hambali. Both al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were secretly photographed at the meeting by Malaysian authorities, who provided surveillance at the request of the CIA. Malaysian authorities reported that al-Mihdhar spoke at length with Tawfiq bin Attash, one of the Yemenis, and others who were later involved in the USS \"Cole\" bombing. Al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar also met with Fahd al-Quso, who was later involved in the USS \"Cole\" bombing. After the meeting, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi traveled to Bangkok in Thailand on 8 January, and left a week later on 15 January to travel to the United States.\nIn the United States.\nEnters the United States with Mihdhar.\nOn 15 January 2000, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar arrived together at Los Angeles International Airport from Bangkok, and were admitted for a six-month period. On 1 February 2000\u201417 days upon entering the United States\u2014the two men encountered Omar al-Bayoumi and Caysan Bin Don at a halal food restaurant on Venice Boulevard in Culver City. Al-Bayoumi claims he was merely being charitable in helping the two seemingly out-of-place Muslims to move to San Diego where he helped them find an apartment near his own, co-signed their lease, and gave them $1,500 to help pay their rent. FBI documents declassified in 2022 demonstrate that al-Bayoumi was an agent of Saudi intelligence, with the FBI concluding that there was a \"50/50 chance\" that he (and thus the Saudi government) had foreknowledge of the attacks.\nIn the beginning of February 2000, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi rented an apartment at the Parkwood Apartments, a 175-unit complex in the Clairemont Mesa section of San Diego, near the Balboa Drive Mosque. In February, al-Mihdhar purchased a used 1988 Toyota Corolla. While living at the Parkwood Apartments, neighbors thought that al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were odd. Months passed without them getting any furniture for the apartment. Instead, the men slept on mattresses on the floor, yet they carried briefcases, were frequently on their mobile phones, and were occasionally picked up by a limousine. After the attacks, their neighbors told the media that the pair constantly played flight simulator games. Authorities say the two regularly attended the Masjid Ar-Ribat al-Islami mosque that Anwar Al-Awlaki led as the imam in San Diego, having many closed-door meetings with the imam, although Al-Awlaki told authorities their conversations were trivial in nature. While in San Diego, witnesses told the FBI he and al-Mindhar had a close relationship with Anwar Al-Awlaki. Al-Hazmi got a part-time job through the mosque at a nearby car wash.\nOn 4 April 2000, al-Hazmi took a one-hour introductory flight lesson at the National Air College in San Diego. Both al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi took flight lessons in May 2000 at the Sorbi Flying Club, located at Montgomery Field in San Diego. On 5 May, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar took a lesson for one hour, and additional lessons on 10 May at the Sorbi Flying Club, with al-Hazmi flying an aircraft for 30 minutes. However, their English skills were very poor, and they did not do well with flight lessons. The first day that they showed up, they told instructors that they wanted to learn how to fly Boeings. Al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi raised some suspicion when they offered extra money to their flight instructor, Richard Garza, if he would train them to fly jets. Suspicious of the two men, Garza refused the offer but did not report them to authorities. Garza described the two men as \"impatient students\" who \"wanted to learn to fly jets, specifically Boeings.\"\nAdel Rafeea received a wire transfer of $5,000, on 18 April, from Ali Abdul Aziz Ali in the UAE, which he later claimed was money al-Hazmi had asked him to accept on his behalf.\nAt the end of May 2000, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar moved out of Parkwood Apartments, and moved to nearby Lemon Grove, California. Two days later\u2014on 2 June\u2014al-Mihdhar transferred his vehicle's registration to al-Hazmi, and departed the U.S. for Frankfurt, Germany on 10 June 2000. Al-Mihdhar returned to Yemen, which angered Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who did not want al-Hazmi to be left alone in California.\nOn 12 July 2000, al-Hazmi filed for an extension of his visa, which was due to expire. His visa was extended until January 2001, though al-Hazmi never filed any further requests to extend it beyond that.\nIn September, al-Hamzi and al-Mihdhar both moved into the house of FBI informant Abdussattar Shaikh, although he did not report the pair as suspicious. Al-Mihdhar is believed to have left the apartment in early October, less than two weeks before the USS \"Cole\" bombing. Al-Hazmi continued living with Shaikh until December.\nHani Hanjour arrived in San Diego in early December 2000, where he joined al-Hazmi, but on 10 December they were seen leaving their Mount Vernon address. The two men traveled to Phoenix, Arizona, where Hanjour could take refresher flight training classes. On 12 December, they arrived at Mesa, Arizona. On 22 December, Hanjour and al-Hazmi signed a lease for an apartment in the Indian Springs Village complex in Mesa, moving in on 9 January 2001.\n2001.\nIn March, al-Hazmi received a shipment of VHS videos including videos about Boeing 747 and 777 flight decks and \"how an airline captain should look and act\" and later a road atlas, map of New York City and a World aeronautical chart.\nOn 30 March, al-Hazmi notified his utility company that he might be moving to another state or Saudi Arabia. He and Hanjour moved out before the apartment rental expired at the end of the month on their way to Virginia. Two days later on 1 April 2001, Oklahoma police officer C. L. Parkins pulled al-Hazmi over for speeding in their Corolla along with an additional citation for failing to use a seatbelt together totaling $138. A routine inspection of his California drivers license turned up no warrants or alerts, although his name was known to both the NSA and the CIA as a suspected terrorist.\nAnwar al-Awlaki had already headed east and served as Imam at the Dar al-Hijrah mosque in the metropolitan Washington, DC area starting in January 2001. Shortly after this, his sermons were attended by three of the 9/11 hijackers (the new one being Hanjour).\nBy 3 April, he was likely with companion Hani Hanjour when he was recorded at an ATM in Front Royal, Virginia, arriving in Falls Church, Virginia, by 4 April. They met a man believed to be a Jordanian named Eyad Alrababah at a 7-11 that day. The 9/11 Commission wrote that al-Hazmi and Hanjour met Alrababah at the Dar al Hijra mosque who was a computer technician who had moved from West Paterson, New Jersey and was there to ask imam Anwar al-Awlaki about finding a job. He helped the pair rent an apartment in Alexandria where they moved in.\nThe 9/11 Commission concluded that two of the hijackers \"reportedly respected al-Awlaki as a religious figure\". Police found his telephone number in the contacts of Ramzi bin al-Shibh (the \"20th hijacker\") when they searched his Hamburg apartment while investigating the 9/11 attacks.\nOn 1 May 2001, al-Hazmi reported to police that a man tried to take his wallet outside his Fairfax, Virginia, residence, but before the county officer left, al-Hazmi signed a \"statement of release\" indicating he did not want the incident investigated.\nThe day after, on 2 May, two other hijackers, Ahmed al-Ghamdi and Majed Moqed, arrived in Virginia and moved in with them. On 8 May, Alrababah suggested that al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar move with him to Fairfield, Connecticut, and helped all four hijackers move to a hotel there. They called area flight schools and after a few days Alrababah drove the four to Paterson, New Jersey, to show them around. Some FBI agents suspected that al-Awlaki gave Alrababah the job of helping al-Hazmi and Hanjour. Alrababah was later arrested as a witness convicted after 9/11 in a fraudulent driver's license scheme and deported to Jordan.\nOn 21 May, al-Hazmi moved in with Hanjour into an apartment in Paterson New Jersey. Mohamed Atta was living in the same city at another location.\nOn 30 June, al-Hazmi's car was involved in a minor traffic accident on the east-bound George Washington Bridge. On 25 June 2001, al-Hazmi obtained a drivers' license in Florida, providing an address in Delray Beach, Florida, and he obtained a USA ID card on 10 July. On 2 August, al-Hazmi also obtained a Virginia drivers' license, and made a request for it to be reissued on 7 September.\nOn 20 July, al-Hazmi and fellow hijacker Hani Hanjour flew to the Montgomery County Airpark in Maryland from on a practice flight from Fairfield, New Jersey.\nAl-Hazmi, along with at least five other future hijackers, traveled to Las Vegas, Nevada, at least six times in the summer of 2001. They reportedly drank alcohol, gambled, and paid strippers to perform lap dances for them.\nThroughout the summer, al-Hazmi met with leader Mohamed Atta to discuss the status of the operation of a monthly basis.\nOn 23 August, Israeli Mossad reportedly gave his name to the CIA as one of 19 belonging to US residents who they said were planning to attack the United States in the near future. Only four of the names are known for certain, the other three belonging to fellow 9/11 hijackers Mohamed Atta, Marwan al-Shehhi, and Khalid al-Mihdhar, but it is not known if all 19 of the 9/11 hijackers' names were on the list or if the list had 19 names by sheer coincidence. Regardless, the connection was not made with previous contacts by local law enforcement. On the same day, he was added to an INS watch list, along with al-Mihdhar, to prevent entry into the US.\nAn internal review after 9/11 found that \"everything was done [to find them] that could have been done.\" However, the search does not appear to have been particularly aggressive. A national motor vehicle index was reportedly checked, but al-Hazmi's speeding ticket was not detected for some reason. The FBI did not search credit card databases, bank account databases, or car registration, all of which would have produced positive results. Al-Hazmi was even listed in the 2000\u20132001 San Diego phone book, but this too was not searched until after the attacks.\nHe had not been placed on terrorist watch lists, nor did the CIA or NSA alert the FBI, Customs and Immigration, or local police and enforcement agencies.\nOn 27 August, brothers Nawaf and Salem Al-Hazmi purchased flight tickets through Travelocity.com using Nawaf's Visa card.\nOn 1 September, Nawaf Al-Hazmi registered Room #7 at the Pin-Del Motel in Laurel, Maryland. On the registration, he listed his driver's license number as 3402142-D, and gave a New York hotel as his permanent residence. Ziad Jarrah had checked into the hotel on 27 August.\nAl-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar purchased their 9/11 plane tickets online using a credit card with their real names. This raised no red flags, since the FAA had not been informed that the two were on a terrorist watchlist.\nAttacks.\nOn 10 September, the day before the September 11 attacks, Hanjour, al-Mihdhar, and al-Hazmi checked into the Marriott Residence Inn in Herndon, Virginia, where Saleh Ibn Abdul Rahman Hussayen, a prominent Saudi government official, was staying \u2013 although no evidence was ever uncovered that they had met, or knew of each other's presence.\nOn the morning of 11 September, al-Hazmi boarded American Airlines Flight 77. The flight was scheduled to depart at 08:10 but ended up departing 10\u00a0minutes late from Gate\u00a0D26 at Dulles. The last normal radio communications from the aircraft to air traffic control occurred at 08:50:51. At 08:54, the hijackers sent pilots Charles Burlingame and David Charlesbois to the back of the plane. Flight 77 began to deviate from its normal, assigned flight path and turned south. The hijackers then set the flight's autopilot in the direction of Washington, D.C. Passenger Barbara Olson called her husband, United States Solicitor General Theodore Olson, and reported that the plane had been hijacked and that the assailants had box cutters and knives. At 09:37, American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the west facade of the Pentagon, killing all 64 aboard (including the hijackers) along with 125 in the Pentagon.\nAftermath.\nNawaf al-Hazmi's 1988 blue Toyota Corolla was found on the next day in Dulles International Airport's hourly parking lot. Inside the vehicle, authorities found a letter written by Mohamed Atta, maps of Washington, D.C. and New York City, a cashier's check made out to a Phoenix flight school, four drawings of a Boeing 757 cockpit, a box cutter, and a page with notes and phone numbers.\nIn the recovery process at the Pentagon, remains of all five Flight\u00a077 hijackers were identified through a process of elimination, as not matching any DNA samples for the victims, and put into custody of the FBI. Forensics teams confirmed that it seemed two of the hijackers were brothers, based on their DNA similarities.\nSeveral weeks after the attacks, a Las Vegas Days Inn employee went to the FBI and stated that she recognized al-Hazmi's photographs from the media as being a man she had met at the hotel, who had asked for details on hotels near Los Angeles. She admitted that he never gave his name.\nTimeline in America.\nLate in 2005, Army Lt. Col. Kevin Shaffer and Congressman Curt Weldon alleged that the Defense Department data mining project Able Danger had kept Nawaf al-Hazmi, Khalid al-Mihdhar, Mohamed Atta and Marwan al-Shehhi all under surveillance as al-Qaeda agents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21631", "revid": "14896122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21631", "title": "November 12", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 12 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar"}
{"id": "21632", "revid": "11692354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21632", "title": "Nero", "text": "Roman emperor from AD 54 to 68\nNero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus ( ; born Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus; 15\u00a0December AD\u00a037 \u2013 9\u00a0June AD\u00a068) was a Roman emperor and the final emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, reigning from AD\u00a054 until his death in AD 68.\nNero was born at Antium in AD\u00a037, the son of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the Younger (great-granddaughter of the emperor Augustus). Nero was three when his father died. By the time Nero turned eleven, his mother married Emperor Claudius, who then adopted Nero as his heir. Upon Claudius' death in AD 54, Nero ascended to the throne with the backing of the Praetorian Guard and the Senate. In the early years of his reign, Nero was advised and guided by his mother Agrippina, his tutor Seneca the Younger, and his praetorian prefect Sextus Afranius Burrus, but sought to rule independently and rid himself of restraining influences. The power struggle between Nero and his mother reached its climax when he orchestrated her murder. Roman sources also implicate Nero in the deaths of both his wife Claudia Octavia \u2013 supposedly so he could marry Poppaea Sabina \u2013 and his stepbrother Britannicus.\nNero's practical contributions to Rome's governance focused on diplomacy, trade, and culture. He ordered the construction of amphitheaters, and promoted athletic games and contests. He made public appearances as an actor, poet, musician, and charioteer, which scandalized his aristocratic contemporaries as these occupations were usually the domain of slaves, public entertainers, and infamous persons. However, the provision of such entertainments made Nero popular among lower-class citizens. The costs involved were borne by local elites either directly or through taxation, and were much resented by the Roman aristocracy.\nDuring Nero's reign, the general Corbulo fought the Roman\u2013Parthian War of 58\u201363, and made peace with the hostile Parthian Empire. The Roman general Suetonius Paulinus quashed a major revolt in Britain led by queen Boudica. The Bosporan Kingdom was briefly annexed to the empire, and the First Jewish\u2013Roman War began. When the Roman senator Vindex rebelled, with support from the eventual Roman emperor Galba, Nero was declared a public enemy and condemned to death \"in absentia\". He fled Rome, and on 9 June AD\u00a068 committed suicide. His death sparked a brief period of civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors.\nMost Roman sources offer overwhelmingly negative assessments of his personality and reign. Most contemporary sources describe him as tyrannical, self-indulgent, and debauched. The historian Tacitus claims the Roman people thought him compulsive and corrupt. Suetonius tells that many Romans believed the Great Fire of Rome was instigated by Nero to clear land for his planned \"Golden House\". Tacitus claims Nero seized Christians as scapegoats for the fire and had them burned alive, seemingly motivated not by public justice, but personal cruelty. Some modern historians question the reliability of ancient sources on Nero's tyrannical acts, considering his popularity among the Roman commoners. In the eastern provinces of the Empire, a popular legend arose that Nero had not died and would return. After his death, at least three leaders of short-lived, failed rebellions presented themselves as \"Nero reborn\" to gain popular support.\nEarly life.\nNero was born Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus on 15 December AD 37 in Antium (modern Anzio), eight months after the death of Tiberius. He was an only-child, the son of the politician Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the Younger. His mother Agrippina was the sister of the third Roman emperor Caligula. Nero was also the great-great-grandson of former emperor Augustus (descended from Augustus' only daughter, Julia).\nThe ancient biographer Suetonius, who was critical of Nero's ancestors, wrote that emperor Augustus had reproached Nero's grandfather for his unseemly enjoyment of violent gladiator games. According to J\u00fcrgen Malitz, Suetonius tells that Nero's father was known to be \"irascible and brutal\", and that both \"enjoyed chariot races and theater performances to a degree not befitting their position\". Suetonius also mentions that when Nero's father Domitius was congratulated by his friends for the birth of his son, he replied that any child born to him and Agrippina would have a detestable nature and become a public danger.\nDomitius died in AD 41. A few years before his father's death, his father was involved in a serious political scandal. His mother and his two surviving sisters, Agrippina and Julia Livilla, were exiled to a remote island in the Mediterranean Sea. His mother was said to have been exiled for plotting to overthrow the emperor Caligula. Nero's inheritance was taken from him, and he was sent to live with his paternal aunt Domitia Lepida, the mother of later emperor Claudius's third wife, Messalina.\nAfter Caligula's death, Claudius became the new emperor. Nero's mother married Claudius in AD 49, becoming his fourth wife. On 25 February AD 50, Claudius was pressured to adopt Nero as his son, giving him the new name of \"Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Germanicus\". Claudius had gold coins issued to mark the adoption. Classics professor Josiah Osgood has written that \"the coins, through their distribution and imagery alike, showed that a new Leader was in the making.\" However, David Shotter noted that, despite events in Rome, Nero's step-brother Britannicus was more prominent in provincial coinages during the early 50s.\nNero formally entered public life as an adult in AD 51 while 13 years old. When he turned 16, Nero married Claudius' daughter (his step-sister), Claudia Octavia. Between the years AD 51 and AD 53, he gave several speeches on behalf of various communities, including the Ilians; the Apameans (requesting a five-year tax reprieve after an earthquake); and the northern colony of Bologna, after their settlement had suffered a devastating fire.\nClaudius died in AD 54; many ancient historians claim that he was poisoned by Agrippina. Shotter has written that \"Claudius' death...has usually been regarded as an event hastened by Agrippina, due to signs that Claudius was showing a renewed affection for his natural son.\" He notes that among ancient sources, the Roman historian Josephus was uniquely reserved in describing the poisoning as a rumor. Contemporary sources differ in their accounts of the poisoning. Tacitus says that the poison-maker Locusta prepared the toxin, which was served to the Emperor by his servant Halotus. Tacitus also writes that Agrippina arranged for Claudius' doctor Xenophon to administer poison, in the event that the Emperor survived. Suetonius differs in some details, but also implicates Halotus and Agrippina. Like Tacitus, Cassius Dio writes that the poison was prepared by Locusta, but in Dio's account it is administered by Agrippina instead of Halotus. In \"Apocolocyntosis\", Seneca the Younger does not mention mushrooms at all. Agrippina's involvement in Claudius' death is not accepted by all modern scholars.\nBefore Claudius' death, Agrippina had maneuvered to remove Claudius' sons' tutors in order to replace them with tutors that she had selected. She was also able to convince Claudius to replace two prefects of the Praetorian Guard (who were suspected of supporting Claudius' son) with Afranius Burrus (Nero's future guide). Since Agrippina had replaced the guard officers with men loyal to her, Nero was subsequently able to assume power without incident.\nReign (AD 54\u201368).\nThe main ancient Roman literary sources for Nero's reign are Tacitus, Suetonius and Cassius Dio. They found Nero's construction projects overly extravagant and claim that their cost left Italy \"thoroughly exhausted by contributions of money\" with \"the provinces ruined\". Modern historians note that the period was riddled with deflation and that Nero intended his spending on public-work and charities to ease economic troubles.\nEarly reign.\nNero became emperor in AD 54, aged 16. His tutor, Seneca, prepared Nero's first speech before the Senate. During this speech, Nero spoke about \"eliminating the ills of the previous regime\". H. H. Scullard writes that \"he promised to follow the Augustan model in his principate, to end all secret trials \"intra cubiculum\", to have done with the corruption of court favorites and freedmen, and above all to respect the privileges of the Senate and individual Senators.\" His respect for Senatorial autonomy, which distinguished him from Caligula and Claudius, was generally well received by the Roman Senate.\nScullard writes that Nero's mother, Agrippina, \"meant to rule through her son\". Agrippina murdered her political rivals: Domitia Lepida the Younger, the aunt that Nero had lived with during Agrippina's exile; Marcus Junius Silanus, a great-grandson of Augustus; and Narcissus. One of the earliest coins that Nero issued during his reign shows Agrippina on the coin's obverse side; usually, this would be reserved for a portrait of the emperor. The Senate also allowed Agrippina two lictors during public appearances, an honor that was customarily bestowed upon only magistrates and the Vestalis Maxima. In AD 55, Nero removed Agrippina's ally Marcus Antonius Pallas from his position in the treasury. Shotter writes the following about Agrippina's deteriorating relationship with Nero: \"What Seneca and Burrus probably saw as relatively harmless in Nero\u2014his cultural pursuits and his affair with the slave girl Claudia Acte\u2014were to her signs of her son's dangerous emancipation of himself from her influence.\" Britannicus was poisoned after Agrippina threatened to side with him. Nero, who was having an affair with Acte, exiled Agrippina from the palace when she began to cultivate a relationship with his wife Octavia.\nJ\u00fcrgen Malitz writes that ancient sources do not provide any clear evidence to evaluate the extent of Nero's personal involvement in politics during the first years of his reign. He describes the policies that are explicitly attributed to Nero as \"well-meant but incompetent notions\" like Nero's failed initiative to abolish all taxes in AD 58. Scholars generally credit Nero's advisors Burrus and Seneca with the administrative successes of these years. Malitz writes that in later years, Nero panicked when he had to make decisions on his own during times of crisis.\nNevertheless, his early administration ruled to great acclaim. A generation later those years were seen in retrospect as an exemplar of good and moderate government and described as \"Quinquennium Neronis\" by Trajan. Especially well received were fiscal reforms which among others put tax collectors under more strict control by establishing local offices to supervise their activities. After the affair of Lucius Pedanius Secundus, who was murdered by a desperate slave, Nero allowed slaves to file complaints about their treatment to the authorities.\nResidences.\nOutside of Rome, Nero had several villas or palaces built, the ruins of which can still be seen today. These included the Villa of Nero at Antium, his place of birth, where he razed the villa on the site to rebuild it on a more massive and imperial scale and including a theatre. At Subiaco, Lazio, near Rome he had 3 artificial lakes built, with waterfalls, bridges and walkways for the luxurious villa. He stayed at the Villa of Nero at Olympia, Greece, during his participation at the Olympic Games of AD 67.\nMatricide.\nAccording to Suetonius, Nero had his former freedman Anicetus arrange a shipwreck, which Agrippina managed to survive. She then swam ashore and was executed by Anicetus, who reported her death as a suicide. \"The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome\" cautiously notes that Nero's reasons for killing his mother in AD 59 are \"not fully understood\". According to Tacitus, the source of conflict between Nero and his mother was Nero's affair with Poppaea Sabina. In \"Histories\" Tacitus writes that the affair began while Poppaea was still married to Rufrius Crispinus, but in his later work \"Annals\" Tacitus says Poppaea was married to Otho when the affair began. In \"Annals\" Tacitus writes that Agrippina opposed Nero's affair with Poppaea because of her affection for his wife Octavia. Anthony A. Barrett writes that Tacitus' account in \"Annals\" \"suggests that Poppaea's challenge drove [Nero] over the brink\". A number of modern historians have noted that Agrippina's death would not have offered much advantage for Poppaea, as Nero did not marry Poppaea until AD 62. Barrett writes that Poppaea seems to serve as a \"literary device, utilized [by Tacitus] because [he] could see no plausible explanation for Nero's conduct and also incidentally [served] to show that Nero, like Claudius, had fallen under the malign influence of a woman.\"\nDecline.\nModern scholars believe that Nero's reign had been going well in the years before Agrippina's death. For example, Nero promoted the exploration of the Nile river sources with a successful expedition. After Agrippina's exile, Burrus and Seneca were responsible for the administration of the Empire. However, Nero's \"conduct became far more egregious\" after his mother's death. Miriam T. Griffin suggests that Nero's decline began as early as AD 55 with the murder of his stepbrother Britannicus, but also notes that \"Nero lost all sense of right and wrong and listened to flattery with total credulity\" after Agrippina's death. Griffin points out that Tacitus \"makes explicit the significance of Agrippina's removal for Nero's conduct\".\nHe began to build a new palace, the Domus Transitoria, from about AD 60. It was intended to connect all of the imperial estates that had been acquired in various ways, linking the Palatine with the Gardens of Maecenas, Horti Lamiani, Horti Lolliani, etc.\nIn AD 62, Nero's adviser Burrus died. That same year, Nero called for the first treason trial of his reign (\"maiestas\" trial) against Antistius Sosianus. He also executed his rivals Cornelius Sulla and Rubellius Plautus. J\u00fcrgen Malitz considers this to be a turning point in Nero's relationship with the Roman Senate. Malitz writes that \"Nero abandoned the restraint he had previously shown because he believed a course supporting the Senate promised to be less and less profitable.\"\nAfter Burrus' death, Nero appointed two new Praetorian prefects: Faenius Rufus and Ofonius Tigellinus. Politically isolated, Seneca was forced to retire. According to Tacitus, Nero divorced Octavia on grounds of infertility, and banished her. After public protests over Octavia's exile, Nero accused her of adultery with Anicetus, and she was executed.\nIn AD\u00a064 during the Saturnalia, Nero is said to have married Pythagoras, a freedman.\nGreat Fire of Rome.\nThe Great Fire of Rome began on the night of 18 to 19 July 64, probably in one of the merchant shops on the slope of the Aventine overlooking the Circus Maximus, or in the wooden outer seating of the Circus itself. Rome had always been vulnerable to fires, and this one was fanned to catastrophic proportions by the winds. Tacitus, Cassius Dio, and modern archaeology describe the destruction of mansions, ordinary residences, public buildings, and temples on the Aventine, Palatine, and Caelian hills. The fire burned for over seven days before subsiding; it then started again and burned for three more. It destroyed three of Rome's 14 districts and severely damaged seven more.\nSome Romans thought the fire an accident, as the merchant shops were timber-framed and sold flammable goods, and the outer seating stands of the Circus were timber-built. Others claimed it was arson committed on Nero's behalf. The accounts by Pliny the Elder, Suetonius, and Cassius Dio suggest several possible reasons for Nero's alleged arson, including his creation of a real-life backdrop to a theatrical performance about the burning of Troy. Suetonius wrote that Nero started the fire to clear the site for his planned palatial Golden House. This would include lush artificial landscapes and a 30-meter-tall statue of himself, the Colossus of Nero, the site of its construction would become known as the Colosseum, though later the famous Flavian Amphitheater was built, and to posterity the word 'Colosseum' was incorrectly misappropriated as the name of the theater. Suetonius and Cassius Dio claim that Nero sang the \"Sack of Ilium\" in stage costume while the city burned. The popular legend that Nero played the lyre while Rome burned \"is at least partly a literary construct of Flavian propaganda ... which looked askance on the abortive Neronian attempt to rewrite Augustan models of rule\".\nTacitus suspends judgment on Nero's responsibility for the fire; he found that Nero was in Antium when the fire started, and returned to Rome to organize a relief effort, providing for the removal of bodies and debris, which he paid for from his own funds. After the fire, Nero opened his palaces to provide shelter for the homeless, and arranged for food supplies to be delivered in order to prevent starvation among the survivors.\nTacitus writes that to remove suspicion from himself, Nero accused Christians of starting the fire. According to this account, many Christians were arrested and brutally executed by \"being thrown to the beasts, crucified, and being burned alive\". Tacitus asserts that in his imposition of such ferocious punishments, Nero was not motivated by a sense of justice, but by a penchant for personal cruelty.\nHouses built after the fire were spaced out, built in brick, and faced by porticos on wide roads. Nero also built himself a new palace complex known as the Domus Aurea in an area cleared by the fire. The cost to rebuild Rome was immense, requiring funds the state treasury did not have. To find the necessary funds for the reconstruction, Nero's government increased taxation. Particularly heavy tributes were imposed on the provinces of the empire. To meet at least a portion of the costs, Nero devalued the Roman currency, increasing inflationary pressure for the first time in the Empire's history.\nLater years.\nIn AD 65, Gaius Calpurnius Piso, a Roman statesman, organized a conspiracy against Nero with the help of Subrius Flavus and Sulpicius Asper, a tribune and a centurion of the Praetorian Guard. According to Tacitus, many conspirators wished to \"rescue the state\" from the emperor and restore the Republic. The freedman Milichus discovered the conspiracy and reported it to Nero's secretary, Epaphroditus. As a result, the conspiracy failed and its members were executed, including Lucan, the poet. Nero's previous advisor Seneca was accused by Natalis; he denied the charges but was still ordered to commit suicide, as by this point he had fallen out of favor with Nero.\nNero was said to have kicked Poppaea to death in AD 65, before she could give birth to his second child. Modern historians, noting the probable biases of Suetonius, Tacitus, and Cassius Dio, and the likely absence of eyewitnesses to such an event, propose that Poppaea may have died after miscarriage or in childbirth. Nero went into deep mourning; Poppaea was given a sumptuous state funeral and divine honors, and was promised a temple for her cult. A year's importation of incense was burned at the funeral. Her body was not cremated, as would have been strictly customary, but embalmed after the Egyptian manner and entombed; it is not known where.\nIn AD 67, Nero married Sporus, a young boy who is said to have greatly resembled Poppaea. Nero had him castrated and married him with all the usual ceremonies, including a dowry and a bridal veil. It is believed that he did this out of regret for his killing of Poppaea.\nRevolt of Vindex and Galba and Nero's death.\nIn March 68, Gaius Julius Vindex, the governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, rebelled against Nero's tax policies. Lucius Verginius Rufus, the governor of Germania Superior, was ordered to put down Vindex's rebellion. In an attempt to gain support from outside his own province, Vindex called upon Servius Sulpicius Galba, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, to join the rebellion and to declare himself emperor in opposition to Nero.\nAt the Battle of Vesontio in May 68, Verginius' forces easily defeated those of Vindex, and the latter committed suicide. However, after defeating the rebel, Verginius' legions attempted to proclaim their own commander as Emperor. Verginius refused to act against Nero, but the discontent of the legions of Germania and the continued opposition of Galba in Hispania did not bode well for him.\nWhile Nero had retained some control of the situation, support for Galba increased despite his being officially declared a \"public enemy\". The prefect of the Praetorian Guard, Gaius Nymphidius Sabinus, also abandoned his allegiance to the Emperor and came out in support of Galba.\nIn response, Nero fled Rome with the intention of going to the port of Ostia and, from there, to take a fleet to one of the still-loyal eastern provinces. According to Suetonius, Nero abandoned the idea when some army officers openly refused to flee with him \u2014 one of them going so far as to quote Turnus's line from Virgil's \"Aeneid\": \"Is it so dreadful a thing, then, to die?\" Nero then toyed with the idea of fleeing to Parthia, throwing himself upon the mercy of Galba, or appealing to the people and begging them to pardon him for his past offences \"and if he could not soften their hearts, to entreat them at least to allow him the prefecture of Egypt\". Suetonius reports that the text of this speech was later found in Nero's writing desk, but that he dared not give it from fear of being torn to pieces before he could reach the Forum.\nNero returned to Rome and spent the evening in the palace. After sleeping, he awoke at about midnight to find the palace guard had left. Dispatching messages to his friends' palace chambers for them to come, he received no answers. Upon going to their chambers personally, he found them all abandoned. When he called for a gladiator or anyone else adept with a sword to kill him, no one appeared. He cried, \"Have I neither friend nor foe?\" and ran out as if to throw himself into the Tiber.\nReturning, Nero sought a place where he could hide and collect his thoughts. An imperial freedman, Phaon, offered his villa, outside the city. Travelling in disguise, Nero and four loyal freedmen \u2014 Epaphroditus, Phaon, Neophytus, and Sporus \u2014 reached the villa, whereupon Nero ordered them to dig a grave for him. At this time, Nero learned that the Senate had declared him a public enemy. Nero prepared himself for suicide, pacing up and down muttering \"Qualis artifex pereo\" (\"What an artist the world is losing!\"). Losing his nerve, he begged one of his companions to set an example by killing himself first. At last, the sound of approaching horsemen drove Nero to face the end. However, he still could not bring himself to take his own life, but instead forced his private secretary, Epaphroditus, to perform the task.\nWhen one of the horsemen entered and saw that Nero was dying, he attempted to stop the bleeding, but efforts to save Nero's life were unsuccessful. Nero's final words were \"Too late! This is fidelity!\". He died on 9 June 68, the anniversary of the death of his first wife, Claudia Octavia, and was buried in the Mausoleum of the Domitii Ahenobarbi, in what is now the Villa Borghese (Pincian Hill) area of Rome. According to Sulpicius Severus, it is unclear whether Nero took his own life.\nWith his death, the Julio-Claudian dynasty ended. Chaos would ensue in the Year of the Four Emperors.\nAfter Nero.\nAccording to Suetonius and Cassius Dio, the people of Rome celebrated the death of Nero. Tacitus, though, describes a more complicated political environment. Tacitus mentions that Nero's death was welcomed by senators, nobility, and the upper class. The lower class, slaves, frequenters of the arena and the theater, and \"those who were supported by the famous excesses of Nero\", on the other hand, were upset with the news. Members of the military were said to have mixed feelings, as they had allegiance to Nero but had been bribed to overthrow him.\nEastern sources, namely Philostratus and Apollonius of Tyana, mention that Nero's death was mourned as he \"restored the liberties of Hellas with a wisdom and moderation quite alien to his character\", and that he \"held our liberties in his hand and respected them\". Modern scholarship generally holds that, while the Senate and more well-off individuals welcomed Nero's death, the general populace was \"loyal to the end and beyond, for Otho and Vitellius both thought it worthwhile to appeal to their nostalgia\".\nNero's name was erased from some monuments, in what Edward Champlin regards as an \"outburst of private zeal\". Many portraits of Nero were reworked to represent other figures; according to Eric R. Varner, over 50 such images survive. This reworking of images is often explained as part of the way in which the memory of disgraced emperors was condemned posthumously, a practice known as \"damnatio memoriae\". Champlin doubts that the practice is necessarily negative and notes that some continued to create images of Nero long after his death. Damaged portraits of Nero, often with hammer blows directed to the face, have been found in many provinces of the Roman Empire, three recently having been identified from the United Kingdom.\nThe civil war during the Year of the Four Emperors was described by ancient historians as a troubling period. According to Tacitus, this instability was rooted in the fact that emperors could no longer rely on the perceived legitimacy of the imperial bloodline, as Nero and those before him could. Galba began his short reign with the execution of many of Nero's allies. One such notable enemy included Nymphidius Sabinus, who claimed to be the son of Emperor Caligula.\nOtho overthrew Galba. Otho was said to be liked by many soldiers because he had been a friend of Nero and resembled him somewhat in temperament. It was said that the common Roman hailed Otho as Nero himself. Otho used \"Nero\" as a surname and reerected many statues to Nero. Vitellius overthrew Otho. Vitellius began his reign with a large funeral for Nero complete with songs written by Nero.\nAfter Nero's death in AD 68, there was a widespread belief, especially in the eastern provinces, that he was not dead and somehow would return. This belief came to be known as the Nero Redivivus legend. The legend of Nero's return lasted for hundreds of years after Nero's death. Augustine of Hippo wrote of the legend as a popular belief in AD 422.\nAt least three Nero impostors emerged leading rebellions. The first, who sang and played the cithara or lyre, and whose face was similar to that of the dead emperor, appeared in 69 AD during the reign of Vitellius. After persuading some to recognize him, he was captured and executed. Sometime during the reign of Titus (79\u201381), another impostor appeared in Asia and sang to the accompaniment of the lyre and looked like Nero, but he, too, was killed. Twenty years after Nero's death, during the reign of Domitian, there was a third pretender. He was supported by the Parthians, who only reluctantly gave him up, and the matter almost came to war.\nMilitary conflicts.\nBoudica's uprising.\nIn Britannia (Britain) in AD 59, Prasutagus, leader of the Iceni tribe and a client king of Rome during Claudius' reign, had died. The client state arrangement was unlikely to survive following the death of Claudius. The will of the Iceni tribal King Prasutagus, leaving control of the Iceni to his daughters, was denied. When the Roman procurator Catus Decianus scourged Prasutagus' wife Boudica and raped her daughters, the Iceni revolted. They were joined by the Celtic Trinovantes tribe and their uprising became the most significant provincial rebellion of the 1st century AD. Under Queen Boudica, the towns of Camulodunum (Colchester), Londinium (London) and Verulamium (St. Albans) were burned, and a substantial body of Roman legion infantry were eliminated. The governor of the province, Gaius Suetonius Paulinus, assembled his remaining forces and defeated the Britons. Although order was restored for some time, Nero considered abandoning the province. Julius Classicianus replaced the former procurator, Catus Decianus, and Classicianus advised Nero to replace Paulinus who continued to punish the population even after the rebellion was over. Nero decided to adopt a more lenient approach by appointing a new governor, Petronius Turpilianus.\nPeace with Parthia.\nNero began preparing for war in the early years of his reign, after the Parthian king Vologeses set his brother Tiridates on the Armenian throne. Around AD 57 and AD 58 Domitius Corbulo and his legions advanced on Tiridates and captured the Armenian capital Artaxata. Tigranes was chosen to replace Tiridates on the Armenian throne. When Tigranes attacked Adiabene, Nero had to send further legions to defend Armenia and Syria from Parthia.\nThe Roman victory came at a time when the Parthians were troubled by revolts; when this was dealt with they were able to devote resources to the Armenian situation. A Roman army under Paetus surrendered under humiliating circumstances and though both Roman and Parthian forces withdrew from Armenia, it was under Parthian control. The triumphal arch for Corbulo's earlier victory was part-built when Parthian envoys arrived in AD 63 to discuss treaties. Given \"imperium\" over the eastern regions, Corbulo organised his forces for an invasion but was met by this Parthian delegation. An agreement was thereafter reached with the Parthians: Rome would recognize Tiridates as king of Armenia, only if he agreed to receive his diadem from Nero. A coronation ceremony was held in Italy AD 66. Dio reports that Tiridates said \"I have come to you, my God, worshiping you as Mithras.\" Shotter says this parallels other divine designations that were commonly applied to Nero in the East including \"The New Apollo\" and \"The New Sun\". After the coronation, friendly relations were established between Rome and the eastern kingdoms of Parthia and Armenia. Artaxata was temporarily renamed Neroneia.\nFirst Jewish War.\nIn 66, there was a Jewish revolt in Judea stemming from Greek and Jewish religious tension. In 67, Nero dispatched Vespasian to restore order. This revolt was eventually put down in 70, after Nero's death. This revolt is famous for Romans breaching the walls of Jerusalem and destroying the Second Temple of Jerusalem.\nPursuits.\nNero studied poetry, music, painting, and sculpture. He both sang and played the \"cithara\" (a type of lyre). Many of these disciplines were standard education for the Roman elite, but Nero's devotion to music exceeded what was socially acceptable for a Roman of his class. Ancient sources were critical of Nero's emphasis on the arts, chariot-racing and athletics. Pliny described Nero as an \"actor-emperor\" (\"scaenici imperatoris\") and Suetonius wrote that he was \"carried away by a craze for popularity...since he was acclaimed as the equal of Apollo in music and of the Sun in driving a chariot, he had planned to emulate the exploits of Hercules as well.\"\nIn AD 67 Nero participated in the Olympics. He had bribed organizers to postpone the games for a year so he could participate, and artistic competitions were added to the athletic events. Nero won every contest in which he was a competitor. During the games Nero sang and played his lyre on stage, acted in tragedies and raced chariots. He won a 10-horse chariot race, despite being thrown from the chariot and leaving the race. He was crowned on the basis that he would have won if he had completed the race. After he died a year later, his name was removed from the list of winners. Champlin writes that though Nero's participation \"effectively stifled true competition, [Nero] seems to have been oblivious of reality.\"\nNero established the Neronian games in AD 60. Modeled on Greek style games, these games included musical, gymnastic, and equestrian contests. According to Suetonius the gymnastic contests were held in the Saepta area of the Campus Martius.\nHistoriography.\nThe history of Nero's reign is problematic in that no historical sources survived that were contemporary with Nero. These first histories, while they still existed, were described as biased and fantastical, either overly critical or praising of Nero. The original sources were also said to contradict on a number of events. Nonetheless, these lost primary sources were the basis of surviving secondary and tertiary histories on Nero written by the next generations of historians. A few of the contemporary historians are known by name. Fabius Rusticus, Cluvius Rufus and Pliny the Elder all wrote condemning histories on Nero that are now lost. There were also pro-Nero histories, but it is unknown who wrote them or for what deeds Nero was praised.\nThe bulk of what is known of Nero comes from Tacitus, Suetonius, and Cassius Dio, who were all of the upper classes. Tacitus and Suetonius wrote their histories on Nero over 50 years after his death, while Cassius Dio wrote his history over 150 years after Nero's death. These sources contradict one another on a number of events in Nero's life, including the death of Claudius, the death of Agrippina, and the Roman fire of AD 64, but they are consistent in their condemnation of Nero.\nCassius Dio (c. 155\u2013229) was the son of Cassius Apronianus, a Roman senator. He passed the greater part of his life in public service. He was a senator under Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus; and afterwards suffect consul around 205, and also proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.\nBooks 61\u201363 of Dio's \"Roman History\" describe the reign of Nero. Only fragments of these books remain and what does remain was abridged and altered by John Xiphilinus, an 11th-century monk.\nDio Chrysostom (c. 40\u2013120), a Greek philosopher and historian, wrote the Roman people were very happy with Nero and would have allowed him to rule indefinitely. They longed for his rule once he was gone and embraced imposters when they appeared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Indeed the truth about this has not come out even yet; for so far as the rest of his subjects were concerned, there was nothing to prevent his continuing to be Emperor for all time, seeing that even now everybody wishes he were still alive. And the great majority do believe that he still is, although in a certain sense he has died not once but often along with those who had been firmly convinced that he was still alive.\nEpictetus (c. 55\u2013135) was the slave to Nero's scribe Epaphroditos. He makes a few passing negative comments on Nero's character in his work, but makes no remarks on the nature of his rule. He describes Nero as a spoiled, angry and unhappy man.\nThe historian Josephus (c. 37\u2013100), while calling Nero a tyrant, was also the first to mention bias against Nero. Of other historians, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But I omit any further discourse about these affairs; for there have been a great many who have composed the history of Nero; some of which have departed from the truth of facts out of favour, as having received benefits from him; while others, out of hatred to him, and the great ill-will which they bore him, have so impudently raved against him with their lies, that they justly deserve to be condemned. Nor do I wonder at such as have told lies of Nero, since they have not in their writings preserved the truth of history as to those facts that were earlier than his time, even when the actors could have no way incurred their hatred, since those writers lived a long time after them.\nAlthough more of a poet than a historian, Lucan (c. 39\u201365) has one of the kindest accounts of Nero's rule. He writes of peace and prosperity under Nero, in contrast to previous war and strife. Ironically, he was later involved in a conspiracy to overthrow Nero and was executed.\nPhilostratus II, \"the Athenian\" (c. 172\u2013250), spoke of Nero in the \"Life of Apollonius of Tyana\" (Books 4\u20135). Although he has a generally bad or dim view of Nero, he speaks of others' positive reception of Nero in the East.\nThe history of Nero by Pliny the Elder (c. 24\u201379) did not survive. Still, there are several references to Nero in Pliny's \"Natural Histories\". Pliny has one of the worst opinions of Nero and calls him an \"enemy of mankind\".\nPlutarch (c. 46\u2013127) mentions Nero indirectly in his account of the Life of Galba and the Life of Otho, as well as in the Vision of Thespesius in Book 7 of the Moralia, where a voice orders that Nero's soul be transferred to a more offensive species. Nero is portrayed as a tyrant, but those that replace him are not described as better.\nSeneca (c. 4 BC\u2013AD 65), Nero's teacher and advisor, writes very positively of Nero.\nSuetonius (c. 69\u2013130) was a member of the equestrian order, and he was the head of the department of the imperial correspondence. While in this position, Suetonius started writing biographies of the emperors, accentuating the anecdotal and sensational aspects. By this account, Nero raped the vestal virgin Rubria.\nThe \"Annals\" by Tacitus (c. 56\u2013117) is the most detailed and comprehensive history on the rule of Nero, despite being incomplete after the year AD 66. Tacitus described the rule of the Julio-Claudian emperors as generally unjust. He also thought that existing writing on them was unbalanced:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The histories of Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and Nero, while they were in power, were falsified through terror, and after their death were written under the irritation of a recent hatred.\nTacitus was the son of a procurator, who married into the elite family of Agricola. He entered his political life as a senator after Nero's death and, by Tacitus' own admission, owed much to Nero's rivals. Realising that this bias may be apparent to others, Tacitus protests that his writing is true.\nIn 1562, Girolamo Cardano published in Basel his \"Encomium Neronis\", which was one of the first historical references of the modern era to portray Nero in a positive light.\nIn Jewish and Christian tradition.\nJewish tradition.\nAn aggadah in the Talmud relates that at the end of year 66, a conflict broke out between Greeks and Jews in Jerusalem and Caesarea Maritima. During the Great Jewish Revolt, as related in tractate \"Gittin\" 56a:7, Nero went to Jerusalem and shot arrows in all four directions; all the arrows landed in the city. He then asked a passing child to repeat the Tanakh verse he had learned that day. The child responded, \"I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel\" (Ezekiel 25:14). Upon hearing this, Nero became terrified: he believed that God wanted the Second Temple to be destroyed, but that he would punish the one to carry out its destruction. Nero said, \"He desires to lay waste His House and to lay the blame on me,\" so he fled, converted to Judaism to escape retribution, and sent Vespasian to quell the revolt.\nThe Talmud adds that the sage Rabbi Meir, who lived during Mishnah's collation and was a prominent supporter of Bar Kokhba's revolt against Roman rule, was a descendant of Nero. Rabbi Meir was considered one of the greatest of the \"Tannaim\" of the third generation (139\u2013163). \nThe Talmudic stories about Nero's conversion and Rabbi Meir being of his descendant met various reactions by later Jewish scholars. Azariah de Rossi and Rabbi David Gans suggest that Nero may have converted secretly, explaining the absence of historical records. The Maharal takes the Talmudic narrative at face value, interpreting it as a reflection of Nero's moral character rather than a literal historical account. Modern scholars view the story as a rabbinic motif linking a non-Jewish figure to a Jewish sage; others, including Rabbi Zvi Ron, allegorize it as a lesson about the consequences of refusing to mediate conflict.\nContemporary Roman and Greek sources do not support the Talmudic legend about Nero's alleged trip to Jerusalem or conversion to Judaism. There is also no record of Nero having any offspring who survived infancy: his only recorded child, Claudia Augusta, died aged 4 months.\nChristian tradition.\nTacitus details Nero's extensive torture and execution of Christians after the Great Fire of Rome in 64, while Suetonius mentions Nero punishing Christians for their \"new and mischievous superstition,\" without linking it to the fire. Christian theologian Tertullian (c.\u2009155\u2013230) was the first to call Nero the first persecutor of Christians, writing \"Examine your records. There you will find that Nero was the first that persecuted this doctrine.\" Lactantius (c. 240\u2013320) also said that Nero \"first persecuted the servants of God\" (i.e., Christians, in this case), as did Sulpicius Severus. However, Suetonius writes that, \"since the Jews constantly made disturbances at the instigation of Chrestus, the [emperor Claudius] expelled them from Rome\" (\"Iudaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantis Roma expulit\"). These expelled \"Jews\" may have, in fact, been early Christians, although Suetonius is not explicit in either direction. In his mention of Priscilla and Aquila, the author of the Christian book of Acts includes the couple among the \"Jews\" affected by Claudius' expulsion of Jews from Rome (Acts 18:2).\nMartyrdoms of Peter and Paul.\nThe earliest evidence suggesting that Nero ordered the execution of an apostle is found in the First Epistle of Clement, which was sent to the Christian community in Corinth and is traditionally dated c. AD 96. The apocryphal Ascension of Isaiah, a Christian text from the 2nd century, relates, \"the slayer of his mother, who himself (even) this king, will persecute the plant which the Twelve Apostles of the Beloved have planted. Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hands\"\u2014this is interpreted as referring to Nero.\nBishop Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 275\u2013339) was the first to report that Paul the Apostle was beheaded and Peter was crucified in Rome during the reign of Nero. He claims Nero's persecution resulted in the deaths of Peter and Paul, but without specific orders. However, first-century accounts suggest Paul survived his two years in Rome, traveled to Hispania, and was tried again in Rome before his death.\nPeter is said to have been crucified upside-down in Rome during Nero's reign in the apocryphal Acts of Peter (c. 200). The account ends with Paul still alive and Nero abiding by God's command not to persecute Christians any longer. By the fourth century, a number of writers were stating that Nero killed Peter and Paul.\nAntichrist.\nThe Sibylline Oracles (books 5 and 8), written in the second century, speak of Nero returning and bringing destruction. Within Christian communities, these writings, along with others, fueled the belief that Nero would be resurrected as the Antichrist. In 310, Lactantius wrote that Nero \"suddenly disappeared, and even the burial place of that noxious wild beast was nowhere to be seen. This has led some persons of extravagant imagination to suppose that, having been conveyed to a distant region, he is still reserved alive; and to him they apply the Sibylline verses.\" Lactantius maintains that it is not right to believe this.\nIn 422, Augustine of Hippo, referring to 2 Thessalonians 2:1\u201311, that he believed that Paul mentioned the coming of the Antichrist. Although he rejects the view, Augustine mentions that many Christians believed Nero was or would return as the Antichrist. He wrote that, \"in saying, 'For the mystery of iniquity doth already work,' he alluded to Nero, whose deeds already seemed to be as the deeds of Antichrist.\"\nSome modern Christian biblical scholars, such as Delbert Hillers (Johns Hopkins University) of the American Schools of Oriental Research and the editors of the \"Oxford Study Bible\" and \"HarperCollins Study Bible\", contend that the number of the beast in the Book of Revelation is a code for Nero, a view that is also supported in Roman Catholic biblical commentaries. The claim is in regard to the \"Babylon\" mentioned in Revelation 17:1\u201318, which, according to Scott G. Sinclair, in the period of the book's authorship, referred to Rome (e.g., 1 Peter 5:13).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21634", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21634", "title": "Neoclassical economics", "text": "Approach to economics\nNeoclassical economics is an approach to economics in which the production, consumption, and valuation (pricing) of goods and services are observed as driven by the supply and demand model. According to this line of thought, the value of a good or service is determined through a hypothetical maximization of utility by income-constrained individuals and of profits by firms facing production costs and employing available information and factors of production. This approach has often been justified by appealing to rational choice theory.\nNeoclassical economics is the dominant approach to microeconomics and, together with Keynesian economics, formed the neoclassical synthesis which dominated mainstream economics as \"neo-Keynesian economics\" from the 1950s onward.\nClassification.\nThe term was originally introduced by Thorstein Veblen in his 1900 article \"Preconceptions of Economic Science\", in which he related marginalists in the tradition of Alfred Marshall \"et al.\" to those in the Austrian School.\nNo attempt will here be made even to pass a verdict on the relative claims of the recognized two or three main \"schools\" of theory, beyond the somewhat obvious finding that, for the purpose in hand, the so-called Austrian school is scarcely distinguishable from the neo-classical, unless it be in the different distribution of emphasis. The divergence between the modernized classical views, on the one hand, and the historical and Marxist schools, on the other hand, is wider, so much so, indeed, as to bar out a consideration of the postulates of the latter under the same head of inquiry with the former.\nIt was later used by John Hicks, George Stigler, and others to include the work of Carl Menger, William Stanley Jevons, L\u00e9on Walras, John Bates Clark, and many others. Today it is usually used to refer to mainstream economics, although it has also been used as an umbrella term encompassing a number of other schools of thought, notably excluding institutional economics, various historical schools of economics, and Marxian economics, in addition to various other heterodox approaches to economics.\nNeoclassical economics is characterized by several assumptions common to many schools of economic thought. There is not a complete agreement on what is meant by neoclassical economics, and the result is a wide range of neoclassical approaches to various problem areas and domains\u2014ranging from neoclassical theories of labor to neoclassical theories of demographic changes.\nTheory.\nAssumptions and objectives.\nIt was expressed by E. Roy Weintraub that neoclassical economics rests on three assumptions, although certain branches of neoclassical theory may have different approaches:\nFrom these three assumptions, neoclassical economists have built a structure to understand the allocation of scarce resources among alternative ends\u2014in fact, understanding such allocation is often considered the definition of economics to neoclassical theorists. Here is how William Stanley Jevons presented \"the problem of Economics\".\nGiven, a certain population, with various needs and powers of production, in possession of certain lands and other sources of material: required, the mode of employing their labor which will maximize the utility of their produce.\nFrom the basic assumptions of neoclassical economics comes a wide range of theories about various areas of economic activity. For example, profit maximization lies behind the neoclassical theory of the firm, while the derivation of demand curves leads to an understanding of consumer goods, and the supply curve allows an analysis of the factors of production. Utility maximization is the source for the neoclassical theory of consumption, the derivation of demand curves for consumer goods, and the derivation of labor supply curves and reservation demand.\nSupply and demand model.\nMarket analysis is typically the neoclassical answer to price questions, such as why does an apple cost less than an automobile, why does the performance of work command a wage, or how to account for interest as a reward for saving. An important device of neoclassical market analysis is the graph presenting supply and demand curves. The curves reflect the behavior of individual buyers and individual sellers. Buyers and sellers interact with each other in and through these markets, and their interactions determine the market prices of anything they buy and sell. In the following graph, the specific price of the commodity being bought/sold is represented by P*.\nIn reaching agreed outcomes of their interactions, the market behaviors of buyers and sellers are driven by their preferences (= wants, utilities, tastes, choices) and productive abilities (= technologies, resources). This creates a complex relationship between buyers and sellers. Thus, the geometrical analytics of supply and demand is only a simplified way how to describe and explore their interaction.\nMarket supply and demand are aggregated across firms and individuals. Their interactions determine equilibrium output and price. The market supply and demand for each factor of production is derived analogously to those for market final output to determine equilibrium income and the income distribution. Factor demand incorporates the marginal productivity relationship of that factor in the output market.\nNeoclassical economics emphasizes equilibria, which are the solutions of agent maximization problems. Regularities in economies are explained by methodological individualism, the position that economic phenomena can be explained by aggregating over the behavior of agents. The emphasis is on microeconomics. Institutions, which might be considered as before and conditioning individual behavior, are de-emphasized. Economic subjectivism accompanies these emphases. See also general equilibrium.\nUtility theory of value.\nNeoclassical economics uses the utility theory of value, which states that the value of a good is determined by the marginal utility experienced by the user. This is one of the main distinguishing factors between neoclassical economics and other earlier economic theories, such as Classical and Marxian, which use the labor theory of value that value is determined by the labor required for production.\nThe partial definition of the neoclassical theory of value states that the value of an object of market exchange is determined by human interaction between the preferences and productive abilities of individuals. This is one of the most important neoclassical hypotheses. However, the neoclassical theory also asks what exactly is causing the supply and demand behaviors of buyers and sellers, and how exactly the preferences and productive abilities of people determine the market prices. Therefore, the neoclassical theory of value is a theory of these forces: the preferences and productive abilities of humans. They are the final causal determinants of the behavior of supply and demand and therefore of value. According to neoclassical economics, individual preferences and productive abilities are the essential forces that generate all other economic events (demands, supplies, and prices).\nMarket failure and externalities.\nDespite favoring markets to organize economic activity, neoclassical theory acknowledges that markets do not always produce the socially desirable outcome due to the presence of externalities. Externalities are considered a form of market failure. Neoclassical economists vary in terms of the significance they ascribe to externalities in market outcomes.\nPareto criterion.\nIn a market with a very large number of participants and under appropriate conditions, for each good, there will be a unique price that allows all welfare\u2013improving transactions to take place. This price is determined by the actions of the individuals pursuing their preferences. If these prices are flexible, meaning that all parties are able to pursue transactions at any rates they find mutually beneficial, they will, under appropriate assumptions, tend to settle at price levels that allow for all welfare\u2013improving transactions. Under these assumptions, free-market processes yield an optimum of social welfare. This type of group welfare is called the Pareto optimum (criterion) after its discoverer Vilfredo Pareto.\nWolff and Resnick (2012) describe the Pareto optimality in another way. According to them, the term \"Pareto optimal point\" signifies the equality of consumption and production, which indicates that the demand (as a ratio of marginal utilities) and supply (as a ratio of marginal costs) sides of an economy are in balance with each other. The Pareto optimum point also signifies that society has fully realized its potential output.\nNormative judgments in neoclassical economics are shaped by the Pareto criterion. As a result, many neoclassical economists favor a relatively laissez-faire approach to government intervention in markets, since it is very difficult to make a change where no one will be worse off. However, many less conservative neoclassical economists instead use the compensation principle, which says that an intervention is good if the total gains are larger than the total losses, even if losers are not compensated in practice.\nInternational trade.\nNeoclassical economics favors free trade according to David Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage. This idea holds that free trade between two countries is mutually beneficial because it allows the greatest total consumption in both countries.\nOrigins.\nClassical economics, developed in the 18th and 19th centuries, included a value theory and distribution theory. The value of a product was thought to depend on the costs involved in producing that product. The explanation of costs in classical economics was simultaneously an explanation of distribution. A landlord received rent, workers received wages, and a capitalist tenant farmer received profits on their investment. This classic approach included the work of Adam Smith and David Ricardo.\nHowever, some economists gradually began emphasizing the perceived value of a good to the consumer. They proposed a theory that the value of a product was to be explained with differences in utility (usefulness) to the consumer. (In England, economists tended to conceptualize utility in keeping with the utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham and later of John Stuart Mill.)\nThe third step from political economy to economics was the introduction of marginalism and the proposition that economic actors made decisions based on margins. For example, a person decides to buy a second sandwich based on how full he or she is after the first one, a firm hires a new employee based on the expected increase in profits the employee will bring. This differs from the aggregate decision-making of classical political economy in that it explains how vital goods such as water can be cheap, while luxuries can be expensive.\nMarginal revolution.\nThe change in economic theory from classical to neoclassical economics has been called the \"marginal revolution\", although it has been argued that the process was slower than the term suggests. It is frequently dated from William Stanley Jevons's \"Theory of Political Economy\" (1871), Carl Menger's \"Principles of Economics\" (1871), and L\u00e9on Walras's \"Elements of Pure Economics\" (1874\u20131877). Historians of economics and economists have debated:\nIn particular, Jevons saw his economics as an application and development of Jeremy Bentham's utilitarianism and never had a fully developed general equilibrium theory. Menger did not embrace this hedonic conception, explained diminishing marginal utility in terms of subjective prioritization of possible uses, and emphasized disequilibrium and the discrete; further, Menger had an objection to the use of mathematics in economics, while the other two modeled their theories after 19th-century mechanics. Jevons built on the hedonic conception of Bentham or of Mill, while Walras was more interested in the interaction of markets than in explaining the individual psyche.\nAlfred Marshall's textbook, \"Principles of Economics\" (1890), was the dominant textbook in England a generation later. Marshall's influence extended elsewhere; Italians would compliment Maffeo Pantaleoni by calling him the \"Marshall of Italy\". Marshall thought classical economics attempted to explain prices by the cost of production. He asserted that earlier marginalists went too far in correcting this imbalance by overemphasizing utility and demand. Marshall thought that \"We might as reasonably dispute whether it is the upper\nor the under blade of a pair of scissors that cuts a piece of paper, as to whether the value is governed by utility or cost of production\".\nMarshall explained price by the intersection of supply and demand curves. The introduction of different market \"periods\" was an important innovation of Marshall's:\nMarshall took supply and demand as stable functions and extended supply and demand explanations of prices to all runs. He argued supply was easier to vary in longer runs, and thus became a more important determinant of price in the very long run.\nCambridge and Lausanne school.\nCambridge and Lausanne School of economics form the basis of neoclassical economics. Until the 1930s, the evolution of neoclassical economics was determined by the Cambridge school and was based on the marginal equilibrium theory. At the beginning of the 1930s, the Lausanne general equilibrium theory became the general basis of neoclassical economics and the marginal equilibrium theory was understood as its simplification.\nThe thinking of the Cambridge school continued in the steps of classical political economics and its traditions but was based on the new approach that originated from the marginalist revolution. Its founder was Alfred Marshall, and among the main representatives were Arthur Cecil Pigou, Ralph George Hawtrey and Dennis Holme Robertson. Pigou worked on the theory of welfare economics and the quantity theory of money. Hawtrey and Robertson developed the Cambridge cash balance approach to theory of money and influenced the trade cycle theory. Until the 1930s, John Maynard Keynes was also influencing the theoretical concepts of the Cambridge school. The key characteristic of the Cambridge school was its instrumental approach to the economy \u2013 the role of the theoretical economist is first to define theoretical instruments of economic analysis and only just then apply them to real economic problems.\nThe main representatives of the Lausanne school of economic thought were L\u00e9on Walras, Vilfredo Pareto and Enrico Barone. The school became famous for developing the general equilibrium theory. In the contemporary economy, the general equilibrium theory is the methodologic basis of mainstream economics in the form of New classical macroeconomics and New Keynesian macroeconomics.\nEvolution.\nPeriodization.\nThe evolution of neoclassical economics is sometimes divided into three phases. \nThe pre-Keynesian phase began when neoclassical economics initially formed (in the second half of the nineteenth century) and continued until the arrival of Keynesian economics in the 1930s. \nThe Keynesian phase occurred from 1940 through the first half of the 1970s. During this era, Keynesian economics dominated the world's economy but neoclassical economics did not cease to exist. It continued in the development of its microeconomic theory and began creating its own macroeconomic theory. The development of the neoclassical macroeconomic theory was based on the development of the quantity theory of money and the theory of distribution. One of the products of the second phase was the Neoclassical synthesis, representing a special combination of neoclassical microeconomics and Keynesian macroeconomics. \nThe third phase began in the 1970s when neoclassical schools of thoughts such as Monetarism and New classical macroeconomics were developed and rose to prominence. Despite the diverse focus and approach of these theories, they are all based on the theoretical and methodological principles of traditional neoclassical economics.\nEvolution.\nAn important change in neoclassical economics occurred around 1933. Joan Robinson and Edward H. Chamberlin, with the nearly simultaneous publication of their respective books, \"The Economics of Imperfect Competition\" (1933) and \"The Theory of Monopolistic Competition\" (1933), introduced models of imperfect competition. Theories of market forms and industrial organization grew out of this work. They also emphasized certain tools, such as the marginal revenue curve. In her book, Robinson formalized a type of limited competition. The conclusions of her work for welfare economics were worrying: they were implying that the market mechanism operates in a way that the workers are not paid according to the full value of their marginal productivity of labor and that also the principle of consumer sovereignty is impaired. This theory heavily influenced the anti\u2013trust policies of many Western countries in the 1940s and 1950s.\nJoan Robinson's work on imperfect competition, at least, was a response to certain problems of Marshallian partial equilibrium theory highlighted by Piero Sraffa. Anglo-American economists also responded to these problems by turning towards general equilibrium theory, developed on the European continent by Walras and Vilfredo Pareto. J. R. Hicks's \"Value and Capital\" (1939) was influential in introducing his English-speaking colleagues to these traditions. He, in turn, was influenced by the Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek's move to the London School of Economics, where Hicks then studied.\nThese developments were accompanied by the introduction of new tools, such as indifference curves and the theory of ordinal utility. The level of mathematical sophistication of neoclassical economics increased. Paul Samuelson's \"Foundations of Economic Analysis\" (1947) contributed to this increase in mathematical modeling.\nThe interwar period in American economics has been argued to have been pluralistic, with neoclassical economics and institutionalism competing for allegiance. Frank Knight, an early Chicago school economist attempted to combine both schools. But this increase in mathematics was accompanied by greater dominance of neoclassical economics in Anglo-American universities after World War II. Some argue that outside political interventions, such as McCarthyism, and internal ideological bullying played an important role in this rise to dominance.\nHicks' book, \"Value and Capital\" had two main parts. The second, which was arguably not immediately influential, presented a model of temporary equilibrium. Hicks was influenced directly by Hayek's notion of intertemporal coordination and paralleled by earlier work by Lindhal. This was part of an abandonment of disaggregated long-run models. This trend probably reached its culmination with the Arrow\u2013Debreu model of intertemporal equilibrium. The Arrow\u2013Debreu model has canonical presentations in G\u00e9rard Debreu's \"Theory of Value\" (1959) and in Arrow and Hahn's \"General Competitive Analysis\" (1971).\nNeoclassical synthesis.\nMany of these developments were against the backdrop of improvements in both econometrics, that is the ability to measure prices and changes in goods and services, as well as their aggregate quantities, and in the creation of macroeconomics, or the study of whole economies. The attempt to combine neo-classical microeconomics and Keynesian macroeconomics would lead to the neoclassical synthesis which was the dominant paradigm of economic reasoning in English-speaking countries from the 1950s till the 1970s. Hicks and Samuelson were for example instrumental in mainstreaming Keynesian economics.\nThe dominance of Keynesian economics was upset by its inability to explain the economic crises of the 1970s- neoclassical economics emerged distinctly in macroeconomics as the new classical school, which sought to explain macroeconomic phenomenon using neoclassical microeconomics. It and its contemporary New Keynesian economics contributed to the new neoclassical synthesis of the 1990s, which informs much of mainstream macroeconomics today.\nCambridge capital controversy.\nProblems exist with making the neoclassical general equilibrium theory compatible with an economy that develops over time and includes capital goods. This was explored in a major debate in the 1960s\u2014the \"Cambridge capital controversy\"\u2014about the validity of neoclassical economics, with an emphasis on economic growth, capital, aggregate theory, and the marginal productivity theory of distribution. There were also internal attempts by neoclassical economists to extend the Arrow\u2013Debreu model to disequilibrium investigations of stability and uniqueness. However, a result known as the Sonnenschein\u2013Mantel\u2013Debreu theorem suggests that the assumptions that must be made to ensure that equilibrium is stable and unique are quite restrictive.\nCriticisms.\nAlthough the neoclassical approach is dominant in economics, the field of economics includes others, such as Marxist, behavioral, Schumpeterian, developmentalist, Austrian, post-Keynesian, Humanistic economics, real-world economics and institutionalist schools. All of these schools differ with the neoclassical school and each other, and incorporate various criticisms of the neoclassical economics. Not all criticism comes from other schools: some prominent economists such as Nobel Prize recipient and former chief economist of the World Bank Joseph Stiglitz are vocally critical of mainstream neoclassical economics.\nMethodology and mathematical models.\nSome see mathematical models used in contemporary research in mainstream economics as having transcended neoclassical economics, while others disagree. Mathematical models also include those in game theory, linear programming, and econometrics. Critics of neoclassical economics are divided into those who think that highly mathematical method is inherently wrong and those who think that mathematical method is useful even if neoclassical economics has other problems.\nCritics such as Tony Lawson contend that neoclassical economics' reliance on functional relations is inadequate for social phenomena in which knowledge of one variable does not reliably predict another. The different factors affecting economic outcomes cannot be experimentally isolated from one another in a laboratory; therefore the explanatory and predictive power of mathematical economic analysis is limited. Lawson proposes an alternative approach called the contrast explanation which he says is better suited for determining causes of events in social sciences. More broadly, critics of economics as a science vary, with some believing that all mathematical economics is problematic or even pseudoscience and others believing it is still useful but has less certainty and higher risk of methodology problems than in other fields.\nMilton Friedman, one of the most prominent and influential neoclassical economists of the 20th century, responded to criticisms that assumptions in economic models were often unrealistic by saying that theories should be judged by their ability to predict events rather than by the supposed realism of their assumptions. He claimed that, on the contrary, a theory with more absurd assumptions has stronger predictive power. He argued that a theory's ability to theoretically explain reality is irrelevant compared to its ability to empirically predict reality, no matter the method of getting to that prediction.\nObjectivity and pluralism.\nNeoclassical economics is often criticized for having a normative bias despite sometimes claiming to be \"value-free\". Such critics argue an ideological side of neoclassical economics, generally to argue that students should be taught more than one economic theory and that economics departments should be more pluralistic.\nRational behavior assumptions.\nOne of the most widely criticized aspects of neoclassical economics is its set of assumptions about human behavior and rationality. The \"economic man\", or a hypothetical human who acts according to neoclassical assumptions, does not necessarily behave the same way as humans do in reality. The economist and critic of capitalism Thorstein Veblen claimed that neoclassical economics assumes a person to be \"a lightning calculator of pleasures and pains, who oscillates like a homogeneous globule of desire of happiness under the impulse of stimuli that shift about the area, but leave him intact.\"\nVeblen's characterization references a number of commonly criticized rationality assumptions: that people make decisions using a rigid utilitarian framework, have perfect information available about their options, have perfect information processing ability allowing them to immediately calculate utility for all possible options, and are independent decision-makers whose choices are unaffected by their surroundings or by other people. While Veblen is from the Institutional school, the Behavioral school of economics is focused on studying the mechanisms of human decision-making and how they differ from neoclassical assumptions of rationality. Altruistic or empathy-based behavior is another form of \"non-rational\" decision making studied by behavioral economists, which differs from the neoclassical assumption that people only act in self-interest. Behavioral economists account for how psychological, neurological, and even emotional factors significantly affect economic perceptions and behaviors.\nRational choice theory need not be problematic according to a paper written by the economist Gary Becker which was published in 1962 in the \"Journal of Political Economy\" called \"Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory\". According to Becker, this paper demonstrates \"how the important theorems of modern economics result from a general principle which not only includes rational behavior and survivor arguments as special cases, but also much irrational behavior.\" The specific important theorems and results which are shown to result from a broad range of different type of irrational behavior, as well as rational behavior by market participants in the paper, are that market demand curves are downward sloping or \"negatively inclined\", and that if an industry transformed from a competitive industry to a completely monopolistic cartel and profits are always maximized, then output per firm under the cartel would decrease compared to its equilibrium level when the industry was competitive.\nThis paper was largely based on the 1950 paper \"Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic Theory\" by Armen Alchian. The paper sets out a justification for supply analysis separate from relying on the assumption of rational consumption, the representative firm and the way neoclassical economists analyze firm behavior in markets which does not rely on rational behavior by the decision makers in those firms, nor any other type of foresighted or goal directed behavior by them. Becker's subsequent 1962 paper provides an independent justification for neoclassical market demand analysis. The two papers offer separate justifications for the use of neoclassical methodology for supply and demand analysis without relying on assumptions otherwise criticised as implausible.\nMethodological individualism.\nNeoclassical economics offers an approach to studying the economic behavior of \"homo-economicus\". This theory is based on methodological individualism and adopts an atomistic approach to social phenomena, according to which social atoms are the individuals and their actions. According to this doctrine, individuals are independent of social phenomena, but the opposite is not true. Individuals' actions can explain macro-scale behavior, and social collections are nothing more than aggregates, and they do not add anything to its components (Ibid). Although methodological individualism does not negate complex social phenomena such as institutions or behavioral rules, it argues any explanation should be based on constituent components' characteristics of those institutions. This is a reductionist approach based on which it is believed that the characteristics of the social system are derived from the individuals' preferences and their actions.\nA critique of this approach is that the individuals' preferences and interests are not fixed. The structures contextualize individual's. According to social constructivists, systems are co-constituted alongside the actors, and ideas within the system define actors' identities, their interests, and thus their behavior. In this regard, actors in various circumstances (exposed to different impressions and experiences) will construct their interests and preferences differently, both within each other and over time. Given the individualistic foundation of the economic theory, critics argue that this theory should consider individual action's structural contexts.\nInequality.\nNeoclassical economics is often criticized as promoting policies that increase inequality and as failing to recognise the impact of inequality on economic outcomes. In the case of the former claim, neoclassical economics is often used for analysis in support of policies reducing economic inequality\u2014in particular through determining the diminishing marginal utility of income, whereby poorer individuals gain greater net benefits from a given increase in income than comparable richer individuals, but more generally by being the primary means by which the impact on inequality of any given policy is assessed. In the case of the latter claim, neoclassical economics is the prevailing lens through which the relationship between inequality and economic outcomes is studied.\nEthics of markets.\nNeoclassical economics tends to promote commodification and privatization of goods due to its principle that market exchange generally results in the most effective allocation of goods. For example, some economists support markets for human organs, on the basis that it increases supply of life-saving organs and benefits willing donors financially. However, there are arguments in moral philosophy that use of markets for certain goods is inherently unethical. Political philosopher Michael Sandel summarizes that market exchanges have two ethical problems: coercion and corruption. Coercion happens because market participation may not be as free as proponents often claim: people often participate in markets because it is the only way to survive, which is not truly voluntary. Corruption describes how commodification of a good can inherently degrade its value.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21636", "revid": "47568590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21636", "title": "Naomi Wolf", "text": "American feminist, journalist, and conspiracy theorist (born 1962)\nNaomi Rebekah Wolf (born 1962) is an American feminist author, journalist, and conspiracy theorist.\nAfter the 1991 publication of her first book, \"The Beauty Myth\", Wolf became a prominent figure in the third wave of the feminist movement. Feminists including Gloria Steinem and Betty Friedan praised her work. Others, including Camille Paglia, criticized it. In the 1990s, Wolf was a political advisor to the presidential campaigns of Bill Clinton and Al Gore.\nWolf's later books include the bestseller ' in 2007 and '. Critics have challenged the quality and accuracy of her books' scholarship; her serious misreading of court records for \"Outrages\" (2019) led to its U.S. publication being canceled. Wolf's career in journalism has included topics such as abortion and the Occupy Wall Street movement in articles for media outlets such as \"The Nation\", \"The New Republic\", \"The Guardian\", and \"The Huffington Post\".\nSince around 2014, Wolf has been described by journalists and media outlets as a conspiracy theorist. She has been criticized for posting misinformation on topics such as beheadings carried out by ISIS, the Western African Ebola virus epidemic, and Edward Snowden.\nWolf has objected to COVID-19 lockdowns and criticized COVID-19 vaccines. In June 2021, her Twitter account was suspended for posting anti-vaccine misinformation.\nEarly life and education.\nNaomi Rebekah Wolf was born in 1962 in San Francisco, California, to a Jewish family. Her mother is Deborah Goleman Wolf, an anthropologist and the author of \"The Lesbian Community\". Her father was Leonard Wolf, a Romanian-born scholar of gothic horror novels, faculty member at San Francisco State University, and Yiddish translator. Leonard Wolf died from Parkinson's disease on March 20, 2019. Wolf has a brother, Aaron, and a half-brother, Julius, from her father's earlier relationship; it remained a secret until Wolf was in her 30s.\nWolf attended Lowell High School and debated in regional speech tournaments as a member of the Lowell Forensic Society. She attended Yale University, receiving her Bachelor of Arts in English literature in 1984. From 1985 to 1987, she was a Rhodes Scholar at New College, University of Oxford. Wolf's initial period at Oxford University was difficult, as she experienced \"raw sexism, overt snobbery and casual antisemitism\". Her writing became so personal and subjective that her tutor advised against submitting her doctoral thesis. Wolf told interviewer Rachel Cooke, writing for \"The Observer\", in 2019: \"My subject didn't exist. I wanted to write feminist theory, and I kept being told by the dons there was no such thing.\" Her writing at this time formed the basis of her first book, \"The Beauty Myth\".\nWolf ultimately returned to Oxford, completing her Doctor of Philosophy degree in English literature in 2015. Her thesis, supervised by Stefano Evangelista of Trinity College, formed the basis of her 2019 book \"Outrages: Sex, Censorship, and the Criminalization of Love\". The thesis (which the journal \"Times Higher Education\" called \"error-strewn\") was subject to significant corrections of its scholarship, prompting several articles in the UK higher education press.\nPolitical consultant.\nWolf was involved in President Bill Clinton's 1996 reelection bid, brainstorming with Clinton's team about ways to reach female voters. Hired by Dick Morris, she wanted Morris to promote Clinton as \"The Good Father\" and a protector of \"the American house\". She met with him every few weeks for nearly a year, according to the book Morris wrote about the campaign, \"Behind the Oval Office\". Wolf managed to \"persuade me to pursue school uniforms, tax breaks for adoption, simpler cross-racial adoption laws and more workplace flexibility.\" The advice she gave was without payment, Morris said in November 1999, as Wolf was fearful the knowledge of her involvement in the campaign might have negative consequences for Clinton.\nDuring Al Gore's bid for the presidency in the 2000 election, Wolf was hired as a consultant. Her ideas and participation in the campaign generated considerable media coverage. According to a report by Michael Duffy and Karen Tumulty in \"Time\", Wolf was paid a salary of $15,000 (by November 1999, $5,000) per month \"in exchange for advice on everything from how to win the women's vote to shirt-and-tie combinations.\" Wolf's direct involvement in the \"Time\" article was unclear; she declined to be interviewed on the record.\nIn a \"New York Times\" interview with Melinda Henneberger, Wolf said she had been appointed in January 1999 and denied having advised Gore on his wardrobe. Wolf said she had mentioned the term \"alpha male\" only once in passing and that it \"was just a truism, something the pundits had been saying for months, that the vice president is in a supportive role and the president is in an initiatory role\u2026I used those terms as shorthand in talking about the difference in their job descriptions\". Wolf told Katharine Viner of \"The Guardian\" in 2001: \"I believe his agenda for women was a really historic agenda. I was honored to bring the concerns of women to Gore's table. I'm sorry that he didn't win and the controversy was worth it for me.\" She told Viner the men in Gore's campaign, at the equivalent level, were paid more than she was.\nWorks.\n\"The Beauty Myth\" (1991).\nIn 1991, Wolf gained international attention as a spokeswoman of third-wave feminism after the publication of her first book, \"The Beauty Myth\", an international bestseller. \"The New York Times\" named it \"one of the seventy most influential books of the twentieth century\". She argues that \"beauty\" as a normative value is entirely socially constructed, and that the patriarchy determines the content of that construction with the objective to maintain women's subjugation.\nWolf proposes the concept of an \"iron maiden\", an intrinsically unreachable norm that is then used to physically and mentally punish women for failing to achieve and adhere to it. She condemns the fashion and beauty industries for exploiting women, but also writes that the beauty myth pervades all aspects of human life. Wolf believes that women should have \"the freedom to do anything we choose with our faces and bodies without being penalized by an ideology that uses attitudes, economic pressure, and even legal judgments about women's looks to psychologically and politically destroy us.\" She claims that the \"beauty myth\" has targeted women in five areas: labor, religion, sex, violence, and hunger. Finally, Wolf advocates for a relaxation of conventional beauty norms. In her introduction, she scaffolds her work upon the achievements of second-wave feminists and offers the following analysis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The more legal and material hindrances women have broken through, the more strictly and heavily and cruelly images of female beauty have come to weigh upon us ... [D]uring the past decade, women breached the power structure; meanwhile, eating disorders rose exponentially and cosmetic surgery became the fastest-growing specialty ... [P]ornography became the main media category, ahead of legitimate films and records combined, and thirty-three thousand American women told researchers that they would rather lose ten to fifteen pounds than achieve any other goal ... More women have more money and power and scope and legal recognition than we have ever had before; but in terms of how we feel about ourselves physically, we may actually be worse off than our unliberated grandmothers.\nAccuracy.\nChristina Hoff Sommers criticized Wolf for publishing the estimate that 150,000 women were dying every year from anorexia. Sommers said she traced the source to the American Anorexia and Bulimia Association, which said it was misquoted; the figure refers to sufferers, not fatalities. Wolf's citation came from a book by Brumberg, who referred to an American Anorexia and Bulimia Association newsletter and misquoted the newsletter. Wolf acknowledged the error and changed it in future editions. Sommers gave an estimate for the number of fatalities in 1990 as 100\u2013400. The annual anorexia casualties in the U.S. were estimated to be around 50 to 60 per year in the mid-1990s. In 1995, for an article in \"The Independent on Sunday\", British journalist Joan Smith recalled asking Wolf to explain her unsourced assertion in \"The Beauty Myth\" that the UK \"has 3.5 million anorexics or bulimics (95 per cent of them female), with 6,000 new cases yearly\". Wolf replied, according to Smith, that she had calculated the statistics from patients with eating disorders at one clinic.\nCaspar Schoemaker of the Netherlands Trimbos Institute published a paper in the academic journal \"Eating Disorders\" demonstrating that of the 23 statistics cited by Wolf in \"Beauty Myth\", 18 were incorrect, with Wolf citing numbers that average out to 8 times the number in the source she was citing.\nReception.\nSecond-wave feminist Germaine Greer wrote that \"The Beauty Myth\" was \"the most important feminist publication since \"The Female Eunuch\" (Greer's own work), and Gloria Steinem wrote, \"The Beauty Myth\" is a smart, angry, insightful book, and a clarion call to freedom. Every woman should read it.\" British novelist Fay Weldon called the book \"essential reading for the New Woman\". Betty Friedan wrote in \"Allure\" magazine that \"\"The Beauty Myth\" and the controversy it is eliciting could be a hopeful sign of a new surge of feminist consciousness.\"\nCamille Paglia, whose \"Sexual Personae\" was published the same year as \"The Beauty Myth\", derided Wolf as unable to perform \"historical analysis\" and called her education \"completely removed from reality\". These comments touched off a series of debates between Wolf and Paglia in the pages of \"The New Republic\".\nCaryn James wrote in \"The New York Times\":No other work has so forcefully confronted the anti-feminism that emerged during the conservative, yuppified 1980's, or so honestly depicted the confusion of accomplished women who feel emotionally and physically tortured by the need to look like movie stars. Even by the standards of pop-cultural feminist studies, \"The Beauty Myth\" is a mess, but that doesn't mean it's wrong. James also wrote that the book's \"claims of an intensified anti-feminism are plausible, but Ms. Wolf doesn't begin to prove them because her logic is so lame, her evidence so easily knocked down.\" Marilyn Yalom in \"The Washington Post\" called the book \"persuasive\" and praised its \"accumulated evidence\".\nRevisiting \"The Beauty Myth\" in 2019 for \"The New Republic\", literary critic Maris Kreizman recalls that reading it as an undergraduate made her \"world burst open\", but as she matured, Kreizman saw Wolf's books as \"poorly argued tracts\" with Wolf making \"wilder and wilder assertions\" over time. Kreizman \"began to write [Wolf] off as a fringe character\" despite the fact that she had \"once informed my own feminism so deeply.\"\n\"Fire with Fire\" (1993).\nIn \"Fire with Fire\" (1993), Wolf wrote about politics, female empowerment, and women's sexual liberation. She wished to persuade women to reject \"victim feminism\" in favor of \"power feminism\". She argued for diminishing the issue of opposing men, avoiding divisive issues such as abortion and the rights of lesbians, and considering more universal issues like violence against women, pay disparities and sexual harassment. Mary Nemeth wrote in \"Maclean's\" that her \"central thesis\u2014that when Anita Hill in 1991 accused U.S. Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment she provoked a 'genderquake' that turned American women into 'the political ruling class'\u2014seems grossly exaggerated.\" Melissa Benn in the \"London Review of Books\" called the book Wolf's \"call for a realpolitik in which 'sisterhood and capital' might be allies\".\nMichiko Kakutani of \"The New York Times\" assailed \"Fire with Fire\" for its \"dubious oversimplifications and highly debatable assertions\" and its \"disconcerting penchant for inflationary prose\", but approved of Wolf's \"efforts to articulate an accessible, pragmatic feminism, \u2026helping to replace strident dogma with common sense.\" \"Time\" magazine reviewer Martha Duffy dismissed the book as \"flawed\", but wrote that Wolf was \"an engaging raconteur\" who was also \"savvy about the role of TV\u2014especially the Thomas-Hill hearings and daytime talk shows\u2014in radicalizing women, including homemakers\", characterizing the book as advocating an inclusive strain of feminism that welcomed abortion opponents. Feminist author Natasha Walter wrote in \"The Independent\" that the book \"has its faults, but compared with \"The Beauty Myth\" it has energy and spirit, and generosity too.\" But Walter criticized it for having a \"narrow agenda\" where \"you will look in vain for much discussion of older women, of black women, of women with low incomes, of mothers.\" Calling Wolf a \"media star\", Walter wrote: \"She is particularly good, naturally, on the role of women in the media.\"\n\"Promiscuities\" (1997).\n\"Promiscuities\" (1997) reports on and analyzes the shifting patterns of contemporary adolescent sexuality. Wolf argues that literature is rife with examples of male coming-of-age stories, covered autobiographically by D. H. Lawrence, Tobias Wolff, J. D. Salinger, and Ernest Hemingway, and misogynistically by Henry Miller, Philip Roth and Norman Mailer, while female accounts of adolescent sexuality have been systematically suppressed. Schools, in Wolf's opinion, should teach their students \"sexual gradualism\", masturbation, mutual masturbation and oral sex, which she sees as a more credible approach than total abstinence and without the risks of full intercourse.\nWolf uses cross-cultural material to try to demonstrate that women have, across history, been celebrated as more carnal than men. She also argues that women must reclaim the legitimacy of their sexuality by shattering the polarization of women between virgin and whore. Partly an account of her own sexual history, the book urges women to \"redeem the slut in ourselves and rejoice in being bad girls\".\n\"Promiscuities\" generally received negative reviews. In \"The New York Times\", Kakutani wrote that Wolf is \"a frustratingly inept messenger: a sloppy thinker and incompetent writer\" who \"tries in vain to pass off tired observations as radical \"aper\u00e7us\", subjective musings as generational truths, sappy suggestions as useful ideas\". Of Wolf's claims about accounts of female sexuality being suppressed, Kakutani wrote: \"Where has Ms. Wolf been? What about the raunchy confessions that surface daily on radio and television talk shows? What about all the memoirists\u2014from Anais Nin to Kathryn Harrison?\" Two days earlier in the \"Times\", Weaver Courtney praised the book: \"Anyone\u2014particularly anyone who, like Ms. Wolf, was born in the 1960s\u2014will have a very hard time putting down \"Promiscuities\". Told through a series of confessions, her book is a searing and thoroughly fascinating exploration of the complex wildlife of female sexuality and desire.\" In contrast, \"The Library Journal\" excoriated the book, writing, \"Overgeneralization abounds as she attempts to apply the microcosmic events of this mostly white, middle-class, liberal milieu to a whole generation. \u2026There is a desperate defensiveness in the tone of this book which diminishes the force of her argument.\"\n\"Misconceptions\" (2001).\n\"I feel absolutely staggered by what I discovered after giving birth\", Wolf said at the time \"Misconceptions: Truth, Lies, and the Unexpected on the Journey to Motherhood\" was published. \"Birth today is like agribusiness. It's like a chicken plant: they go in, they go out\", she told Katharine Viner. \"Pregnancy, birth and motherhood\" has \"made me a more radical feminist than I have ever been.\" The book draws heavily on Wolf's experience of her first pregnancy. She describes the \"vacuous impassivity\" of the ultrasound technician who gives her the first glimpse of her new baby. Wolf laments her C-section and examines why the procedure is common in the U.S., advocating a return to midwifery. The book's second half is anecdotal, focusing on inequalities between parents with respect to child care. In the section describing being on the operating table having a Caesarean, Wolf compares herself to Jesus at his crucifixion. She outlines a \"mothers' manifesto\", including flexi-time for both parents, neighborhood toy banks, and a radical mothers' movement.\nIn her \"New York Times\" review, Claire Dederer wrote that Wolf \"barely pauses to acknowledge that Caesareans are, at times, a necessary and even lifesaving intervention\" and that she does \"her best writing when she's observing her own life\" as a memoirist, calling Wolf's work in this idiom not \"self-indulgent. It seems vital, and in a sense radical, in the tradition of 1970's feminists who sought to speak to every aspect of women's lives.\"\n\"The Treehouse\" (2005).\nWolf's \"The Treehouse: Eccentric Wisdom from My Father on How to Live, Love, and See\" is an account of her midlife crisis. She revalues her father's love, and his role as an artist and a teacher during a year living in a house in upstate New York.\nIn a promotional interview with \"The Herald\", Wolf related her experience of a vision of Jesus: \"just this figure who was the most perfected human being \u2013 full of light and full of love. \u2026There was light coming out of him holographically, simply because he was unclouded.\" \n\"The End of America\" (2007).\nIn \"\", Wolf takes a historical look at the rise of fascism, outlining 10 steps necessary for a fascist group or government to destroy the democratic character of a nation-state. The book details how this pattern was implemented in Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and elsewhere, and analyzes its emergence and application of all 10 steps in American political affairs since the September 11 attacks. Alex Beam wrote in the \"International Herald Tribune\" (reprinted in \"The New York Times\"): \"In the book, Wolf insists that she is not equating [George W.] Bush with Hitler, nor the United States with Nazi Germany, then proceeds to do just that.\" A month before the 2008 presidential election, she announced her intention to propose means to arrest Bush. \"Americans are facing a coup, as of this morning, October 1st\", she said in a radio interview.\nSeveral years later in 2013, Mark Nuckols argued in \"The Atlantic\" that Wolf's supposed historical parallels between incidents from the era of the European dictators and modern America are based on a highly selective reading in which Wolf omits significant details and misuses her sources. In \"The Daily Beast\", Michael C. Moynihan called the book \"an astoundingly lazy piece of writing.\"\n\"The End of America\" was adapted for the screen as a documentary by filmmakers Annie Sundberg and Ricki Stern, best known for \"The Devil Came on Horseback\" and \"The Trials of Darryl Hunt\". It premiered in October 2008, and was favorably reviewed in \"The New York Times\" by Stephen Holden and by \"Variety\" magazine. Nigel Andrews in the \"Financial Times\" saw aspects of it positively, but \"what isn't plausible or reality-related is the conclusion itself. At the door of the Third Reich, Wolf's credibility collapses.\" Moynihan called it \"an even dumber documentary film\" than the \"dumb book\".\nInterviewed by Alternet in 2010, Wolf compared some of President Barack Obama's actions to those of Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler as typical of dictatorships.\nWolf returned to her \"The End of America\" theme in a \"Globe and Mail\" article in 2014, considering how modern Western women, born in inclusive, egalitarian liberal democracies, are assuming positions of leadership in neofascist political movements.\n\"Give Me Liberty\" (2008).\n\"Give Me Liberty: A Handbook for American Revolutionaries\" was written as a sequel to \"The End of America\". The book looks at times and places in history where citizens faced the closing of an open society and successfully fought back.\n\"Vagina: A New Biography\" (2012).\n\"Vagina: A New Biography\" was much criticized, especially by feminist authors. Katie Roiphe called it \"ludicrous\" in \"Slate\": \"I doubt the most brilliant novelist in the world could have created a more skewering satire of Naomi Wolf's career than her latest book.\" In \"The Nation\", Katha Pollitt called it a \"silly book\" containing \"much dubious neuroscience and much foolishness.\" It becomes \"loopier as it goes on. We learn that women think and feel through their vagina, which can 'grieve' and feel insulted.\"\nToni Bentley wrote in \"The New York Times Book Review\" that Wolf used \"shoddy research methodology\", while with \"her graceless writing, Wolf opens herself to ridicule on virtually every page.\" Janice Turner in \"The Times\" wrote that since Mary Wollstonecraft, female \"writers have argued that women should not be defined by biology\", yet \"Wolf, our self-styled leader, has declared that female consciousness, creativity and destiny all come back\" to a woman's genitals. \"Los Angeles Times\" columnist Meghan Daum wrote: \"By asserting that what's between a woman's ears is directly informed by what's between her legs\u2014'the vagina mediates female confidence, creativity and sense of transcendence,' Wolf writes\u2014it acts as a perverse echo of Republican efforts to limit reproductive rights.\" In the book, according to Suzanne Moore in \"The Guardian\", \"feminism becomes simply a highly mediated form of narcissism devoid of any actual brain/politics connection.\"\nIn \"The New York Review of Books\", Zo\u00eb Heller wrote that the book \"offers an unusually clear insight into the workings of her mystic feminist philosophy\", that the part of the book about the history of the vagina's representation is \"full of childlike generalizations\", and that Wolf's understanding of science \"is pretty shaky too\". In an interview with \"The New York Times\", Wolf rejected claims that she had written more freely than her sources could sustain. In \"The New York Observer\", Nina Burleigh suggested that critics of the book were so vehement \"because (a) their editors handed the book to them for review because they thought it was an Important Feminist Book when it's actually slight and (b) there's a grain of truth in what she's trying to say.\"\nIn response to the criticism, Wolf said in a television interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anything that shows documentation of the brain and vagina connection is going to alarm some feminists\u2026also feminism has kind of retreated into the academy and sort of embraced the idea that all gender is socially constructed and so here is a book that is actually looking at science\u2026though there has been some criticisms of the book from some feminists\u2026who say, \"well you can't look at the science because that means we have to grapple with the science\"\u2026to me the feminist task of creating a just world isn't changed at all by this fascinating neuroscience that shows some differences between men and women.\nAt a party organized to celebrate Wolf's publishing deal for this book, the male host invited guests to make pasta pieces shaped like vulvas. Wolf came to view this as mocking, and recounted feeling pressured to remain silent as the butt of a joke, something she said women often feel pressured to do. She said the incident resulted in her having writer's block for the next six months.\n\"Outrages\" (2019).\nWolf's book \"Outrages: Sex, Censorship, and the Criminalization of Love\" was based on the 2015 doctoral thesis she completed under the supervision of literary scholar Stefano-Maria Evangelista, a Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. It studies the repression of homosexuality in relation to attitudes toward divorce and prostitution, and also in relation to the censorship of books.\n\"Outrages\" was published in the UK in May 2019 by Virago Press. On June 12, 2019, \"Outrages\" was named on the \"O, The Oprah Magazine\"'s \"The 32 Best Books by Women of Summer 2019\" list. The next day, the U.S. publisher recalled all copies from U.S. bookstores.\nIn a 2019 BBC radio interview, broadcaster and author Matthew Sweet identified an error in a central tenet of the book: a misunderstanding of the legal term \"death recorded\", which Wolf had taken to mean that the convict had been executed but in fact means that the convict was pardoned or the sentence was commuted. He cited a website for the Old Bailey Criminal Court, which Wolf had referred to in the interview as one of her sources. Reviewers have described other errors of scholarship in the work.\nAt the Hay Festival in Wales in May 2019, a few days after her exchange with Sweet, Wolf defended her book and said she had already corrected the error. At an event in Manhattan in June, she said she was not embarrassed and felt grateful to Sweet for the correction. On October 18, 2019, it became known that Houghton Mifflin Harcourt's release of the book in the U.S. was being canceled, with copies already printed and distributed being pulled and pulped. Wolf expressed hope that the book would still be published in the U.S.\nIn November 2020, Virago published a UK paperback edition of the book that removed the incorrect references to the execution of men for sodomy included in the hardback edition. Interviewed about the new edition, Sweet said that the book continues to misread historical sources: \"Dr Wolf has misrepresented the experiences of victims of child abuse and violent sexual assault. This is the most profound offence against her discipline, as well as the memories of real people on the historical record\". Cultural historian Fern Riddell called the book a \"calumny against gay people\" in the 19th century and said that Wolf \"presents child rapists and those taking part in acts of bestiality as being gay men in consensual relationships and that is completely wrong\". \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that there had been calls for Wolf's 2015 DPhil to be reexamined, and for Virago to withdraw the book. In a statement to \"The Guardian\", Wolf said the book had been reviewed \"by leading scholars in the field\" and \"it is clear that I have accurately represented the position\". Oxford University stated that a \"statement of clarification\" to Wolf's thesis had been received and approved, and would be \"available for consultation in the Bodleian Library in due course\".\nIn March 2021, \"Times Higher Education\" reported that Wolf's original thesis remained unavailable six years after it was examined. Oxford doctoral graduates can request an embargo of up to three years, with the potential for renewal. The thesis finally became available in April 2021, with nine pages of corrections attached dealing with the misreading of historic criminal records. Wolf had submitted the thesis to the archive in December 2020, more than five years after her DPhil was awarded, and had requested a one-year extension to the embargo period so that she could seek legal advice. The extension request was declined.\nIn university teaching, \"Outrages\" has been used as an example of the danger of misreading historical sources.\nFeminist issues.\nAbortion.\nIn an October 1995 \"New Republic\" article, Wolf was critical of contemporary pro\u2013choice positions, arguing that the movement had \"developed a lexicon of dehumanization\", and urged feminists to accept abortion as a form of homicide and defend the procedure within the ambiguity of this moral conundrum. She continued, \"Abortion should be legal; it is sometimes even necessary. Sometimes the mother must be able to decide that the fetus, in its full humanity, must die.\"\nWolf concluded by speculating that in a world of \"real gender equality\", passionate feminists \"might well hold candlelight vigils at abortion clinics, standing shoulder to shoulder with the doctors who work there, commemorating and saying goodbye to the dead.\" In a 2005 article for \"New York\" magazine on the subtle manipulation of George W. Bush's image among women, Wolf wrote: \"Abortion is an issue not of \"Ms.\" Magazine-style fanaticism or suicidal Republican religious reaction, but a complex issue.\"\nPornography.\nIn a 2003 \"New York\" magazine article, Wolf suggested that the ubiquity of internet pornography tends to enervate men's sexual attraction to real women. She wrote, \"The onslaught of porn is responsible for deadening male libido in relation to real women, and leading men to see fewer and fewer women as 'porn-worthy.' Far from having to fend off porn-crazed young men, young women are worrying that as mere flesh and blood, they can scarcely get, let alone hold, their attention.\" Wolf advocated abstaining from porn not on moral grounds but because \"greater supply of the stimulant equals diminished capacity.\"\nWomen in Islamic countries.\nWolf has commented about the dress required of women living in Muslim countries. In 2008, she wrote in \"The Sydney Morning Herald\", \"The West interprets veiling as repression of women and suppression of their sexuality. But when I traveled in Muslim countries and was invited to join a discussion in women-only settings within Muslim homes, I learned that Muslim attitudes toward women's appearance and sexuality are not rooted in repression, but in a strong sense of public versus private, of what is due to God and what is due to one's husband. It is not that Islam suppresses sexuality, but that it embodies a strongly developed sense of its appropriate channeling\u2014toward marriage, the bonds that sustain family life, and the attachment that secures a home.\"\nOther views.\nConspiracy theories.\nIn the January 2013 issue of \"The Atlantic\", law and business professor Mark Nuckols wrote: \"In her various books, articles, and public speeches, Wolf has demonstrated recurring disregard for the historical record and consistently mutilated the truth with selective and ultimately deceptive use of her sources.\" He added: \"[W]hen she distorts facts to advance her political agenda, she dishonors the victims of history and poisons present-day public discourse about issues of vital importance to a free society.\" Nuckols argued that Wolf \"has for many years now been claiming that a fascist coup in America is imminent. ... [I]n \"The Guardian\" she alleged, with no substantiation, that the U.S. government and big American banks are conspiring to impose a 'totally integrated corporate-state repression of dissent'.\"\nIn the same month, Charles C. W. Cooke wrote in \"National Review Online\" , \"Over the last eight years, Naomi Wolf has written hysterically about coups and about vaginas and about little else besides. She has repeatedly insisted that the country is on the verge of martial law, and transmogrified every threat\u2014both pronounced and overhyped\u2014into a government-led plot to establish a dictatorship. She has made prediction after prediction that has simply not come to pass. Hers are not sober and sensible forecasts of runaway human nature, institutional atrophy, and constitutional decline, but psychedelic fever-dreams that are more typically suited to the \"InfoWars\" crowd.\"\nSarah Ditum wrote in the \"New Statesman\", \"Perhaps it's not that Wolf is a feminist who's degenerated into conspiracism, but instead that she's a conspiracy theorist who happened to fall into feminism first. \"The Beauty Myth\" is a conspiracy theory of a sort, and sometimes conspiracies are real: the self-replicating power structure of patriarchy is one of them.\"\nDefense of Julian Assange.\nShortly after Julian Assange was arrested in 2010, Wolf wrote in an article for \"The Huffington Post\" that the allegations two women made against him amounted to no more than bad manners from a boyfriend. His accusers, she later wrote in several contexts, were working for the CIA, and Assange had been falsely accused.\nOn December 20, 2010, \"Democracy Now!\" featured a debate between Wolf and Jaclyn Friedman on Assange's case. According to Wolf, the alleged victims should have said no, asserted that they consented to having sex with him, and said the claims were politically motivated and demeaned the cause of legitimate rape victims. In a 2011 \"Guardian\" article, she argued that the accuser in rape cases should not retain anonymity. She said anonymity in such cases was \"a relic of the Victorian era\" which \"serves institutions that do not want to prosecute rapists ... this is particularly clear in the Assange case, where public opinion matters far more than usual\". In \"The Nation\", Katha Pollitt wrote that Wolf's argument was that anonymity \"impedes law enforcement\", which Pollitt said \"is a little bizarre: doesn't Wolf realize that anonymity applies only to the media? Everyone in the justice system knows who the complainants are.\" Laurie Penny wrote in the \"New Statesman\" in September 2012 that \"Wolf has done great damage by using her platform as one of the world's most famous feminists to dismiss these women's allegations.\"\nOccupy Wall Street.\nOn October 18, 2011, Wolf was arrested and detained in New York during the Occupy Wall Street protests, having ignored a police warning not to remain on the street in front of a building. She spent about 30 minutes in a cell. She disputed the NYPD's interpretation of applicable laws: \"I was taken into custody for disobeying an unlawful order. The issue is that I actually know New York City permit law\u2026I didn't choose to get myself arrested. I chose to obey the law and that didn't protect me.\"\nA month later, Wolf argued in \"The Guardian\", citing leaked documents, that attacks on the Occupy movement were a coordinated plot orchestrated by federal law enforcement agencies. Those leaks, she alleged, showed that the FBI was privately treating OWS as a terrorist threat rather than a peaceful organization. The response to this article ranged from praise to criticism of Wolf for being overly speculative and creating a conspiracy theory. Wolf responded that there was ample evidence for her argument, and proceeded to review the information available to her at the time of the article, and what she alleged was new evidence since that time.\nImani Gandy of Balloon Juice wrote that \"nothing substantiates Wolf's claims\", that \"Wolf's article has no factual basis whatsoever and is, therefore, a journalistic failure of the highest order\" and that \"it was incumbent upon [Wolf] to fully research her claims and to provide facts to back them up.\" Corey Robin, a political theorist, journalist, and associate professor of political science at Brooklyn College and the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, wrote on his blog: \"The reason Wolf gets her facts wrong is that she's got her theory wrong.\"\nIn a December 2012 \"Guardian\" article, Wolf wrote about FBI documents released following an FOIA request from the Partnership for Civil Justice Fund revealed that the FBI used counterterrorism agents and other resources to monitor the national Occupy movement extensively. The documents contained no references to agency personnel covertly infiltrating Occupy branches, but did indicate that the FBI gathered information from police departments and other law enforcement agencies relating to planned protests. Additionally, the blog Techdirt reported that the documents disclosed a plot by unnamed parties \"to murder OWS leadership in Texas\" but that \"the FBI never bothered to inform the targets of the threats against their lives.\" Wolf wrote:It was more sophisticated than we had imagined: new documents show that the violent crackdown on Occupy last fall [2011]\u2014so mystifying at the time\u2014was not just coordinated at the level of the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security, and local police. The crackdown, which involved, as you may recall, violent arrests, group disruption, canister missiles to the skulls of protesters, people held in handcuffs so tight they were injured, people held in bondage till they were forced to wet or soil themselves\u2014was coordinated with the big banks themselves.\nHow simple\u2026just to label an entity a 'terrorist organization' and choke off, disrupt or indict its sources of financing.\n[The FBI crackdown on Occupy] was never really about 'the terrorists'. It was not even about civil unrest. It was always about this moment, when vast crimes might be uncovered by citizens\u2014it was always, that is to say, meant to be about you.\"Mother Jones\" claimed that none of the documents revealed efforts by federal law enforcement agencies to disband the Occupy camps, and that the documents did not provide much evidence that federal officials attempted to suppress protesters' free speech rights. \"Mother Jones\" said the truth was \"a far cry from Wolf's contention.\"\nEdward Snowden.\nIn June 2013, \"New York\" magazine reported that Wolf, in a recent Facebook post, had expressed her \"creeping concern\" that NSA leaker Edward Snowden \"is not who he purports to be, and that the motivations involved in the story may be more complex than they appear to be.\" Wolf was similarly skeptical of Snowden's \"very pretty pole-dancing Facebooking girlfriend who appeared for, well, no reason in the media coverage ... and who keeps leaking commentary, so her picture can be recycled in the press.\" She wondered whether he was planted by \"the Police State\".\nWolf responded on her website: \"I do find a great deal of media/blog discussion about serious questions such as those I raised, questions that relate to querying some sources of news stories, and their potential relationship to intelligence agencies or to other agendas that may not coincide with the overt narrative, to be extraordinarily ill-informed and naive.\" Of Snowden, she wrote, \"Why should it be seen as bizarre to wonder, if there are some potential red flags\u2014the key term is 'wonder'\u2014if a former NSA spy turned apparent whistleblower might possibly still be\u2014working for the same people he was working for before?\"\n\"Salon\" accused Wolf of making factual errors and misreadings.\nIslamic State executions and other assertions.\nIn a series of Facebook posts in October 2014, Wolf questioned the authenticity of videos purporting to show beheadings of two American journalists and two Britons by the Islamic State, implying that they had been staged by the U.S. government and that the victims and their parents were actors. Wolf also charged that the U.S. was dispatching military troops not to assist in treating the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa, but to carry the disease back home to justify a military takeover of the U.S. She further said that the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, in which Scotland voted to remain in the U.K., was faked. Speaking about this at a demonstration in Glasgow on October 12, Wolf said, \"I truly believe it was rigged.\"\nResponding to such criticism, Wolf said, \"All the people who are attacking me right now for 'conspiracy theories' have no idea what they are talking about ... people who assume the dominant narrative MUST BE TRUE and the dominant reasons MUST BE REAL are not experienced in how that world works.\" Wolf posted, \"I stand by what I wrote.\" But in a later Facebook post, she retracted her statement: \"I am not asserting that the ISIS videos have been staged\", she wrote.\nI certainly sincerely apologize if one of my posts was insensitively worded. I have taken that one down. ... I am not saying the ISIS beheading videos are not authentic. I am not saying they are not records of terrible atrocities. I am saying that they are not yet independently confirmed by two sources as authentic, which any Journalism School teaches, and the single source for several of them, SITE, which received half a million dollars in government funding in 2004, and which is the only source cited for several, has conflicts of interest that should be disclosed to readers of news outlets. Max Fisher commented that \"the videos were widely distributed on open-source jihadist online outlets\" while the \"Maryland-based nonprofit SITE monitors extremist social media.\" Wolf deleted her original Facebook posts.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, Wolf has frequently promoted COVID-19 misinformation, misinformation related to vaccination and 5G conspiracy theories.\nAfter Joe Biden was elected U.S. president, Wolf tweeted on November 9, 2020: \"If I'd known Biden was open to 'lockdowns' as he now states, which is something historically unprecedented in any pandemic, and a terrifying practice, one that won't ever end because elites love it, I would never have voted for him.\" In February 2021, Wolf said on \"Tucker Carlson Tonight\" on Fox News that government COVID-19 restrictions were turning the U.S. \"into a totalitarian state before everyone's eyes\", and went on to say, \"I really hope we wake up quickly, because history also shows that it's a small window in which people can fight back before it is too dangerous to fight back.\"\nIn a March 2021 interview for Sky News Australia, Wolf claimed that lockdown policies are an \"invention\" of Chinese leader Xi Jinping. She also said that \"Every human right in law is being violated\", that Australians are being \"lied to over and over\", and that Australians are being psychologically tortured.\nOn April 19, 2021, Wolf alleged that National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases director Anthony Fauci, Biden's chief medical advisor, \"doesn't work for us\", asserting he had loyalties to Israel that interfered with service to public health. Wolf pointed to $1 million she said Fauci had received from Israel. It was actually the Dan David Prize, a prestigious private award that Fauci received in 2021 for public service.\nWolf opposes COVID-19 vaccine passports, saying they represent \"the absolute end of the line for human liberty in the West.\"\nWolf has frequently shared conspiracy theories concerning the safety and efficacy of vaccines against COVID-19. In April 2021, she was instrumental in amplifying and spreading myths that the vaccines cause female infertility. Wolf's conspiratorial and anti-vaccine stance has been criticized as irresponsible, and she has also been the subject of ridicule.\nTwitter suspended Wolf's account in June 2021, a decision the company said was permanent, according to the London \"Observer\". At the end of July 2021, \"The Daily Beast\" reported that Wolf was a co-plaintiff in former president Donald Trump's social media lawsuit. According to Wolf, Twitter's suspension of her account led her to lose \"over half of her business model, investors in her business, and other sources of income.\"\nWolf appeared on the May 23, 2022, episode of \"The Charlie Kirk Show\", where she said: \"There are military-age men pouring over the border from places like Afghanistan and Ukraine. And the easiest thing in the world to send them to God knows where, you know, and to arm them to assist the World Health Organization.\" She argued that the Second Amendment made it harder for government to subjugate the population, but that it was possible. Wolf said, \"I really hope that it doesn't devolve into civil war, which is really what the next thing is in history when you have an occupying force, which is what the WHO will be, you know, by next week.\"\nIn an October 2022 interview with UK TV channel GB News, Wolf said that COVID-19 vaccines are part of an effort \"to destroy British civil society\". Ofcom, the UK broadcasting regulatory agency, announced an investigation into GB News after receiving more than 400 complaints from members of the public and later found the channel in breach of broadcasting rules.\nIn January 2023, Wolf appeared with Steve Bannon in his War Room show on Robert J. Sigg's Real America's Voice television network. They advertised a book titled \"Pfizer Documents Analysis Report\" that supposedly contained \"50 reports using primary source Pfizer documents released under a court order by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration\". The authors were not mentioned, but summarized as a team of 3,500 medical experts by the name of \"The War Room/DailyClout Pfizer Documents Analysis Project\". According to Wolf and Bannon, the book rips \"the veneer off the myth that mRNA injections are safe and effective.\"\nMartin Luther King Jr..\nOn September 7, 2024, Wolf posted to Twitter, \"Rev MLK Jr was a convicted felon.\" In fact, King's only felony indictment was in February 1960, when an Alabama grand jury issued a warrant for his arrest for perjury. He was found not guilty. Wolf's false claim was subsequently \"fact-checked into oblivion\" by Community Notes. Bernice King, Martin Luther King Jr.'s youngest child, called Wolf's claim an attempt to \"assassinate my father's character\".\nPersonal life.\nWolf's first marriage was in 1993 to journalist David Shipley, then an editor at \"The New York Times\". The couple had two children, a son and daughter. Wolf and Shipley divorced in 2005.\nOn November 23, 2018, Wolf married Brian William O'Shea, a U.S. Army veteran, private detective, and owner of Striker Pierce Investigations. According to a November 2018 \"New York Times\" article, Wolf and O'Shea met in 2014 after people threatened Wolf on the internet after she reported on human rights violations in the Middle East, and her contacts recommended O'Shea.\nWolf is often confused with author Naomi Klein; this confusion is a major subject of Klein's 2023 book \"Doppelganger\", which Wolf did not contribute to despite numerous attempts by Klein to contact her.\nAlleged \"sexual encroachment\" incident at Yale.\nIn a 2004 article for \"New York\" magazine, Wolf accused literary scholar Harold Bloom of a \"sexual encroachment\" in 1983 for touching her inner thigh. She said that what she alleged Bloom did was not harassment, either legally or emotionally, and she did not think herself a \"victim\", but that she had harbored this secret for 21 years. In a 2015 interview with \"Time\", Bloom denied ever being indoors with \"this person\". Explaining why she had finally gone public with the charges, Wolf wrote:\nI began, nearly a year ago, to try\u2014privately\u2014to start a conversation with my alma mater that would reassure me that steps had been taken in the ensuing years to ensure that unwanted sexual advances of this sort weren't still occurring. I expected Yale to be responsive. After nine months and many calls and e-mails, I was shocked to conclude that the atmosphere of collusion that had helped to keep me quiet twenty years ago was still intact\u2014as secretive as a Masonic lodge. Sexual encroachment in an educational context or a workplace is, most seriously, a corruption of meritocracy; it is in this sense parallel to bribery. I was not traumatized personally, but my educational experience was corrupted. If we rephrase sexual transgression in school and work as a civil-rights and civil-society issue, everything becomes less emotional, less personal. If we see this as a systemic corruption issue, then when people bring allegations, the focus will be on whether the institution has been damaged in its larger mission.\nIn \"Slate\" magazine around the time the allegations against Bloom first surfaced, Meghan O'Rourke wrote that Wolf generalized about sexual assault at Yale on the basis of her alleged personal experience. Moreover, O'Rourke wrote, despite Wolf's assertion that sexual assault existed at Yale, she did not interview any Yale students for her story. In addition, O'Rourke wrote, \"She jumps through verbal hoops to make it clear she was not 'personally traumatized,' yet she spends paragraphs describing the incident in precisely those terms.\" O'Rourke wrote that, despite Wolf's claim that her educational experience was corrupted, Wolf \"neglects to mention that she later was awarded a Rhodes [scholarship].\" O'Rourke concluded that the \"gaps and imprecision\" in Wolf's article \"give fodder to skeptics who think sexual harassment charges are often just a form of hysteria.\"\nSeparately, a formal complaint was filed with the US Department of Education Office for Civil Rights on March 15, 2011, by 16 current and former Yale students\u201412 female and 4 male\u2014describing a sexually hostile environment at Yale. A federal investigation of Yale University began in March 2011 in response to the complaints. In April, Wolf said on CBS's \"The Early Show\", \"Yale has been systematically covering up much more serious crimes than the ones that can be easily identified.\" More specifically, she alleged \"they use the sexual harassment grievance procedure in a very cynical way, purporting to be supporting victims, but actually using a process to stonewall victims, to isolate them, and to protect the university.\" Yale settled the federal complaint in June 2012, acknowledging \"inadequacies\" but not facing \"disciplinary action with the understanding that it keeps in place policy changes instituted after the complaint was filed. The school [was] required to report on its progress to the Office of Civil Rights until May, 2014.\"\nIn January 2018, Wolf accused Yale officials of blocking her from filing a formal grievance against Bloom. She told \"The New York Times\" that she had attempted to file the complaint in 2015 with Yale's University-Wide Committee on Sexual Misconduct, but that the university had refused to accept it. On January 16, 2018, Wolf said, she determined to see Yale's provost, Ben Polak, in another attempt to present her case. \"As she documented on Twitter,\" the newspaper reported, \"she brought a suitcase and a sleeping bag, because she said she did not know how long she would have to stay. When she arrived at the provost's office, she said, security guards prevented her from entering any elevators. Eventually, she said, Aley Menon, the secretary of the sexual misconduct committee, appeared and they met in the committee's offices for an hour, during which she gave Ms. Menon a copy of her complaint.\" This was reported and confirmed by Norman Vanamee, who apparently met Wolf at Yale that morning. In \"Town &amp; Country\" magazine in January 2018, Vanamee returned to the story and wrote, \"Yale University has a 93-person police department, and, after the guard called for backup, three of its armed and uniformed officers appeared and stationed themselves between Wolf and the elevator bank.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21637", "revid": "47154815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21637", "title": "New Year", "text": "Beginning of the calendar year\nThe New Year is the time or day at which a new calendar year begins and the calendar's year count increments by one. Many cultures celebrate the event in some manner. In the Gregorian calendar, the most widely used calendar system today, New Year occurs on January 1 (New Year's Day, preceded by New Year's Eve). This was also the first day of the year in the original Julian calendar and the Roman calendar (after 153 BC).\nOther cultures observe their traditional or religious New Year's Day according to their own customs, typically (though not invariably) because they use a lunar calendar or a lunisolar calendar. Chinese New Year, the Islamic New Year, Tamil New Year (Puthandu), and the Jewish New Year are among well-known examples. India, Nepal, and other countries also celebrate New Year on dates according to their own calendars that are movable in the Gregorian calendar.\nDuring the Middle Ages in Western Europe, while the Julian calendar was still in use, authorities moved New Year's Day, depending upon locale, to one of several other days, including March 1, March 25, Easter, September 1, and December 25. Since then, many national civil calendars in the Western World and beyond have changed to using one fixed date for New Year's Day, January 1\u2014most doing so when they adopted the Gregorian calendar.\nBy type.\nBased on the used calendar new years are often categorized between lunar or lunisolar new years or solar new years.\nBy month or season.\nWinter lunisolar new years.\nLunisolar calendars count months according to lunations but, because there are not an even number of lunar cycles in a solar year, the calendar must be restarted annually on the first, second or even third new moon after the winter solstice. (The term \"lunar calendar\" is often used of lunisolar calendars, but true lunar calendars (such as the Islamic calendar) count only lunations and ignore the solar seasons.)\nMid-April (Spring in the Northern Hemisphere).\nThe new year of many South and Southeast Asian calendars falls between April 13\u201315, marking the beginning of spring.\nChristian liturgical year.\nThe early development of the Christian liturgical year coincided with the Roman Empire (east and west), and later the Byzantine Empire, both of which employed a taxation system labeled the Indiction, the years for which began on September 1. This timing may account for the ancient church's establishment of September 1 as the beginning of the liturgical year, despite the official Roman New Year's Day of January 1 in the Julian calendar, because the Indiction was the principal means for counting years in the empires, apart from the reigns of the Emperors. The September 1 date prevailed throughout all of Christendom for many centuries, until subsequent divisions eventually produced revisions in some places.\nAfter the sack of Rome in 410, communications and travel between east and west deteriorated. Liturgical developments in Rome and Constantinople did not always match, although a rigid adherence to form was never mandated in the church. Nevertheless, the principal points of development were maintained between east and west. The Roman and Constantinopolitan liturgical calendars remained compatible even after the East-West Schism in 1054. Separations between the Catholic General Roman Calendar and Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar grew only over several centuries' time. During those intervening centuries, the Latin Church Catholic ecclesiastic year was moved to the first day of Advent, the Sunday nearest to St. Andrew's Day (November 30). By the time of the Reformation (early 16th century), the Roman Catholic general calendar provided the initial basis for the calendars for the liturgically oriented Protestants, including the Anglican and Lutheran Churches, who inherited this observation of the liturgical new year.\nThe present-day Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar is the virtual culmination of the ancient eastern development cycle, though it includes later additions based on subsequent history and lives of saints. It still begins on September 1, proceeding annually into the Nativity of the Theotokos (September 8) and Exaltation of the Cross (September 14) to the celebration of Nativity of Christ (Christmas), through his death and resurrection (Pascha/Easter), to his Ascension and the Dormition of the Theotokos (\"falling asleep\" of the Virgin Mary, August 15). This last feast is known in the Roman Catholic church as the Assumption. The dating of \"September 1\" is according to the \"new\" (revised) Julian calendar or the \"old\" (standard) Julian calendar, depending on which is used by a particular Orthodox Church. Hence, it may fall on September 1 on the civil calendar, or on September 14 (between 1900 and 2099 inclusive).\nThe liturgical calendars of the Coptic and Ethiopian Orthodox churches are unrelated to these systems but instead follow the Alexandrian calendar which fixed the wandering ancient Egyptian calendar to the Julian year. Their New Year celebrations on Neyrouz and Enkutatash were fixed; however, at a point in the Sothic cycle close to the Indiction; between the years 1900 and 2100, they fall on September 11 during most years and September 12 in the years preceding a leap year.\nHistorical European new year dates.\nDuring the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, years began on the date on which each consul first entered the office. This was probably May 1 before 222 BC, March 15 from 222 BC to 154 BC, and January 1 from 153 BC. In 45 BC, when Julius Caesar's new Julian calendar took effect, the Senate fixed January 1 as the first day of the year. At that time, this was the date on which those who were to hold civil office assumed their official position, and it was also the traditional annual date for the convening of the Roman Senate. This civil new year remained in effect throughout the Roman Empire, east and west, during its lifetime and well after, wherever the Julian calendar continued in use.\nIn the Middle Ages in Europe a number of significant feast days in the ecclesiastical calendar of the Roman Catholic Church came to be used as the beginning of the Julian year:\nOver the centuries, countries changed between styles until the Modern Style (January 1) prevailed. For example,\nA more unusual case is France, which observed the Northern autumn equinox day (usually September 22) as \"New Year's Day\" in the French Republican Calendar, which was in use from 1793 to 1805. This was \"primidi Vend\u00e9miaire\", the first day of the first month.\nAdoptions of January 1.\nIt took quite a long time before January 1 again became the universal or standard start of the civil year. The years of adoption of January 1 as the new year are as follows:\nMarch 1 was the first day of the numbered year in the Republic of Venice until its destruction in 1797, and in Russia from 988 until 1492 (Anno Mundi 7000 in the Byzantine calendar). September 1 was used in Russia from 1492 (A.M. 7000) until the adoption of both the Anno Domini notation and 1 January as New Year's Day, with effect from 1700, via December 1699 decrees (1735, 1736) of Tsar Peter I.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21638", "revid": "4731720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21638", "title": "Northern Territory", "text": "Territory of Australia\nThe Northern Territory (abbreviated as NT; known formally as the Northern Territory of Australia and informally as the Territory) is an Australian internal territory in the central and central-northern regions of Australia. The Northern Territory shares its borders with Western Australia to the west (129th meridian east), South Australia to the south (26th parallel south), and Queensland to the east (138th meridian east). To the north, the Northern Territory looks out to the Timor Sea, the Arafura Sea, and the Gulf of Carpentaria, including Western New Guinea and various other islands of the Indonesian archipelago.\nThe NT covers , making it the third-largest Australian federal division, and the 11th-largest country subdivision in the world. It is sparsely populated, with a population of only 260,400 as of March 2025[ [update]] \u2013 fewer than half the population of Tasmania. The largest population centre is the capital city of Darwin, having about 52.6% of the Territory's population. The largest inland settlement is Alice Springs with a population of about 25,000 people.\nThe archaeological history of the Northern Territory may have begun more than 60,000 years ago when humans first settled this region of the Sahul Continent. From at least the 18th century, Makassan traders began a relationship with the indigenous people of the Northern Territory around the trading of trepang. The coast of the Territory was first seen by Europeans in the 17th century. The British were the first Europeans to attempt to settle the coastal regions. After three failed attempts to establish a settlement (1824\u20131828, 1838\u20131849, and 1864\u20131866), success was achieved in 1869 with the establishment of a settlement at Port Darwin.\nThe economy is based largely on mining and petroleum, which during 2018\u20132019 contributed 23% of the gross state product, or $5.68 billion, accounting for 92.4% of exports.\nThe Territory's population is concentrated in coastal regions and along the Stuart Highway. Besides the capital of Darwin, the major settlements are (in order of size) Palmerston, Alice Springs, Katherine, Nhulunbuy and Tennant Creek. Residents of the Northern Territory are often known as \"Territorians\".\nHistory.\nPre-colonial.\nHumans have lived in the present area of the Northern Territory since at least 48,400 to 68,700 years ago.\nFrom the 17th or 18th century AD onwards, traders from Sulawesi established extensive seasonal trade links with the Indigenous peoples of Kimberley region, the modern-day Northern Territory, and Arnhem Land. They collected \"trepang\" (sea cucumber) for Chinese markets and introduced several goods and technologies to the Indigenous peoples. There is significant evidence of contact with Makassan fishers in examples of Indigenous Australian rock art and bark painting of northern Australia, with the Makassan \"perahu\" a prominent feature.\nColonial administration.\nWith the coming of the British, there were four early attempts to settle the harsh environment of the northern coast, of which three failed in starvation and despair. The land now occupied by the Northern Territory was part of colonial New South Wales from 1825 to 1863, except for a brief time from February to December 1846, when it was part of the short-lived colony of North Australia. The Northern Territory was part of South Australia from 1863 to 1911, and under its administration the Overland Telegraph Line was constructed between 1870 and 1872.\nFrom its establishment in 1869, the Port Darwin was the major supply point for the Territory for many decades.\nA railway was built between Palmerston and Pine Creek between 1883 and 1889 as part of the North Australia Railway. The economic pattern of cattle raising and mining was established so that by 1911 there were 513,000 cattle. Victoria River Downs Station, west of Darwin, was at one time the largest cattle station in the world. \nGold was found at Grove Hill in 1872 and at Pine Creek (in 1871), Brocks Creek, Burundi, and copper was found at Daly River.\nFederal territory.\nOn 1 January 1911, a decade after Federation, the Northern Territory was separated from South Australia, alongside the Australian Capital Territory from NSW, and transferred to federal control. Alfred Deakin opined at this time \"[t]o me the question has been not so much commercial as national, first, second, third and last. Either we must accomplish the peopling of the northern territory or submit to its transfer to some other nation.\"\nIn late 1912 there was growing sentiment that the name \"Northern Territory\" was unsatisfactory. The names \"Kingsland\" (after King George V and to correspond with Queensland), \"Centralia\" and \"Territoria\" were proposed with Kingsland becoming the preferred choice in 1913. However, the name change never went ahead.\nDivision into North Australia and Central Australia.\nFor a brief time between 1927 and 1931 the Northern Territory was divided into North Australia and Central Australia at the 20th parallel south. Soon after this time, parts of the Northern Territory were considered in the Kimberley Plan as a possible site for the establishment of a Jewish Homeland, understandably considered the \"Unpromised Land\".\nDuring the early 20th century, the southern part of the Territory was considered the \"last frontier\" of Australian settlement, where 'sympathetic whites' hoped that Aboriginal traditions would continue to be practised. Conflicts arose due to the resource scarcity and the fragility of the cattle industry and the area was rife with Indigenous 'bush bandits' who speared cattle for food for want of employment by ranchers. This was exacerbated by a drought between 1925 and 1929 that led to the deaths of 85 per cent of the children at the Hermannsburg Mission in Central Australia. In the meantime, white attitudes towards Aboriginal people were paternalistic, torn between the desire to help them in times of hunger and the fear of \"pauperizing\" them and reducing their incentives to work. \nIn the 1928 Coniston massacre, punitive expeditions were carried out by white colonists led by Northern Territory Police constable William George Murray in response to the murder of a dingo hunter, resulting in the deaths of dozens to hundreds of people of the Warlpiri, Anmatyerre, and Kaytetye groups. This was one of many massacres of Aboriginal people in the region.\nPost-World War II.\nDuring World War II, most of the Top End was placed under military government. This is the only time since Federation that part of an Australian state or territory has been under military control. After the war, control for the entire area was handed back to the Commonwealth. The Bombing of Darwin occurred on 19 February 1942. It was the largest single attack ever mounted by a foreign power on Australia. Evidence of Darwin's World War II history is found at a variety of preserved sites in and around the city, including ammunition bunkers, airstrips, oil tunnels and museums. The port was damaged in the 1942 Japanese air raids. It was subsequently restored.\nIn the late 1960s improved roads in adjoining States linking with the territory, port delays and rapid economic development led to uncertainty in port and regional infrastructure development. As a result of the Commission of Enquiry established by the Administrator, port working arrangements were changed, berth investment deferred and a port masterplan prepared. Extension of rail transport was then not considered because of low freight volumes.\nIndigenous Australians had struggled for rights to fair wages and land. An important event in this struggle was the strike and walk off by the Gurindji people at Wave Hill Cattle Station in 1966. The Northern Territory Council for Aboriginal Rights (NTCAR) supported the strikers and provided publicity. The Federal government of Gough Whitlam set up the Woodward Royal Commission in February 1973, to enquire into how land rights might be achieved in the Northern Territory. Justice Woodward's first report in July 1973 recommended that a Central Land Council and a Northern Land Council be established to present to him the views of Aboriginal people. A Land Rights Bill was drafted, and the \"Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976\" was passed by the Fraser government on 16 December 1976 and began operation on 26 January 1977). The Northern Territory Council for Aboriginal Rights was disestablished in 1976.\nIn 1974, from Christmas Eve to Christmas Day, Darwin was devastated by tropical Cyclone Tracy. Cyclone Tracy killed 71 people, caused A$837 million in damage (approximately A$6.85 billion as of 2018[ [update]]) and destroyed more than 70 per cent of Darwin's buildings, including 80 per cent of houses. Tracy left more than 41,000 out of the 47,000 inhabitants of the city homeless. The city was rebuilt with much-improved construction codes and is a modern, landscaped metropolis today.\nIn 1978 the Territory was granted Self Government with a Legislative Assembly headed by a Chief Minister. The Administrator of the Northern Territory is another important position in the government and they act as the King's representative in the Territory and a part of their role is appointing the Chief Minister. The Territory also publishes official notices in its own \"Government Gazette\".\nIn the 1980s, conservation-oriented areas in the Northern Territory such as Kakadu National Park and Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List for their mix of natural heritage and Aboriginal culture.\nDuring 1995\u201396 the Northern Territory was briefly one of the few places in the world with legal voluntary euthanasia, until the Federal Parliament overturned the legislation. Before the over-riding legislation was enacted, four people used the law supported by Dr Philip Nitschke.\nGeography.\nThere are many very small settlements scattered across the Territory, but the larger population centres are located on the single paved road that links Darwin to southern Australia, the Stuart Highway, known to locals simply as \"the track\".\nThe Territory is home to many spectacular natural rock formations, including Uluru / Ayers Rock and Kata Tjuta / The Olgas in the Central Australian region and Kakadu National Park in the north. Each of these sites are sacred to the local Aboriginal people and which have become major International tourist attractions and recognised UNESCO World Heritage sites.\nThe northern portion of the Territory is principally tropical savannas, composed of several distinct ecoregions \u2013 Arnhem Land tropical savanna, Carpentaria tropical savanna, Kimberley tropical savanna, Victoria Plains tropical savanna, and Mitchell Grass Downs. The southern portion of the Territory is covered in deserts and xeric shrublands, including the Great Sandy-Tanami desert, Simpson Desert, and Central Ranges xeric scrub.\nThere are also an extensive series of river systems in the Territory. These rivers include: the Alligator Rivers, Daly River, Finke River, McArthur River, Roper River, Todd River and Victoria River. The Hay River is a river south-west of Alice Springs, with the Marshall River, Arthur Creek, Camel Creek and Bore Creek flowing into it.\nNational parks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe Northern Territory has two distinctive climate zones.\nThe northern end, including Darwin, has a tropical climate with high humidity and two seasons, the wet (October to April) and dry season (May to September). During the dry season nearly every day is warm and sunny, and afternoon humidity averages around 30%. There is very little rainfall between May and September. In the coolest months of June and July, the daily minimum temperature may dip as low as , but very rarely lower, and frost has never been recorded.\nThe wet season is associated with tropical cyclones and monsoon rains. The majority of rainfall occurs between December and March (the southern hemisphere summer), when thunderstorms are common and afternoon relative humidity averages over 70% during the wettest months. On average more than of rain falls in the north. Rainfall is highest in north-west coastal areas, where rainfall averages from .\nThe central region is the desert centre of the country, which includes Alice Springs and Uluru (Ayers Rock), and is semi-arid with little rain usually falling during the hottest months from October to March. Seasons are more distinct in central Australia, with very hot summers and cool winters. Frost is recorded a few times a year. The region receives less than of rain per year.\nThe highest temperature recorded in the territory was at Finke on 1 and 2 January 1960. The lowest temperature was at Alice Springs on 17 July 1976.\nGovernance.\nParliament.\nThe Northern Territory Parliament is one of the three unicameral parliaments in the country. Based on the Westminster System, it consists of the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly which was created in 1974, replacing the Northern Territory Legislative Council. It also produces the \"Northern Territory of Australia Government Gazette\".\nThe Northern Territory Legislative Council was the partly elected governing body from 1947 until its replacement by the fully elected Northern Territory Legislative Assembly in 1974. The total enrolment for the 1947 election was 4,443. The Northern Territory was split into five electorates: Darwin, Alice Springs, Tennant Creek, Batchelor, and Stuart.\nWhile this assembly exercises powers similar to those of the parliaments of the states of Australia, it does so by legislated devolution of powers from the Commonwealth Government, rather than by any constitutional right. As such, the Commonwealth Government retains the right to legislate for the territory, including the power to override legislation passed by the Legislative Assembly. The Monarch is represented by the Administrator of the Northern Territory, who performs a role similar to that of a state governor.\nTwenty-five members of the Legislative Assembly are elected to four-year terms from single-member electorates.\nNumerous times since self government was granted there has been agitation for full statehood within the region. A referendum of voters in the Northern Territory was held on the issue in 1998, which resulted in a 'no' vote. This was a shock to both the Northern Territory and Commonwealth governments, as opinion polls showed most Territorians supported statehood. But under the Australian Constitution, the federal government may set the terms of entry to full statehood. The Northern Territory was offered three senators, rather than the twelve guaranteed to original states (because of the difference in populations, equal numbers of Senate seats would mean a Territorian's vote for a senator would have been worth more than 30 such votes in New South Wales or Victoria). Alongside what was cited as an arrogant approach adopted by then chief minister Shane Stone, it is believed that most Territorians, regardless of their general views on statehood, were reluctant to adopt the particular offer that was made.\nChief minister and cabinet.\nThe chief minister is the head of government of a self-governing territory (the head of a state government is a \"premier\"). The chief minister is appointed by the administrator, who in normal circumstances appoints the leader of whichever party holds the majority of seats in the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly. The current chief minister is Lia Finocchiaro of the Country Liberal Party. The CLP defeated Territory Labor to win office on 24 August 2024.\nAdministrator.\nThe Northern Territory became self-governing on 1 July 1978 under its own administrator appointed by the Governor-General of Australia. The federal government, not the NT government, advises the governor-general on the appointment of the administrator, but by convention consults first with the Territory government. The current administrator is Hugh Heggie who commenced his three-year term on 31 January 2023; he had previously served as the Northern Territory\u2019s Chief Health Officer.\nFederal government.\nThe Northern Territory is represented in the federal parliament by two members in the House of Representatives and two members in the Senate. As of May 2022, resulting from the 2022 federal election, Marion Scrymgour from the Australian Labor Party (ALP) in Lingiari and Luke Gosling from the Australian Labor Party (ALP) in Solomon serve in the House of Representatives, and Malarndirri McCarthy from the ALP and Jacinta Nampijinpa Price from the Country Liberal Party serve in the Senate.\nLocal government.\nThe Northern Territory is divided into seventeen local government areas: two cities, three municipalities, nine regions, and three shires. Shire, city and town councils are responsible for functions delegated by the Northern Territory parliament, such as road infrastructure and waste management. Council revenue comes mostly from property taxes and government grants.\nAboriginal land councils.\nAboriginal land councils in the Northern Territory are groups of Aboriginal landowners, set up under the \"Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976\".\nPolitical parties.\nThe two historically dominant political parties in the Northern Territory are the conservative Country Liberal Party which governed the Territory from 1974 to 2001, from 2012 to 2016 and since 2024, and the social-democratic Australian Labor Party which governed the Territory from 2001 to 2012 and from 2016 to 2024. Minor parties that are also active in the NT include the Northern Territory Greens, the Shooters and Fishers Party and various others. It is common for independent politicians to win elections.\nThe CLP's rule was once so tight, that a former minister once said the CLP had a \"'rightful inheritance of being the party that runs this place'\".\nThe 2024 Northern Territory general election saw the NT Greens win a seat in the Legislative Assembly, with Kat McNamara defeating former Chief Minister Natasha Fyles in the seat of Nightcliff; this marked the first time the Greens entered the Legislative Assembly in the history of the Northern Territory. \nAs fewer parties and candidates contest Northern Territory general elections than they do Australian federal elections in the Northern Territory, the CLP, Labor and independents usually have a higher vote share at territory elections than at federal elections in the Northern Territory due to the absence of right-wing minor parties such as Pauline Hanson's One Nation and the fact that the Greens do not run in every seat at territory elections.\nDemographics.\nThe population of the Northern Territory at the 2011 Australian census was 211,945, a 10 per cent increase from the 2006 census. The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated a June 2015 resident population of 244,300, taking into account residents overseas or interstate. The territory's population represents 1% of the total population of Australia.\nThe Northern Territory's population is the youngest in Australia and has the largest proportion (23.2%) under 15 years of age and the smallest proportion (5.7%) aged 65 and over. The median age of residents of the Northern Territory is 31 years, six years younger than the national median age.\nIndigenous Australians make up 30.3% of population and own some 49% of the land. The life expectancy of Aboriginal Australians is well below that of non-Indigenous Australians in the Northern Territory, a fact that is mirrored elsewhere in Australia. ABS statistics suggest that Indigenous Australians die about 11 years earlier than the average non-Indigenous Australian. There are Aboriginal communities in many parts of the territory, the largest ones being the Pitjantjatjara near Uluru / Ayers Rock, the Arrernte near Alice Springs, the Luritja between those two, the Warlpiri further north, and the Yolngu in eastern Arnhem Land.\nIn 2019, 147,255 people lived in Darwin, an overwhelming majority of the Territory's population. Despite this, the Northern Territory is the least urbanised jurisdiction in the Commonwealth (followed by Tasmania).\nAncestry and immigration.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \n31.2% of the population was born overseas at the 2016 census. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from the Philippines (2.6%), England (2.4%), New Zealand (2%), India (1.6%) and Greece (0.6%).\n25.5% of the population, or 58,248 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2016.\nLanguages.\nAt the 2021 census, 57.3% of the population spoke only English at home. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Kriol (2.2%), Djambarrpuyngu (1.7%), Greek (1.4%) and Nepali (1.3%).\nThere are more than 100 Aboriginal languages and dialects spoken in the Northern Territory, in addition to English which is most common in cities such as Darwin or Alice Springs. Major indigenous languages spoken in the Northern Territory include Murrinh-patha and Ngangikurrungurr in the northwest around Wadeye, Warlpiri and Warumungu in the centre around Tennant Creek, Arrernte around Alice Springs, Pintupi-Luritja to the south east, Pitjantjatjara in the south near Uluru / Ayers Rock, Yolngu Matha to the far north in Arnhem Land (where the dialect Djambarrpuyngu of Dhuwal is considered a lingua franca), and Burarra, Maung, Iwaidja and Kunwinjku in the centre north and on Croker Island and the Goulburn Islands. Tiwi is spoken on Melville Island and Bathurst Island. Literature in many of these languages is available in the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, Christianity is the major Religious affiliation in Northern Territory followed by 40.5% of its population. In 1971, Christianity was followed by 70.2% of the population and it has been declining since, while percentage of people who identified as having no religious affiliation has increased from 17.9% in 1971 to 38.5% in 2021.\nHinduism is the territory's largest non-Christian religion (2.7%), followed by Buddhism (2.1%) and Islam (1.4%).\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary.\nA Northern Territory school education consists of six years of primary schooling, including one transition year, three years of middle schooling, and three years of secondary schooling. In the beginning of 2007, the Northern Territory introduced Middle School for Years 7\u20139 and High School for Years 10\u201312. Northern Territory children generally begin school at age five. On completing secondary school, students earn the Northern Territory Certificate of Education and Training (NTCET). Students who successfully complete their secondary education also receive a tertiary entrance ranking, or ATAR score, to determine university admittance.\nNorthern Territory schools are either publicly or privately funded. Public schools, also known as state or government schools, are funded and run directly by the Department of Education. Private fee-paying schools include schools run by the Catholic Church and independent schools, some elite ones similar to English public schools. Some Northern Territory Independent schools are affiliated with Protestant, Lutheran, Anglican, Greek Orthodox or Seventh-day Adventist Churches, but include non-church schools and an Indigenous school.\nAs of 2009, the Northern Territory had 151 public schools, 15 Catholic schools and 21 independent schools. 39,492 students were enrolled in schools around the territory with 29,175 in public schools, and 9,882 in independent schools. The Northern Territory has about 4,000 full-time teachers.\nTertiary.\nThe Northern Territory has one university which opened in 1989 under the name of the Northern Territory University. Now renamed as the Charles Darwin University, it had about 19,000 students enrolled: about 5,500 higher education students and about 13,500 students on vocational education and training (VET) courses. The first tertiary institution in the territory was the Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education which was established in the mid-1960s.\nLibraries and archives.\nLibrary &amp; Archives NT is the Northern Territory's public research library and archival organisation and it supports the development of library services across the Territory by supporting public libraries. Library &amp; Archives NT was formed in 2019 following the merge of the Northern Territory Archives Service and the Northern Territory Library.\nThe National Archives of Australia also have a repository in Darwin, this is collocated with the Library &amp; Archives NT repository at the Northern Territory Archives Centre.\nEconomy.\nMining.\nThe Northern Territory's economy is largely driven by mining, which is concentrated on energy producing minerals, petroleum and energy and contributes around $2.5 billion to the gross state product and employs over 4,600 people. Mining accounts for 14.9% of the gross state product in 2014\u201315 compared to just 7% nationally.\nIn recent years, largely due to the effect of major infrastructure projects and mine expansions, construction has overtaken mining as the largest single industry in the territory. Construction, mining and manufacturing, and government and community services, combine to account for about half of the territory's gross state product (GSP), compared to about a third of national gross domestic product (GDP).\nThe economy has grown considerably over the past decade, from a value of $15 billion in 2004\u201305 to over $22 billion in 2014\u201315. In 2012\u201313 the territory economy expanded by 5.6%, over twice the level of national growth, and in 2014\u201315 it grew by 10.5%, four times the national growth rate.\nBetween 2003 and 2006 the gross state product had risen from $8.67 billion to $11.476 billion, an increase of 32.4%. During the three years to 2006\u20132007 the Northern Territory gross state product grew by an average annual rate of 5.5%. Gross state product per capita in the Northern Territory ($72,496) is higher than any Australian state or territory and is also higher than the gross domestic product per capita for Australia ($54,606).\nThe Northern Territory's exports were up 12.9% or $681 million in 2012\u201313. The largest contributor to the territory's exports was: mineral fuels (largely LNG), crude materials (mainly mineral ores) and food and live animals (primarily live cattle). The main international markets for territory exports are Japan, China, Indonesia, the United States and Korea.\nImports to the Northern Territory totalled $2,887.8 million which consisted of mainly machinery and equipment manufacturing (58.4%) and petroleum, coal, chemical and associated product manufacturing (17.0%).\nThe principal mining operations are bauxite at Gove Peninsula where the production is estimated to increase 52.1% to $254 million in 2007\u201308, manganese at Groote Eylandt, production is estimated to increase 10.5% to $1.1 billion which will be helped by the newly developed mines include Bootu Creek and Frances Creek, gold which is estimated to increase 21.7 per cent to $672 million at the Union Reefs plant and uranium at Ranger Uranium Mine.\nTourism.\nTourism is an important economic driver for the territory and a significant industry in regional areas. Iconic destinations such as Uluru / Ayers Rock and Kakadu make the Northern Territory a popular destination for domestic and international travellers. Diverse landscapes, waterfalls, wide open spaces, aboriginal culture and wild and untamed wildlife provides the opportunity for visitors to immerse themselves in the natural wonder that the Northern Territory offers. In 2015, the territory received a total of about 1.6 million domestic and international visitors contributing an estimated $2.0 billion to the local economy. Holiday visitors made up the majority of total visitation (about 792,000 visitors).\nTourism has strong links to other sectors in the economy including accommodation and food services, retail trade, recreation and culture, and transport.\nWide Open Space is an annual festival of music, arts and culture that takes place over three days at the Ross River Resort in the McDonnell Ranges, around east of Alice Springs. over three days in April/May.\nOther industries.\nThe Northern Territory announced that it will undertake a project which will benefit its marine industry, including the development of a new Marine Industry Park near Darwin.\nTransport.\nThe Northern Territory is the most sparsely populated state or territory in Australia.\nThe NT has a connected network of sealed roads, including two national highways, linking with adjoining states and connecting the major territory population centres, and other important centres such as Uluru (Ayers Rock), Kakadu and Litchfield National Parks. The Stuart Highway, once known as \"The Track\", runs north to south, connecting Darwin and Alice Springs to Adelaide. Some of the sealed roads are single-lane bitumen. Many unsealed (dirt) roads connect the more remote settlements.\nThe fatigue resulting from long-distance driving and the hazards inherent in dirt roads, wildlife, water crossings and wild weather have led the Northern Territory Government to pursue road safety campaigns in English and several Aboriginal languages. Persuading people to drive at the right speed for the road conditions has been a key goal. As of 2021[ [update]], the Northern Territory's road vehicle speed limit in built-up areas was 60\u00a0kilometres per hour unless the town had gazetted a lower default speed limit: many had chosen 50\u00a0km/h or lower. Outside most built-up areas the default speed limit was 110\u00a0km/h unless a speed limit sign stated otherwise. Reflecting the nature of the topography and very low population density, some sections of the Arnhem, Barkly, Stuart and Victoria highways had a maximum speed of 130\u00a0km/h.\nIn 2004, a standard gauge railway was opened between Alice Springs and Darwin, completing the Adelaide\u2013Darwin rail corridor and bringing to fruition the dream of a transcontinental railway initiated in 1878 with the Central Australia Railway from the south and the North Australia Railway from the north \u2013 but with a gap of more than 800\u00a0km (500\u00a0mi) between Alice Springs and Birdum still to be bridged when the antique narrow-gauge railway was closed in 1976. The line carries fast freight trains and one passenger train: The Ghan experiential tourism train that runs between Darwin and Adelaide, stopping in the NT at Katherine, Tennant Creek, Alice Springs and Kulgera.\nDarwin International Airport is the major domestic and international airport for the territory. Several smaller airports are also scattered throughout the territory and are served by smaller airlines, including Alice Springs Airport, Ayers Rock Airport, Katherine Airport and Tennant Creek Airport.\nMedia.\nPrint.\nThe Northern Territory has only one daily tabloid newspaper, News Corporation's \"Northern Territory News,\" or \"NT News\". \"The Sunday Territorian\" is the sister paper to the \"NT News\" and is the only dedicated Sunday tabloid newspaper in the Northern Territory.\nThe \"Centralian Advocate\" is circulated around the Alice Springs region twice a week. There are also five weekly community newspapers. The territory receives the national daily, \"The Australian\", while \"The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age\" and the \"Guardian Weekly\" are also available in Darwin. Katherine's paper is the \"Katherine Times\".\nThere is an LGBT community publication, QNews Magazine, which is published in Darwin and Alice Springs.\nTelevision.\nMetropolitan Darwin has had five broadcast television stations:\nDarwin also has four open-narrowcast stations:\nRegional Northern Territory has a similar availability of stations:\nRemote areas are generally required to receive television via the Viewer Access Satellite Television service, which carries the same channels as the regional areas, as well as some extra open-narrowcast services, including Indigenous Community Television and Westlink.\nRadio.\nDarwin has radio stations on both AM and FM frequencies. ABC stations include ABC Radio Darwin (105.7FM), ABC Radio National (657AM), ABC News Radio (102.5FM), ABC Classic FM (107.3FM) and Triple J (103.3FM). The two commercial stations are Hot 100 FM (8HOT) and Mix 104.9 (8MIX). The leading community stations are 104.1 Territory FM (8TOP) and 94.5 Radio Larrakia (8KNB).\nThe radio stations in Alice Springs are also broadcast on the AM and FM frequencies. ABC stations include Triple J (94.9FM), ABC Classic FM (97.9FM), 783 ABC Alice Springs (783AM), ABC News Radio (104.1FM) and ABC Radio National (99.7FM). There are two community stations in the town\u2014CAAMA (100.5FM) and 8CCC (102.1FM). The commercial stations, which are both owned by the same company are Sun 96.9 (96.9FM) and 8HA (900AM). Christian radio station Vision Christian Radio (88.0FM). Two additional stations, Territory FM (98.7FM) and Radio TAB (95.9FM) are syndicated from Darwin and Brisbane, respectively.\nSport.\nAustralian rules football in the Northern Territory is widely popular, particularly with Indigenous Australian communities in Darwin, Alice Springs and the Tiwi Islands. The governing body for football in the territory is the AFL Northern Territory.\nCulture.\nThe Northern Territory is home to a number of cultural institutions of importance to the nation. \nThese include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21640", "revid": "1311621276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21640", "title": "Low-alcohol beer", "text": "Type of beverage\nLow-alcohol beer is beer with little or no alcohol by volume that aims to reproduce the taste of beer while eliminating or reducing the inebriating effect, carbohydrates, and calories of regular alcoholic brews. Low-alcohol beers can come in different beer styles such as lagers, stouts, and ales. Low-alcohol beer is also known as light beer, non-alcoholic beer, small beer, small ale, or near-beer.\nHistory.\nLow-alcohol brews such as small beer date back at least to medieval Europe, where they served as a less risky alternative to water (which often was polluted by faeces and parasites) and were less expensive than higher-quality, higher-alcohol brews like stouts, porters, and ales.\nMore recently, the temperance movements and the need to avoid alcohol while driving, operating machinery, taking certain medications, etc. led to the development of non-intoxicating beers.\nIn the United States, according to John Naleszkiewicz, non-alcoholic brews were promoted during Prohibition. In 1917, President Wilson proposed limiting the alcohol content of malt beverages to 2.75% to try to appease avid prohibitionists. In 1919, Congress approved the Volstead Act, which limited the alcohol content of all beverages to 0.5%. These very-low-alcohol beverages became known as \"tonics\", and many breweries began brewing them in order to stay in business during Prohibition. Since removing the alcohol from the beer requires just one extra step, many breweries saw it as an easy change. In 1933, when Prohibition was repealed, breweries simply omitted this extra step.\nBy the 1980s and 90s, \"light\" beers became more popular. Declining consumption has also led to the introduction of mass-market non-alcoholic beverages, dubbed \"near beer\". Low-alcohol and alcohol-free bars and pubs have also been established to cater for drinkers of non-alcoholic beverages.\nIn the UK, the introduction of a lower rate of beer duty for low-strength beer (of 2.8% ABV or less) in October 2011 spurred many small brewers to revive old styles of small beer and create higher-hopped craft beers at the lower alcohol level to be able to lower the cost of their beer to consumers.\nAt the start of the 21st century, alcohol-free beer has seen a rise in popularity in the Middle East (which now makes up a third of the market). One reason for this is that Islamic scholars issued \"fatawa\" which permitted the consumption of beer as long as large quantities could be consumed without getting drunk. By 2022, craft hop water has become a market unto itself in the United States, with one Southern California brewer regarding it as not being beer at all.\nPros and cons.\nPositive features of non-alcoholic brews include the ability to drive after consuming several drinks, the reduction in alcohol-related illness, and fewer severe hangover symptoms. Low-alcohol and alcohol-free beers are usually lower in calories than equivalent full-strength beers.\nSome common complaints about non-alcoholic brews include a loss of flavor, addition of one step in the brewing process, sugary taste, and a shorter shelf life. There are also legal implications. Some state governments, e.g. Pennsylvania, prohibit the sale of non-alcoholic beers to persons under the age of 21. A study conducted by the department of psychology at Indiana University said, \"Because non-alcoholic beer provides sensory cues that simulate alcoholic beer, this beverage may be more effective than other placebos in contributing to a credible manipulation of expectancies to receive alcohol\", making people feel \"drunk\" when physically they are not.\nThere is little to no research on consequences of drinking such products in pregnancy, but as they may contain trace amounts of alcohol, in rare cases even higher than 1% (despite labelling as 0%), one paper advises against drinking this type of non-alcoholic beverage during pregnancy.\nCategories.\nIn the United States, beverages containing less than 0.5% alcohol by volume (ABV) were legally called non-alcoholic, according to the now-defunct Volstead Act. Because of its very low alcohol content, non-alcoholic beer may be legally sold to people under age 21 in many American states.\nIn the United Kingdom, Government guidance recommends the following descriptions for \"alcohol substitute\" drinks including alcohol-free beer. The use of these descriptions is voluntary:\nIn some parts of the European Union, beer must contain no more than 0.5% ABV if it is labelled \"alcohol-free\".\nIn Australia, the term \"light beer\" refers to any beer with less than 3.5% alcohol.\nLight beer.\nLight beers are beers with reduced caloric content compared to regular beer, and typically also have a lower alcoholic content, depending on the brand and where they are sold. The spelling \"lite beer\" is also commonly used. Light beers are manufactured by reducing the carbohydrate content, and secondarily by reducing the alcohol content, since both carbohydrates and alcohol contribute to the caloric content of beer.\nLight beers are marketed primarily to drinkers who wish to manage their calorie intake. However, these beers are sometimes criticized for being less flavorful than full-strength beers, being \"watered down\" (whether in perception or in fact), and thus advertising campaigns for light beers generally advertise their retention of flavor.\nIn Australia, regular beers have approximately 4%-5% ABV, while reduced-alcohol beers have 2.2%\u20133.2%.\nIn Canada, regular beers typically have 5% ABV, while a reduced-alcohol beer contains 2.6%\u20134.0% ABV and an \"extra-light\" beer contains less than 2.5%.\nIn the United States, most mass-market light beer brands, including Bud Light, Coors Light, and Miller Lite, have 4.2% ABV, less than ordinary beers from the same makers which are 5% ABV.\nIn Sweden, low alcohol beer is either 2.2%, 2.8% or 3.5%, and can be purchased in an ordinary supermarket whereas normal strength beers of above 3.5% must be purchased at \"Systembolaget\". Beer containing 2.8-3.5% ABV (called Folk\u00f6l or \"Peoples' Beer\") may be legally sold in any convenience store to people over 18 years of age, whereas stronger beer may only be sold in state-run liquor stores to people older than 20. In addition, businesses selling food for on-premises consumption do not need an alcohol license to serve 3.5% beer. Virtually all major Swedish brewers, and several international ones, in addition to their full-strength beer, make 3.5% folk\u00f6l versions as well. Beer below or equaling 2.25% ABV (\"l\u00e4tt\u00f6l\") is not legally subject to age restrictions; however, some stores voluntarily opt out from selling it to minors anyway.\nLow-point beer.\nLow-point beer, which is often known in the United States as \"three-two beer\" or \"3 point 2 brew\", is beer that contains 3.2% alcohol by weight (equivalent to about 4% ABV).\nThe term \"low-point beer\" is unique to the United States, where some states limit the sale of beer, but beers of this type are also available in countries (such as Sweden and Finland) that tax or otherwise regulate beer according to its alcohol content.\nIn the United States, 3.2 beer was the highest alcohol content beer allowed to be produced legally for nine months in 1933. As part of his New Deal, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Cullen\u2013Harrison Act that repealed the Volstead Act on 22 March 1933. In December 1933, the Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution was passed, eliminating a federal level prohibition on the production and sale of alcoholic beverages and returning to the states the power to regulate them within their borders.\nAfter the repeal of Prohibition, a number of state laws prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors remained in effect. As these were repealed, they were first replaced by laws limiting the maximum alcohol content allowed for sale to 3.2 ABW. As of 2019, the state of Minnesota permits general establishments such as supermarket chains and convenience stores to sell only low-point beer; in the 2010s, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Utah revised state laws to end this practice. In the states that maintain such laws, all alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2% alcohol by weight (ABW) must be sold from state-licensed liquor stores.\nMissouri also has a legal classification for low-point beer, which it calls \"nonintoxicating beer\". Unlike Minnesota and Utah, Missouri does not limit supermarket chains and convenience stores to selling only low-point beer. Instead, Missouri's alcohol laws permit grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations, and even \"general merchandise stores\" (a term that Missouri law does not define) to sell any alcoholic beverage; consequently, 3.2% beer is rarely sold in Missouri.\nNear beer.\n\"Near beer\" was a term for malt beverages containing little or no alcohol (less than 0.5% ABV), which were mass-marketed during Prohibition in the United States. Near beer could not legally be labeled as \"beer\" and was officially classified as a \"cereal beverage\". \nThe most popular \"near beer\" was Bevo, brewed by the Anheuser-Busch company. The Pabst company brewed \"Pablo\", Miller brewed \"Vivo\", and Schlitz brewed \"Famo\". Many local and regional breweries stayed in business by marketing their own near-beers. By 1921, production of near beer had reached over 300 million US gallons (1 billion L) a year (36 L/s).\nA popular illegal practice was to add alcohol to near beer. The resulting beverage was known as \"spiked beer\" or \"needle beer\", so called because a needle was used to inject alcohol through the cork of the bottle or keg.\nFood critic and writer Waverley Root described the common American near beer as \"such a wishy-washy, thin, ill-tasting, discouraging sort of slop that it might have been dreamed up by a Puritan Machiavelli with the intent of disgusting drinkers with genuine beer forever.\"\nIn the early 2010s, major breweries began experimenting with mass-market non-alcoholic beers to counter with declining alcohol consumption amid growing preference for craft beer, launching beverages like Anheuser-Busch's Budweiser Prohibition Brew, launched in 2016.\nA drink similar to \"near beer\", \"bj\u00f3rl\u00edki\" was quite popular in Iceland before alcoholic beer was made legal in 1989. The Icelandic variant normally consisted of a shot of vodka added to a half-a-litre glass of light beer.\nSmall beer.\nSmall beer (also, small ale) is a beer/ale that contains very little alcohol. Sometimes unfiltered and porridge-like, it was a favored drink in Medieval Europe and colonial North America as opposed to the often polluted water and the expensive beer used for festivities. Small beer was also produced in households for consumption by children and servants.\nHowever, small beer/small ale can also refer to a beer made of the \"second runnings\" from a very strong beer (e.g., scotch ale) mash. These beers can be as strong as a mild ale, depending on the strength of the original mash. This was done as an economy measure in household brewing in England up to the 18th century and is still done by some homebrewers. One commercial brewery, San Francisco's Anchor Brewing Company, also produces their \"Anchor Small Beer\" using the second runnings from their Old Foghorn Barleywine. The term is also used for commercially produced beers which are thought to taste too weak.\nNon-alcoholic beer.\nAs more people consume non-alcoholic beverages for health reasons, social reasons, or because they want to enjoy the taste of beer without the effects of alcohol, the global non-alcoholic beer market was expected to double by 2024 from the level in 2018.\nArab world.\nThe Middle East accounts for almost a third of worldwide sales of nonalcoholic and alcohol-free beer.\nMalaysia.\nThe market for nonalcoholic beer in Malaysia has been slow in comparison to other Muslim-majority countries, and as of 2015, the Malaysian government has not approved any non-alcoholic beers as halal.\nIran.\nIn 2008, the sale of non-alcoholic beers in Iran continued its high performance with double-digit growth rates in both value and volume and is expected to more than double its total volume sales between 2008 and 2013.\nIndia.\nNon alcoholic beer sales in India are relatively low.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has seen a rise in non-alcoholic beer consumption over the last decade.\nEurope.\nIn 2014 Spain was the main consumer and producer of low-alcohol beer in the European Union.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs of March 2020, sales of alcohol-free beer were up by 30% since 2016, with younger generations shunning alcoholic beverages. Brewers have introduced low or no alcohol varieties of established brands to meet the increased demand for low-alcohol beers, and new low-alcohol brands such as Lucky Saint have seen success in the UK market.\nLegal drinking age in the US.\nBeers that are labeled \"non-alcoholic\" still contain a very small amount of alcohol. Thus, some US states require the purchaser to be 21 years old, which is the legal drinking age in the United States. Exceptions include:\nProduction process.\nAccording to the Birmingham Beverage Company, the brewing process of traditional brews consists of eight basic steps, nine for brewing non-alcoholic brews.\nTypical low- and non-alcohol beer starts out as regular alcoholic beer, which is then processed to remove the alcohol.\nA different approach to making 0.5% non-alcoholic beer is to reduce the formation of alcohol in the first place, so that craft brewers do not need to pay the expense of having to dealcoholize a beer. Methods include using special low-sugar grains, yeast which converts less sugar to alcohol, or removing sugar from the wort before fermentation. These can be combined with limited fermentation, in which the fermentation process is stopped early.\nIdentity.\nIn an attempt to create a readily recognizable identity for low-alcohol beer, some brands were incorporating the colour blue into the packaging design as of 2018, including Becks Blue, Heineken 0.0%, O\u017eujsko Cool and Erdinger Alkoholfrei.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21641", "revid": "50951359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21641", "title": "Norman Foster", "text": "English architect (born 1935)\nNorman Robert Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank (born 1 June 1935) is an English architect. Closely associated with the development of high-tech architecture, Lord Foster is recognised as a key figure in British modernist architecture. His firm Foster and Partners, first founded in 1967 as Foster Associates is the largest in the United Kingdom, and operates internationally. He also serves as president of the Norman Foster Foundation, established to 'promote interdisciplinary thinking and research to help new generations of architects, designers and urbanists to anticipate the future'. The foundation, which opened in June 2017, is based in Madrid and operates globally. Foster received the Pritzker Prize in 2000.\nEarly life and education.\nNorman Robert Foster was born in 1935 in Reddish, north of Stockport, formerly a part of Lancashire but by then incorporated into the County Borough of Stockport. He was the only child of Robert and Lilian Foster (born Smith). The family moved to Levenshulme, a neighbouring suburb of Manchester, where they lived in poverty. His father was a machine painter at the Metropolitan-Vickers works in Trafford Park, which influenced Norman to take up engineering, design, and, ultimately, architecture. His mother worked in a local bakery. Foster's parents were diligent and hard workers who often had neighbours and family members look after their son, which Foster later believed restricted his relationship with his mother and father.\nFoster attended Burnage Grammar School for Boys in Burnage, where he was bullied by fellow pupils and took up reading. He considered himself quiet and awkward in his early years. At 16, he left school and passed an entrance exam for a trainee scheme set up by Manchester Town Hall, which led to his first job, an office junior and clerk in the treasurer's department. In 1953, Foster completed his national service in the Royal Air Force, choosing the air force because aircraft had been a longtime hobby. Upon returning to Manchester, Foster went against his parents' wishes and sought employment elsewhere. He had seven O-levels by this time, and applied to work at a duplicating machine company, telling the interviewer he had applied for the prospect of a company car and a \u00a31,000 salary. Instead, he became an assistant to a contract manager at a local architects, John E. Beardshaw and Partners. The staff advised him that if he wished to become an architect, he should prepare a portfolio of drawings using the perspective and shop drawings from Beardshaw's practice as an example. Beardshaw was so impressed with Foster's drawings that he promoted him to the drawing department.\nIn 1956 Foster began study at the School of Architecture and City Planning, part of the Victoria University of Manchester. He was ineligible for a maintenance grant, so he took part-time jobs to fund his studies, including an ice-cream salesman, bouncer, and night shifts at a bakery making crumpets. During this time, he also studied at the local library in Levenshulme. His talent and hard work was recognised in 1959 when he won \u00a3105 and a RIBA silver medal for what he described as \"a measured drawing of a windmill\". The windmill he drew was Bourn Windmill, Cambridgeshire. After graduating in 1961, Foster won the Henry Fellowship to the Yale School of Architecture in New Haven, Connecticut, where he met future business partner Richard Rogers and earned his master's degree. At the suggestion of Yale art historian Vincent Scully, the pair travelled across America for a year to study architecture.\nCareer.\n1960s\u20131980s.\nIn 1963 Foster returned to the UK and established his own architectural firm Team 4, with Rogers, Su Brumwell, and the sisters Georgie and Wendy Cheesman. Among their first projects was the Cockpit, a minimalist glass bubble installed in Cornwall, the features of which became a recurring theme in Foster's future projects. After the four separated in 1967, Foster and Wendy founded a new practice, Foster Associates. From 1968 to 1983, Foster collaborated with American architect Richard Buckminster Fuller on several projects that became catalysts in the development of an environmentally sensitive approach to design, such as the Samuel Beckett Theatre at St Peter's College, Oxford.\nFoster Associates concentrated on industrial buildings until 1969, when the practice worked on the administrative and leisure centre for Fred. Olsen Lines based in the London Docklands, which integrated workers and managers within the same office space. This was followed, in 1970, by the world's first inflatable office building for Computer Technology Limited near Hemel Hempstead, which housed 70 employees for a year. The practice's breakthrough project in England followed in 1974 with the completion of the Willis Faber &amp; Dumas headquarters in Ipswich, commissioned in 1970 and completed in 1975. The client, a family-run insurance company, wanted to restore a sense of community to the workplace. In response, Foster designed a space with modular, open plan office floors, long before open-plan became the norm, and placed a roof garden, 25-metre swimming pool, and gymnasium in the building to enhance the quality of life for the company's 1,200 employees. The building has a full-height glass fa\u00e7ade moulded to the medieval street plan and contributes drama, subtly shifting from opaque, reflective black to a glowing back-lit transparency as the sun sets. The design was inspired by the Daily Express Building in Manchester that Foster had admired as a youngster. The building is now Grade I listed. The Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, an art gallery and museum on the campus of the University of East Anglia, Norwich, was one of the first major public buildings to be designed by Foster, completed in 1978, and became grade II* listed in December 2012.\nIn 1981, Foster received a commission for the construction of a new terminal building at London's Stansted Airport. Executed by Foster + Partners, the building, recognised as a landmark work of high-tech architecture, was opened to the public in 1991, and was awarded the 1990 European Union Prize for Contemporary Architecture / Mies van der Rohe Award. As part of the project's development, in 1988 Foster and British artist Brian Clarke made several proposals for an integral stained glass artwork for the terminal building; the principal proposal would have seen the walls of the terminal's east and west elevations clad in two sequences of traditionally mouth-blown, leaded glass. For complex technical and security reasons, the original scheme, which Clarke considered to be his \"magnum opus\", couldn't be executed. Though unrealised, the collaboration is historically significant for its scale, its introduction of colour and materials broadly viewed as antithetical to high-tech architecture into a key work of that movement, and for having been the first time in the history of stained glass that computer-assisted design had been utilised in the creative process.\nFoster gained a reputation for designing office buildings. In the 1980s he designed the HSBC Main Building in Hong Kong for the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (a founding member of the future HSBC Holdings plc), at the time the most expensive building ever constructed. The building is marked by its high level of light transparency, as all 3500 workers have a view to Victoria Peak or Victoria Harbour. Foster said that if the firm had not won the contract it would probably have been bankrupted.\n1990s\u2013present.\nFoster was assigned the brief for a development on the site of the Baltic Exchange, which had been damaged beyond repair by an IRA bomb, in the 1990s. Foster's firm submitted a plan for a skyscraper, the London Millennium Tower, but its height was seen as excessive for London's skyline. The proposal was scrapped and instead Foster proposed 30 St Mary Axe, popularly referred to as \"the gherkin\", after its shape. Foster worked with engineers to integrate complex computer systems with the most basic physical laws, such as convection. In 1999, the company was renamed Foster &amp; Partners, which was then stylised as Foster + Partners from 2006 onwards.\nBy then, Foster's style had evolved from its earlier sophisticated, machine-influenced high-tech vision into a more sharp-edged modernity. In 2004, Foster designed the tallest bridge in the world, the Millau Viaduct in Southern France, with the Millau Mayor Jacques Godfrain stating; \"The architect, Norman Foster, gave us a model of art.\"\nFoster worked with Steve Jobs from about 2009 until Jobs' death to design the Apple offices, Apple Campus 2 (now called Apple Park), in Cupertino, California, US. Apple's board and staff continued to work with Foster as the design was completed and the construction in progress. The circular building was opened to employees in April 2017, six years after Jobs died in 2011.\nIn January 2007, the \"Sunday Times\" reported that Foster had called in Catalyst, a corporate finance house, to find buyers for Foster + Partners. Foster does not intend to retire, but rather to sell his 80\u201390% holding in the company valued at \u00a3300\u00a0million to \u00a3500\u00a0million. In 2007, he worked with Philippe Starck and Sir Richard Branson of the Virgin Group for the Virgin Galactic plans.\nFoster currently sits on the board of trustees at architectural charity Article 25 who design, construct and manage innovative, safe, sustainable buildings in some of the most inhospitable and unstable regions of the world. He has also been on the Board of Trustees of The Architecture Foundation. Foster believes that attracting young talent is essential, and is proud that the average age of people working for Foster and Partners is 32, just like it was in 1967.\nIn May 2022, it was announced that Foster would help plan reconstruction in Ukraine after the end of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nBy 2024, Foster + Partners earned more than half a billion dollars in fees. 40% of Foster + Partner's fees were paid by clients in the Middle East.\nIn September 2025, Foster was awarded the London Design Festival's lifetime achievement medal.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nFoster has been married three times. His first wife, Wendy Cheesman, one of the four founders of Team 4, died from cancer in 1989. From 1991 to 1995, he was married to Begum Sabiha Rumani Malik; the marriage ended in divorce. In 1996, he married Spanish psychologist and art curator Elena Ochoa. He has five children; two of the four sons he had with Cheesman are adopted.\nHealth.\nIn the 2000s, Foster was diagnosed with bowel cancer and was told he had only weeks to live. He underwent chemotherapy treatment and made a full recovery. He has also suffered a heart attack.\nHonours.\nFoster was made a Knight Bachelor in the 1990 Birthday Honours, granting him the title \"Sir.\" He was appointed to the Order of Merit (OM) in 1997. In the 1999 Birthday Honours, it was announced that he would be elevated to the peerage, becoming Baron Foster of Thames Bank, of Reddish in the County of Greater Manchester in July.\nHe was elected an Associate of the Royal Academy (ARA) on 19 May 1983, and a Royal Academician (RA) on 26 June 1991. In 1995, he was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering (HonFREng). On 24 April 2017, he received the Freedom of the City of London. in October 2018, the Bloomberg London building received a Stirling Prize.\nIn 1986, he received an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Bath.\nRecognition.\nFoster received The Lynn S. Beedle Lifetime Achievement Award from the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat in 2007 to honour his contributions to the advancement of tall buildings.\nHe was awarded the Aga Khan Award for Architecture, for the University of Technology Petronas in Malaysia, and in 2008 he was granted an honorary degree from the Dundee School of Architecture at the University of Dundee. In 2009, he received the Prince of Asturias Award in the category 'Arts'. In 2017, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Lord Jacob Rothschild during the International Achievement Summit in London. In 2012, Foster was among the British cultural figures selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork \u2013 the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover \u2013 to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires. He was awarded the 2025 Lifetime Achievement Medal by the London Design Festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21642", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21642", "title": "Niklaus Wirth", "text": "Swiss computer scientist (1934\u20132024)\nNiklaus Emil Wirth (IPA: ) (15 February 1934 \u2013 1 January 2024) was a Swiss computer scientist. He designed several programming languages, including Pascal, and pioneered several classic topics in software engineering. In 1984, he won the Turing Award, generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science, \"for developing a sequence of innovative computer languages\".\nEarly life and education.\nNiklaus Emil Wirth was born in Winterthur, Switzerland, on 15 February 1934. He was the son of Hedwig (n\u00e9e Keller) and Walter Wirth, a high school teacher. Wirth studied electronic engineering at the Federal Institute of Technology, Z\u00fcrich (ETH Z\u00fcrich) from 1954 to 1958, graduating with a Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree. In 1960, he earned a Master of Science (M.Sc.) from Universit\u00e9 Laval in Quebec. Then in 1963, he was awarded a PhD in electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) from the University of California, Berkeley, supervised by computer design pioneer Harry Huskey.\nCareer.\nFrom 1963 to 1967, Wirth served as assistant professor of computer science at Stanford University and again at the University of Z\u00fcrich. In 1968, he became a professor of informatics at ETH Z\u00fcrich, taking two one-year sabbaticals at Xerox PARC in California (1976\u20131977 and 1984\u20131985). He retired in 1999.\nAlthough Wirth was involved with developing international standards in programming and informatics, as a member of the International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Working Group 2.1 on Algorithmic Languages and Calculi, which specified, maintains, and supports the programming languages ALGOL 60 and ALGOL 68, he got frustrated by the discussions in the standards groups and published his languages later on as personal work, mainly Pascal, Modula-2 and Oberon.\nIn 2004, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum \"for seminal work in programming languages and algorithms, including Euler, Algol-W, Pascal, Modula, and Oberon.\"\nProgramming languages.\nWirth was the chief designer of the programming languages Euler (1965), PL360 (1966), ALGOL W (1966), Pascal (1970), Modula (1975), Modula-2 (1978), Oberon (1987), Oberon-2 (1991), and Oberon-07 (2007). He was also a major part of the design and implementation team for the operating systems Medos-2 (1983, for the Lilith workstation), and Oberon (1987, for the Ceres workstation), and for the Lola (1995) digital hardware design and simulation system.\nIn 1984, Wirth received the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Turing Award for the development of these languages. In 1994, he was inducted as a Fellow of the ACM.\nIn 1999, he received the ACM SIGSOFT Outstanding Research Award\nWirth's law.\nIn 1995, he popularized the adage now named Wirth's law. In his 1995 paper \"A Plea for Lean Software\" he attributed the following to Martin Reiser phrasing it as, \"Software is getting slower more rapidly than hardware becomes faster.\"\nPublications.\nThe April 1971 Communications of the ACM article \"Program Development by Stepwise Refinement\", concerning the teaching of programming, is considered to be a classic text in software engineering. The paper is considered to be the earliest work to formally outline the top-down method for designing programs. The article was discussed by Fred Brooks in his influential book \"The Mythical Man-Month\" and was described as \"seminal\" in the ACM's brief biography of Wirth published in connection to his Turing Award.\nThe 1973 textbook, \"Systematic Programming: An Introduction\", was described as a quality source for mathematicians desiring to understand the nature of programming in a 1974 review. The cover flap, of the 1973 edition, stated the book \"... is tailored to the needs of people who view a course on systematic construction of algorithms as part of their basic mathematical training, rather than to the immediate needs of those who wish to be able to occasionally encode a problem and hand it over to their computer for instant solution.\" Described in the review as a challenging text to work through, it was nevertheless recommended as useful reading for those interested in numerical mathematics.\nIn 1974, \"The Pascal User Manual and Report\", jointly written with Kathleen Jensen, served as the basis of many language implementation efforts in the 1970s (BSD Pascal), and 1980s in the United States and across Europe.\nIn 1975, he wrote the book \"Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs\", which gained wide recognition. Major revisions of this book with the new title \"Algorithms &amp; Data Structures\" were published in 1986 and 2004. The examples in the first edition were written in Pascal. These were replaced in the later editions with examples written in Modula-2 and Oberon, respectively.\nIn 1992, Wirth and J\u00fcrg Gutknecht published the full documentation of the Oberon operating system. A second book, with Martin Reiser, was intended as a programming guide.\nDeath.\nWirth died in Z\u00fcrich on New Year's Day 2024, at age 89.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21646", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21646", "title": "National Cartoonists Society", "text": "Professional organization\nThe National Cartoonists Society (NCS) is an organization of professional cartoonists in the United States. It presents the National Cartoonists Society Awards. The Society was born in 1946 when groups of cartoonists got together to entertain the troops. They enjoyed each other's company and decided to meet on a regular basis.\nNCS members work in many branches of the profession, including advertising, animation, newspaper comic strips and syndicated single-panel cartoons, comic books, editorial cartoons, gag cartoons, graphic novels, greeting cards, magazine and book illustration. Only recently has the National Cartoonists Society embraced web comics. Membership is limited to established professional cartoonists, with a few exceptions of outstanding persons in affiliated fields. The NCS is not a guild or labor union.\nThe organization's stated primary purposes are \"to advance the ideals and standards of professional cartooning in its many forms\", \"to promote and foster a social, cultural and intellectual interchange among professional cartoonists of all types\" and \"to stimulate and encourage interest in and acceptance of the art of cartooning by aspiring cartoonists, students and the general public.\"\nHistory.\nThe National Cartoonists Society had its origins during World War II when cartoonists Gus Edson, Otto Soglow, Clarence D. Russell, Bob Dunn and others did chalk talks at hospitals for the USO in 1943. Edson recalled, \"We played two spots. Fort Hamilton and Governor's Island. And then we quit the USO.\" They were lured away by choreographer and former Rockette Toni Mendez. When she learned of these chalk talks, she recruited the cartoonists to do shows for the Hospital Committee of the American Theatre Wing. Beginning with a performance emceed by humor columnist Bugs Baer at Halloran Hospital on Staten Island, these shows were produced and directed by Mendez. The group expanded to junkets on military transport planes, flying to military bases along the southeastern seaboard. On one of those flights, Russell proposed a club to Rube Goldberg and others so the group could still get together after WWII ended. Mendez recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He said, \"Everybody has a club or an association or some kind\u2014lumber jacks, undertakers, rug weavers, even garbage collectors\u2014so I don't see why we can't have one, too.\" All during the flight, Rube kept saying, \"No\u2014leave us alone; we're doing fine.\" C.D. turned to me and he said, \"And no girls. Only boys.\" And he went up and down the aisle of the plane, repeating that this club would be just for boys.\nThe Society was organized on a Friday evening, March 1, 1946, when 26 cartoonists gathered at 7pm in the Barberry Room on East 52nd Street in Manhattan. After drinks and dinner, they voted to determine officers and a name for their new organization. It was initially known as The Cartoonists Society. Goldberg was elected president with Russell Patterson as vice president, C. D. Russell as secretary and Milton Caniff, treasurer. Soglow was later added as second vice president (\"to follow the first vice president around\"). Mendez functioned as the Society's trouble-shooter and later became an agent representing more than 50 cartoonists.\nThe 26 founding members came from the group of 32 members who had paid dues by March 13, including strip cartoonists Wally Bishop (\"Muggs and Skeeter\"), Martin Branner (\"Winnie Winkle\"), Ernie Bushmiller (\"Nancy\"), Milton Caniff, Gus Edson (\"The Gumps\"), Ham Fisher (\"Joe Palooka\"), Harry Haenigsen (\"Penny\"), Fred Harman (\"Red Ryder\"), Bill Holman (\"Smokey Stover\"), Jay Irving (\"Willie Doodle\"), Stan MacGovern (\"Silly Milly\"), Al Posen (\"Sweeney and Son\"), Clarence Russell (\"Pete the Tramp\"), Otto Soglow (\"The Little King\"), Jack Sparling (\"Claire Voyant\"), Raeburn Van Buren (\"Abbie an' Slats\"), Dow Walling (\"Skeets\") and Frank Willard (\"Moon Mullins\").\nAlso among the early 32 members were syndicated panel cartoonists Dave Breger (\"Mister Breger\"), George Clark (\"The Neighbors\"), Bob Dunn (\"Just the Type\") and Jimmy Hatlo (\"They'll Do It Every Time\"); freelance magazine cartoonists Abner Dean and Mischa Richter, editorial cartoonists Rube Goldberg (\"New York Sun\"), Burris Jenkins (\"New York Journal American\"), C. D. Batchelor (\"Daily News\") and Richard Q. Yardley (\"The Baltimore Sun\"); sports cartoonist Lou Hanlon; illustrator Russell Patterson and comic book artists Joe Shuster and Joe Musial.\nMore members joined by mid-May 1946, including Harold Gray (\"Little Orphan Annie\") and the Society's first animator, Paul Terry, followed in the summer by letterer Frank Engli, Bela Zaboly (\"Popeye\"), Al Capp (\"Li'l Abner\") and Ray Bailey (\"Bruce Gentry\"). By March 1947, the NCS had 112 members, including Bud Fisher (\"Mutt and Jeff\"), Don Flowers (\"Glamor Girls\"), Bob Kane (\"Batman\"), Fred Lasswell (\"Barney Google and Snuffy Smith\"), George Lichty (\"Grin and Bear It\"), Zack Mosley (\"The Adventures of Smilin' Jack\"), Alex Raymond (\"Rip Kirby\"), Cliff Sterrett (\"Polly and Her Pals\") and Chic Young (\"Blondie\"), plus editorial cartoonists Reg Manning and Fred O. Seibel and sports cartoonist Willard Mullin.\nMarge Devine Duffy, a secretary in King Features public relations department, had been helping Russell handle correspondence to the NCS, and in 1948, she was installed as the official NCS secretary and later given the title Scribe of the Society. Her name was on all the Society's publications, and her address was the permanent mailing address of the NCS for more than 30 years. As the organizing secretary, she handled agendas, organization and publicity. \"She practically ran the damn thing,\" Caniff recalled. \"A real autocrat, and everyone was delighted to have her be an autocrat because that's what we needed.\"\nIn the fall of 1949, the NCS cooperated with the Treasury Department to sell savings bonds, embarking in a nationwide tour to 17 major cities with teams of 10 or 12 cartoonists and a traveling display, \"20,000 Years of Comics\", a 95-foot pictorial history of the comic strip.\nDespite the contributions of Duffy and Mendez, there were no female members, as stipulated in the NCS' constitution which specified that \"any cartoonist (male) who signs his name to his published work\" could apply for membership. In 1949, Hilda Terry wrote a letter challenging that rule, and after more than six months of debates and votes, three women were finally admitted for membership in 1950\u2014Terry, Edwina Dumm and gag cartoonist Barbara Shermund.\nOn November 6, 1951, 49 members of the NCS arrived at Washington's Carlton Hotel for breakfast with Harry S. Truman. Gathered in Washington to help the Treasury Department sell Defense Stamps, the group presented Truman with a bound volume of their comic strip characters, some interacting with caricatures of Truman.\nUSO Tour and charitable causes.\nWhen Al Posen originated the idea of National Cartoonists Society tours to entertain American servicemen, he became the NCS Director of Overseas Shows. On October 4, 1952, nine cartoonists left on a USO-Camp Shows tour of U.S. Armed Forces installations in Europe, traveling via a Military Air Transport Service plane from Westover Air Force Base in Massachusetts and landing at Rhein-Main Air Base in Germany. On the tour, the cartoonists engaged models in each country to join in their \"Laff Time\" show of audience participation stunts and gags. The cartoonists were Posen, Charles Biro, Bob Dunn, Gus Edson, Bill Holman, Bob Montana, Russell Patterson, Clarence Russell and Dick Wingert (\"Hubert\"). The comic strip \"Dondi\" came about because of a friendship that developed between Edson and Irwin Hasen during a USO trip to Korea.\nHy Eisman described the atmosphere at the NCS when he joined in 1955:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the time I joined they were meeting at the Lambs Club in New York. It was an actor's club, which was actually a copy of an actor's club in London. When the NCS started, Rube Goldberg, Russell Patterson and Bob Dunn had become very friendly with a lot of actors. Goldberg had even done a couple of movies and Dunn was on early TV doing a program called \"Quick on the Draw\". They had gotten the club to allow them to use the premises as a meeting place for cartoonists. When I joined, they had what they called a Shepherd\u2014after all, the meetings were at the Lambs Club\u2014who was the president, Billy Gaxton. The meetings were monthly, and there would be a dinner afterwards. There was always a lot of drinking going on. For Pete's sake, there was a bar right there in the meeting room. In order to get the meeting going, they would always have to pry the guys away from the bar. The first guy I met, sitting right across from me at my first dinner, was Raeburn Van Buren. He was the creator of \"Abbie an' Slats\", and this was always a strip I liked. What was so nice was that even though he was much older, he just talked to me like a fellow professional. At that first meeting there was Al Capp, Walt Kelly, Alex Raymond, Ernie Bushmiller, Milton Caniff, all of them just sitting there, big as life. As I went to more meetings, I got to talk to a few of them. To me, it was unreal that so many legends were just standing around talking shop and gossip with each other. They were all, so, let's just say, normal. These were guys I had idolized for years.\nDuring the 1960s, cartoonists of military comic strips went to the White House and met with Lyndon B. Johnson in the Oval Office. The group included Caniff, Bill Mauldin and Mort Walker.\nIn 1977\u201378, the National Cartoonists Society released \"The National Cartoonists Society Portfolio of Fine Comic Art\", published by Collector's Press. The portfolio featured a total of 34 art prints. Each 12\" x 16\" print was printed on archival fine art paper.\nIn 2011, to memorialize and commemorate the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks, many NCS cartoonists auctioned off art that gave commentary to the tragedy and raised money for families victimized by the event in a reflective homage called, Cartoonists Remember. These cartoon tributes raised over $50,000 to benefit the 9/11 families. The art was featured and displayed in both nationally syndicated newspapers and museums across America, including the Newseum in Washington, DC, the Cartoon Art Museum in San Francisco and the Museum of Comic and Cartoon Art in New York City.\nIn 2005, the Society formed a Foundation to continue the charitable works of its fund for indigent cartoonists, the Milt Gross Fund.\nThe Society's offices are in Winter Park, Florida. In addition, the NCS has chartered 16 regional chapters throughout the United States and one in Canada. Chapter Chairpersons sit on the NCS Regional Council and are represented by a National Representative, who is a voting member of the Board of Directors. As NCS president for two consecutive terms, Jeff Keane, cartoonist for the \"Family Circus\" and son of comic creator, Bil Keane, returned to the charter and spirit of the NCS by extending the society's outreach to the military by visiting and cartooning for vets who served in the Iraq War and Afghanistan War, during the years 2007\u20132011.\nIn 2008, NCS joined over 60 other art licensing businesses (including the Artists Rights Society, Association of American Editorial Cartoonists, Society of Children's Book Writers and Illustrators, the Stock Artists Alliance, Illustrator's Partnership of America and the Advertising Photographers of America) in opposing both The Orphan Works Act of 2008 and the Shawn Bentley Orphan Works Act of 2008. Known collectively as \"Artists United Against the U.S. Orphan Works Acts\", the diverse organizations joined forces to oppose the bills, which the groups believe \"permits, and even encourages, wide-scale infringements while depriving creators of protections currently available under the Copyright Act.\"\nBilly DeBeck Memorial Award.\nThe earliest NCS award was the Billy DeBeck Memorial Award, also known as \"the Barney\" from the character in Billy DeBeck's popular comic strip \"Barney Google and Snuffy Smith\". After DeBeck died on Veteran's Day, 1942, Mary DeBeck remarried (as Mary Bergman) and created the DeBeck Award in 1946. She also made the annual presentation of engraved silver cigarette cases (with DeBeck's characters etched on the cover) to the eight winners spanning the years 1946 to 1953.\nMary Bergman died February 14, 1953, aboard National Airlines Flight 470 which went down in the Gulf of Mexico during a thunderstorm on a flight from Tampa to New Orleans. In 1954, following her death, the DeBeck Award was renamed the Reuben Award, also known \"the Reuben\". When the award name was changed in 1954, all of the prior eight winners were given Reuben statuettes designed by and named after the NCS' first president, Rube Goldberg. The Reuben Award was executed in bronze by sculptor and editorial cartoonist Bill Crawford.\nReuben Award.\nThe National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award started in 1954, as the Billy DeBeck Memorial Award (the \"Barney\"), now named after Rube Goldberg.&lt;ref name=\"nationalcartoonists/awards\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAward weekend is an annual gala event which takes place at a site selected by the President. During the formal, black-tie banquet evening, the Reuben Award (determined by secret ballot) is presented to the Outstanding Cartoonist of the Year. Cartoonists in various professional divisions are also honored with special plaques for excellence. These awards are voted by a combination of the general membership (by secret ballot) and specially-formed juries overseen by various NCS Regional Chapters. A cartoonist does not need to be a member of the NCS to receive one of the Society's awards.\nPrior to 1983, the Reuben Awards Dinner was held in New York City, usually at the Plaza Hotel. Since then, the event has expanded into a full weekend and is held in a different city each year. Recent Reuben locations have included New York City; Boca Raton; San Francisco; Canc\u00fan; Kansas City, Missouri; Las Vegas; and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 2013.\nEach year, during the NCS Annual Reuben Awards Weekend, the Society honors the year's outstanding achievements in all walks of the profession. Excellence in the fields of newspaper strips, newspaper panels, TV animation, feature animation, newspaper illustration, gag cartoons, book illustration, greeting cards, comic books, magazine feature/magazine illustration and editorial cartoons, is honored in the NCS Division Awards, which are chosen by specially-convened juries at the chapter level. An Online Comic Strip Award was added in 2011.\nThe recipient of the profession's highest honor, the Reuben Award for Outstanding Cartoonist of the Year, is chosen by a secret ballot of the members. As part of the presentations and general frivolity, the NCS has produced videos to initiate the festivities, some of which have been parodies of iconic entertainment.\nAward winners.\nBilly DeBeck Memorial Award\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReuben Award\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther awards.\nAce (Amateur Cartoonist Extraordinary) Award.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAward of Honor.\nThis award was for recognition of the American cartoon as an instrument in war, peace, education and in the artistic betterment of our cultural environment. On September 22, 1965, the following were honored:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGold Key Award (National Cartoonists Society Hall of Fame).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMilton Caniff Lifetime Achievement Award.\nThe Milton Caniff Lifetime Achievement Award is awarded by unanimous vote of the NCS Board of Directors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGold T-Square Award.\nThe Gold T-Square is awarded for 50 years as a professional cartoonist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSilver T-Square Award.\nThe Silver T-Square is awarded, by unanimous vote of the NCS Board of Directors, to persons who have demonstrated outstanding dedication or service to the Society or the profession.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nElzie Segar Award.\nThis award was presented to a person who made a unique and outstanding contribution to the profession of cartooning.\nThe winner was selected by the NCS Board and later by King Features Syndicate, in honor of \"Popeye\" creator Elzie Segar.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNo. 1 (Sports Personality of the Year) Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPresidents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21647", "revid": "34372233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21647", "title": "Nebraska", "text": "U.S. state\nNebraska ( ) is a landlocked state in the Midwestern region of the United States. It borders South Dakota to the north; Iowa to the east and Missouri to the southeast, both across the Missouri River; Kansas to the south; Colorado to the southwest; and Wyoming to the west. Nebraska is the 16th-largest state by land area, with just over . With a population of over 2 million as of 2024, it is the 38th-most populous state and the eighth-least densely populated. Nebraska's capital is Lincoln, and its most populous city is Omaha, which is on the Missouri River. Nebraska was admitted into the United States in 1867, two years after the end of the American Civil War. The Nebraska Legislature is unlike any other American legislature in that it is unicameral, and its members are elected without any official reference to political party affiliation. Nebraska is one of only two states (Maine being the other) that divide electoral college votes by district, and is not winner-take-all.\nNebraska is composed of two major land regions: the Dissected Till Plains and the Great Plains. The Dissected Till Plains region consists of gently rolling hills and contains the state's largest cities, Omaha and Lincoln. The Great Plains region, occupying most of western Nebraska, is characterized by treeless prairie. Eastern Nebraska has a humid continental climate while western Nebraska is primarily semi-arid. The state has wide variations between winter and summer temperatures; the variations decrease in southern Nebraska. Violent thunderstorms and tornadoes occur primarily during spring and summer, and sometimes in autumn. The Chinook wind tends to warm the state significantly in the winter and early spring.\nIndigenous peoples, including Omaha, Missouria, Ponca, Pawnee, Otoe, and various branches of the Lakota (Sioux) tribes, lived in the region for thousands of years before European discovery and exploration. The state is crossed by many historic trails, including that of the Lewis and Clark Expedition. The completion of the Transcontinental Railroad through Nebraska and passage of the Homestead Acts led to rapid growth in the population of American settlers in the 1870s and 1880s and the development of a large agriculture sector for which the state is known to this day.\nEtymology.\nNebraska's name is the result of anglicization of the archaic Otoe (contemporary Otoe: ; pronounced ), or the Omaha , (pronounced ), meaning \"flat water\", after the Platte River which flows through the state.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIndigenous peoples lived in the region of present-day Nebraska for thousands of years before European colonization. The historic tribes in the state included the Omaha, Missouria, Ponca, Pawnee, Otoe, and various branches of the Lakota (Sioux), some of which migrated from eastern areas into the region. When European exploration, trade, and settlement began, both Spain and France sought to control the region. In the 1690s, Spain established trade connections with the Apache, whose territory then included western Nebraska. By 1703, France had developed a regular trade with native peoples along the Missouri River in Nebraska, and by 1719 had signed treaties with several of these peoples. After war broke out between the two countries, Spain dispatched an armed expedition to Nebraska under Lieutenant General Pedro de Villasur in 1720. The party was attacked and destroyed near present-day Columbus by a large force of Pawnee and Otoe, both allied with the French. The massacre ended Spanish exploration of the area for the remainder of the 18th century.\nIn 1762, during the Seven Years' War, France ceded the Louisiana Territory to Spain. This left Britain and Spain competing for dominance along the Mississippi River; by 1773, the British were trading with the native peoples of Nebraska. Spain dispatched two trading expeditions up the Missouri River in 1794 and 1795; the second, under James Mackay, established the first European settlement in Nebraska near the mouth of the Platte River. Later that year, Mackay's party built a trading post, dubbed Fort Carlos IV (Fort Charles), near present-day Homer.\nAmerican settlement and statehood.\nIn 1819, the United States established Fort Atkinson as the first U.S. Army post west of the Missouri River, just east of present-day Fort Calhoun. The army abandoned the fort in 1827 as migration moved further west. European-American settlement was scarce until 1848 and the California Gold Rush. On May 30, 1854, the U.S. Congress created the Kansas and Nebraska territories, divided by the Parallel 40\u00b0 North, under the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act. The Nebraska Territory included parts of the current states of Colorado, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana. The territorial capital of Nebraska was Omaha.\nLate 19th century.\nIn the 1860s, after the U.S. government forced many of the American Indian tribes to cede their lands and settle on reservations, it opened large tracts of land to agricultural development by European immigrants and American settlers. Under the Homestead Act, thousands of settlers migrated into Nebraska to claim free land granted by the federal government. Because so few trees grew on the prairies, many of the first farming settlers built their homes of sod, as had Native Americans such as the Omaha. The first wave of settlement gave the territory a sufficient population to apply for statehood. Nebraska became the 37th state on March 1, 1867, and the capital was moved from Omaha to the center at Lancaster, later renamed Lincoln after the recently assassinated President of the United States, Abraham Lincoln. The battle of Massacre Canyon, on August 5, 1873, was the last major battle between the Pawnee and the Sioux.\nDuring the 1870s to the 1880s, Nebraska experienced a large growth in population. Several factors contributed to attracting new residents. The first was that the vast prairie land was perfect for cattle grazing. This helped settlers to learn the unfamiliar geography of the area. The second factor was the invention of several farming technologies. New agricultural innovations such as barbed wire, windmills, and the steel plow, combined with fair weather, enabled settlers to transform Nebraska into prime farming land. By the 1880s, Nebraska's population had soared to more than 450,000 people. The Arbor Day holiday was founded in Nebraska City by territorial governor J. Sterling Morton. The National Arbor Day Foundation is still headquartered in Nebraska City, with some offices in Lincoln.\nIn the late 19th century, African Americans migrated from the South to Nebraska as part of the Great Migration. Eventually, they moved primarily to Omaha which offered working-class jobs in meat packing, the railroads and other industries. Omaha has a long history of civil rights activism. Blacks encountered discrimination from other Americans in Omaha and especially from recent European immigrants who were also competing for the same jobs as well.\n20th century.\nIn 1912, African Americans founded the Omaha chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to work for improved conditions in the city and state. During the Omaha Race Riots in 1919, many white rioters protested throughout Omaha in response to an incident in which a black man was accused of sexually assaulting a white woman. The Great Depression also greatly affected the residents of Nebraska. From 1930 to 1936 the Dust Bowl, a period of dust storms caused by drought, destruction of topsoil by farming practices, and other factors affected Nebraska along with much of the Midwestern United States. In 1934, voters passed an initiative to make Nebraska's legislature a unicameral body, and the first unicameral session was held in 1937. Kay Orr was elected Nebraska's first female governor on November 4, 1986.\nGeography.\nThe state is bordered by South Dakota to the north; Iowa to the east and Missouri to the southeast, across the Missouri River; Kansas to the south; Colorado to the southwest; and Wyoming to the west. The state has 93 counties and is split between two time zones, with the majority of the state observing Central Time and the Panhandle and surrounding counties observing Mountain Time.\nThree rivers cross the state from west to east:\nThe first Constitution of Nebraska in 1866 described Nebraska's boundaries as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The State of Nebraska shall consist of all the territory included within the following boundaries, to-wit: Commencing at a point formed by the intersection of the western boundary of the State of Missouri, with the fortieth degree of north latitude; extending thence due west along said fortieth degree of north latitude, to a point formed by its intersection with the twenty-fifth degree of longitude west from Washington [the Southern border]; thence north along said twenty-fifth degree of longitude, to a point formed by its intersection with the forty-first degree of north latitude; thence west along said forty-first degree of north latitude to a point formed by its intersection with the twenty-seventh degree of longitude west from Washington; thence north along said twenty-seventh degree of west longitude, to a point formed by its intersection with the forty-third degree of north latitude [the Western border, which is the Panhandle]; thence east along said forty-third degree of north latitude to the Keya Paha river; thence down the middle of the channel of said river, with its meanderings, to its junction with the Niobrara River; thence down the middle of the channel of said Niobrara River, and following the meanderings thereof to its junction with the Missouri River [the Northern border]; thence down the middle of the channel of said Missouri River, and following the meanderings thereof to the place of beginning [the Eastern border, which is the Missouri River].\nThe description given for the northern border is no longer accurate, since the Keya Paha River and the Niobrara River no longer form the boundary of the state of Nebraska. Instead, Nebraska's northern border now extends east along the forty-third degree of north latitude until it meets the Missouri River directly.\nNebraska is composed of two major land regions, the Dissected Till Plains and the Great Plains. The easternmost portion of the state was scoured by Ice Age glaciers; the Dissected Till Plains were left after the glaciers retreated. The Dissected Till Plains is a region of gently rolling hills; Omaha and Lincoln are in this region. The Great Plains occupy most of western Nebraska, with the region consisting of several smaller, diverse land regions, including the Sandhills, the Pine Ridge, the Rainwater Basin, the High Plains and the Wildcat Hills. Panorama Point, at , is Nebraska's highest point; though despite its name and elevation, it is a relatively low rise near the Colorado and Wyoming borders. A former tourist slogan for the State of Nebraska was \"Where the West Begins\", but this has since been changed to \"Honestly, it's not for everyone\". Locations given for the beginning of the \"West\" in Nebraska include the Missouri River, the intersection of 13th and O Streets in Lincoln (where it is marked by a red brick star), the 100th meridian, and Chimney Rock.\nFederal land management.\nAreas under the management of the National Park Service include:\nAreas under the management of the National Forest Service include:\nClimate.\nTwo major climatic zones are represented in Nebraska. The eastern two-thirds of the state has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), although the southwest of this region may be classed as a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") using the near the Kansas state line, analogous to the predominantly humid subtropical climate of Kansas and Oklahoma. Western Nebraska, including The Panhandle and adjacent areas bordering Colorado have a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSk\"). The entire state experiences wide seasonal variations in both temperature and precipitation. Average temperatures are fairly uniform across Nebraska, with hot summers and generally cold winters. However, chinook winds from the Rocky Mountains provide a temporary moderating effect on temperatures in the state's western portion during the winter. Thus, average January maximum temperatures are highest at around in southwestern Dundy County, and lowest at about around South Sioux City in the northeast.\nAverage annual precipitation decreases east to west from about in the southeast corner of the state to about in the Panhandle. Humidity also decreases significantly from east to west. Snowfall across the state is fairly even, with most of Nebraska receiving between of snow each year. Nebraska's highest-recorded temperature was in Minden on July 24, 1936. The state's lowest-recorded temperature was in Camp Clarke on February 12, 1899.\nNebraska is located in Tornado Alley. Thunderstorms are common during both the spring and the summer. Violent thunderstorms and tornadoes happen primarily during those two seasons, although they also can occur occasionally during the autumn.\nSettlements.\nEighty-nine percent of the cities in Nebraska have fewer than 3,000 people. Nebraska shares this characteristic with five other Midwestern states: Kansas, Oklahoma, North Dakota and South Dakota, and Iowa. Hundreds of towns have a population of fewer than 1,000. Regional population declines have forced many rural schools to consolidate.\nFifty-three of Nebraska's 93 counties reported declining populations between 1990 and 2000, ranging from a 0.06% loss (Frontier County) to a 17.04% loss (Hitchcock County).\nMore urbanized areas of the state have experienced substantial growth. In 2000, the city of Omaha had a population of 390,007; in 2005, the city's estimated population was 414,521 (427,872 including the recently annexed city of Elkhorn), a 6.3% increase over five years. The 2010 census showed that Omaha has a population of 408,958. The city of Lincoln had a 2000 population of 225,581 and a 2010 population of 258,379, a 14.5% increase.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 530 cities and villages in the state of Nebraska. There are five classifications of cities and villages in Nebraska, which are based upon population. All population figures are 2017 Census Bureau estimates unless flagged by a reference number.\nMetropolitan Class City (400,000 or more)\nPrimary Class City (100,000\u2013399,999)\nFirst Class City (5,000\u201399,999)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecond Class Cities (800\u20134,999) and Villages (100\u2013799) make up the rest of the communities in Nebraska. There are 116 second-class cities and 382 villages in the state.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther areas\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2020 United States census reported that the population of Nebraska was 1,961,504 on April 1, 2020, a 7.4% increase since the 2010 United States census. The center of population of Nebraska is in Polk County, in the city of Shelby.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,246 homeless people in Nebraska.\nThe table below shows the racial composition of Nebraska's population as of 2022.\nAccording to the 2016 American Community Survey, 10.2% of Nebraska's population were of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race): Mexican (7.8%), Puerto Rican (0.2%), Cuban (0.2%), and other Hispanic or Latino origin (2.0%). The largest ancestry groups were: German (36.1%), Irish (13.1%), English (7.8%), Czech (4.7%), Swedish (4.3%), and Polish (3.5%).\nNebraska has the largest Czech American and non-Mormon Danish American population (as a percentage of the total population) in the nation. Nebraska is also home to the largest Polish American population in the Great Plains. German Americans are the largest ancestry group in most of the state, particularly in the eastern counties. Thurston County (made up entirely of the Omaha and Winnebago reservations) has an American Indian majority, and Butler County is one of only two counties in the nation with a Czech-American plurality.\nIn recent years, Nebraska has become home to many refugee communities. In 2016, it welcomed more refugees per capita than any other state. Nebraska, and in particular Lincoln, is the largest home of Yazidis refugees and Yazidi Americans in the United States.\nNotably, Nebraska was the last of all 50 states to maintain a ban on the issuance of driver's licenses to adults who had entered the United States illegally as children (also known as Dreamers). The state legislature lifted the ban in December 2016.\nMexico, India, China, Guatemala, and El Salvador are top countries of origin for Nebraska's immigrants.\nBirth data.\nAs of 2011, 31.0% of Nebraska's population younger than ageone were minorities.\n\"Note: For 2013\u20132015, births in table don't add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number. Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one \"Hispanic\" group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.\"\nReligion.\nThe religious affiliations of the people of Nebraska are predominantly Christian, according to a 2014 survey by the Pew Research Center. At the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute survey, 73% of the population identified as Christian. At the 2014 Pew Research Center's survey, 20% of the population were religiously unaffiliated; in 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 22% of the population became religiously unaffiliated. The 2023\u201324 Pew Research Center Religious Landscape Study found that 74% of Nebraskans identified as Christians and 21% were religiously unaffiliated.\nThe largest single denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church (372,838), the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod (112,585), the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (110,110) and the United Methodist Church (109,283).\nTaxation.\nNebraska has a progressive income tax. The portion of income from $0 to $2,400 is taxed at 2.56%; from $2,400 to $17,500, at 3.57%; from $17,500 to $27,000, at 5.12%; and income over $27,000, at 6.84%. The standard deduction for a single taxpayer is $5,700; the personal exemption is $118.\nNebraska has a state sales and use tax of 5.5%. In addition to the state tax, some Nebraska cities assess a city sales and use tax, in 0.5% increments, up to a maximum of 1.5%. Dakota County levies an additional 0.5% county sales tax. Food and ingredients that are generally for home preparation and consumption are not taxable. All real property within the state of Nebraska is taxable unless specifically exempted by statute. Since 1992, only depreciable personal property is subject to tax and all other personal property is exempt from tax. Inheritance tax is collected at the county level.\nEconomy.\nThe Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates of Nebraska's gross state product in 2010 was $89.8 billion. Per capita personal income in 2004 was $31,339, 25th in the nation. Nebraska has a large agriculture sector, and is a major producer of beef, pork, wheat, corn (maize), soybeans, and sorghum. Other important economic sectors include freight transport (by rail and truck), manufacturing, telecommunications, information technology, and insurance.\nIn October 2021, Nebraska recorded an unemployment rate of 1.9%, the lowest ever recorded for any state.\nIndustry.\nKool-Aid was created in 1927 by Edwin Perkins in the city of Hastings, which celebrates the event the second weekend of every August with Kool-Aid Days, and Kool-Aid is the official soft drink of Nebraska. \"CliffsNotes\" were developed by Clifton Hillegass of Rising City. He adapted his pamphlets from the Canadian publications, \"Coles Notes\".\nOmaha is home to Berkshire Hathaway, whose chief executive officer (CEO), Warren Buffett, was ranked in March 2009 by \"Forbes\" magazine as the second-richest person in the world. The city is also home to Mutual of Omaha, West Corporation, Valmont Industries, Woodmen of the World, Kiewit Corporation, Union Pacific Railroad, and Gallup. Ameritas Life Insurance Corp., Nelnet, Sandhills Publishing Company, Duncan Aviation, and Hudl are based in Lincoln. The Buckle is based in Kearney. Sidney is the national headquarters for Cabela's, a specialty retailer of outdoor goods now owned by Bass Pro Shops. Grand Island is the headquarters of Hornady, a manufacturer of ammunition.\nThe world's largest train yard, Union Pacific's Bailey Yard, is in North Platte. The Vise-Grip was invented by William Petersen in 1924, and was manufactured in De Witt until the plant was closed and moved to China in late 2008.\nLincoln's Kawasaki Motors Manufacturing is the only Kawasaki plant in the world to produce the Jet Ski, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), and MULE product lines. The facility employs more than 1,200 people.\nThe Spade Ranch, in the Sandhills, is one of Nebraska's oldest and largest beef cattle operations.\nEnergy.\nNebraska has been the nation's second-largest producer of ethanol biofuels. It has few fossil-fuel resources except for crude oil from the Niobrara Formation which underlays a portion of the state's western region. It hosts one uranium leach mining operation near its northwest border with Wyoming. It has an abundance of renewable generation resources, including untapped biomass generation potential from its productive agriculture industry. It has been a top-ten state for per-capita energy consumption due in large part to its energy-intensive agriculture, meat packing, and food processing industries.\nNebraska is the only state in the US where all electric utilities are publicly owned. Half of its electricity is generated from coal and the fastest-growing source in recent years has been wind. Nebraska has no renewable portfolio standard while supporting net metering.\nTransportation.\nRailroads.\nThe Union Pacific Railroad, headquartered in Omaha, was incorporated on July 1, 1862, in the wake of the Pacific Railway Act of 1862. Bailey Yard, in North Platte, is the largest railroad classification yard in the world. The route of the original transcontinental railroad runs through the state.\nOther major railroads with operations in the state are Amtrak; BNSF Railway; Canadian National Railway; and Iowa Interstate Railroad.\nRoads and highways.\nInterstate Highways through the State of Nebraska\nThe U.S. Routes in Nebraska\nLaw and government.\nThe Government of Nebraska operates under the framework of the Nebraska Constitution, adopted in 1875, and is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.\nExecutive branch.\nThe head of the executive branch is Governor Jim Pillen (Republican). The Governor of Nebraska is the head of government of the U.S. state of Nebraska as provided by the fourth article of the Constitution of Nebraska. Other elected officials in the executive branch are Lieutenant Governor Joe Kelly, Attorney General Mike Hilgers, Secretary of State Bob Evnen, State Treasurer John Murante, and State Auditor Mike Foley. All elected officials in the executive branch serve four-year terms.\nLegislative branch.\nNebraska is the only state in the United States with a 'single-house' unicameral legislature. Although this house is officially known simply as the \"Legislature\", and more commonly called the \"Unicameral\", its members call themselves \"senators\". Nebraska's Legislature is also the only state legislature in the United States that is officially nonpartisan. The senators are elected with no party affiliation next to their names on the ballot, and members of any party can be elected to the positions of speaker and committee chairs. The Nebraska Legislature can also override the governor's veto with a three-fifths majority, in contrast to the two-thirds majority required in some other states.\nWhen Nebraska became a state in 1867, its legislature consisted of two houses: a House of Representatives and a Senate. For years, U.S. Senator George Norris (Senator 1913\u20131943) and other Nebraskans encouraged the idea of a unicameral legislature and demanded the issue be decided in a referendum. Norris argued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The constitutions of our various states are built upon the idea that there is but one class. If this be true, there is no sense or reason in having the same thing done twice, especially if it is to be done by two bodies of men elected in the same way and having the same jurisdiction. Unicameral supporters also argued that a bicameral legislature had a significant undemocratic feature in the committees that reconciled House and Senate legislation. Votes in these committees were secretive, and would sometimes add provisions to bills that neither house had approved. Nebraska's unicameral legislature today has rules that bills can contain only one subject, and must be given at least five days of consideration. In 1934, due in part to the budgetary pressure of the Great Depression, Nebraska citizens ran a state initiative to vote on a constitutional amendment creating a unicameral legislature, which was approved, which, in effect, abolished the House of Representatives (the lower house).\nThe Legislature meets in the third Nebraska State Capitol building, built between 1922 and 1932. It was designed by Bertram G. Goodhue. Built from Indiana limestone, the capitol's base is a cross within a square. A 400-foot (122 m) domed tower rises from this base. The Sower, a 19-foot (5.8 m) bronze statue representing agriculture, crowns the building.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial system in Nebraska is unified, with the Nebraska Supreme Court having administrative authority over all the courts within the state. Nebraska uses the Missouri Plan for the selection of judges at all levels, including county courts (as the lowest-level courts) and twelve district courts, which contain one or more counties. The Court of Appeals hears appeals from the district courts, juvenile courts, and workers' compensation courts.\nFederal representation.\nNebraska is represented in the U.S. Senate by Republican Deb Fischer, who was first elected in 2012. Nebraska's other Senate seat is currently held by Pete Ricketts, who took office on January 23, 2023.\nNebraska has three representative seats in the U.S. House of Representatives. Until the next election, Nebraska's representatives are Mike Flood (R) of the 1st district, Don Bacon (R) of the 2nd district, and Adrian Smith (R) of the 3rd district.\nNebraska is one of two states (Maine is the other) that allow for a split in the state's allocation of electoral votes in presidential elections. Under a 1991 law, two of Nebraska's five votes are awarded to the winner of the statewide popular vote, while the other three go to the highest vote-getter in each of the state's three congressional districts.\nPolitics.\nFor most of its history, Nebraska has been a solidly Republican state. Republicans have carried the state in all but one presidential election since 1940: the 1964 landslide election of Lyndon B. Johnson. In the 2004 presidential election, George W. Bush won the state's five electoral votes by a margin of 33 percentage points (making Nebraska's the fourth-strongest Republican vote among states) with 65.9% of the overall vote; only Thurston County, which is majority-Native American, voted for his Democratic challenger John Kerry. In 2008, the state split its electoral votes for the first time: Republican John McCain won the popular vote in Nebraska as a whole and two of its three congressional districts; the second district, which includes the city of Omaha, went for Democrat Barack Obama. Since then, the state has split its electoral vote twice, with the second district going for the Democratic Party candidates Joe Biden in 2020 and Kamala Harris in 2024.\nDespite the current Republican domination of Nebraska politics, the state has a long tradition of electing centrist members of both parties to state and federal office; examples include George W. Norris (who served a few years in the Senate as an independent), J. James Exon, Bob Kerrey, and Chuck Hagel. Voters have tilted to the right in recent years, a trend evidenced when Hagel retired from the Senate in 2008 and was succeeded by conservative Republican Mike Johanns to the U.S. Senate, as well as with the 2006 re-election of Ben Nelson, who was considered the most conservative Democrat in the Senate until his retirement in 2013. Johanns retired in 2015 and was succeeded by Ben Sasse, while Nelson retired in 2013 and was succeeded by Deb Fischer, both conservative Republicans.\nThough its politics are generally conservative, the state also has a history of progressive reform. Nebraska was the first U.S. state to outlaw sexual assault within a marriage, in 1975. In 1980, it became the first U.S. state to divest from South Africa to protest the racist system of apartheid.\nFormer President Gerald Ford was born in Nebraska but moved away shortly after birth. Illinois native William Jennings Bryan represented Nebraska in Congress, served as U.S. Secretary of State under President Woodrow Wilson, and unsuccessfully ran for president three times. Former Vice President Dick Cheney was born in Lincoln but moved to Casper.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nArts.\nMuseums\nPerforming arts\nSports.\nCollege sports.\nNebraska is currently home to seven member schools of the NCAA, eight of the NAIA, seven of the NJCAA, one of the NCCAA, and one independent school.\nThe College World Series has been held in Omaha since 1950. It was held at Rosenblatt Stadium from 1950 through 2010, and has been domiciled at Charles Schwab Field Omaha since 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nSurveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly special studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21648", "revid": "27199218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21648", "title": "New Jersey", "text": "U.S. state\nNew Jersey is a state located in both the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern regions of the United States. Located at the geographic hub of the heavily urbanized Northeast megalopolis, it is bordered to the northwest, north, and northeast by New York State; on its east, southeast, and south by the Atlantic Ocean; on its west by the Delaware River and Pennsylvania; and on its southwest by Delaware Bay and Delaware. At , New Jersey is the fifth-smallest state in land area. According to a 2024 U.S. Census Bureau estimate, it is the 11th-most populous state, with over 9.5 million residents, its highest estimated count ever. The state capital is Trenton, and the state's most populous city is Newark. New Jersey is the only U.S. state in which every county is deemed urban by the U.S. Census Bureau. It is the most densely populated U.S. state.\nNew Jersey was first inhabited by Paleo-Indians as early as 13,000 BC. The Lenape were the dominant Indigenous group when Europeans arrived in the early 17th century, and they were subdivided into dialectal groups such as the Munsee, in the north, and the Unami and the Unalachtigo, elsewhere. Dutch and Swedish colonists founded the first European settlements in the state, with the British later seizing control of the region and establishing the Province of New Jersey, named after Jersey. The colony's fertile lands and relative religious tolerance drew a large and diverse population. New Jersey was among the Thirteen Colonies that supported the American Revolution, hosting several pivotal battles and military commands in the American Revolutionary War earning the title, \"Crossroads of the American Revolution.\" New Jersey remained in the Union during the American Civil War and provided troops, resources, and military leaders in support of the Union Army. After the war, the state emerged as a major manufacturing center and a leading destination for immigrants, helping drive the Industrial Revolution in the U.S. New Jersey was the site of many industrial, technological, and commercial innovations. Many prominent Americans associated with New Jersey have proven influential nationally and globally, including in academia, advocacy, business, entertainment, government, military, non-profit leadership, and other fields.\nNew Jersey's central location in the Northeast megalopolis helped fuel its rapid growth and suburbanization in the second half of the 20th century. Since the beginning of the 21st century, the state's economy has become highly diversified, with major sectors, including New Jersey's role as the world's largest pharmaceutical industry hub\u2014 as well as biotechnology, information technology, finance, digital media, filmmaking, and tourism, and it has become an Atlantic seaboard epicenter for logistics and distribution. New Jersey is a major destination for immigrants and is home to one of the world's most multicultural populations. Echoing historical trends, the state has increasingly re-urbanized, with growth in cities outpacing suburbs since 2008.\nNew Jersey is one of the most educated, affluent, healthy, diverse, and highly developed states in the U.S., ranking high among states in several quality of life metrics. New Jersey had a median household income of $99,781 as of 2023, the second-highest of any U.S. state behind Massachusetts. Almost one-tenth of all households in the state, or over 323,000, are millionaires, the highest representation of millionaires among all states. New Jersey's public school system consistently ranks at or among the top of all U.S. states. In 2025, New Jersey was ranked as having the healthiest population overall. The state ranks near the top on both the American Human Development Index and the standard Human Development Index. Consequently, New Jersey is typically ranked as one of the best U.S. states, as well as one of the most expensive states for residents to live in.\nAccording to climatology research by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, New Jersey has been the fastest-warming state by average air temperature over a 100-year period beginning in the early 20th century, which has been attributed to warming of the North Atlantic Ocean.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric era.\nThe pressure of collision between North America and Africa gave rise to the Appalachian Mountains. Around 18,000 years ago, the Ice Age resulted in glaciers that reached New Jersey. As glaciers retreated, they left behind Lake Passaic along with rivers, meadows, swamps, and gorges.\nSince the 6th millennium BC, Native American people have inhabited New Jersey, beginning with the Lenape tribe. \"\" is the Lenape name for the land that represents present-day New Jersey. The Lenape were several autonomous groups that practiced maize agriculture in order to supplement their hunting and gathering in the region surrounding the Delaware River, the lower Hudson River, and western Long Island Sound. The Lenape were divided into matrilineal clans that were based upon common female ancestors. Clans were organized into three distinct phratries identified by their animal sign: Turtle, Turkey, and Wolf. They first encountered the Dutch in the early 17th century, and their primary relationship with the Dutch and later European settlers was through fur trade.\nColonial era.\nThe Dutch were the first Europeans to lay claim to geographic territory in New Jersey. The Dutch colony of New Netherland consisted of parts of the modern Mid-Atlantic states. Although the European principle of land ownership was not recognized by the Lenape, Dutch West India Company policy required its colonists to purchase land that they settled. The first to do so was Michiel Pauw, who established a patroonship called Pavonia in 1630 along North River, that eventually became Bergen, the first permanent settlement, local civil government and municipality in the state. Peter Minuit's purchase of lands along the Delaware River established the colony of New Sweden, that lasted until the Dutch conquered it in 1655. Then the entire region became a territory of England on June 24, 1664, after an English fleet under command of Colonel Richard Nicolls sailed into what is now New York Harbor and took control of Fort Amsterdam, annexing the entire province.\nDuring the English Civil War, the Channel Island of Jersey remained loyal to the British Crown and gave sanctuary to the King. In the Royal Square in St Helier, Charles II of England was proclaimed King in 1649, following the execution of his father, Charles I. North American lands were divided by Charles II, who gave his brother, the Duke of York (later King James II), the region between New England and Maryland as a proprietary colony (as opposed to a royal colony). James then granted land between the Hudson River and the Delaware River (the land that would become New Jersey) to two friends who had remained loyal through the English Civil War: Sir George Carteret and Lord Berkeley of Stratton. The area was named the Province of New Jersey.\nSince its inception, New Jersey has been characterized by ethnic and religious diversity. New England Congregationalists settled alongside Scots Presbyterians and Dutch Reformed migrants. While the majority of residents lived in towns with individual landholdings of , a few rich proprietors owned vast estates. English Quakers and Anglicans owned large landholdings. Unlike Plymouth Colony, Jamestown and other colonies, New Jersey was populated by a secondary wave of immigrants who came from other colonies instead of those who migrated directly from Europe. New Jersey remained agrarian and rural throughout the colonial era, and commercial farming developed sporadically. Some townships, such as Burlington on the Delaware River and Perth Amboy, emerged as important ports for shipping to New York City and Philadelphia. The colony's fertile lands and tolerant religious policy drew more settlers, and New Jersey's population had increased to 120,000 by 1775.\nSettlement for the first ten years of English rule took place along the Hackensack River and Arthur Kill. Settlers came primarily from New York and New England. On March 18, 1673, Berkeley sold his half of the colony to Quakers in England, who settled the Delaware Valley region as a Quaker colony, with William Penn acting as trustee for the lands for a time. New Jersey was governed as two distinct provinces, East and West Jersey, for 28 years between 1674 and 1702, which were part of the Dominion of New England from 1686 to 1689.\nIn 1702, the two provinces were reunited under a royal governor rather than a proprietary one. Edward Hyde, titled Lord Cornbury, became the first governor of the royal colony. Britain believed that he was an ineffective and corrupt ruler, taking bribes and speculating on land. In 1708, he was recalled to England. New Jersey was then ruled by the governors of New York, but this infuriated the settlers of New Jersey, who accused these governors of favoritism to New York. Judge Lewis Morris led the case for a separate governor, and was appointed governor by King George II in 1738.\nRevolutionary War era.\nNew Jersey was one of the Thirteen Colonies that revolted against British rule in the American Revolution. The was passed July 2, 1776, just two days before the Second Continental Congress declared American Independence from Great Britain. It was an act of the Provincial Congress, which made itself into the State Legislature. To reassure neutrals, it provided that the legislature would disband if New Jersey reached reconciliation with Great Britain. Among the 56 Founding Fathers who signed the Declaration of Independence, five were New Jersey representatives: Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John Hart, and Abraham Clark.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, British and American armies crossed New Jersey numerous times with several pivotal battles taking place in the state. In total, there were 296 engagements that occurred within New Jersey, more clashes than occurred in any other of the 13 colonies during the war. Because of this, New Jersey today is sometimes referred to as \"The Crossroads of the American Revolution\". The winter quarters of the Continental Army were established in New Jersey twice by General George Washington in Morristown, which has been called \"The Military Capital of the American Revolution.\"\nOn the night of December 25\u201326, 1776, the Continental Army under George Washington crossed the Delaware River. After the crossing, they surprised and defeated the Hessian troops in the Battle of Trenton. Slightly more than a week after victory at Trenton, Continental Army forces gained an important victory by stopping General Cornwallis's charges at the Second Battle of Trenton. By evading Cornwallis's army, the Continental Army was able to make a surprise attack on Princeton and successfully defeated the British forces there on January 3, 1777. Emanuel Leutze's painting of \"Washington Crossing the Delaware\" became an icon of the Revolution.\nContinental Army forces under Washington's command met British forces under General Henry Clinton at the Battle of Monmouth in an indecisive engagement in June 1778. Washington's forces attempted to take the British column by surprise. When the British army attempted to flank the Americans, the Continental Army retreated in disorder. Their ranks were later reorganized and withstood British charges.\nIn the summer of 1783, the Continental Congress met in Nassau Hall at Princeton University, making Princeton the nation's capital for four months. It was there that the Continental Congress learned of the signing of the Treaty of Paris, which ended the war.\nOn December 18, 1787, New Jersey became the third state to ratify the United States Constitution, which was overwhelmingly popular in New Jersey since it prevented New York and Pennsylvania from charging tariffs on goods imported from Europe. On November 20, 1789, New Jersey became the first in the newly formed Union to ratify the Bill of Rights.\nThe 1776 New Jersey State Constitution gave the vote to all inhabitants who had a certain level of wealth. This included women and Black people, but not married women because they were not legally permitted to own property separately from their husbands. Both sides, in several elections, claimed that the other side had had unqualified women vote and mocked them for use of petticoat electors, whether entitled to vote or not; on the other hand, both parties passed Voting Rights Acts. In 1807, legislature passed a bill interpreting the constitution to mean universal white male suffrage, excluding paupers; the constitution was itself an act of the legislature and not enshrined as the modern constitution.\n19th century.\nOn February 15, 1804, New Jersey became the last northern state to abolish new slavery and enacted legislation that slowly phased out existing slavery. This led to a gradual decrease of the slave population. By the American Civil War's end, about a dozen African Americans in New Jersey were still held in bondage. New Jersey voters eventually ratified the constitutional amendments banning slavery and granting rights to the United States' black population.\nIndustrialization accelerated in the present-day North Jersey region of the state following completion of the Morris Canal in 1831. The canal allowed for anthracite coal to be transported from eastern Pennsylvania's Lehigh Valley to North Jersey's growing industries in Paterson, Newark, and Jersey City.\nIn 1844, the second state constitution was ratified and brought into effect. Counties thereby became districts for the state senate, and some realignment of boundaries (including the creation of Mercer County) immediately followed. This provision was retained in the 1947 Constitution, but was overturned by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1962, by the decision \"Baker v. Carr\". While the Governorship was stronger than under the 1776 constitution, the constitution of 1844 created many offices that were not responsible to him, or to the people, and it gave him a three-year term, but he could not succeed himself.\nNew Jersey was one of the few Union states (the others being Delaware and Kentucky) to select a candidate other than Abraham Lincoln twice in national elections, and sided with Stephen A. Douglas (1860) and George B. McClellan (1864) during their campaigns. McClellan, a native Philadelphian, had New Jersey ties and formally resided in New Jersey at the time; he later became Governor of New Jersey (1878\u201381). (In New Jersey, the factions of the Democratic party managed an effective coalition in 1860.) During the American Civil War, the state was led first by Republican governor Charles Smith Olden, then by Democrat Joel Parker. During the course of the war, between 65,000 and 80,000 soldiers from the state enlisted in the Union army; unlike many states, including some Northern ones, no battle was fought there.\nIn the Industrial Revolution, cities like Paterson grew and prospered. Previously, the economy had been largely agrarian, which was problematically subject to crop failures and poor soil. This caused a shift to a more industrialized economy, one based on manufactured commodities such as textiles and silk. Inventor Thomas Edison also became an important figure of the Industrial Revolution, having been granted 1,093 patents, many of which for inventions he developed while working in New Jersey. Edison's facilities, first at Menlo Park and then in West Orange, are considered perhaps the first research centers in the United States. Christie Street in Menlo Park was the first thoroughfare in the world to have electric lighting. Transportation was greatly improved as locomotion and steamboats were introduced to New Jersey.\nIron mining was also a leading industry during the middle to late 19th century. Bog iron pits in the New Jersey Pine Barrens were among the first sources of iron for the new nation. Mines such as Mt. Hope, Mine Hill, and the Rockaway Valley Mines created a thriving industry. Mining generated the impetus for new towns and was one of the driving forces behind the need for the Morris Canal. Zinc mines were also a major industry, especially the Sterling Hill Mine.\n20th century.\nNew Jersey prospered through the Roaring Twenties. The first Miss America Pageant was held in 1921 in Atlantic City; the Holland Tunnel connecting Jersey City to Manhattan opened in 1927; and the first drive-in movie was shown in 1933 in Camden. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the state offered begging licenses to unemployed residents, the zeppelin airship Hindenburg crashed in flames over Lakehurst, and the SS \"Morro Castle\" beached itself near Asbury Park after going up in flames while at sea.\nThrough both World Wars, New Jersey was a center for war production, especially naval construction. The Federal Shipbuilding and Drydock Company yards in Kearny and Newark and the New York Shipbuilding Corporation yard in Camden produced aircraft carriers, battleships, cruisers, and destroyers. New Jersey manufactured 6.8 percent of total United States military armaments produced during World War II, ranking fifth among the 48 states. In addition, Fort Dix (1917) (originally called \"Camp Dix\"), Camp Merritt (1917), and Camp Kilmer (1941) were all constructed to house and train American soldiers through both World Wars. New Jersey also became a principal location for defense in the Cold War. Fourteen Nike missile stations were constructed for the defense of the New York City and Philadelphia areas. \"PT-109\", a motor torpedo boat commanded by Lt. (j.g.) John F. Kennedy in World War II, was built at the Elco Boatworks in Bayonne. The aircraft carrier USS \"Enterprise\" (CV-6) was briefly docked at the Military Ocean Terminal in Bayonne in the 1950s before she was sent to Kearney to be scrapped. In 1962, the world's first nuclear-powered cargo ship, the NS Savannah, was launched at Camden.\nIn 1951, the New Jersey Turnpike opened, facilitating efficient travel by car and truck between North Jersey and the New York metropolitan area, and South Jersey and the Philadelphia metropolitan area. Subsequently, in 1957, the Garden State Parkway was completed, serving as a diagonal counterpart to the Turnpike, and opening up highway travel along New Jersey's coastal flank between Bergen County in the northeast and the Cape May County peninsula at the southeastern tip of New Jersey; in doing so, the Jersey Shore became readily accessible to millions of residents in the New York metropolitan area. In 1959, Air Defense Command deployed the CIM-10 Bomarc surface-to-air missile to McGuire Air Force Base. On June 7, 1960, an explosion in a CIM-10 Bomarc missile fuel tank caused an accident and subsequent plutonium contamination.\nIn the 1960s, race riots erupted in many of the industrial cities of North Jersey. The first race riots in New Jersey occurred in Jersey City on August 2, 1964. Several others ensued in 1967, in Newark and Plainfield. Other riots followed the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in April 1968, just as in the rest of the country. A riot occurred in Camden in 1971. As a result of an order from the New Jersey Supreme Court to fund schools equitably, the New Jersey legislature passed an income tax bill in 1976. Prior to this bill, the state had no income tax.\n21st century.\nIn the early part of the 2000s, two light rail systems were opened: the Hudson\u2013Bergen Light Rail (HBLR) in Hudson County and the River Line between Camden and Trenton. The intent of these projects was to encourage transit-oriented development in North Jersey and South Jersey, respectively. The HBLR was credited with a revitalization of Hudson County and Jersey City. Urban revitalization has continued in North Jersey in the 21st century. In 2014, Jersey City's Census-estimated population was 262,146, with the largest population increase of any municipality in New Jersey since 2010, representing an increase of 5.9% from the 2010 U.S. census, when the city's population was enumerated at 247,597. In 2017, Jersey City's tax base grew by US$136\u00a0million, giving Jersey City the largest municipal tax base in New Jersey. Between 2000 and 2010 Newark experienced its first population increase since the 1950s, and by 2020 had rebounded to 311,549.\nGeography.\nNew Jersey is at the center of the Northeast megalopolis, the most populated American urban agglomeration. It is bordered on the north and northeast by New York (parts of which are across the Hudson River, Upper New York Bay, the Kill Van Kull, Newark Bay, and the Arthur Kill); on the east by the Atlantic Ocean; on the southwest by Delaware across Delaware Bay; and on the west by Pennsylvania across the Delaware River.\nNew Jersey is broadly divided into the North, Central, and South Jersey geographic regions, although some residents do not consider Central Jersey a region in its own right. Across the regions are five distinct areas divided by natural geography and population concentration. Northeastern New Jersey, often referred to as the Gateway Region, lies closest to Manhattan in New York City, and up to a million residents commute daily into the city for work, many via public transportation. The Jersey Shore, along the Atlantic Coast in Central and South Jersey, has its own unique natural, residential, and cultural characteristics owing to its location by the ocean. South Jersey represents the southernmost geographical region of the northeastern United States. The Philadelphia metropolitan area includes the southwestern counties of the state, which reside within the Delaware Valley surrounding Philadelphia.\nDespite the state's heavily urban character and a long history of industrialization, forests cover roughly 45 percent of New Jersey's land area, or approximately , ranking 31st among the 50 U.S. states and six territories. Northwestern New Jersey, often referred to as the Skylands Region, is more wooded, rural, and mountainous. The chief tree of the northern forests is the oak. The New Jersey Pine Barrens is situated in the southern interior of New Jersey and covered extensively by mixed pine and oak forest; its population density is lower than most of the state.\nHigh Point in Montague Township, Sussex County is the state's highest elevation at above sea level. The state's highest prominence is Kitty Ann Mountain in Morris County, rising . The Palisades are a line of steep cliffs on the west side of the Hudson River in Bergen and Hudson Counties. Major New Jersey rivers include the Hudson, Delaware, Raritan, Passaic, Hackensack, Rahway, Musconetcong, Mullica, Rancocas, Manasquan, Maurice, and Toms rivers. Due to New Jersey's peninsular geography, both sunrise and sunset are visible over water from different points on the Jersey Shore.\nClimate.\nThe state consists of two climate zones; most of the state has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa), while the northwest has a humid continental climate (Dfa). New Jersey receives between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually.\nSummers are typically hot and humid, with statewide average high temperatures of and lows of ; however, temperatures exceed on average 25 days each summer, exceeding in some years. Winters are usually cold, with average high temperatures of and lows of for most of the state, but temperatures can, for brief periods, fall below and sometimes rise above . Northwestern parts of the state have significantly colder winters with sub- being an almost annual occurrence. Spring and autumn may feature wide temperature variations, with lower humidity than summer. The USDA Plant Hardiness Zone classification ranges from6 in the northwest of the state, to 7B near Cape May. All-time temperature extremes recorded in New Jersey include on July 10, 1936, in Runyon, Middlesex County and on January 5, 1904, in River Vale, Bergen County.\nAverage annual precipitation ranges from , spread uniformly throughout the year. Average snowfall per winter season ranges from in the south and near the seacoast, in the northeast and central part of the state, to about in the northwestern highlands, but this often varies considerably from year to year. Precipitation falls on an average of 120 days a year, with 25 to 30 thunderstorms, most of which occur during the summer.\nDuring winter and early spring, New Jersey can experience nor'easters, which are capable of causing blizzards or flooding throughout the northeastern United States. Hurricanes and tropical storms, tornadoes, and earthquakes are rare; the state was impacted by a hurricane in 1903, Tropical Storm Floyd in 1999, and Hurricane Sandy in 2012, which made landfall in the state with top winds of .\nClimate change.\nClimate change is affecting New Jersey faster than much of the rest of the United States. Climatologists at the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have concluded that New Jersey has been the fastest-warming state by average air temperature over a 100-year period beginning in the early 20th century.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe United States Census Bureau divides New Jersey's 21 counties into seven metropolitan statistical areas, with 20 counties included in either the New York City or Philadelphia Combined Statistical Area. Warren County is part of the Lehigh Valley metropolitan area based in eastern Pennsylvania.\nCounties.\nThe 21 counties in New Jersey, ranked by population in the 2020 United States census, are:\nMunicipalities.\nFor its overall population and nation-leading population density, New Jersey is primarily suburban and has a relative paucity of classically large cities. This paradox is most pronounced in Bergen County, the state's most populous county, whose 955,732 residents at the 2020 census inhabited 70 municipalities, of which the most populous is Hackensack, with 46,030 residents. Many urban areas extend far beyond the limits of a single large city, as New Jersey municipalities tend to be geographically small; three of the four largest cities in New Jersey by population have under of land area, and eight of the top ten, including all the top five, have a land area under . As of the 2010 United States census[ [update]], only four municipalities had over 100,000 residents (although Edison and Woodbridge Township came very close); this number increased to seven by the 2020 census.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nResidents of New Jersey are most commonly referred to as New Jerseyans or, less commonly, as New Jerseyites. According to the 2020 U.S. census, the state had a population of 9,288,994, a 5.7% increase since the 2010 U.S. census, which counted 8,791,894 residents. The state ranked eleventh in the country by total population and first in population density, with 1,185 residents per square mile (458 per km2). Historically, New Jersey has experienced one of the fastest growth rates in the country, with its population increasing by double digits almost every decade until 1980; growth has since slowed but remained relatively robust until recently. In 2022, the Census Bureau estimated there were 6,262 fewer residents than in 2020, a decline of 0.3% from 2020, related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2024, the Census Bureau reported that the state population rebounded by 2.3% or 211,837 residents from April 2020. New Jersey lead the Northeast with a 1.3% growth rate or 121,209 residents from 2023 placing it among the top ten states nationwide for population growth.\nNew Jersey is the only state where every county is deemed urban as defined by the Census Bureau. Most residents live in the counties surrounding New York City, the nation's largest city, Philadelphia, the nation's sixth-largest city, or along the eastern Jersey Shore; the extreme southern and northwestern counties are relatively less dense overall. Since the 2000 census, the United States Census Bureau calculated that New Jersey's center of population was located in East Brunswick. The state is located in the middle of the Northeast megalopolis, which has more than 50 million residents.\nAs of 2023, New Jersey had a median household income of $99,781, the second-highest of any U.S. state behind Massachusetts. Conversely, New Jersey's poverty rate of 9.4% was slightly lower than the national average of 11.4%, and the sixth lowest of the fifty states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico. This is attributed to several factors, including the state's proximity to the major economic centers of New York City and Philadelphia, its hosting the highest number of millionaires both per capita and per square mile in the U.S., and the fact that it has the most scientists and engineers per square mile in the world.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 8,752 homeless people in New Jersey. The top countries of origin for New Jersey's immigrants in 2018 were India, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Ecuador, and the Philippines.\nRace and ethnicity.\nNew Jersey is one of the most ethnically diverse states in the United States: as of 2022, over one-fifth (21.5%) of its residents are Hispanic or Latino, 15.3% are Black, and one-tenth are Asian. One in four New Jerseyans were born abroad and more than one million (12.1%) are not fully fluent in English. As of the 2024 census estimate,[ [update]] the White non-Hispanic population of the state was less than 50%, making it a majority-minority state. Compared to the U.S. as a whole, the state is more racially and ethnically diverse and has a higher proportion of immigrants. \n2024 American Community Survey one-year estimates.\nNew Jersey is home to roughly half a million undocumented immigrants, comprising an estimated 6.2% of the population, which in 2018 was the fifth-highest percentage of any U.S. state. The municipalities of Camden, Jersey City, and Newark are considered sanctuary cities for illegal immigrants.\nFor further information on various ethnoracial groups and neighborhoods prominently featured within New Jersey, see the following articles:\nNew Jersey is one of the most ethnically and religiously diverse states in the United States. Nearly one-fourth of New Jerseyans (22.7%) were foreign born, compared to the national average of 13.5%. As of 2011, 56.4% of New Jersey's children under the age of one belonged to racial or ethnic minority groups, meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white. The 2019 Vintage Year Census estimated that the state's ethnic makeup was as follows: 71.9% White alone, 15.1% Black or African American alone, 10.0% Asian alone, 0.6% American Indian and Alaska Native alone, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, and 2.3% Two or more races. Hispanic or Latino accounted for 20.9%, while White alone (non-Hispanic or Latino) accounted for 54.6% of the population. Many of the municipalities in Bergen County, New Jersey, the state's largest county, have a sizeable minority population of Hispanics and Asians. There are also three state-recognized tribes, and in 2020, 51,186 identified as being Native American alone, while 96,691 did in combination with one or more other races.\nNew Jersey hosts some of the nation's largest communities of religious and ethnic minorities in proportional or absolute terms. It has the second-largest Jewish population by percentage (after New York); the largest Muslim population by percentage; the largest population of Peruvians in the U.S.; the largest population of Cubans outside Florida; the third-highest Asian population by percentage; and the second-highest Italian population, according to the 2000 census. African Americans, Hispanics (Puerto Ricans and Dominicans), West Indians, Arabs, and Brazilian and Portuguese Americans are also high in number. New Jersey also has the fourth-largest Filipino population, and fourth-largest Chinese population, per the 2010 U.S. Census.\nNew Jersey has the-third highest Indian population of any state by absolute numbers and the highest by percentage, with India Square in Jersey City, Hudson County hosting the highest concentration of Asian Indians in the Western Hemisphere. A study by the Pew Research Center found that in 2013, New Jersey was the only U.S. state in which immigrants born in India constituted the largest foreign-born nationality, representing roughly 10% of all foreign-born residents in the state. Central New Jersey, particularly Edison and surrounding Middlesex County, has the highest concentration of Indians, at nearly 20% in 2020; Little India is the largest and most diverse South Asian cultural hub in the United States. The area includes a sprawling Chinatown and Koreatown running along New Jersey Route 27. Monroe Township in Middlesex County has experienced a particularly rapid growth rate in its Indian American population with an estimated 5,943 (13.6%) as of 2017, which was 23 times the 256 (0.9%) counted at the 2000 Census; Diwali is celebrated by the township as a Hindu holiday. In Middlesex County, election ballots are printed in English, Spanish, Gujarati, Hindi, and Punjabi. Robbinsville, in neighboring Mercer County, hosts the world's largest Hindu temple outside Asia. Carteret's Punjabi Sikh community, variously estimated at upwards of 3,000, is the largest concentration of Sikhs in the state. Bergen County is home to America's largest Malayali community.\nNew Jersey also has the third-largest Korean population, with Bergen County home to the highest Korean concentration per capita of any U.S. county (6.9% in 2011). It is a growing hub and home to all of the nation's top ten municipalities by percentage of Korean population, led by Palisades Park (\ubcbc\ub791 \uacf5\uc6d0), the municipality with the highest density of ethnic Koreans in the Western Hemisphere. Displaying ubiquitous Hangul (\ud55c\uae00) signage and known as the \"Korean village\", Palisades Park uniquely comprises a Korean majority (52% in 2010) of its population, with both the highest Korean-American density and percentage of any municipality in the United States.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2010, 71.31% (5,830,812) of New Jersey residents age5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 14.59% (1,193,261) spoke Spanish, 1.23% (100,217) Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin), 1.06% (86,849) Italian, 1.06% (86,486) Portuguese, 0.96% (78,627) Tagalog, and Korean was spoken as a main language by 0.89% (73,057) of the population over the age of five. In total, 28.69% (2,345,644) of New Jersey's population age5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.\nA diverse collection of languages has since evolved amongst the state's population, given that New Jersey has become cosmopolitan and is home to ethnic enclaves of non-English-speaking communities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nNew Jersey is widely regarded as an LGBTQ+ friendly state and is now home to more gay villages per square mile than any other U.S. state. Same-sex marriage in New Jersey has been legally recognized since October 21, 2013, the effective date of a trial court ruling invalidating New Jersey's restriction of marriage to persons of different sexes at the time. In September 2013, Mary C. Jacobson, Assignment Judge of the Mercer Vicinage of the Superior Court, ruled that as a result of the U.S. Supreme Court's June 2013 decision in \"United States v. Windsor\", the Constitution of New Jersey requires the state to recognize same-sex marriages.\nNumerous gayborhoods have emerged in New Jersey, most prominently in Jersey City, Asbury Park, Maplewood, Montclair, and Lambertville. Trenton, the state capital of New Jersey, elected Reed Gusciora, its first openly gay mayor, in 2018, and Jennifer Williams, New Jersey's first openly transgender city councilmember, in 2022. In June 2018, Maplewood, Essex County unveiled permanent rainbow-colored crosswalks to celebrate LGBTQ pride. Rahway, Union County, also unveiled its own rainbow-colored crosswalks in June 2019. In January 2019, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy signed legislation mandating LGBTQ+ inclusive educational curriculum in schools. In February 2019, New Jersey began allowing a neutral or non-binary gender choice on birth certificates.\nReligion.\nBy number of adherents, the largest religious traditions in New Jersey, according to the 2010 Association of Religion Data Archives, were the Roman Catholic Church with 3,235,290; Islam with 160,666; and the United Methodist Church with 138,052. The world's largest Hindu temple outside Asia is in Robbinsville, Mercer County. In September 2021, the State of New Jersey aligned with the World Hindu Council to declare October Hindu Heritage Month. In January 2018, Gurbir Grewal became the first Sikh American to serve as state attorney general in the United States. In January 2019, Sadaf Jaffer of Montgomery became the first female Muslim American mayor, first female South Asian mayor, and first female Pakistani-American mayor in the U.S. Large numbers of Orthodox Jews are now migrating to New Jersey from New York, due to the latter's higher cost of living. The world's largest gathering of rabbis outside of Israel occurred in Edison on December 1, 2024.\nEducation.\nAs of the 2020\u20132021 school year, there were 686 operating districts in the state. Of these, 599 were traditional public school districts and 87 were charter school districts. The NJDOE reported a total district enrollment of 1,362,400 students, the lowest total enrollment since the early 2000s, though these figures do not consider homeschooled students or those attending out-of-state schools. New Jersey public schools emphasize STEM subjects, and New Jersey is home to more scientists and engineers per square mile than anywhere else in the world.\nEducational standards.\nNew Jersey is known for the high quality of its education. In 2024, New Jersey spent the second-most per public school student among all states, behind New York, amounting to $26,600 spent per pupil; Over 50% of the expenditure is allocated to student instruction.\nNew Jersey is home to several prestigious private universities, including Princeton University in Princeton in Mercer County, one of the world's most prominent research universities, which was ranked first for the tenth consecutive year among all national universities by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in 2025 and has ranked first in comparable lists published by \"Forbes\" and \"The Wall Street Journal\", and public universities such as Rutgers University, headquartered in New Brunswick, Middlesex County, the state's flagship institution of higher education.\nIn 2014, New Jersey's school systems were ranked at the top of all fifty U.S. states by financial website WalletHub. In 2018, New Jersey's overall educational system was ranked second among all states to Massachusetts by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". In 2019, 2020, and 2021, \"Education Week\" also ranked New Jersey public schools the best of all U.S. states.\nIn 2016, nine New Jersey-based high schools were ranked among the top 25 in the nation, more than any other state, in \"America's Top High Schools 2016\", published by \"Newsweek\".\nIn November 2023, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy signed into law legislation eliminating testing for prospective teachers in reading, writing, and math, replacing it with an alternative certification process.\nEconomy.\nThe U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that New Jersey's gross state product in the third quarter of 2022 was $753 billion.\nAffluence.\nNew Jersey's per capita gross state product routinely ranks among the highest in the nation. In 2020, New Jersey had more millionaires both per capita and per square mile, representing roughly 9.76% of all New Jersey household, than any state in the nation.\nThe state is ranked second in the nation by the number of places with per capita incomes exceeding the national average with 76.4%. Three of New Jersey's counties are among the 20 highest income U.S. counties in the nation as of 2023.\nFiscal policy.\nNew Jersey has seven tax brackets that determine state income tax rates, which range from 1.4% (for income below $20,000) to 10.75% (for income above $1,000,000).\nThe standard sales tax rate as of January 1, 2018, is 6.625%, applicable to all retail sales unless specifically exempt by law. This rate, which is comparably lower than that of New York City, often attracts numerous shoppers from New York City, often to suburban Paramus, New Jersey, which has five malls, one of which (the Garden State Plaza) has over of retail space. Tax exemptions include most food items for at-home preparation, medications, most clothing, footwear and disposable paper products for use in the home. There are 27 Urban Enterprise Zone statewide, including sections of Paterson, Elizabeth, and Jersey City. In addition to other benefits to encourage employment within the zone, shoppers can take advantage of a reduced 3.3125% sales tax rate (half the rate charged statewide) at eligible merchants.\nNew Jersey has the highest cumulative tax rate of all 50 states with residents paying a total of $68\u00a0billion in state and local taxes annually with a per capita burden of $7,816 at a rate of 12.9% of income. All real property located in the state is subject to property tax unless specifically exempted by statute. New Jersey does not assess an intangible personal property tax or an estate tax, but it does impose an inheritance tax (which is levied only on heirs who are not direct descendants). In 2023, Governor Phil Murphy signed into law a new tax-relief program known as StayNJ that will provide for an annual property-tax cut of 50% for those aged 65 and over with incomes below $500,000; the cut will go into effect in January 2026 and be capped at $6,500, but with this cap rising as indexed to the increase in New Jersey's overall property taxes.\nFederal taxation disparity.\nNew Jersey consistently ranks as having one of the highest proportional levels of disparity of any state in the U.S., based upon what it receives from the federal government relative to what it pays. In 2015, WalletHub ranked New Jersey the state that was least dependent on federal government aid overall and the state with the fourth-lowest return on taxpayer investment from the federal government, at 48 cents per dollar. In 2023, New Jersey sent approximately $183 billion to Washington, D.C. in taxes but only received approximately $113 billion in federal investment resulting in each state resident sending the federal government approximately $7,500 more than they get back. In 2025, WalletHub again ranked New Jersey as the least dependent on federal government aid overall with now the second-lowest return on taxpayer spending from the federal government, at 48 cents per dollar.\nNew Jersey has one of the highest tax burdens of any state the nation. Factors for this include the large federal tax liability, which is not adjusted for New Jersey's higher cost of living and Medicaid funding formulas.\nIndustries.\nNew Jersey's economy is multifaceted, featuring high levels of both productivity and retail consumption; the Garden State's economy comprises the pharmaceutical industry, biotechnology, information technology, the financial industry, tourism, filmmaking, telecommunications, gambling, food processing, electrical equipment manufacturing, printing, and publishing. New Jersey's agricultural outputs are nursery stock, horses, vegetables, fruits and nuts, seafood, and dairy products. New Jersey ranks second among states in blueberry production, third in cranberries and spinach, and fourth in bell peppers, peaches, and head lettuce. The state harvests the fourth-largest number of acres planted with asparagus. South Jersey has become an East Coast epicenter for logistics and warehouse construction.\nScientific economy.\nNew Jersey has a strong scientific economy and is home to major pharmaceutical and telecommunications firms, drawing on the state's large and well-educated labor pool, including one of the highest concentrations of engineers and other scientists in the world. There is also a robust service economy in retail sales, education, and real estate, serving residents who work in New York City or Philadelphia. Thomas Edison invented the first electric light bulb at his home in Menlo Park, Edison in 1879. New Jersey is also a key participant in the renewable wind industry. New Jersey has more scientists and engineers per square mile than anywhere in the world, and is a global leader in pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, life sciences, and technology.\nCorporate and retail.\nNew Jersey hosts numerous business headquarters, including twenty-four Fortune 500 companies. Paramus in Bergen County has become the top retail ZIP code (07652) in the United States, with the municipality generating over US$6\u00a0billion in annual retail sales. Several New Jersey counties, including Somerset (7), Morris (10), Hunterdon (13), Bergen (21), and Monmouth (42), have been ranked among the highest-income counties in the United States.\nShipping, manufacturing, and logistics.\nShipping is a key industry in New Jersey because of the state's strategic geographic location, the Port of New York and New Jersey being the busiest seaport on the U.S. East Coast. The Port Newark-Elizabeth Marine Terminal was the world's first container port and today is one of the world's largest and busiest. New Jersey's location at the center of the Eastern North American population belt has made the state a prime hub for the logistics, warehousing, and supply chain management industries. The manufacturing economy in New Jersey had declined for several decades in the post-Industrial Revolution era but has since resumed growth.\nTourism.\nNew Jersey's location at the center of the Northeast megalopolis and its extensive transportation system have put over one-third of all United States residents and many Canadian residents within overnight distance by land. This accessibility to consumer revenue has enabled seaside resorts such as Atlantic City and the remainder of the Jersey Shore, as well as the state's other natural and cultural attractions, to contribute significantly to the record 111\u00a0million tourist visits to New Jersey in 2018, providing US$44.7\u00a0billion in tourism revenue, directly supporting 333,860 jobs, sustaining more than 531,000 jobs overall including peripheral impacts, and generating US$5\u00a0billion in state and local tax revenue.\nGambling.\nIn 1976, a referendum by Jersey voters approved casino gambling in Atlantic City, where the first legalized casino opened in 1978. At that time, Las Vegas was the only other casino resort in the country. Today, several casinos lie along the Atlantic City Boardwalk, the oldest and longest boardwalk in the world, at in length. Atlantic City experienced a dramatic contraction in its stature as a gambling destination after 2010, including the closure of multiple casinos since 2014, spurred by competition from the advent of legalized gambling in other northeastern U.S. states.\nOn February 26, 2013, Governor Chris Christie signed online gambling into law. Sports betting has become a growing source of gambling revenue in New Jersey, with sportsbooks bringing in almost $12 billion in bets, making over $1 billion in revenue in 2023. Since being legalized across the nation by the U.S. Supreme Court on May 14, 2018, New Jersey led all states in sports betting handle until New York passed them. In September 2022, the lifetime revenue from online casinos operating in New Jersey for the nine years since the industry's launch had surpassed $5 billion.\nMedia.\nTelevision and film production.\nNew Jersey is a growing center for filmmaking and television production, with media companies, enticed by its proximity to Manhattan, in conjunction with tax incentives, collectively spending billions of dollars to develop large new studio facilities and sound stage complexes. Motion picture technology was developed by Thomas Edison, with much of his early work done at his West Orange laboratory. Edison's Black Maria was the first motion picture studio. America's first motion picture industry started in 1907 in Fort Lee and the first studio was constructed there in 1909. DuMont Laboratories in Passaic developed early sets and made the first broadcast to the private home.\nA number of television shows and films have been filmed in New Jersey. Since 1978, the state has maintained a Motion Picture and Television Commission to encourage filming in-state. New Jersey has long offered tax credits to television producers. Governor Chris Christie suspended the credits in 2010, but the New Jersey State Legislature in 2011 approved the restoration and expansion of the tax credit program. Under bills passed by both the state Senate and Assembly, the program offers 20 percent tax credits (22% in urban enterprise zones) to television and film productions that shoot in the state and meet set standards for hiring and local spending. When Governor Phil Murphy took office, he instated the New Jersey Film &amp; Digital Media Tax Credit Program in 2018 and expanded it in 2020. The benefits include a 30% tax credit on film projects and a 40% subsidy for studio developments.\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision stations.\nNew Jersey has several PBS member stations: WNET (13) in Newark, WNJN (50) in Montclair, WNJB (58) in New Brunswick, WNJS (23) in Camden and WNJT (52) in Trenton.\nThere are no standard commercial network affiliates in the state. WMGM-TV (Wildwood) lost its affiliation with NBC in 2014. Viewers in northern New Jersey receive New York City market stations over cable or over the air; southern New Jersey viewers receive Philadelphia market stations over cable or over the air.\nWMGM now affiliates with the True Crime Network. WJLP (Middletown) affiliates with the retro network MeTV. There are Telemundo affiliates in Fort Lee, Linden and Mount Laurel, and Univision affiliates in Paterson and Vineland.\nFinance as Wall Street West.\nJersey City's Hudson River waterfront, from Exchange Place to Newport, is known as Wall Street West and has over 13\u00a0million square feet of Class A office space. One third of the private sector jobs in the city are in the financial services sector: more than 60% are in the securities industry, 20% are in banking and 8% in insurance. Jersey City is home to the headquarters of Verisk Analytics and Lord Abbett, a privately held money management firm. Companies such as Computershare, ADP, IPC Systems, and Fidelity Investments also conduct operations in the city. In 2014, \"Forbes\" magazine moved its headquarters to the district, having been awarded a $27\u00a0million tax grant in exchange for bringing 350 jobs to the city over a ten-year period. By the early 2020s, the construction of residential skyscrapers Downtown made median rental rates in Jersey City amongst the highest of any city in the United States.\nNatural resources and energy.\nLimited mining activity of zinc, iron, and manganese still takes place in the area in and around the Franklin Furnace in Sussex County.\nAlthough New Jersey is home to many energy-intensive industries, its energy consumption is only 2.7% of the U.S. total, and its carbon dioxide emissions are 0.8% of the U.S. total. New Jersey's electricity comes primarily from natural gas and nuclear power. New Jersey is seventh in the nation in solar power installations, enabled by one of the country's most favorable net metering policies and renewable portfolio standard. The state has more than 140,000 solar installations.\nEnvironment.\nDue to past industrial activity, New Jersey has more Superfund toxic waste sites than any other state in the union despite its small geographic size. By 2024, only 35 of New Jersey's Superfund sites (out of about 150 that have been on the EPA's list since the Superfund law was passed in 1980) have been cleaned up.\nIn late 2023, a concern became public about PFAs (so-called \"forever chemicals\") existing in the state's water supplies.\nTransportation.\nNew Jersey's population density and location at the geographic center of the Northeast Megalopolis have rendered it a vital transportation for hub for both passengers and industry.\nRoadways.\nThe New Jersey Turnpike is one of the most prominent and heavily trafficked roadways in the United States. This toll road, which overlaps with Interstate 95 for much of its length, carries traffic between Delaware and New York, and up and down the East Coast in general. Commonly referred to as simply \"the Turnpike\", it is known for its numerous rest areas named after prominent New Jerseyans.\nThe Garden State Parkway, or simply \"the Parkway\", carries relatively more in-state traffic than interstate traffic and runs from New Jersey's northern border to its southernmost tip at Cape May. It is the main route that connects the New York metropolitan area to the Jersey Shore. With a total of fifteen travel and six shoulder lanes, the Driscoll Bridge on the Parkway, spanning the Raritan River in Middlesex County, is the widest motor vehicle bridge in the world by number of lanes as well as one of the busiest.\nNew Jersey is connected to New York City via various key bridges and tunnels. The double-decked George Washington Bridge carries the heaviest load of motor vehicle traffic of any bridge in the world, at 102\u00a0million vehicles per year, across fourteen lanes. It connects Fort Lee, New Jersey to the Washington Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan, and carries Interstate 95 and U.S. Route 1/9 across the Hudson River. The Lincoln Tunnel connects to Midtown Manhattan carrying New Jersey Route 495, and the Holland Tunnel connects to Lower Manhattan carrying Interstate 78. New Jersey is also connected to Staten Island by three bridges\u2014from north to south, the Bayonne Bridge, the Goethals Bridge, and the Outerbridge Crossing.\nNew Jersey has interstate compacts with all three of its neighboring states. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the Delaware River Port Authority (with Pennsylvania), the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission (with Pennsylvania), and the Delaware River and Bay Authority (with Delaware) operate most of the major transportation routes in and out of the state. Bridge tolls are collected only from traffic exiting the state, with the exception of the private Dingman's Ferry Bridge over the Delaware River, which charges a toll in both directions.\nIt is unlawful for a customer to serve themselves gasoline in New Jersey. It became the last remaining U.S. state where all gas stations are required to sell full-service gasoline to customers at all times in 2016, after Oregon's introduction of restricted self-service gasoline availability took effect.\nAirports.\nNewark Liberty International Airport (EWR) is one of the busiest airports in the United States. Operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, it is one of the three main airports serving the New York metropolitan area, along with John F. Kennedy International Airport and LaGuardia Airport, which are both in Queens, New York. United Airlines is the airport's largest tenant, operating an entire terminal (Terminal C) there, which it uses as one of its primary hubs. FedEx Express operates a large cargo terminal at EWR as well. The adjacent Newark Airport railroad station provides access to Amtrak and NJ Transit trains along the Northeast Corridor Line.\nTwo smaller commercial airports, Atlantic City International Airport and rapidly growing Trenton-Mercer Airport, also operate in other parts of the state. Teterboro Airport in Bergen County and Millville Municipal Airport in Cumberland County are general aviation airports popular with private and corporate aircraft due to their proximity to New York City and the Jersey Shore, respectively.\nRail and bus.\nNJ Transit operates extensive rail and bus service throughout the state. A state-run corporation, it began with the consolidation of several private bus companies in North Jersey in 1979. In the early 1980s, it acquired Conrail's commuter train operations that connected suburban towns to New York City. NJ Transit has 12 rail lines that run through different parts of the state and 165 stations statewide. Most of the lines end at either Penn Station in New York City or Hoboken Terminal in Hoboken, although some lines serve service to both terminal stations. One line provides service between Atlantic City and Philadelphia.\nNJ Transit also operates three light rail systems in the state. The Hudson-Bergen Light Rail connects Bayonne to North Bergen, through Hoboken and Jersey City. The Newark Light Rail is partially underground, and connects downtown Newark with other parts of the city and its suburbs, Belleville and Bloomfield. The River Line connects Trenton and Camden.\nThe PATH is a rapid transit system consisting of four lines operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. It links Hoboken, Jersey City, Harrison, and Newark with New York City. The PATCO Speedline is a rapid transit system that links Camden County to Philadelphia. Both the PATCO and the PATH are two of only five rapid transit systems in the United States to operate 24 hours a day.\nAmtrak operates numerous long-distance passenger trains in New Jersey, both to and from neighboring states and around the country. In addition to the Newark Airport connection, other major Amtrak railway stations include Trenton Transit Center, Metropark, and the historic Newark Penn Station.\nThe Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, or SEPTA, has two commuter rail lines that operate into New Jersey. The Trenton Line terminates at the Trenton Transit Center, and the West Trenton Line terminates at the West Trenton Rail Station in Ewing.\nAirTrain Newark is a monorail connecting the Amtrak/NJ Transit station on the Northeast Corridor to the airport's terminals and parking lots.\nSome private bus carriers still remain in New Jersey. Most of these carriers operate with state funding to offset losses and state owned buses are provided to these carriers, of which Coach USA companies make up the bulk. Other carriers include private charter and tour bus operators that take gamblers from other parts of New Jersey, New York City, Philadelphia, and Delaware to the casino resorts of Atlantic City.\nFerries.\nNew York Waterway has ferry terminals at Belford, Jersey City, Hoboken, Weehawken, and Edgewater, with service to different parts of Manhattan. Liberty Water Taxi in Jersey City has ferries from Paulus Hook and Liberty State Park to Battery Park City in Manhattan. Statue Cruises offers service from Liberty State Park to the Statue of Liberty National Monument, including Ellis Island. SeaStreak offers services from the Raritan Bayshore to Manhattan, Martha's Vineyard, and Nantucket.\nThe Delaware River and Bay Authority operates the Cape May\u2013Lewes Ferry on Delaware Bay, carrying both passengers and vehicles between New Jersey and Delaware as part of US 9. The agency also operates the Forts Ferry Crossing for passengers across the Delaware River. The Delaware River Port Authority operates the RiverLink Ferry between the Camden waterfront and Penn's Landing in Philadelphia.\nCulture.\nGeneral.\nNew Jersey has continued to play a prominent role as a U.S. cultural nexus. Like every state, New Jersey has its own cuisine, religious communities, museums, and .\nNew Jersey is the birthplace of many modern inventions, including FM radio, the motion picture camera, the lithium battery, the light bulb, transistors, and the electric train. Other New Jersey creations include: the drive-in movie, the cultivated blueberry, cranberry sauce, the boardwalk, the zipper, the phonograph, saltwater taffy, the dirigible, the seedless watermelon, the first use of a submarine in warfare, and the ice cream cone.\nDiners are iconic to New Jersey. The state is home to many diner manufacturers and has over 600 diners, more than any other place in the world.\nNew Jersey is the only state to have never had a state song; as of 2021, it is one of only two states (the other being Maryland) that are currently without a state song. \"I'm From New Jersey\" is incorrectly listed on many websites as being the New Jersey state song, but it was not even a contender when the New Jersey Arts Council submitted state song suggestions to the New Jersey Legislature in 1996.\nNew Jersey is frequently the target of jokes in American culture, especially from New York City-based television shows, such as \"Saturday Night Live\". Academic Michael Aaron Rockland attributes this to New Yorkers' view that New Jersey is the beginning of Middle America. The New Jersey Turnpike, which runs between two major East Coast cities, New York City and Philadelphia, is also cited as a reason, as people who traverse through the state may only see its industrial zones. Reality television shows like \"Jersey Shore\" and \"The Real Housewives of New Jersey\" have reinforced stereotypical views of New Jersey culture, but Rockland cited \"The Sopranos\" and the music of Bruce Springsteen as exporting a more positive image.\nThe \"New\" in \"New Jersey\" is often omitted in casual conversation.\nCuisine.\nNew Jersey is known for several foods developed within the region, including Taylor Ham (also known as pork roll), sloppy joe sandwiches, tomato pies, salt water taffy, and Texas wieners. Just as New York City's cuisine has an influence on North Jersey, Philadelphia's cuisine influences South Jersey.\nNew Jersey's third-largest industry is food and agriculture just behind pharmaceuticals and tourism. New Jersey is one of the top 10 producers of blueberries, cranberries, peaches, tomatoes, bell peppers, eggplant, cucumbers, apples, spinach, squash, and asparagus in the United States. Many restaurants in the state offer locally grown ingredients because of this.\nCampbell's Soup Company has been headquartered in Camden since 1869. Goya Foods, the largest Hispanic-owned food company in the United States, operates a corporate headquarters in Jersey City. Mars Wrigley Confectionery's US headquarters has been based in Hackettstown and Newark since 2007.\nSeveral states with substantial Italian American populations take credit for the development of submarine sandwiches, including New Jersey.\nMusic.\nNew Jersey has long been an important origin for both rock and rap music. Prominent musicians from or with significant connections to New Jersey include:\nSports.\nNew Jersey currently has six teams from major professional sports leagues playing in the state, although one Major League Soccer team and two National Football League teams identify themselves as being from the New York metropolitan area.\nProfessional sports.\nThe National Hockey League's New Jersey Devils, based in Newark at the Prudential Center, is the only major league sports franchise to bear the state's name. Founded in 1974 in Kansas City, Missouri, as the Kansas City Scouts, the team played in Denver, Colorado, as the Colorado Rockies from 1976 until the spring of 1982 when naval architect, businessman, and Jersey City native John J. McMullen purchased, renamed, and moved the franchise to Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford's Meadowlands Sports Complex. While the team was poor to mediocre in Kansas City, Denver, and its first years in New Jersey, qualifying for the playoffs once in the 13 seasons from 1974 to 1987, the Devils ultimately established themselves in late 1980s and early 1990s during the tenure of Hall of Fame president and general manager Lou Lamoriello. As of 2023, the Devils have appeared in 23 postseasons in 40 seasons in New Jersey, reaching five Stanley Cup Finals (most recently in 2012) and winning it in 1995, 2000, and 2003. The organization is the youngest of the nine \"Big Four\" major league teams based in New York metropolitan area, ultimately establishing its core following throughout the northern and central portions of the state and carving a place in a media market once dominated by the New York Rangers and Islanders which has the distinction of being the only metropolitan area in the country with three major league professional sports teams participating in the same sport.\nIn 2018, the Philadelphia Flyers renovated and expanded their training facility, the Virtua Center Flyers Skate Zone, in Voorhees Township in the southern portion of the state.\nThe New York metropolitan area's two National Football League teams, the New York Giants and the New York Jets, play at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford's Meadowlands Sports Complex. Built for about $1.6\u00a0billion, the venue is one of the most expensive stadiums ever built. On February 2, 2014, MetLife Stadium hosted Super Bowl XLVIII.\nThe New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer play in Sports Illustrated Stadium, a soccer-specific stadium in Harrison across the Passaic River from downtown Newark. On July 27, 2011, Red Bull Arena hosted the 2011 MLS All-Star Game. New Jersey hosted matches during the 1994 FIFA World Cup at Giants Stadium and will be one of 16 cities to host matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup, at MetLife Stadium, which will also host the tournament final.\nFrom 1977 to 2012, New Jersey had a National Basketball Association team, the New Jersey Nets. WNBA's New York Liberty played in New Jersey from 2011 to 2013 while their primary home arena, Madison Square Garden was undergoing renovations. In 2016, the Philadelphia 76ers of the NBA opened their new headquarters and training facility, the Philadelphia 76ers Training Complex, in Camden.\nThe Meadowlands Sports Complex is home to the Meadowlands Racetrack, one of three major harness racing tracks in the state. The Meadowlands Racetrack and Freehold Raceway in Freehold are two of the major harness racing tracks in North America. Monmouth Park Racetrack in Oceanport is a popular spot for thoroughbred racing in New Jersey and the northeast. It hosted the Breeders' Cup in 2007, and its turf course was renovated in preparation.\nCollege sports.\nMajor schools.\nNew Jerseyans' collegiate allegiances are predominantly split among the three major NCAA Division I programs in the state: the Rutgers University (New Jersey's flagship state university) Scarlet Knights, members of the Big Ten Conference; the Seton Hall University (the state's largest Catholic university) Pirates, members of the Big East Conference; and the Princeton University (the state's Ivy League university) Tigers.\nThe intense rivalry between Rutgers and Princeton athletics began with the first intercollegiate football game in 1869. The schools have not met on the football field since 1980, but they continue to play each other annually in all other sports offered by the two universities.\nRutgers, which fields 24 teams in various sports, is nationally known for its football program, with a 6\u20134 all-time bowl record; and its women's basketball programs, which appeared in a National Final in 2007. In 2008 and 2009, Rutgers expanded their football home, Rutgers Stadium, now called SHI Stadium, on the Busch Campus. The basketball teams play at the Rutgers Athletic Center on Livingston Campus. Both venues and campuses are in Piscataway, across the Raritan River from New Brunswick. The university also fields men's basketball and baseball programs. Rutgers' fans live mostly in the western parts of the state and Middlesex County; its alumni base is the largest in the state.\nRutgers' satellite campuses in Camden and Newark each field their own athletic programs\u2014the Rutgers\u2013Camden Scarlet Raptors and the Rutgers\u2013Newark Scarlet Raiders\u2014which both compete in NCAA Division III.\nSeton Hall fields no football team, but its men's basketball team is one of the Big East's storied programs. No New Jersey team has won more games in the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament, and it is the state's only men's basketball program to reach a modern National Final. The Pirates play their home games at Prudential Center in downtown Newark, about from the university's South Orange campus. Their fans hail largely from the predominantly Roman Catholic areas of the northern part of the state and the Jersey Shore. The annual inter-conference rivalry game between Seton Hall and Rutgers, whose venue alternates between Newark and Piscataway, the Garden State Hardwood Classic, is planned through 2026.\nOther schools.\nThe state's other Division I schools include the Monmouth University Hawks (West Long Branch), the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) Highlanders (Newark), the Rider University Broncs (Lawrenceville), and the Saint Peter's University Peacocks and Peahens (Jersey City).\nFairleigh Dickinson University competes in both Division I and Division III. It has two campuses, each with its own sports teams. The teams at the Metropolitan Campus are known as the FDU Knights, and compete in the Northeast Conference and NCAA Division I. The college at Florham (FDU-Florham) teams are known as the FDU-Florham Devils and compete in the Middle Atlantic Conferences' Freedom Conference and NCAA Division III.\nAmong the various Division III schools in the state, the Stevens Institute of Technology Ducks have fielded the longest continuously running collegiate men's lacrosse program in the country. 2009 marked the 125th season.\nHigh school.\nNew Jersey high schools are divided into divisions under the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA).'\nGovernment and politics.\nExecutive.\nThe position of Governor of New Jersey is one of the most powerful in the nation. The governor is elected on a ticket with their lieutenant governor as the only statewide elected executive officials in the state; the governor appoints the entire executive cabinet and judges of the Supreme and Superior Courts. Phil Murphy (D) is the governor. The governor's mansion is Drumthwacket, located in Princeton, Mercer County.\nBefore 2010, New Jersey was one of the few states without a lieutenant governor. Republican Kim Guadagno was elected the first lieutenant governor of New Jersey on the Republican ticket with Governor Chris Christie and took office on January 19, 2010. The position was created as the result of a Constitutional amendment to the New Jersey State Constitution passed by the voters in 2005. Previously a gubernatorial vacancy would be filled by the president of the New Jersey State Senate as acting governor, thus directing half of the legislative and all of the executive process.\nLegislative.\nThe current version of the New Jersey State Constitution was adopted in 1947. It provides for a bicameral New Jersey Legislature, consisting of an upper house Senate of 40 members and a lower house General Assembly of 80 members. Each of the 40 legislative districts elects one state senator and two Assembly members. Assembly members are elected for a two-year term in all odd-numbered years; state senators are elected in years ending in 1, 3, and7 and thus serve either four- or two-year terms.\nNew Jersey is one of only five states that elects its state officials in odd-numbered years (the others are Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Virginia). New Jersey holds elections for these offices every four years, in the year following each federal Presidential election year.\nJudicial.\nThe New Jersey Supreme Court consists of a chief justice and six associate justices. All are appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of a majority of the membership of the state senate. Justices serve an initial seven-year term, after which they can be reappointed to serve until age 70.\nMost of the day-to-day work in the New Jersey courts is carried out in the Municipal Court, where simple traffic tickets, minor criminal offenses, and small civil matters are heard.\nMore serious criminal and civil cases are handled by the Superior Court for each county. All Superior Court judges are appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of a majority of the membership of the state senate. Each judge serves an initial seven-year term and can be reappointed to serve until age 70. New Jersey's judiciary is unusual in that it still has separate courts of law and equity, like its neighbor Delaware but unlike most other U.S. states. The New Jersey Superior Court is divided into Law and Chancery Divisions at the trial level; the Law Division hears both criminal cases and civil lawsuits where the plaintiff's primary remedy is damages, while the Chancery Division hears family cases, civil suits where the plaintiff's primary remedy is equitable relief, and probate trials.\nThe Superior Court also has an Appellate Division, which functions as the state's intermediate appellate court. Superior Court judges are assigned to the Appellate Division by the Chief Justice.\nThere is also a Tax Court, which is a court of limited jurisdiction. Tax Court judges hear appeals of tax decisions made by County Boards of Taxation. They also hear appeals on decisions made by the director of the Division of Taxation on such matters as state income, sales and business taxes, and homestead rebates. Appeals from Tax Court decisions are heard in the Appellate Division of Superior Court. Tax Court judges are appointed by the governor for initial terms of seven years, and upon reappointment are granted tenure until they reach the mandatory retirement age of 70. There are 12 Tax Court judgeships.\nCounties.\nNew Jersey is divided into 21 counties; 13 date from the colonial era. New Jersey was completely divided into counties by 1692; the present counties were created by dividing the existing ones; most recently Union County in 1857. New Jersey was formerly the only state in the nation where elected county officials were called freeholders. Elected county officials are now called county commissioners as of bill S855 signed by Governor Murphy on August 8, 2020. The county commissioners govern each county as part of its own Board of Chosen County Commissioners The number of county commissioners in each county is determined by referendum, and must consist of three, five, seven or nine members.\nDepending on the county, the executive and legislative functions may be performed by the Board of County Commissioners or split into separate branches of government. In 16 counties, the County Commissioners perform both legislative and executive functions on a commission basis, with each commissioner assigned responsibility for a department or group of departments. In the other five counties (Atlantic, Bergen, Essex, Hudson and Mercer), there is a directly elected County Executive who performs the executive functions while the commissioners retain a legislative and oversight role. In counties without an Executive, a County Administrator (or County Manager) may be hired to perform day-to-day administration of county functions.\nMunicipalities.\nNew Jersey currently has 564 municipalities; the most recent dissolution of a municipality was when Pine Valley merged into Pine Hill on January 1, 2022. Unlike other states, all New Jersey land is part of a municipality. In 2008, Governor Jon Corzine proposed cutting state aid to all towns under 10,000 people, to encourage mergers to reduce administrative costs. In May 2009, the Local Unit Alignment Reorganization and Consolidation Commission began a study of about 40 small communities in South Jersey to decide which ones might be good candidates for consolidation.\nForms of municipal government.\nStarting in the 20th century, largely driven by reform-minded goals, a series of six modern forms of government was implemented. This began with the Walsh Act, enacted in 1911 by the New Jersey Legislature, which provided for a three- or five-member commission elected on a non-partisan basis. This was followed by the 1923 Municipal Manager Law, which offered a non-partisan council, provided for a weak mayor elected by and from the members of the council, and introduced a Council-manager government structure with an appointed manager responsible for the day-to-day administration of municipal affairs.\nThe Faulkner Act, originally enacted in 1950 and substantially amended in 1981, offers four basic plans: Mayor-Council, Council-Manager, Small Municipality, and Mayor-Council-Administrator. The act provides many choices for communities with a preference for a strong executive and professional management of municipal affairs and offers great flexibility in allowing municipalities to select the characteristics of its government: the number of seats on the council; seats selected at-large, by wards, or through a combination of both; staggered or concurrent terms of office; and a mayor chosen by the council or elected directly by voters. Most large municipalities and a majority of New Jersey's residents are governed by municipalities with Faulkner Act charters. Municipalities can also formulate their own unique form of government and operate under a Special Charter with the approval of the New Jersey Legislature.\nWhile municipalities retain their names derived from types of government, they may have changed to one of the modern forms of government, or further in the past to one of the other traditional forms, leading to municipalities with formal names quite baffling to the general public. For example, though there are four municipalities that are officially of the village type, none use the village form of government. Loch Arbour and Ridgefield Park (now with a Walsh Act form), Ridgewood (now with a Faulkner Act Council-Manager charter) and South Orange (now operates under a Special Charter) all migrated to other non-village forms.\nPolitics.\nSocial attitudes and issues.\nSocially, New Jersey is considered one of the more liberal states in the nation. Polls indicate that 60% of the population are self-described as pro-choice, although a majority are opposed to late trimester and intact dilation and extraction and public funding of abortion. As of 2022, all aspects of reproductive choice (including abortion) are protected by law.\nIn a 2009 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll, a plurality supported same-sex marriage 49% to 43% opposed. On October 18, 2013, the New Jersey Supreme Court rendered a provisional, unanimous (7\u20130) order authorizing same-sex marriage in the state, pending a legal appeal by Governor Chris Christie, who then withdrew this appeal hours after the inaugural same-sex marriages took place on October 21, 2013.\nNew Jersey also has some of the most stringent gun control laws in the U.S. These include bans on assault firearms, hollow-nose bullets and slingshots. No gun offense in New Jersey is graded less than a felony. BB guns and black-powder guns are all treated as modern firearms. New Jersey does not recognize out-of-state gun licenses and aggressively enforces its own gun laws.\nIn 2020, the state's voting population passed a public question that amended the state constitution to legalize marijuana and erase past legal convictions for possession. The measure passed by a two-thirds vote. At the time the measure was enacted, about a dozen other U.S. states had also legalized the sale and possession of marijuana. As of 2024, local governments and municipalities are still in the process of regulating marijuana-related businesses within their jurisdictions.\nElections.\nNew Jersey is a Democratic stronghold. New Jersey Democrats have majority control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature (Senate, 24\u201316, and Assembly, 46\u201334), 9\u20133 split of the state's twelve seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, and both U.S. Senate seats. There have been recent Republican governors, however: Christine Todd Whitman won election in 1993 and 1997 and Chris Christie in 2009 and 2013.\nIn federal elections, the state leans heavily towards the Democratic Party, having last voted for a Republican for president in 1988. New Jersey was a crucial swing state in the elections of 1960, 1968, and 1992. The last elected Republican to hold a Senate seat from New Jersey was Clifford P. Case in 1979. Newark Mayor Cory Booker was elected in October 2013 to join Robert Menendez to make New Jersey the first state with concurrently serving black and Latino U.S. senators.\nThe state's Democratic strongholds include Camden County, Essex County (the state's most Democratic county\u2014it includes Newark, the state's largest city), Hudson County (the second-strongest Democratic county, including Jersey City, the state's second-largest city); Mercer County (especially around Trenton and Princeton), Middlesex County, and Union County (including Elizabeth, the state's fourth-largest city). Other suburban counties, especially Bergen County and Burlington County, had the majority of votes go to the Democratic Party.\nThe northwestern and southeastern counties of the state are reliably Republican: Republicans have support along the coast in Ocean County and Cape May County as well as in the mountainous northwestern part of the state, especially in Hunterdon County, Sussex County, and Warren County.\nTo be eligible to vote in a U.S. election, all New Jerseyans are required to start their residency in the state 30 days prior to an election and register 21 days prior to election day.\nCapital punishment.\nOn December 17, 2007, Governor Jon Corzine signed into law a bill that would eliminate the death penalty in New Jersey. New Jersey was the first state to pass such legislation since Iowa and West Virginia eliminated executions in 1965. Corzine also signed a bill that would downgrade the Death Row prisoners' sentences from \"Death\" to \"Life in Prison with No Parole\".\nPoints of interest.\nBoardwalks.\nMany communities along the Jersey Shore have a boardwalk with various attractions, entertainment, shopping, dining, arcades, water parks, and amusement parks. The Atlantic City Boardwalk, opened in 1870, as the world's first boardwalk. At long, it is also the world's longest and busiest boardwalk. \nEntertainment and concert venues.\nVisitors and residents take advantage of and contribute to performances at the numerous music, theater, and dance companies and venues located throughout the state, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21649", "revid": "16344749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21649", "title": "New Mexico", "text": "U.S. state\nNew Mexico is a state in the Southwestern region of the United States. It is one of the Mountain States of the southern Rocky Mountains, sharing the Four Corners region with Utah, Colorado, and Arizona. It also borders the state of Texas to the east and southeast, Oklahoma to the northeast, and shares an international border with the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora to the south. New Mexico's largest city is Albuquerque, and its state capital is Santa Fe, the oldest state capital in the U.S.\u2014founded in 1610 as the government seat of Nuevo M\u00e9xico in New Spain\u2014and the highest in elevation, at .\nNew Mexico is the fifth-largest of the fifty states by area, but with just over 2.1\u00a0million residents, ranks 36th in population and 45th in population density. Its climate and geography are highly varied, ranging from forested mountains to sparse deserts; the northern and eastern regions exhibit a colder alpine climate, while the west and south are warmer and more arid. The Rio Grande and its fertile valley runs from north-to-south, creating a riparian biome through the center of the state that supports a bosque habitat and distinct Albuquerque Basin climate. One\u2013third of New Mexico's land is federally owned, including many protected wilderness areas, 15 national parks and monuments, and three UNESCO World Heritage Sites wholly contained within the state\u2014the most of any U.S. state.\nNew Mexico's economy is highly diversified; major sectors include mining, oil and gas, aerospace, media, and film. Its total real gross domestic product (GDP) in 2023 was over $105 billion, with a GDP per capita of $49,879. New Mexico often ranks low in wealth, healthcare, and education, but has some of the highest concentrations of scientists, engineers, along with other highly skilled workers, and it includes one of the most educated counties in the U.S. (albeit very small) in Los Alamos County. New Mexico has a significant federal presence, including U.S. military installations such as White Sands Missile Range and Kirtland Air Force Base, and Department of Energy research centers such as the Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. The state hosted several key facilities of the Manhattan Project, which developed the world's first atomic bomb, and was the site of the first nuclear test, Trinity.\nIn prehistoric times, New Mexico was home to Ancestral Puebloans, the Mogollon culture, and ancestral Ute. Navajos and Apaches arrived in the late 15th century and the Comanches in the early 18th century. The Pueblo peoples occupied several dozen villages, primarily in the Rio Grande valley of northern New Mexico. Spanish explorers and settlers arrived in the 16th century from present-day Mexico. Isolated by its rugged terrain, New Mexico was a peripheral part of the viceroyalty of New Spain. Following Mexican independence in 1821, it became an autonomous yet restive region of Mexico, with increasing economic ties to the U.S. Following the Mexican\u2013American War in 1848, the U.S. annexed New Mexico as part of the larger New Mexico Territory, which was central to U.S. westward expansion; New Mexico was admitted to the Union as the 47th state on January 6, 1912.\nNew Mexico's history has contributed to its unique culture. As one of only seven majority-minority states, it has the nation's highest percentage of Hispanic and Latino Americans and second-highest percentage of Native Americans, after Alaska. The state is home to one\u2013third of the Navajo Nation, 19 federally recognized Pueblo communities, and three federally recognized Apache tribes. Its large Latino population includes Hispanos descended Spanish era settlers, and successive groups of Mexican Americans. The New Mexican flag, which is among the most recognizable in the U.S., reflects indigenous and Spanish inspiration. The convergence of indigenous, Spanish, Mexican, and American influences is also evident in New Mexico's unique cuisine, Spanish dialect, folk music, and Pueblo Revival and Territorial styles of architecture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nNew Mexico received its name long before the present-day country of Mexico won independence from Spain and adopted that name in 1821. The name \"Mexico\" derives from Nahuatl and originally referred to the heartland of the Mexica, the rulers of the Aztec Empire, in the Valley of Mexico. Following their conquest of the Aztecs in the early 16th century, the Spanish began exploring what is now the Southwestern United States calling it \"Nuevo M\u00e9xico\". In 1581, the Chamuscado and Rodr\u00edguez Expedition named the region north of the Rio Grande \"San Felipe del Nuevo M\u00e9xico\". The Spaniards had hoped to find wealthy indigenous cultures similar to the Mexica. The indigenous cultures of New Mexico, however, proved to be unrelated to the Mexica and lacking in riches, but the name persisted.\nBefore statehood in 1912, the name \"New Mexico\" loosely applied to various configurations of territories in the same general area, which evolved throughout the Spanish, Mexican, and U.S. periods, but typically encompassed most of present-day New Mexico along with sections of neighboring states.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe first known inhabitants of New Mexico were members of the Clovis culture of Paleo-Indians. Footprints discovered in 2017 suggest that humans may have been present in the region as long ago as 21,000\u201323,000 BC. Later inhabitants include the Mogollon and Ancestral Pueblo cultures, which are characterized by sophisticated pottery work and urban development; pueblos or their remnants, like those at Acoma, Taos, and Chaco Culture National Historical Park, indicate the scale of Ancestral Puebloan dwellings within the area. These cultures form part of the broader Oasisamerica region of pre-Columbian North America.\nThe vast trade networks of the Ancestral Puebloans led to legends throughout Mesoamerica and the Aztec Empire (Mexico) of an unseen northern empire that rivaled their own, which they called \"Yancuic Mexico\", literally translated as \"a new Mexico\".\nNuevo M\u00e9xico.\nNew Spain era.\nAztec legends of a prosperous empire to their north became the primary basis for the mythical Seven Cities of Gold, which spurred exploration by Spanish conquistadors following their conquest of the Aztecs in the early 16th century; prominent explorers included \u00c1lvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca, Andr\u00e9s Dorantes de Carranza, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado, Estevanico, and Marcos de Niza.\nThe settlement of \"La Villa Real de la Santa Fe de San Francisco de As\u00eds\" \u2014 modern day Santa Fe \u2013 was established by Pedro de Peralta as a more permanent capital at the foot of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in 1610. Towards the end of the 17th century, the Pueblo Revolt drove out the Spanish and occupied these early cities for over a decade. After the death of Pueblo leader Pop\u00e9, Diego de Vargas restored the area to Spanish rule, with Puebloans offered greater cultural and religious liberties. Returning settlers founded \"La Villa de Alburquerque\" in 1706 at Old Town Albuquerque as a trading center for existing surrounding communities such as Barelas, Isleta, Los Ranchos, and Sandia; it was named for the viceroy of New Spain, Francisco Fern\u00e1ndez de la Cueva, 10th Duke of Alburquerque. Governor Francisco Cuervo y Vald\u00e9s established the villa in Tiguex to provide free trade access and facilitate cultural exchange in the region.\nBeyond forging better relations with the Pueblos, governors were forbearing in their approach to the indigenous peoples, such as was with governor Tom\u00e1s V\u00e9lez Cachup\u00edn; the comparatively large reservations in New Mexico and Arizona are partly a legacy of Spanish treaties recognizing indigenous land claims in Nuevo M\u00e9xico. Nevertheless, relations between the various indigenous groups and Spanish settlers remained nebulous and complex, varying from trade and commerce to cultural assimilation and intermarriage to total warfare. During most of the 18th century, raids by Navajo, Apache, and especially Comanche inhibited the growth and prosperity of the New Mexico. The region's harsh environment and remoteness, surrounded by hostile Native Americans, fostered a greater degree of self-reliance, as well as pragmatic cooperation, between the Pueblo peoples and colonists. Many indigenous communities enjoyed a large measure of autonomy well into the late 19th century due to the improved governance.\nTo encourage settlement in its vulnerable periphery, Spain awarded land grants to European settlers in Nuevo M\u00e9xico; due to the scarcity of water throughout the region, the vast majority of colonists resided in the central valley of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. Most communities were walled enclaves consisting of adobe houses that opened onto a plaza, from which four streets ran outward to small, private agricultural plots and orchards; these were watered by \"acequias,\" community owned and operated irrigation canals. Just beyond the wall was the \"ejido\", communal land for grazing, firewood, or recreation. By 1800, the population of New Mexico had reached 25,000 (not including indigenous inhabitants), far exceeding the territories of California and Texas.\nMexico era.\nAs part of New Spain, the province of New Mexico became part of the First Mexican Empire in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence. Upon its secession from Mexico in 1836, the Republic of Texas claimed the portion east of the Rio Grande, based on the erroneous assumption that the older Hispanic settlements of the upper Rio Grande were the same as the newly established Mexican settlements of Texas. The Texan Santa Fe Expedition was launched to seize the contested territory but failed with the capture and imprisonment of the entire army by the Hispanic New Mexico militia.\nDuring the turn of the 19th century, the extreme northeastern part of New Mexico, north of the Canadian River and east of the spine of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, was still claimed by France, which sold it in 1803 as part of the Louisiana Purchase. In 1812, the U.S. reclassified the land as part of the Missouri Territory. This region of New Mexico (along with territory comprising present-day southeastern Colorado, the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles, and southwestern Kansas) was ceded to Spain under the Adams-Onis Treaty in 1819.\nWhen the First Mexican Republic began to transition into the Centralist Republic of Mexico, they began to centralize power ignoring the sovereignty of Santa Fe and disregarding Pueblo land rights. This led to the Chimay\u00f3 Rebellion in 1837, led by \"gen\u00edzaro\" Jos\u00e9 Gonzales. The death of then governor Albino P\u00e9rez during the revolt, was met with further hostility. Though Jos\u00e9 Gonzales was executed due to his involvement in the governor's death, subsequent governors Manuel Armijo and Juan Bautista Vigil y Alarid agreed with some of the underlying sentiment. This led to New Mexico becoming financially and politically tied to the U.S., and preferring trade along the Santa Fe Trail.\nTerritorial phase.\nFollowing the victory of the United States in the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u201348), Mexico ceded its northern territories to the U.S., including California, Texas, and New Mexico. The Americans were initially heavy-handed in their treatment of former Mexican citizens, triggering the Taos Revolt in 1847 by Hispanos and their Pueblo allies; the insurrection led to the death of territorial governor Charles Bent and the collapse of the civilian government established by Stephen W. Kearny. In response, the U.S. government appointed local Donaciano Vigil as governor to better represent New Mexico, and also vowed to accept the land rights of Nuevomexicans and grant them citizenship. In 1864, President Abraham Lincoln symbolized the recognition of Native land rights with the Lincoln Canes, sceptres of office gifted to each of the Pueblos, a tradition dating back to Spanish and Mexican eras.\nAfter the Republic of Texas was admitted as a state in 1846, it attempted to claim the eastern portion of New Mexico east of the Rio Grande, while the California Republic and State of Deseret each claimed parts of western New Mexico. Under the Compromise of 1850, these regions were forced by the U.S. government to drop their claims, Texas received $10million in federal funds, California was granted statehood, and officially establishing the Utah Territory; therein recognizing most of New Mexico's historically established land claims. Pursuant to the compromise, Congress established the New Mexico Territory in September of that year; it included most of present-day Arizona and New Mexico, along with the Las Vegas Valley and what would later become Clark County in Nevada.\nIn 1853 the U.S. acquired the mostly desert southwestern bootheel of the state, along with Arizona's land south of the Gila River, in the Gadsden Purchase, which was needed for the right-of-way to encourage construction of a transcontinental railroad.\nU.S. Civil War, American Indian Wars, and American frontier.\nWhen the U.S. Civil War broke out in 1861, both Confederate and Union governments claimed ownership and territorial rights over New Mexico Territory. The Confederacy claimed the southern tract as its own Arizona Territory, and as part of the Trans-Mississippi Theater of the war, waged the ambitious New Mexico Campaign to control the American Southwest and open up access to Union California. Confederate power in the New Mexico Territory was effectively broken after the Battle of Glorieta Pass in 1862, though the Confederate territorial government continued to operate out of Texas. More than 8,000 soldiers from New Mexico Territory served in the Union Army.\nThe end of the war saw rapid economic development and settlement in New Mexico, which attracted homesteaders, ranchers, cowboys, businessmen, and outlaws; many of the folklore characters of the Western genre had their origins in New Mexico, most notably businesswoman Maria Gertrudis Barcel\u00f3, outlaw Billy the Kid, and lawmen Pat Garrett and Elfego Baca. The influx of \"Anglo Americans\" from the eastern U.S. (which include African Americans and recent European immigrants) reshaped the state's economy, culture, and politics. Into the late 19th century, the majority of New Mexicans remained ethnic mestizos of mixed Spanish and Native American ancestry (primarily Pueblo, Navajo, Apache, Gen\u00edzaro, and Comanche), many of whom had roots going back to Spanish settlement in the 16th century; this distinctly New Mexican ethnic group became known as Hispanos and developed a more pronounced identity vis-a-vis the newer Anglo arrivals. Politically, they still controlled most town and county offices through local elections, and wealthy ranching families commanded considerable influence, preferring business, legislative, and judicial relations with fellow indigenous New Mexican groups. By contrast, Anglo Americans, who were \"outnumbered, but well-organized and growing\" tended to have more ties to the territorial government, whose officials were appointed by the U.S. federal government; subsequently, newer residents of New Mexico generally favored maintaining territorial status, which they saw as a check on Native and Hispano influence.\nA consequence of the civil war was intensifying conflict with indigenous peoples, which was part of the broader American Indian Wars along the frontier. The withdrawal of troops and material for the war effort had prompted raids by hostile tribes, and the federal government moved to subdue the many native communities that had been effectively autonomous throughout the colonial period. Following the elimination of the Confederate threat, Brigadier General James Carleton, who had assumed command of the Military Department of New Mexico in 1862, led what he described as a \"merciless war against all hostile tribes\" that aimed to \"force them to their knees, and then confine them to reservations where they could be Christianized and instructed in agriculture.\" With famed frontiersman Kit Carson placed in charge of troops in the field, powerful indigenous groups such as the Navajo, Mescalero Apache, Kiowa, and Comanche were brutally pacified through a scorched earth policy, and thereafter forced into barren and remote reservations. Sporadic conflicts continued into the late 1880s, most notably the guerilla campaigns led by Apache chiefs Victorio and his son-in-law Nana.\nThe political and cultural clashes between these competing ethnic groups sometimes culminated in mob violence, including lynchings of Native, Hispanic, and Mexican peoples, as was attempted at the Frisco shootout in 1884. Nevertheless, prominent figures from across these communities, and from both the Democratic and Republican parties, attempted to fight this prejudice and forge a more cohesive, multiethnic New Mexican identity; they include lawmen Baca and Garrett, and governors Curry, Hagerman, and Otero. Indeed, some territorial governors, like Lew Wallace, had served in both the Mexican and American militaries.\nStatehood.\nThe United States Congress admitted New Mexico as the 47th state on January 6, 1912. It had been eligible for statehood 60 years earlier, but was delayed due to the perception that its majority Hispanic population was \"alien\" to U.S. culture and political values. When the U.S. entered the First World War roughly five years later, New Mexicans volunteered in significant numbers, in part to prove their loyalty as full-fledged citizens of the U.S. The state ranked fifth in the nation for military service, enlisting more than 17,000 recruits from all 33 counties; over 500 New Mexicans were killed in the war.\nIndigenous-Hispanic families had long been established since the Spanish and Mexican era, but most American settlers in the state had an uneasy relationship with the large Native American tribes. Most indigenous New Mexicans lived on reservations and near old \"placitas\" and \"villas\". In 1924, Congress passed a law granting all Native Americans U.S. citizenship and the right to vote in federal and state elections. However, Anglo-American arrivals into New Mexico enacted Jim Crow laws against Hispanos, Hispanic Americans, and those who did not pay taxes, targeting indigenous affiliated individuals; because Hispanics often had interpersonal relationships with indigenous peoples, they were often subject to segregation, social inequality, and employment discrimination.\nDuring the fight for women's suffrage in the United States, New Mexico's Hispano and Mexican women at the forefront included Trinidad Cabeza de Baca, Dolores \"Lola\" Armijo, Mrs. James Chavez, Aurora Lucero, Anita \"Mrs. Secundino\" Romero, Arabella \"Mrs. Cleofas\" Romero and her daughter, Marie.\nA major oil discovery in 1928 near the town of Hobbs brought greater wealth to the state, especially in surrounding Lea County. The New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources called it \"the most important single discovery of oil in New Mexico's history\". Nevertheless, agriculture and cattle ranching remained the primary economic activities.\nNew Mexico was greatly transformed by the U.S. entry into the Second World War in December 1941. As in the First World War, patriotism ran high among New Mexicans, including among marginalized Hispanic and indigenous communities; on a per capita basis, New Mexico produced more volunteers, and suffered more casualties, than any other state. The war also spurred economic development, particularly in extractive industries, with the state becoming a leading supplier of several strategic resources. New Mexico's rough terrain and geographic isolation made it an attractive location for several sensitive military and scientific installations; the most famous was Los Alamos, one of the central facilities of the Manhattan Project, where the first atomic bombs were designed and manufactured. The first bomb was tested at Trinity site in the desert between Socorro and Alamogordo, which is today part of the White Sands Missile Range.\nAs a legacy of the Second World War, New Mexico continues to receive large amounts of federal government spending on major military and research institutions. In addition to the White Sands Missile Range, the state hosts three U.S. Air Force bases that were established or expanded during the war. While the high military presence brought considerable investment, it has also been the center of controversy; on May 22, 1957, a B-36 accidentally dropped a nuclear bomb 4.5 miles from the control tower while landing at Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque; only its conventional \"trigger\" detonated. The Los Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories, two of the nation's leading federal scientific research facilities, originated from the Manhattan Project. The focus on high technology is still a top priority of the state, to the extent that it became a center for unidentified flying objects, especially following the 1947 Roswell incident.\nNew Mexico saw its population nearly double from roughly 532,000 in 1940 to over 954,000 by 1960. In addition to federal personnel and agencies, many residents and businesses moved to the state, particularly from the northeast, often drawn by its warm climate and low taxes. The pattern continues into the 21st century, with New Mexico adding over 400,000 residents between 2000 and 2020.\nNative Americans from New Mexico fought for the United States in both world wars. Returning veterans were disappointed to find their civil rights limited by state discrimination. In Arizona and New Mexico, veterans challenged state laws or practices prohibiting them from voting. In 1948, after veteran Miguel Trujillo Sr. of Isleta Pueblo was told by the county registrar that he could not register to vote, he filed suit against the county in federal district court. A three-judge panel overturned as unconstitutional New Mexico's provisions that Native Americans who did not pay taxes (and could not document if they had paid taxes) could not vote.\nIn the early to mid-20th century, the art presence in Santa Fe grew, and it became known as one of the world's great art centers. The presence of artists such as Georgia O'Keeffe attracted many others, including those along Canyon Road. In the late 20th century, Native Americans were authorized by federal law to establish gaming casinos on their reservations under certain conditions, in states which had authorized such gaming. Such facilities have helped tribes close to population centers generate revenues for reinvestment in the economic development and welfare of their peoples. The Albuquerque metropolitan area is home to several casinos as a result.\nIn the 21st century, employment growth areas in New Mexico include electronic circuitry, scientific research, information technology, casinos, art of the American Southwest, food, film, and media, particularly in Albuquerque. The state was the founding location of Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems, which led to the founding of Microsoft in Albuquerque. Intel maintains their F11X in Rio Rancho, which also hosts an IT center for HP Inc. New Mexico's culinary scene became recognized and is now a source of revenue for the state. Albuquerque Studios has become a filming hub for Netflix, and it was brought international media production companies to the state like NBCUniversal.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed to have reached the U.S. state of New Mexico on March 11, 2020. On December 23, 2020, the New Mexico Department of Health reported 1,174 new COVID-19 cases and 40 deaths, bringing the cumulative statewide totals to 133,242 cases and 2,243 deaths since the start of the pandemic.\nGeography.\nWith a total area of , New Mexico is the fifth-largest state, after Alaska, Texas, California, and Montana. Its eastern border lies along 103\u00b0W longitude with the state of Oklahoma, and west of 103\u00b0W longitude with Texas due to a 19th-century surveying error. On the southern border, Texas makes up the eastern two-thirds, while the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora make up the western third, with Chihuahua making up about 90% of that. The western border with Arizona runs along the 109\u00b0 03'W longitude. The southwestern corner of the state is known as the Bootheel. The 37\u00b0N parallel forms the northern boundary with Colorado. The states of New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and Utah come together at the Four Corners in New Mexico's northwestern corner. Its surface water area is about .\nDespite its popular depiction as mostly arid desert, New Mexico has one of the most diverse landscapes of any U.S. state, ranging from wide, auburn-colored deserts and verdant grasslands, to broken mesas and high, snow-capped peaks. Close to a third of the state is covered in timberland, with heavily forested mountain wildernesses dominating the north. The Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the southernmost part of the Rocky Mountains, run roughly north\u2013south along the east side of the Rio Grande, in the rugged, pastoral north. The Great Plains extend into the eastern third of the state, most notably the Llano Estacado (\"Staked Plain\"), whose westernmost boundary is marked by the Mescalero Ridge escarpment. The northwestern quadrant of New Mexico is dominated by the Colorado Plateau, characterized by unique volcanic formations, dry grasslands and shrublands, open pinyon-juniper woodland, and mountain forests. The Chihuahuan Desert, which is the largest in North America, extends through the south.\nOver four\u2013fifths of New Mexico is higher than above sea level. The average elevation ranges from up to above sea level in the northwest, to less than 4,000 feet in the southeast. The highest point is Wheeler Peak at over in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, while the lowest is the Red Bluff Reservoir at around , in the southeastern corner of the state.\nIn addition to the Rio Grande, which is tied for the fourth-longest river in the U.S., New Mexico has four other major river systems: the Pecos, Canadian, San Juan, and Gila. Nearly bisecting New Mexico from north to south, the Rio Grande has played an influential role in the region's history; its fertile floodplain has supported human habitation since prehistoric times, and European settlers initially lived exclusively in its valleys and along its tributaries. The Pecos, which flows roughly parallel to the Rio Grande at its east, was a popular route for explorers, as was the Canadian River, which rises in the mountainous north and flows east across the arid plains. The San Juan and Gila lie west of the Continental Divide, in the northwest and southwest, respectively. With the exception of the Gila, all major rivers are dammed in New Mexico and provide a major water source for irrigation and flood control.\nClimate.\nNew Mexico has long been known for its dry, temperate climate. Overall, the state is semi-arid to arid, with areas of continental and alpine climates at higher elevations. New Mexico's statewide average precipitation is a year, with average monthly amounts peaking in the summer, particularly in the more rugged north-central area around Albuquerque and in the south. Generally, the eastern third of the state receives the most rainfall, while the western third receives the least. Higher altitudes receive around , while the lowest elevations see as little as .\nAnnual temperatures can range from in the southeast to below in the northern mountains, with the average being the mid-50s \u00b0F (12\u00a0\u00b0C). During the summer, daytime temperatures can often exceed at elevations below ; the average high temperature in July ranges from at the lower elevations down to 78\u00b0F (26\u00b0C) at the higher elevations. In the colder months of November to March, many cities in New Mexico can have nighttime temperature lows in the teens above zero, or lower. The highest temperature recorded in New Mexico was at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) near Loving on June 27, 1994; the lowest recorded temperature is at Ciniza (near Jamestown) on January 13, 1963.\nNew Mexico's stable climate and sparse population provides for clearer skies and less light pollution, making it a popular site for several major , including the Apache Point Observatory, the Very Large Array, and the Magdalena Ridge Observatory, among others.\nFlora and fauna.\nOwing to its varied topography, New Mexico has six distinct vegetation zones that provide diverse sets of habitats for many plants and animals. The Upper Sonoran Zone is by far the most prominent, constituting about three-fourths of the state; it includes most of the plains, foothills, and valleys above 4,500 feet, and is defined by prairie grasses, low pi\u00f1on pines, and juniper shrubs. The Llano Estacado in the east features Shortgrass Prairie with blue grama, which sustain bison. The Chihuahuan Desert in the south is characterized by shrubby creosote. The Colorado Plateau in the northwest corner of New Mexico is high desert with cold winters, featuring sagebrush, shadescale, greasewood, and other plants adapted to the saline and seleniferous soil.\nThe mountainous north hosts a wide array of vegetation types corresponding to elevation gradients, such as pi\u00f1on-juniper woodlands near the base, through evergreen conifers, spruce-fir and aspen forests in the transitionary zone, and Krummholz, and alpine tundra at the very top. The Apachian zone tucked into the southwestern bootheel of the state has high-calcium soil, oak woodlands, Arizona cypress, and other plants that are not found in other parts of the state. The southern sections of the Rio Grande and Pecos valleys have of New Mexico's best grazing land and irrigated farmland.\nNew Mexico's varied climate and vegetation zones consequently support diverse wildlife. Black bears, bighorn sheep, bobcats, cougars, deer, and elk live in habitats above 7,000 feet, while coyotes, jackrabbits, kangaroo rats, javelina, porcupines, pronghorn antelope, western diamondbacks, and wild turkeys live in less mountainous and elevated regions. The iconic roadrunner, which is the state bird, is abundant in the southeast. Endangered species include the Mexican gray wolf, which is being gradually reintroduced in the world, and Rio Grande silvery minnow. Over 500 species of birds live or migrate through New Mexico, third only to California and Mexico.\nPublic lands.\nNew Mexico and 12 other western states together account for 93% of all federally owned land in the U.S. Roughly one\u2013third of the state, or 24.7\u00a0million of 77.8\u00a0million acres, is held by the U.S. government, the tenth-highest percentage in the country. More than half this land is under the Bureau of Land Management as either public domain land or National Conservation Lands, while another third is managed by the U.S. Forest Service as national forests.\nNew Mexico was central to the early\u201320th century conservation movement, with Gila Wilderness being designated the world's first wilderness area in 1924. The state also hosts nine of the country's 84 national monuments, the most of any state after Arizona; these include the second oldest monument, El Morro, which was created in 1906, and the Gila Cliff Dwellings, proclaimed in 1907.\nNational parks in New Mexico.\nNew Mexico's national parks, together with national monuments and trails managed by the National Park Service, are listed as follows:\nNational conservation lands in New Mexico.\nNew Mexico's national monuments, conservation areas, and other units of the National Landscape Conservation System are managed by the Bureau of Land Management. Units include but are not limited to:\nNational wildlife refuges in New Mexico.\nNew Mexico's National Wildlife Refuges are managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Units include:\nState parks in New Mexico.\nAreas managed by the New Mexico State Parks Division:\nOther nature reserves in New Mexico.\nExamples of locally administered nature reserves include:\nEnvironmental issues.\nIn January 2016, New Mexico sued the United States Environmental Protection Agency over negligence after the 2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill. The spill had caused heavy metals such as cadmium and lead and toxins such as arsenic to flow into the Animas River, polluting water basins of several states. The state has since implemented or considered stricter regulations and harsher penalties for spills associated with resource extraction.\nNew Mexico is a major producer of greenhouse gases. A study by Colorado State University showed that the state's oil and gas industry generated 60 million metric tons of greenhouse gases in 2018, over four times greater than previously estimated. The fossil fuels sector accounted for over half the state's overall emissions, which totaled 113.6\u00a0million metric tons, about 1.8% of the country's total and more than twice the national average per capita. The New Mexico government has responded with efforts to regulate industrial emissions, promote renewable energy, and incentivize the use of electric vehicles.\nSettlements.\nWith just , New Mexico is one of the least densely populated states, ranking 45th out of 50; by contrast, the overall population density of the U.S. is . The state is divided into 33 counties and 106 municipalities, which include cities, towns, villages, and a consolidated city-county, Los Alamos. Only three cities have at least 100,000 residents: Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, and Las Cruces, whose respective metropolitan areas together account for the majority of New Mexico's population.\nResidents are concentrated in the north-central region of New Mexico, anchored by the state's largest city, Albuquerque. Centered in Bernalillo County, the Albuquerque metropolitan area includes New Mexico's third-largest city, Rio Rancho, and has a population of over 918,000, accounting for one-third of all New Mexicans. It is adjacent to Santa Fe, the capital and fourth-largest city. Altogether, the Albuquerque\u2013Santa Fe\u2013Los Alamos combined statistical area includes more than 1.17\u00a0million people, or nearly 60% of the state population.\nNew Mexico's other major center of population is in south-central area around Las Cruces, its second-largest city and the largest city in the southern region of the state. The Las Cruces metropolitan area includes roughly 214,000 residents, but with neighboring El Paso, Texas forms a combined statistical area numbering over 1 million.\nNew Mexico hosts 23 federally recognized tribal reservations, including part of the Navajo Nation, the largest and most populous tribe; of these, 11 hold off-reservation trust lands elsewhere in the state. The vast majority of federally recognized tribes are concentrated in the northwest, followed by the north-central region.\nLike several other southwestern states, New Mexico hosts numerous \"colonias\", unincorporated, low-income slums characterized by abject poverty, the absence of basic services (such as water and sewage), and scarce housing and infrastructure. The University of New Mexico estimates there are 118 colonias in the state, though the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development identifies roughly 150. The majority are located along the Mexico-U.S. border.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2020 census recorded a population of 2,117,522, an increase of 2.8% from 2,059,179 in the 2010 census. This was the lowest rate of growth in the western U.S. after Wyoming, and among the slowest nationwide. By comparison, between 2000 and 2010, New Mexico's population increased by 11.7% from 1,819,046\u2014among the fastest growth rates in the country. A report commissioned in 2021 by the New Mexico Legislature attributed the state's slow growth to a negative net migration rate, particularly among those 18 or younger, and to a 19% decline in the birth rate. However, growth among Hispanics and Native Americans remained healthy.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau estimated a slight decrease in population, with 3,333 fewer people from July 2021 to July 2022. This was attributed to deaths exceeding births by roughly 5,000, with net migration mitigating the loss by 1,389.\nMore than half of New Mexicans (51.4%) were born in the state; 37.9% were born in another state; 1.1% were born in either Puerto Rico, an island territory, or abroad to at least one American parent; and 9.4% were foreign born (compared to a national average of roughly 12%). Almost a quarter of the population (22.7%) was under the age of 18, and the state's median age of 38.4 is slightly above the national average of 38.2. New Mexico's somewhat older population is partly reflective of its popularity among retirees: It ranked as the most popular retirement destination in 2018, with an estimated 42% of new residents being retired.\nHispanics and Latinos constitute nearly half of all residents (49.3%), giving New Mexico the highest proportion of Hispanic ancestry among the fifty states. This broad classification includes descendants of Spanish colonists who settled between the 16th and 18th centuries as well as recent immigrants from Latin America (particularly Mexico and Central America).\nFrom 2000 to 2010, the number of persons in poverty increased to 400,779, or approximately one-fifth of the population. The 2020 census recorded a slightly reduced poverty rate of 18.2%, albeit the third highest among U.S. states, compared to a national average of 10.5%. Poverty disproportionately affects minorities, with about one-third of African Americans and Native Americans living in poverty, compared with less than a fifth of whites and roughly a tenth of Asians; likewise, New Mexico ranks 49th among states for education equality by race and 32nd for its racial gap in income.\nNew Mexico's population is among the most difficult to count, according to the Center for Urban Research at the City University of New York, due to the state's size, sparse population, and numerous isolated communities. Likewise, the Census Bureau estimated that roughly 43% of the state's population (about 900,000 people) live in such \"hard-to-count\" areas. In response, the New Mexico government invested heavily in public outreach to increase census participation, resulting in a final tally that exceeded earlier estimates and outperformed several neighboring states.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,560 homeless people in New Mexico.\nRace and ethnicity.\nNew Mexico is one of seven \"majority-minority\" states where non-Hispanic whites constitute less than half the population. As early as 1940, roughly half the population was estimated to be nonwhite. Before becoming a state in 1912, New Mexico was among the few U.S. territories that was predominately nonwhite, which contributed to its delayed admission into the Union.\nThe largest ethnic group is Hispanic and Latino Americans; according to the 2020 census they account for nearly half the state's population, at 47.7%; they include Hispanos descended from pre-United States settlers and more recent successions of Mexican Americans.\nSome 200,000 residents, about one-tenth of the population, are of Indigenous descent, ranking third in size, and second proportionally, nationwide. There are 23 federally recognized tribal nations, each with its distinct culture, history, and identity. Both the Navajo and Apache share Athabaskan origin, with the latter living on three federal reservations in the state. The Navajo Nation, which spans over 16 million acres (6.5\u00a0millionha), mostly in neighboring Arizona, is the largest reservation in the U.S., with one-third of its members living in New Mexico. Pueblo Indians, who share a similar lifestyle but are culturally and linguistically distinct, live in 19 pueblos scattered throughout the state, which collectively span over 2 million acres (800,000 ha). Many indigenous New Mexicans have moved to urban areas throughout the state, and some cities such as Gallup are major hubs of Native American culture. New Mexico is also a hub for indigenous communities beyond its borders: the annual Gathering of Nations, which began in 1983, has been described as the largest \"pow wow\" in the U.S., drawing hundreds of native tribes from across North America.\nAlmost half of New Mexicans claim Hispanic origin; many are descendants of colonial settlers called \"Hispanos\" or \"Nuevomexicanos\", who settled mostly in the north of the state between the 16th and 18th centuries; by contrast, the majority of Mexican immigrants reside in the south. Some Hispanos claim Jewish ancestry through descendance from \"conversos\" or Crypto-Jews among early Spanish colonists. Many New Mexicans speak a unique dialect known as New Mexican Spanish, which was shaped by the region's historical isolation and various cultural influences; New Mexican Spanish lacks certain vocabulary from other Spanish dialects and uses numerous Native American words for local features, as well as anglicized words that express American concepts and modern inventions.\nNew Mexico has the fourth largest Native American community in the U.S., at over 200,000; comprising roughly one-tenth of all residents, this is the second largest population by percentage after Alaska. New Mexico is also the only state besides Alaska where indigenous people have maintained a stable proportion of the population for over a century: In 1890, Native Americans made up 9.4% of New Mexico's population, almost the same percentage as in 2020. By contrast, during that same period, neighboring Arizona went from one-third indigenous to less than 5%.\nNew Mexico's population consists of many mestizo Indo-Hispano groups, including Hispanos of Oasisamerican descent and Indigenous Mexican American with Mesoamerican ancestry.\nAccording to the 2022 American Community Survey, the most commonly claimed ancestry groups in New Mexico were:\nCensus data from 2020 found that 19.9% of the population identifies as multiracial/mixed-race, a population larger than the Native American, Black, Asian and NHPI population groups. Almost 90% of the multiracial population in New Mexico identifies as Hispanic or Latino.\nThe majority of live births in New Mexico are to Hispanic whites, with Hispanics of any race consistently accounting for over half of all live births since 2013.\nImmigration.\nA little over 9% of New Mexican residents are foreign-born, and an additional 6.0% of U.S.-born residents live with at least one immigrant parent. The proportion of foreign-born residents is below the national average of 13.7%, and New Mexico was the only state to see a decline in its immigrant population between 2012 and 2022.\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for New Mexico's immigrants were Mexico, the Philippines, India, Germany and Cuba. As of 2021, the vast majority of immigrants in the state came from Mexico (67.6%), followed by the Philippines (3.1%) and Germany (2.4%).\nNotwithstanding their relatively small population, immigrants play a disproportionately large role in New Mexico's economy, accounting for almost one-eighth (12.5%) of the labor force,15% of entrepreneurs, and 19.1% of personal care aides, as well as 9.1% of workers in STEM fields.\nLanguages.\nNew Mexico ranks third after California and Texas in the number of multilingual residents. According to the 2010 U.S. census, 28.5% of the population age5 and older speak Spanish at home, while 3.5% speak Navajo. Some speakers of New Mexican Spanish are descendants of pre-18th century Spanish settlers. Contrary to popular belief, New Mexican Spanish is not an archaic form of 17th-century Castilian Spanish; though some archaic elements exist, linguistic research has determined that the dialect \"is neither more Iberian nor more archaic\" than other varieties spoken in the Americas. Nevertheless, centuries of isolation during the colonial period insulated the New Mexican dialect from \"standard\" Spanish, leading to the preservation of older vocabulary as well as its own innovations.\nBesides Navajo, which is also spoken in Arizona, several other Native American languages are spoken by smaller groups in New Mexico, most of which are endemic to the state. Native New Mexican languages include Mescalero Apache, Jicarilla Apache, Tewa, Southern Tiwa, Northern Tiwa, Towa, Keres (Eastern and Western), and Zuni. Mescalero and Jicarilla Apache are closely related Southern Athabaskan languages, and both are also related to Navajo. Tewa, the Tiwa languages, and Towa belong to the Kiowa-Tanoan language family, and thus all descend from a common ancestor. Keres and Zuni are language isolates with no relatives outside of New Mexico.\nOfficial language.\nNew Mexico's original state constitution of 1911 required all laws be published in both English and Spanish for twenty years after ratification; this requirement was renewed in 1931 and 1943, with some sources stating the state was officially bilingual until 1953. Nonetheless, the current constitution does not declare any language \"official\". While Spanish was permitted in the legislature until 1935, all state officials are required to have a good knowledge of English; consequently, some analysts argue that New Mexico cannot be considered a bilingual state, since not all laws are published in both languages.\nHowever, the state legislature remains constitutionally empowered to publish laws in English and Spanish and to appropriate funds for translation. Whenever a referendum to approve an amendment to the New Mexican constitution is held, the ballots must be printed in both English and Spanish. Certain legal notices must be published in both English and Spanish as well, and the state maintains a list of newspapers for Spanish publication.\nWith regard to the judiciary, witnesses and defendants have the right to testify in either of the two languages, and monolingual speakers of Spanish have the same right to be considered for jury duty as do speakers of English. In public education, the state has the constitutional obligation to provide bilingual education and Spanish-speaking instructors in school districts where the majority of students are Hispanophone. The constitution also provides that all state citizens who speak neither English nor Spanish have a right to vote, hold public office, and serve on juries.\nIn 1989, New Mexico became the first of only four states to officially adopt the English Plus resolution, which supports acceptance of non-English languages. In 1995, the state adopted an official bilingual song, \"New Mexico \u2013 Mi Lindo Nuevo M\u00e9xico\". In 2008, New Mexico was the first state to officially adopt a Navajo textbook for use in public schools.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLike most U.S. states, New Mexico is predominantly Christian, with Roman Catholicism and Protestantism each constituting roughly a third of the population. According to Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), the largest denominations in 2010 were the Catholic Church (684,941 members); the Southern Baptist Convention (113,452); The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (67,637), and the United Methodist Church (36,424). Approximately one-fifth of residents are unaffiliated with any religion, which includes atheists, agnostics, and deists. A 2020 study by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) determined 67% of the population were Christian, with Roman Catholics constituting the largest denominational group. In 2022, the PRRI estimated 63% of the population were Christian.Roman Catholicism is deeply rooted in New Mexico's history and culture, going back to its settlement by the Spanish in the early 17th century. The oldest Christian church in the continental U.S., and the third oldest in any U.S. state or territory, is the San Miguel Mission in Santa Fe, which was built in 1610. Within the hierarchy of the Catholic Church, New Mexico belongs to the ecclesiastical province of Santa Fe. The state has three ecclesiastical districts: the Archdiocese of Santa Fe, the Diocese of Gallup, and the Diocese of Las Cruces. Evangelicalism and nondenominational Christianity have seen growth in the state since the late 20th century: The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association has hosted numerous events in New Mexico, and Albuquerque has several megachurches, which have numerous satellite locations in the state, including Calvary of Albuquerque, Legacy Church, and Sagebrush Church.\nNew Mexico has been a leading center of the New Age movement since at least the 1960s, attracting adherents from across the country. The state's \"thriving New Age network\" encompasses various schools of alternative medicine, Holistic Health, psychic healing, and new religions, as well as festivals, pilgrimage sites, spiritual retreats, and communes. New Mexico's Japanese American community has influenced the state's religious heritage, with Shinto and Zen represented by Kagyu Shenpen Kunchab, K\u014dbun Chino Otogawa, Upaya Institute and Zen Center. Likewise, Holism is represented in New Mexico, as are associated faiths such as Buddhism and Seventh-day Adventism; a Tibetan Buddhist temple is located at Zuni Mountain Stupa in Grants.\nReligious education, art, broadcasting, media exist across religions and faiths in New Mexico, including KHAC, KXXQ, Dar al-Islam, and \"Intermountain Jewish News\". Christian schools in New Mexico are encouraged to receive educational accreditation, and among them are the University of the Southwest, St. Pius High School, Hope Christian, Sandia View Academy, St. Michael's High School, Las Cruces Catholic School, St. Bonaventure Indian School, and Rehoboth Christian School. Albuquerque's growing media sector has made it a popular hub for several national Christian media institutions, such as Trinity Broadcasting Network's KNAT-TV. Christian artistic expression includes the gospel tradition within New Mexico music, and contemporary Christian music such as KLYT radio station. Several indigenous and Christian religious sites are registered and protected as part of regional and global cultural heritage.\nReflecting centuries of successive migrations and settlements, New Mexico has developed a distinct syncretic folk religion that is centered on Puebloan traditions and Hispano folk Catholicism, with some elements of Din\u00e9 Bahane\u02bc, Apache, Protestant, and Evangelical faiths. This unique religious tradition is sometimes referred to as \"Pueblo Christianity\" or \"Placita Christianity\", referring to both the Pueblos and Hispanic town squares. Customs and practices include the maintenance of acequias, Pueblo and Territorial Style churches, ceremonial dances such as the \"matachines,\" religious artistic expression of kachinas and santos, religious holidays celebrating saints such as Pueblo Feast Days, Christmas traditions of bizcochitos and farolitos or luminarias, and pilgrimages like that of El Santuario de Chimayo. The luminaria tradition is a cultural hallmark of the Pueblos and Hispanos of New Mexico and a part of the state's distinct heritage. The luminaria custom has spread nationwide, both as a Christmas tradition as well as for other events. New Mexico's distinctive faith tradition is believed to reflect the religious naturalism of the state's indigenous and Hispano peoples, who constitute a pseudo ethnoreligious group.\nNew Mexico's leadership within otherwise disparate traditions such as Christianity, the Native American Church, and New Age movements has been linked to its remote and ancient indigenous spirituality, which emphasized sacred connections to nature, and its over 300 years of syncretized Pueblo and Hispano religious and folk customs. The state's remoteness has likewise been cited as attracting and fostering communities seeking the freedom to practice or cultivate new beliefs. Global spiritual leaders including Billy Graham and Dalai Lama, along with community leaders of Hispanic and Latino Americans and indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest, have remarked on New Mexico being a sacred space.\nAccording to a 2017 survey by the Pew Research Center, New Mexico ranks 18th among the 50 U.S. states in religiosity, 63% of respondents stating they believe in God with certainty, with an additional 20% being fairly certain of the existence of God, while 59% considering religion to be important in their lives and another 20% believe it to be somewhat important. Among its population in 2022, 31% were unaffiliated.\nEconomy.\nOil and gas production, the entertainment industry, high tech scientific research, tourism, and government spending are important drivers of the state economy. The state government has an elaborate system of tax credits and technical assistance to promote job growth and business investment, especially in new technologies.\nAs of 2021, New Mexico's gross domestic product was over $95\u00a0billion, compared to roughly $80\u00a0billion in 2010. State GDP peaked in 2019 at nearly $99\u00a0billion but declined in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, the per capita personal income was slightly over $45,800, compared to $31,474 in 2007; it was the third lowest in the country after West Virginia and Mississippi. The percentage of persons below the poverty level has largely plateaued in the 21st century, from 18.4% in 2005 to 18.2% in 2021.\nTraditionally dependent on resource extraction, ranching, and railroad transportation, New Mexico has increasingly shifted towards services, high-end manufacturing, and tourism. Since 2017, the state has seen a steady rise in the number of annual visitors, culminating in a record-breaking 39.2\u00a0million tourists in 2021, which had a total economic income of $10\u00a0billion. New Mexico has also seen greater investment in media and scientific research.\nOil and gas.\nNew Mexico is the second largest crude oil and ninth largest natural gas producer in the United States; it overtook North Dakota in oil production in July 2021 and is expected to continue expanding. The Permian and San Juan Basins, which are located partly in New Mexico, account for some of these natural resources. In 2000 the value of oil and gas produced was $8.2\u00a0billion, and in 2006, New Mexico accounted for 3.4% of the crude oil, 8.5% of the dry natural gas, and 10.2% of the natural gas liquids produced in the United States. However, the boom in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling since the mid-2010s led to a large increase in the production of crude oil from the Permian Basin and other U.S. sources; these developments allowed the United States to again become the world's largest producer of crude oil by 2018. New Mexico's oil and gas operations contribute to the state's above-average release of the greenhouse gas methane, including from a national methane hot spot in the Four Corners area.\nIn common with other states in the Western U.S., New Mexico receives royalties from the sale of federally owned land to oil and gas companies. It has the highest proportion of federal land with oil and gas, as well as the most lucrative: since the last amendment to the U.S. Mineral Leasing Act in 1987, New Mexico had by far the lowest percent of land sold for the minimum statutory amount of $2 per acre, at just 3%; by contrast, all of Arizona's federal land was sold at the lowest rate, followed by Oregon at 98% and Nevada at 84%. The state had the fourth-highest total acreage sold to the oil and gas industry, at about 1.1\u00a0million acres, and the second-highest number of acres currently leased fossil fuel production, at 4.3\u00a0million acres, after Wyoming's 9.2\u00a0million acres; only 11 percent of these lands, or 474,121 acres, are idle, which is the lowest among Western states. Nevertheless, New Mexico has had recurring disputes and discussions with the U.S. government concerning management and revenue rights over federal land.\nArts and entertainment.\nReflecting the artistic traditions of the American Southwest, New Mexican art has its origins in the folk arts of the indigenous and Hispanic peoples in the region. Pueblo pottery, Navajo rugs, and Hispano religious icons like \"kachinas\" and \"santos\" are recognized in the global art world. Georgia O'Keeffe's presence brought international attention to the Santa Fe art scene, and today the city has several notable art establishments and many commercial art galleries along Canyon Road. As the birthplace of William Hanna, and the residence of Chuck Jones, the state also connections to the animation industry.\nNew Mexico provides financial incentives for film production, including tax credits valued at 25\u201340% of eligible in-state spending. A program enacted in 2019 provides benefits to media companies that commit to investing in the state for at least a decade and that use local talent, crew, and businesses. According to the New Mexico Film Office, in 2022, film and television expenditures reached the highest recorded level at over $855\u00a0million, compared to $624\u00a0million the previous year. During fiscal years 2020\u20132023, the total direct economic impact from the film tax credit was $2.36\u00a0million. In 2018, Netflix chose New Mexico for its first U.S. production hub, pledging to spend over $1\u00a0billion over the next decade to create one of the largest film studios in North America at Albuquerque Studios. NBCUniversal followed suit in 2021 with the opening of its own television film studio in the city, committing to spend $500\u00a0million in direct production and employ 330 full-time equivalent local jobs over the next decade. Albuquerque is consistently recognized by \"MovieMaker\" magazine as one of the top \"big cities\" in North America to live and work as a filmmaker, and the only city to earn No. 1 for four consecutive years (2019\u20132022); in 2024, it placed second, after Toronto.\nCountry music record labels have a presence in the state, following the former success of Warner Western. During the 1950s to 1960s, Glen Campbell, The Champs, Johnny Duncan, Carolyn Hester, Al Hurricane, Waylon Jennings, Eddie Reeves, and JD Souther recorded on equipment by Norman Petty at Clovis. Norman Petty's recording studio was a part of the rock and roll and rockabilly movement of the 1950s, with the distinctive \"Route 66 Rockabilly\" stylings of Buddy Holly and The Fireballs. Albuquerque has been referred to as the \"Chicano Nashville\" due to the popularity of regional Mexican and Western music artists from the region. A heritage style of country music, called New Mexico music, is widely popular throughout the southwestern U.S.; outlets for these artists include the radio station KANW, \"Los 15 Grandes de Nuevo M\u00e9xico\" music awards, and Al Hurricane Jr. hosts \"Hurricane Fest\" to honor his father's music legacy.\nTechnology.\nNew Mexico is part of the larger Rio Grande Technology Corridor, an emerging alternative to Silicon Valley consisting of clusters of science and technology institutions stretching from southwestern Colorado to the Gulf of Mexico. The constituent New Mexico Technology Corridor, centered primarily around Albuquerque, hosts a constellation of high technology and scientific research entities, which include federal facilities such as Sandia National Laboratories, Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Very Large Array; private companies such as Intel, HP, and Facebook; and academic institutions such as the University of New Mexico (UNM), New Mexico State University (NMSU), and New Mexico Tech. Most of these entities form part of an \"ecosystem\" that links their researchers and resources with private capital, often through initiatives of local, state, and federal governments.\nNew Mexico has been a science and technology hub since at least the mid-20th century, following heavy federal government investment during the Second World War. Los Alamos was the site of Project Y, the laboratory responsible for designing and developing the world's first atomic bomb for the Manhattan Project. Horticulturist Fabi\u00e1n Garc\u00eda developed several new varieties of peppers and other crops at what is now NMSU, which is also a leading space grant college. Robert H. Goddard, credited with ushering the space age, conducted many of his early rocketry tests in Roswell. Astronomer Clyde Tombaugh of Las Cruces discovered Pluto in neighboring Arizona. Personal computer company MITS, which was founded in Albuquerque in 1969, brought about the \"microcomputer revolution\" with the development of the first commercially successful microcomputer, the Altair 8800; two of its employees, Paul Allen and Bill Gates, later founded Microsoft in the city in 1975. Multinational technology company Intel, which has had operations in Rio Rancho since 1980, opened its Fab 9 factory in the city in January 2024, part of its commitment to invest $3.5\u00a0billion in expanding its operations in the state; it is the company's first high-volume semiconductor operation and the only U.S. factory producing the world's most advanced packaging solutions at scale.\nThe New Mexican government has aimed to develop the state into a major center for technology startups, namely through financial incentives and public-private partnerships. The bioscience sector has experienced particularly robust growth, beginning with the 2013 opening of a BioScience Center in Albuquerque, the state's first private incubator for biotechnology startups; New Mexicans have since founded roughly 150 bioscience companies, which have received more patents than any other sector. In 2017, New Mexico established the Bioscience Authority to foster local industry development; the following year, pharmaceutical company Curia built two large facilities in Albuquerque, and in 2022 announced plans to invest $100\u00a0million to expand local operations. The state is also positioning itself to play a leading role in developing quantum computing, quantum dot, and clean energy technologies; the New Mexico Quantum Moonshot initiative seeks to transform the state into a global leader in quantum technologies.\nNew Mexico's high altitude, generally clear skies, and sparse population have long fostered astronomical and aerospace activities, beginning with the ancient observatories of the Chaco Canyon culture; the \"Space Triangle\" between Roswell, Alamogordo, and Las Cruces has seen the highest concentration rocket tests and launches. New Mexico is sometimes considered the birthplace of the U.S. space program, beginning with Goddard's design of the first liquid fuel rocket in Roswell in the 1930s. The first rocket to reach space flew from White Sands Missile Range in 1948, and both NASA and the Department of Defense continue to develop and test rockets there and at the adjacent Holloman Air Force Base. New Mexico has also become a major center for private space flight, hosting the world's first purpose-built commercial spaceport, Spaceport America, which anchors several major aerospace companies and associated contractors, most notably Branson's Virgin Galactic.\nIn November 2022, the New Mexico State Investment Council, which manages that state's $38\u00a0billion sovereign wealth fund, announced it would commit $100\u00a0million towards America's Frontier Fund (AFF), a new venture capital firm that will focus on advanced technologies such as microelectronics and semiconductors, advanced manufacturing, artificial intelligence, new energy sources, synthetic biology and quantum sciences.\nAgriculture and food production.\nAlthough much of its land is arid, New Mexico has hosted a variety of agricultural activities for at least 2,500 years, centered mostly on the Rio Grande and its tributaries. This is helped by its long history of acequias, along with other farming and ranching methods within New Mexico. It is regulated by the New Mexico Department of Agriculture, specialty areas include various cash crops, cattle ranching, farming, game and fish.\nAgriculture contributes $40\u00a0billion to New Mexico's economy and employs nearly 260,000 people. As of 2023, the state exports $275\u00a0million in agricultural goods and ranks first nationwide in the production of chile peppers, second in pecans, and fifth in onions.\nThe state vegetables are New Mexico chile peppers and pinto beans, with the former being the most famous and valuable crop. According to the 2017 Census of Agriculture, New Mexico ranked first in the nation for chile pepper acreage, with Do\u00f1a Ana and Luna counties placing first and second among U.S. counties in this regard. New Mexico chile sold close to $40\u00a0million in 2021, while dry beans accounted for $7.6\u00a0million that year. New Mexico is one of the few states commercially producing pistachios, and its pi\u00f1on harvest (pine nut) is a protected commodity.\nDairy is the state's largest commodity, with sales of milk alone totaling $1.3\u00a0billion. Dean Foods owns the Creamland brand in New Mexico, the brand was originally founded in 1937 to expand a cooperative dairy venture known as the Albuquerque Dairy Association. Southwest Cheese Company in Clovis is among the largest cheese production facilities in the United States.\nCaballero history among the indigenous and Hispano communities in New Mexico have resulted in large-scale ranch lands throughout the state, most of which are within historically Apache, Navajo, Pueblo, and Spanish land grants. Wild game and fish found in the state include Rio Grande cutthroat trout, rainbow trout, crawdads, and venison.\nRestaurant chains originating in the state include Blake's Lotaburger, Boba Tea Company, Dion's Pizza, Little Anita's, Mac's Steak in the Rough, and Twisters; many specialize in New Mexican cuisine. Some companies like Allsup's gas stations have consumer foods, like chimichangas.\nTourism.\nNew Mexico's distinctive culture, rich artistic scene, favorable climate, and diverse geography have long been major drivers of tourism. As early as 1880, the state was a major destination for travelers suffering from respiratory illnesses (particularly tuberculosis), with its altitude and aridity believed to be beneficial to the lungs. Since the mid aughts, New Mexico has seen a steady rise in annual visitors, welcoming a record-breaking 39.2\u00a0million tourists in 2021.\nNew Mexico's unique culinary scene has garnered increasing national attention, including numerous James Beard Foundation Awards. The state has been featured in major travel television shows such as \"Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives\", \"\", \"Man v. Food Nation\", and others. Outdoor recreation in the area is fueled by a variety of internationally recognized nature reserves, public parks, ski resorts, hiking trails, and hunting and fishing areas.\nNew Mexico's government is actively involved in promoting tourism, launching the nation's first state publication, \"New Mexico Magazine,\" in 1923. The New Mexico Tourism Department administers the magazine and is also responsible for the \"New Mexico True\" campaign.\nGovernment.\nFederal government spending is a major driver of the New Mexico economy. In 2021, the federal government spent $2.48 on New Mexico for every dollar of tax revenue collected from the state, higher than every state except Kentucky. The same year, New Mexico received $9,624 per resident in federal services, or roughly $20\u00a0billion more than what the state pays in federal taxes. The state governor's office estimated that the federal government spends roughly $7.8\u00a0billion annually in services such as healthcare, infrastructure development, and public welfare.\nFederal employees make up 3.4% of New Mexico's labor force. Many federal jobs in the state relate to the military: the state hosts three air force bases (Kirtland Air Force Base, Holloman Air Force Base, and Cannon Air Force Base); a testing range (White Sands Missile Range); and an army proving ground (Fort Bliss's McGregor Range). A 2005 study by New Mexico State University estimated that 11.7% of the state's total employment arises directly or indirectly from military spending. New Mexico is also home to two major federal research institutions: the Los Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories. The former alone accounts for 24,000 direct and indirect jobs and over $3\u00a0billion in annual federal investment as of 2019.\nEconomic incentives.\nNew Mexico provides a number of economic incentives to businesses operating in the state, including various types of tax credits and tax exemptions. Most incentives are based on job creation: state and local governments are permitted to provide land, buildings, and infrastructure to businesses that will generate employment. Several municipalities impose an Economic Development Gross receipts tax (a form of Municipal Infrastructure GRT) to pay for these infrastructure improvements and for marketing their areas.\nThe New Mexico Finance Authority operates the New Market Tax Credits (NMTC) to provide greater access to financing for new, expanding, or relocating businesses in \"highly distressed\" areas (defined by metrics such as poverty above 30% and median family income below 60% of the statewide median).\nTaxation.\nNew Mexico's state income tax is the highest in the American Southwest outside California and higher than every state bordering it, ranging from 1.7% to a maximum of 5.9%. Yet in some contexts New Mexico has been described as a somewhat favorable state regarding corporate income. It does not levy taxes on inheritance, estate, or sales. Personal income tax rates range from 1.7% to 5.9% within five income brackets; the top marginal rate was increased from 4.9% in 2021 per a 2019 law. Active-duty military salaries are exempt from state income tax, as is income earned by Native American members of federally recognized tribes on tribal land.\nNew Mexico imposes a Gross Receipts Tax (GRT) on many transactions, which may even include some governmental receipts. This resembles a sales tax but, unlike the sales taxes in many states, it applies to services as well as tangible goods. Normally, the provider or seller passes the tax on to the purchaser; however, legal incidence and burden apply to the business, as an excise tax. GRT is imposed by the state and by some counties and municipalities. As of 2021, the combined tax rate ranged from 5.125% to 9.063%.\nProperty tax is imposed on real property by the state, by counties, and by school districts. In general, personal use personal property is not subject to property taxation. On the other hand, property tax is levied on most business-use personal property. The taxable value of property is one-third the assessed value. A tax rate of about 30\u00a0mills is applied to the taxable value, resulting in an effective tax rate of about 1%. In the 2005 tax year, the average millage was about 26.47 for residential property, and 29.80 for non-residential property. Assessed values of residences cannot be increased by more than 3% per year unless the residence is remodeled or sold. Property tax deductions are available for military veterans and heads of household.\nA 2021 analysis by the nonprofit Tax Foundation placed New Mexico 23rd in business tax climate; its property taxes were found to be the least burdensome in the U.S., while taxation for unemployment insurance and on corporations each ranked as the ninth least burdensome.\nWealth and poverty.\nNew Mexico is one of the poorest states in the U.S. and has long struggled with poverty. Its poverty rate of roughly 18% is among the highest in the country, exceeded only by Louisiana and Mississippi. In 2017, nearly 30% of New Mexico's children were in poverty, which is 40% higher than the national average. The majority of births (54%) were financed by Medicaid, a federal healthcare program for the poor, the third highest of any state. As of May 2021, around 44% of residents were enrolled in Medicaid.\nNew Mexico ranks 39th in the share of households with more than $1 million in wealth (5%), and among fourteen states without a Fortune 500 company. The state has a relatively high level of income disparity, with a Gini coefficient of 0.4769, albeit below the national average of 0.486. Household income is slightly less than $47,000, which is the fourth lowest in the U.S. The unemployment rate for June 2021 is 7.9%, tied with Connecticut as the highest in the country, and close to the peak of 8.0% for June\u2013October 2010, following the 2008 financial crisis.\nThe New Mexico government has enacted several policies to address chronic poverty, including approving a minimum wage increase in January 2021 and requiring paid sick leave. The state's minimum wage of $10.50 is higher than that of the federal government and 34 other states; it is set to increase to $11.50 on January 1, 2022, and $12.00 on January 1, 2023. Additionally, counties and municipalities have set their own minimum wages; Santa Fe County enacted a \"Living Wage Ordinance\" on March 1, 2021, mandating $12.32.\nThe New Mexico Legislature is considering implementing a statewide guaranteed basic income program targeting poorer residents; if enacted, it would be only the second U.S. state after California with such a policy. In August 2021, Santa Fe announced a one-year pilot program that would provide a \"stability stipend\" of $400 monthly to 100 parents under the age of 30 who attend Santa Fe Community College; the results of the program will determine whether the state government follows suit with its own basic income proposals. Las Cruces, the state's second largest city, is officially discussing the enactment of a similar program. In November 2025, all New Mexico families became eligible for free child care - the first state to do so.\nTransportation.\nNew Mexico has long been an important corridor for trade and migration. The builders of the ruins at Chaco Canyon also created a radiating network of roads from the mysterious settlement. Chaco Canyon's trade function shifted to Casas Grandes in the present-day Mexican state of Chihuahua; however, north\u2013south trade continued. The pre-Columbian trade with Mesoamerican cultures included northbound exotic birds, seashells and copper. Turquoise, pottery, and salt were some of the goods transported south along the Rio Grande. Present-day New Mexico's pre-Columbian trade is especially remarkable for being undertaken on foot. The north\u2013south trade route later became a path for horse-drawn colonists arriving from New Spain as well as trade and communication; later called \"El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro,\" it was among the four \"royal roads\" that were crucial lifelines to Spanish colonial possessions in North America.\nThe Santa Fe Trail was the 19th-century territory's vital commercial and military highway link to the Eastern United States. Several trails that terminated in northern New Mexico, including the Camino Real, the Santa Fe Trail and the Old Spanish Trail are recognized as National Historic Trails. New Mexico's latitude and low passes made it an attractive east\u2013west transportation corridor. As a territory, the Gadsden Purchase increased New Mexico's land area for the purpose of constructing a southern transcontinental railroad, that of the Southern Pacific Railroad. Another transcontinental railroad was completed by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway. The railroads essentially replaced the earlier trails but prompted a population boom. Early transcontinental auto trails later crossed the state, bringing more migrants. Railroads were later supplemented or replaced by a system of highways and airports. Today, New Mexico's Interstate Highways approximate the earlier land routes of the Camino Real, the Santa Fe Trail and the transcontinental railroads.\nRoad.\nPersonal automobiles remain the primary means of transportation for most New Mexicans, especially in rural areas. The state had 59,927 route miles of highway as of 2000[ [update]], of which 7,037 receive federal aid. In that same year there were of freeways, of which a thousand were the route miles of Interstate Highways 10, 25 and 40. The former number has increased with the upgrading of roads near Pojoaque, Santa Fe and Las Cruces to freeways. Notable bridges include the Rio Grande Gorge Bridge near Taos. Larger cities in New Mexico typically have some form of public transportation by road; ABQ RIDE is the largest such system in the state. Rural and intercity public transportation by road is provided by Americanos USA, LLC, Greyhound Lines and several government operators.\nNew Mexico is plagued by poor road conditions, with roughly a third of its roadways suffering from \"inadequate state and local funding\". As of 2001[ [update]], 703 highway bridges, or one percent, were declared \"structurally deficient\" or \"structurally obsolete\". Data from 2019 found 207 bridges and more than 3,822 miles of highway in less than subpar condition, resulting in greater commute times and higher costs in vehicles maintenance.\nNew Mexico has historically had a problem with drunk driving, though this has lessened: According to the \"Los Angeles Times\", the state once had the nation's highest alcohol-related crash rates but ranked 25th in this regard by July 2009. The highway traffic fatality rate was 1.9 per million miles traveled in 2000, the 13th highest rate among U.S. states. A 2022 report cited poor road as a major factor in New Mexico's continually high traffic fatalities; between 2015 and 2019, close 1,900 people were killed in automotive crashes in the state.\nHighways.\nNew Mexico has only three Interstate Highways: Interstate 10 travels southwest from the Arizona state line near Lordsburg to the area between Las Cruces and Anthony, near El Paso, Texas; Interstate 25 is a major north\u2013south interstate highway starting from Las Cruces to the Colorado state line near Raton; and Interstate 40 is a major east\u2013west interstate highway starting from the Arizona state line west of Gallup to the Texas state line east from Tucumcari. In Albuquerque, I-25 and I-40 meet at a stack interchange called The BigI. The state is tied with Delaware, North Dakota, Puerto Rico, and Rhode Island in having the fewest primary interstate routes, which is partly a reflection of its rugged geography and sparse population.\nNew Mexico currently has 15 United States Highways, which account for over of its highway system. All but seven of its 33 counties are served by U.S. routes, with most of the remainder connected by Interstate Highways. Most routes were built in 1926 by the state government and are still managed and maintained by state or local authorities. The longest is U.S. 70, which spans over across southern New Mexico, making up roughly 15% of the state's total U.S. Highway length; the shortest is U.S. 160, which runs just across the northwestern corner of the state, between the Arizona and Colorado borders.\nThe most famous route in New Mexico, if not the United States, was U.S. 66, colloquially known as the nation's \"Mother Road\" for its scenic beauty and importance to migrants fleeing West from the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. The road crossed through northern New Mexico, connecting the cities of Albuquerque and Gallup, before being replaced by I-40 in 1985. Much of U.S. 66 remains in use for tourism and has been preserved for historical significance. Another famous route was U.S. 666, which ran south to north along the western portion of the state, serving the Four Corners area. It was known as the \"Devil's Highway\" due to the number 666 denoting the \"Number of the beast\" in Christianity; this numerical designation, as well as its high fatality rate was subject to controversy, superstition, and numerous cultural references. U.S. 666 was subsequently renamed U.S. Route 491 in 2003.\nMany existing and former highways in New Mexico are recognized for their aesthetic, cultural, or historical significance, particularly for tourism purposes. The state hosts ten out of 184 \"America's Byways\", which are federally designated for preservation due to their scenic beauty or national importance.\nRail.\nThere were 2,354 route miles of railroads in the year 2000; this number increased by a few miles with the opening of the Rail Runner's extension to Santa Fe in 2006. In addition to local railroads and other tourist lines, the state jointly owns and operates a heritage narrow-gauge steam railroad, the Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railway, with the state of Colorado since 1970. Narrow-gauge railroads once connected many communities in the northern part of the state, from Farmington to Santa Fe. No fewer than 100 railroads of various names and lineage have operated in the state at some point. New Mexico's rail transportation system reached its height in terms of length following admission as a state; in 1914, eleven railroads operated 3124 route miles.\nRailroad surveyors arrived in New Mexico in the 1850s shortly after it became a U.S. territory. The first railroads incorporated in 1869, and the first railway became operational in 1878 with the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway (ATSF), which entered via the lucrative and contested Raton Pass. The ATSF eventually reached El Paso, Texas in 1881, and with the entry of the Southern Pacific Railroad from the Arizona Territory in 1880, created the nation's second transcontinental railroad, with a junction at Deming. The Denver &amp; Rio Grande Railway, which generally used narrow gauge equipment in New Mexico, entered the territory from Colorado, beginning service to Espa\u00f1ola in December 1880. These first railroads were built as long-distance corridors; later railroad construction also targeted resource extraction. \nThe rise of rail transportation was a major source of demographic and economic growth in the state, with many settlements expanding or being established shortly thereafter. As early as 1878, the ATSF promoted tourism in the region with an emphasis on Native American imagery. Named trains often reflected the territory they traveled: \"Super Chief\", the streamlined successor to the \"Chief\"; \"Navajo\", an early transcontinental tourist train; and \"Cavern\", a through car operation connecting Clovis and Carlsbad (by the early 1950s as train 23\u201324), were some of the named passenger trains of the ATSF that connoted New Mexico, The \"Super Chief\" became a favorite of early Hollywood stars and among the most famous named trains in the U.S.; it was known for its luxury and exoticness, with cars bearing the name of regional Native American tribes and outfitted with the artwork of many local artists\u00a0\u2013 but also for its speed: as brief as 39 hours 45 minutes westbound from Chicago to Los Angeles.At its height, passenger train service once connected nine of New Mexico's present ten most populous cities (the sole exception is Rio Rancho); currently, only Albuquerque and Santa Fe are connected by a rail network. With the decline of most intercity rail service in the U.S. in the late 1960s, New Mexico was left with minimal services; no less than six daily long-distance roundtrip trains, supplemented by many branch-line and local trains, served New Mexico in the early 1960s. Declines in passenger revenue, but not necessarily ridership, prompted many railroads to turn over their passenger services in truncated form to Amtrak, a state-owned enterprise. Amtrak, also known as the National Passenger Railroad Corporation, began operating the two extant long-distance routes on May 1, 1971.\nResurrection of passenger rail service from Denver to El Paso, a route once plied in part by the ATSF's \"El Pasoan\", has been proposed; in the 1980s, then\u2013Governor Toney Anaya suggested building a high-speed rail line connecting the two cities with New Mexico's major cities. In 2004, the Colorado-based nonprofit Front Range Commuter Rail was established with the goal of connecting Wyoming and New Mexico with high-speed rail; however, it became inactive in 2011.Since 2006, a state owned, privately run commuter railway, the New Mexico Rail Runner Express, has served the Albuquerque metropolitan area, connecting the city proper with Santa Fe and other communities. The system expanded in 2008 with the adding of the BNSF Railway's line from Belen to a few miles south of Lamy. Phase II of Rail Runner extended the line northward to Santa Fe from the Sandoval County station, the northernmost station under Phase I service; the service now connects Santa Fe, Sandoval, Bernalillo, and Valencia counties. Rail Runner operates scheduled service seven days per week, connecting Albuquerque's population base and central business district to downtown Santa Fe with up to eight roundtrips in a day; the section of the line running south to Belen is served less frequently.\nAmtrak's \"Southwest Chief\" passes through daily at stations in Gallup, Albuquerque, Lamy, Las Vegas, and Raton, offering connections to Los Angeles, Chicago and intermediate points. A successor to the \"Super Chief\" and \"El Capitan,\" the \"Southwest Chief\" is permitted a maximum speed of in various places on the tracks of the BNSF Railway; it also operates on New Mexico Rail Runner Express trackage. The \"Sunset Limited\" makes stops three times a week in both directions at Lordsburg, and Deming, serving Los Angeles, New Orleans and intermediate points. The \"Sunset Limited\" is the successor to the Southern Pacific Railroad's train of the same name and operates exclusively on Union Pacific trackage in New Mexico.\nNew Mexico is served by two of the nation's ten class I railroads, which denote the highest revenue railways for freight: the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad. Together they operate 2,200 route miles of railway in the state.\nAerospace.\nNew Mexico has four primary commercial airports that are served by most major domestic and international airliners. Albuquerque International Sunport is the state's main aerial port of entry and by far the largest airport: It is the only one designated a medium-sized hub by the Federal Aviation Administration, serving millions of passengers annually.\nThe only other comparatively large airports are Lea County Regional Airport, Roswell International Air Center, and Santa Fe Regional Airport, which have varying degrees of service by major airlines. Most airports in New Mexico are small, general aviation hubs operated by municipal and county governments, and usually served solely by local and regional commuter airlines.\nDue to its sparse population and many isolated, rural communities, New Mexico ranks among the states most reliant on Essential Air Service, a federal program that maintains a minimal level of scheduled air service to communities that are otherwise unprofitable for commercial airlines.\nSpaceport America.\nNew Mexico hosts the world's first operational and purpose-built commercial spaceport, Spaceport America, located in Upham, near Truth or Consequences. It is operated by the state-backed New Mexico Spaceport Authority (NMSA). Rocket launches began in April 2007, with the spaceport officially opening in 2011. Tenants include HAPSMobile, UP Aerospace, SpinLaunch, and Virgin Galactic.\nOver 300 suborbital flights have been successfully launched from Spaceport America since 2006, with the most notable being Virgin Galactic's VSS \"Unity\" on May 22, 2021, which made New Mexico the third U.S. state to launch humans into space, after California and Florida.\nOn October 22, 2021, Spaceport America was the site of the first successfully tested vacuum-sealed \"suborbital accelerator\", which aims to offer a significantly more economical alternative to launching satellites via rockets. Conducted by Spaceport tenant SpinLaunch, the test is the first of roughly 30 demonstrations being planned.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Constitution of New Mexico was adopted by popular referendum in 1911. It establishes a republican form of government based on popular sovereignty and a separation of powers. New Mexico has a bill of rights modeled on its federal counterpart, but with more expansive rights and freedoms; for example, victims of certain serious crimes, such as aggravated battery and sexual assault, have explicit rights to privacy, dignity, and the timely adjudication of their case. Major state issues may be decided by popular vote, and the constitution may be amended by a majority vote of both lawmakers and the electorate.\nGovernmental structure.\nMirroring the federal system, the New Mexico government consists of executive, legislative, and judicial departments. The executive is led by the governor and other popularly elected officials, including the lieutenant governor (elected on the same ticket as the governor), attorney general, secretary of state, state auditor, state treasurer, and commissioner of public lands. New Mexico's governor is granted more authority than those of other states, with the power to appoint most high-ranking officials in the cabinet and other state agencies.\nThe legislative branch consists of the bicameral New Mexico Legislature, comprising the 70-member House of Representatives and the 42-member Senate. Members of the House are elected to two-year terms, while those of the Senate are elected every four years. New Mexican legislators are unique in the U.S. for being volunteers, receiving only a daily stipend while in session; this \"citizen legislature\" dates back to New Mexico's admission as a state, and is considered a source of civic pride.\nThe judiciary is headed by the New Mexico Supreme Court, the state's highest court, which primarily adjudicates appeals from lower courts or government agencies. It is made up of five judges popularly elected every eight years with overlapping terms. Below the state supreme court is the New Mexico Court of Appeals, which has intermediate appellate jurisdiction statewide. New Mexico has 13 judicial districts with circuit courts of general jurisdiction, as well as various municipal, magistrate, and probate courts of limited jurisdiction.\nNew Mexico is organized into a number of local governments consisting of counties, municipalities, and special districts.\nPolitics.\nSince 2018, New Mexico has been led by Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham and Lieutenant Governor Howie Morales, both of the Democratic Party. All constitutional officers are currently Democrats, including Secretary of State Maggie Toulouse Oliver, Attorney General Ra\u00fal Torrez, State Auditor Joseph Maestas, State Land Commissioner Stephanie Garcia Richard, and State Treasurer Laura Montaya.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nBoth chambers of the New Mexico Legislature have Democratic majorities: 27 Democrats and 15 Republicans in the Senate, and 45 Democrats and 25 Republicans in the House of Representatives. Likewise, the state is represented in the U.S. Senate by Democrats Martin Heinrich and Ben Ray Luj\u00e1n. The state's three delegates to the U.S. House of Representatives are Democrats Melanie Stansbury, Gabe Vasquez, and Teresa Leger Fernandez, representing the first, second, and third districts, respectively.\nSince achieving statehood in 1912, New Mexico has been carried by the national popular vote winner in every presidential election except in 1976 and 2024. Until 2008, New Mexico was traditionally a swing state in presidential elections. The 1992 election of Bill Clinton marked the first time the state was won by a Democrat since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964. Al Gore narrowly carried the state in 2000 by 366 votes, and George W. Bush won in 2004 by less than 6,000 votes. The election of Barack Obama in 2008 marked the state's transition into a Democratic stronghold; Obama was also the first Democrat to win a majority of New Mexico votes since Johnson. Obama won New Mexico again in 2012, followed by Hillary Clinton in 2016, Joe Biden in 2020, and Kamala Harris in 2024.\nAlthough state politics are decidedly Democratic leaning, New Mexico's political culture is relatively moderate and bipartisan by national standards. While registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans by nearly 200,000, New Mexico voters have historically favored moderate to conservative candidates of both parties at the state and federal levels: According to Pew Research, the largest political ideology among New Mexicans is political moderate at 36%, while 34% are conservatives, 23% are liberal, and 7% stated they did not know. Likewise, New Mexico's demographics are atypical of most traditional liberal states with \"political ideology [being] less important\" than the profile or outreach efforts of the individual candidate. Due to their historically positive connections to the state's heritage, the Republican and Democratic parties of New Mexico are each relatively robust, and New Mexico is considered a bellwether state. The state's Republican Party was the first to incorporate Hispanics and Natives into leadership roles, such as territorial governor Miguel Antonio Otero and state governor Octaviano Ambrosio Larrazolo, who was later the first Mexican American and first Hispanic member of the U.S. Senate. Republican president Theodore Roosevelt had much respect for the Hispanos, Mexican Americans, and indigenous communities of New Mexico, many of whom had been a part of his Rough Riders.\nLujan Grisham succeeded two-term Republican governor Susana Martinez on January 1, 2019. Gary Johnson was governor from 1995 to 2003 as a Republican, but in 2012 and 2016 ran for president from the Libertarian Party. New Mexico's Second Congressional District is among the most competitive in the country: Republican Herrell narrowly lost to Democrat Xochitl Torres Small in 2018 but retook her seat in 2020, subsequently losing to Democrat Gabe Vasquez in 2022. Recent election cycles within the past decade have seen moderate incumbents replaced by progressive Democrats in cities like Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and Las Cruces, with conservative Republicans being elected in rural areas. Democrats in the state are usually strongest in the Santa Fe area, parts of the Albuquerque metro area (such as the southeast and central areas, including the affluent Nob Hill neighborhood and the vicinity of the University of New Mexico), Northern and West Central New Mexico, and most Native American reservations, particularly the Navajo Nation. Republicans have traditionally had their strongholds in the eastern and southern parts of the state, the Farmington area, Rio Rancho, and the newly developed areas in the northwest mesa. Albuquerque's Northeast Heights have historically leaned Republican but have become a key swing area for Democrats in recent election cycles.\nA 2020 study ranked New Mexico as the 20th hardest state for citizens to vote, due mostly to the inaccessibility of polling stations among many isolated communities.\nFemale minority representation.\nNew Mexico has elected more women of color to public office than any other U.S. state. While the trend is partly reflective of the state's disproportionately high Hispanic and indigenous populations, it also reflects longstanding cultural and political trends: In 1922, Soledad Ch\u00e1vez Chac\u00f3n was the first woman elected secretary of state of New Mexico, and the first Hispanic woman elected to statewide office in the United States. Republican governor Susana Martinez was the first Hispanic female governor in the United States, and Democrat congresswoman Deb Haaland was among the first Native American women elected to the U.S. Congress.\nResearch by the Center for American Women and Politics at Rutgers University found that two-thirds of all nonwhite women who have ever been elected governor in the U.S. are from New Mexico, including the current governor, Lujan Grisham. The state also accounts for nearly one-third of the women of color who have served in any statewide executive office, such as lieutenant governor and secretary of state, a distinction shared by only ten other states. New Mexico also has a relatively high percentage of state legislators who are women of color, which at 16% is the sixth highest in the nation.\nNew Mexico is described as a \"national leader in electing female legislators\". As of January 2023, it ranked sixth in the number of female state legislators (43.8%), with women comprising a majority of the New Mexico House of Representatives (53%) and over a quarter of the Senate (29%). Women also hold a majority of seats on the state Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals. At the federal level, two out of three congressional districts are represented by women.\nLocal government.\nLocal government in New Mexico consists primarily of counties and municipalities. There are 33 counties, of which the most populous is Bernalillo, which contains the state's largest city, Albuquerque. Counties are usually governed by an elected five-member county commission, sheriff, assessor, clerk and treasurer. A municipality may call itself a village, town, or city, with no distinction in law and no correlation to any particular form of government. Municipal elections are non-partisan. In addition, limited local authority can be vested in special districts and landowners' associations.\nLaw.\nNew Mexico is one of 23 states without the death penalty, becoming the 15th state to abolish capital punishment in 2009.\nThe state has among the most permissive firearms laws in the country. Its constitution explicitly enshrines the right to bear arms and prevents local governments from regulating gun ownership. Residents may purchase any firearm deemed legal under federal law without a permit. There is a 7-day waiting period under state law for picking up a firearm after it has been purchased (holders of concealed handgun licenses are exempt from the 7-day waiting period), nor any restrictions on magazine capacity. Additionally, New Mexico is a \"shall-issue\" state for concealed carry permits, thus giving applicants a presumptive right to receive a license without giving a compelling reason.\nBefore December 2013, New Mexico law was silent on the issue of same-sex marriage. The issuance of marriage licenses to same-sex couples was determined at the county level, with some county clerks issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples and others not. In December 2013, the New Mexico Supreme Court issued a unanimous ruling directing all county clerks to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, thereby making New Mexico the 17th state to recognize same-sex marriage statewide.\nBased on 2008 data, New Mexico had 146 law enforcement agencies across the state, county, and municipal levels. State law enforcement is statutorily administered by the Department of Public Safety (DPS). The New Mexico State Police is a division of the DPS with jurisdiction over all crimes in the state. As of 2008, New Mexico had over 5,000 sworn police officers, a ratio of 252 per 100,000 residents, which is roughly the same as the nation. The state struggles with one of the nation's highest rates of officer-involved killings, which has prompted political and legal reforms at local and state levels.\nIn April 2021, New Mexico became the 18th state to legalize cannabis for recreational use; possession, personal cultivation, and retail sales are permitted under certain conditions, while relevant marijuana-related arrests and convictions are expunged. New Mexico has long pioneered loosening cannabis restrictions: In 1978, it was the first state to pass legislation allowing the medical use of marijuana in some form, albeit restricted to a federal research program. In 1999, Republican Governor Gary Johnson became the highest-ranking elected official in the U.S. to publicly endorse drug legalization. Medicinal marijuana was fully legalized in 2007, making New Mexico the 12th state to do so, and the fourth via legislative action. In 2019, it was the first U.S. state to decriminalize possession of drug paraphernalia.\nAs of June 2022, New Mexico has one of the nation's most permissive abortion laws: Elective abortion care is legal at all stages of pregnancy, without restrictions such as long waiting periods and mandated parental consent. In 2021, the state repealed a 1969 \"trigger law\" that had banned most abortion procedures, which would have come into effect following the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\". In response to the \"Dobbs\" decision, which held that abortion was not a constitutional right, New Mexico's governor issued an executive order protecting abortion providers from out-of-state litigation, in anticipation of the influx of nonresidents seeking abortions.\nFiscal policy.\nOn a per capita basis, New Mexico's government has one of the largest state budgets, at $9,101 per resident. As of 2017, the state had an S&amp;P Global Rating of AA+, denoting a very strong capacity to meet financial commitments alongside a very low credit risk.\nNew Mexico has two constitutionally mandated permanent funds: The Land Grant Permanent Fund (LGPF), which was established upon statehood in 1912, and the Severance Tax Permanent Fund (STPF), which was created in 1973 during the oil boom. Both funds derive revenue from rents, royalties, and bonuses related to the state's extensive oil, gas, and mining operations; the vast majority of the LGPF's distributions are earmarked for \"common (public) schools\", while all distributions from the STPF are allocated to the LGPF. As of 2020, the Land Grant Permanent Fund was valued at $21.6\u00a0billion, while the Severance Tax Permanent Fund was worth $5.8\u00a0billion.\nEducation.\nDue to its relatively low population and numerous federally funded research facilities, New Mexico had the highest concentration of PhD holders of any state in 2000. Los Alamos County, which hosts the eponymous national laboratory, leads the state in the most post-secondary degree holders, at 38.7% of residents, or 4,899 of 17,950. However, New Mexico routinely ranks near the bottom in studies measuring the quality of primary and secondary school education.\nBy national standards, New Mexico has one of the highest concentrations of persons who did not finish high school or have some college education, albeit by a low margin: Slightly more than 14% of residents did not have a high school diploma, compared to the national rate of 11.4%, the fifth lowest out of 52 U.S. states and territories. Almost a quarter of people over 25 (23.9%) did not complete college, compared with 21% nationally. New Mexico ranks among the bottom ten states in the proportion of residents with a bachelor's degree or higher (27.7%), but 21st in PhD earners (12.2%); the national average is 33.1% and 12.8%, respectively. In 2020, the number of doctorate recipients was 300, placing the state 34th in the nation.\nIn 2018, a state judge issued a landmark ruling that \"New Mexico is violating the constitutional rights of at-risk students by failing to provide them with sufficient education\", in particularly those with indigenous, non-English-speaking, and low-income backgrounds. The court ordered the governor and legislature to provide an adequate system by April 2019; in response, New Mexico increased teacher salaries, funded an extended school year, expanded prekindergarten childhood education programs, and developed a budget formula for delivering more funding to schools that serve at-risk and low-income students. Nevertheless, many activists and public officials contend that these efforts continue to fall short, particularly with respect to Native American schools and students.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe New Mexico Public Education Department oversees the operation of primary and secondary schools; individual school districts directly operate and staff said schools.\nIn January 2022, New Mexico became the first state in the U.S. to recruit national guardsmen and state workers to serve as substitute teachers due to staffing shortages caused by COVID-19. Partly in response to pandemic-related shortages, on March 1, 2022, Governor Grisham signed into law four bills to increase the salaries and benefits of teachers and other school staff, particularly in entry-level positions.\nPostsecondary education.\nNew Mexico has 41 accredited, degree-granting institutions; twelve are private and 29 are state-funded, including four tribal colleges. Additionally, select students can attend certain institutions in Colorado, at in-state tuition rates, pursuant to a reciprocity program between the two states.\nGraduates of four-year colleges in New Mexico have some of the lowest student debt burdens in the U.S.; the class of 2017 owed an average of $21,237 compared with a national average of $28,650, according to the Institute for College Access &amp; Success.\nNew Mexico ranked 13th in the 2022 Social Mobility Index (SMI), which measures the extent to which economically disadvantaged students (with family incomes below the national median) have access to colleges and universities with lower tuition and indebtedness and higher job prospects.\nLottery scholarship.\nNew Mexico is one of eight states that fund college scholarships through the state lottery. The state requires that the lottery put 30% of its gross sales into the scholarship fund.\nThe scholarship is available to residents who graduated from a state high school, and attend a state university full-time while maintaining a 2.5 GPA or higher. It covered 100% of tuition when it was first instated in 1996, decreased to 90%, then dropped to 60% in 2017. The value slightly increased in 2018, and new legislation was passed to outline what funds are available per type of institution.\nOpportunity scholarship.\nIn September 2019, New Mexico announced a plan to make tuition at its public colleges and universities free for all state residents, regardless of family income. The proposal was described as going further than any other existing state or federal plan or program at the time. In March 2022, New Mexico became the first state to offer free college tuition for all residents, after the legislature passed a bipartisan bill allocating almost 1 percent of the state budget toward covering tuition and fees at all 29 public colleges, universities, community colleges, and tribal colleges. The program, which takes effect July 1, 2022, is described as among the most ambitious and generous in the country, as it is available to all residents regardless of income, work status, or legal status, and is provided without taking into account other scholarships and sources of financial aid.\nCulture.\nNew Mexican culture is a unique fusion of indigenous, Spanish, Hispanic, and American influences. The intermingling of these diverse groups is reflected in New Mexico's demographics, toponyms, cuisine, dialect, and identity. Compared to other Western states, New Mexico's Spanish and Mexican heritage remain more visible and enduring, due to it having been the oldest, most populous, and most important province in New Spain's northern periphery. However, some historians allege that this history has been understated or marginalized by persistent American biases and misconceptions towards Spanish colonial history, reflected in part by the fact that many Americans do not know it is part of the U.S.; this misconception variably elicits frustration, amusement, or even pride among New Mexicans as evidence of their unique heritage.\nLike other states in the American Southwest, New Mexico bears the legacy of the \"Old West\" period of American westward expansion, characterized by cattle ranching, cowboys, pioneers, the Santa Fe Trail, and conflicts among and between settlers and Native Americans. The state's vast and diverse geography, sparse population, and abundance of ghost towns have contributed to its enduring frontier image and atmosphere. Many fictional works of the Western genre are set or produced in New Mexico.\nArchitecture.\nExamples of New Mexico's architectural history date back to the Ancestral Puebloans within Oasisamerica. The Hispanos of New Mexico adapted the Pueblo architecture style within their own buildings, and following the establishment of Albuquerque in 1706, the Territorial Style of architecture blended the styles. Rural communities incorporated both building types into a New Mexico vernacular style, further exemplifying the indigenous roots of New Mexico. After statehood, the modern Pueblo Revival and Territorial Revival architectural styles became more prevalent, with these revival architectures becoming officially encouraged since the 1930s. These styles have been blended with other modern styles, as happened with Pueblo Deco architecture, within modern contemporary New Mexican architecture.\nArt, literature, and media.\nThe earliest New Mexico artists whose work survives today are the Mimbres Indians, whose black and white pottery could be mistaken for modern art, except for the fact that it was produced before AD 1130. Many examples of this work can be seen at the Deming Luna Mimbres Museum and at the Western New Mexico University Museum.\nSanta Fe has long hosted a thriving artistic community, which has included such prominent figures as Bruce Nauman, Richard Tuttle, John Connell, Steina Vasulka and Ned Bittinger. The capital city has several art museums, including the New Mexico Museum of Art, Museum of Spanish Colonial Art, Museum of International Folk Art, Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Museum of Contemporary Native Arts, SITE Santa Fe and others. Colonies for artists and writers thrive, and the small city teems with art galleries. In August, the city hosts the annual Santa Fe Indian Market, which is the oldest and largest juried Native American art showcase in the world. Performing arts include the Santa Fe Opera, which presents five operas in repertory each July to August; the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival held each summer; and the restored Lensic Theater, a principal venue for many kinds of performances. The weekend after Labor Day boasts the burning of Zozobra, a fifty-foot (15m) marionette, during Fiestas de Santa Fe.\nAs New Mexico's largest city, Albuquerque hosts many of the state's leading cultural events and institutions, including the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, the National Hispanic Cultural Center, the National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp; History, and the famed annual Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta. The National Hispanic Cultural Center has held hundreds of performing arts events, art showcases, and other events related to Spanish culture in New Mexico and worldwide in the centerpiece Roy E Disney Center for the Performing Arts or in other venues at the 53-acre facility. New Mexico residents and visitors alike can enjoy performing art from around the world at Popejoy Hall on the campus of the University of New Mexico. Popejoy Hall hosts singers, dancers, Broadway shows, other types of acts, and Shakespeare. Albuquerque also has the unique and iconic KiMo Theater built in 1927 in the Pueblo Revival Style architecture. The KiMo presents live theater and concerts as well as movies and simulcast operas. In addition to other general interest theaters, Albuquerque also has the African American Performing Arts Center and Exhibit Hall which showcases achievements by people of African descent and the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center which highlights the cultural heritage of the First Nations people of New Mexico.\nNew Mexico holds strong to its Spanish heritage. Old Spanish traditions such zarzuelas and flamenco are popular; the University of New Mexico is the only institute of higher education in the world with a program dedicated to flamenco. Flamenco dancer and native New Mexican Mar\u00eda Ben\u00edtez founded the Maria Ben\u00edtez Institute for Spanish Arts \"to present programs of the highest quality of the rich artistic heritage of Spain, as expressed through music, dance, visual arts, and other art forms\". There is also the annual Festival Flamenco Internacional de Alburquerque, where native Spanish and New Mexican flamenco dancers perform at the University of New Mexico; it is the largest and oldest flamenco event outside of Spain.\nIn the mid-20th century, there was a thriving Hispano school of literature and scholarship being produced in both English and Spanish. Among the more notable authors were: Ang\u00e9lico Ch\u00e1vez, Nina Otero-Warren, Fabiola Cabeza de Baca, Aurelio Espinosa, Cleofas Jaramillo, Juan Bautista Rael, and Aurora Lucero-White Lea. As well, writer D. H. Lawrence lived near Taos in the 1920s, at the D. H. Lawrence Ranch, where there is a shrine said to contain his ashes.\nNew Mexico's strong Spanish, Anglo, and Wild West frontier motifs have contributed to a unique body of literature, represented by internationally recognized authors such as Rudolfo Anaya, Tony Hillerman, and Daniel Abraham. Western fiction folk heroes Billy the Kid, Elfego Baca, Geronimo, and Pat Garrett originate in New Mexico. These same Hispanic, indigenous, and frontier histories have given New Mexico a place in the history of country and Western music, with its own New Mexico music genre, including the careers of Al Hurricane, Robert Mirabal, and Michael Martin Murphey.\nSilver City, originally a mining town, is now a major hub and exhibition center for large numbers of artists, visual and otherwise. Another former mining town turned art haven is Madrid, New Mexico, which was brought to national fame as the filming location for the 2007 movie \"Wild Hogs\". Las Cruces, in southern New Mexico, has a museum system affiliated with the Smithsonian Institution Affiliations Program, and hosts a variety of cultural and artistic opportunities for residents and visitors.\nThe Western genre immortalized the varied mountainous, riparian, and desert environment into film. Owing to a combination of financial incentives, low cost, and geographic diversity, New Mexico has long been a popular setting or filming location for various films and television series. In addition to \"Wild Hogs\", other movies filmed in New Mexico include \"Sunshine Cleaning\" and \"Vampires\". Various seasons of the A&amp;E/Netflix series \"Longmire\" were filmed in several New Mexico locations, including Las Vegas, Santa Fe, Eagle Nest, and Red River. The widely acclaimed \"Breaking Bad\" franchise was set and filmed in and around Albuquerque, a product of the ongoing success of media in the city in large part helped by Albuquerque Studios, and the presence of production studios like Netflix and NBCUniversal.\nCuisine.\nNew Mexico is known for its unique and eclectic culinary scene, which fuses various indigenous cuisines with those of Spanish and Mexican Hispanos originating in Nuevo M\u00e9xico. Like other aspects of the state's culture, New Mexican cuisine has been shaped by a variety of influences from throughout its history; consequently, it is unlike Latin food originating elsewhere in the contiguous United States. Distinguishing characteristics include the use of local spices, herbs, flavors, and vegetables, particularly red and green New Mexico chile peppers, anise (used in \"bizcochitos\"), and \"pi\u00f1on\" (pine nuts).\nAmong the dishes unique to New Mexico are frybread-style \"sopapillas\", breakfast burritos, \"enchilada montada\" (stacked enchiladas), green chile stew, \"carne seca\" (a thinly sliced variant of jerky), green chile burgers, \"posole\" (a hominy dish), slow-cooked \"frijoles\" (beans, typically pinto beans), \"calabacitas\" (saut\u00e9ed zucchini and summer squash), and \"carne adovada\" (pork marinated in red chile). The state is also the epicenter of a burgeoning Native American culinary movement, in which chefs of indigenous descent serve traditional cuisine through food trucks.\nSports.\nNo major league professional sports teams are based in New Mexico, but the Albuquerque Isotopes are the Pacific Coast League baseball affiliate of the MLB Colorado Rockies. The state hosts several baseball teams of the Pecos League: the Roswell Invaders, Ruidoso Osos, Santa Fe Fuego and the White Sands Pupfish. The Duke City Gladiators of the Indoor Football League (IFL) plays their home games at Tingley Coliseum in Albuquerque; the city also hosts two soccer teams: New Mexico United, which began playing in the second tier USL Championship in 2019, and the associated New Mexico United U23, which plays in the fourth tier USL League Two.\nCollegiate athletics are the center of spectator sports in New Mexico, namely the rivalry between various teams of the University of New Mexico Lobos and the New Mexico State Aggies. The intense competition between the two teams is often referred to as the \"Rio Grande Rivalry\" or the \"Battle of I-25\" (in reference to both campuses being located along that highway). NMSU also has a rivalry with the University of Texas at El Paso called \"The Battle of I-10\". The winner of the NMSU-UTEP football game receives the Silver Spade trophy.\nOlympic gold medalist Tom Jager, an advocate of controversial high-altitude training for swimming, has conducted training camps in Albuquerque at 5,312 feet (1,619m) and Los Alamos at 7,320 feet (2,231m).\nNew Mexico is a major hub for various shooting sports, mainly concentrated in the NRA Whittington Center in Raton, which is largest and most comprehensive competitive shooting range and training facility in the U.S.\nHistoric heritage.\nOwing to its millennia of habitation and over two centuries of Spanish colonial rule, New Mexico features a significant number of sites with historical and cultural significance. Forty-six locations across the state are listed by the U.S. National Register of Historic Places, the 18th highest of any state.\nNew Mexico has nine of the country's 84 national monuments, which are sites federally protected by presidential proclamation; this is the second-highest number after Arizona. The monuments include some of the earliest to have been created: El Morro and Gila Cliff Dwellings, proclaimed in 1906 and 1907, respectively; both preserve the state's ancient indigenous heritage.\nNew Mexico is one of 20 states with a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and among only eight with more than one. Excluding sites shared between states, New Mexico has the most World Heritage Sites in the country, with three exclusively within its territory.\nOther.\nSince 1970, \"New Mexico Magazine\" has had a standing feature, \"One of Our 50 Is Missing\", which relates often humorous anecdotes about instances in which people elsewhere do not realize New Mexico is a state, confuse it with the nation of Mexico, or otherwise mistake it as being a foreign country. The state's license plates say \"New Mexico USA\", so as to avoid confusion with Mexico, which it borders to the southwest. New Mexico is the only state that specifies \"USA\" on its license plates.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21650", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21650", "title": "North Carolina", "text": "U.S. state\nNorth Carolina ( ) is a state in the Southeastern and South Atlantic regions of the United States. It is bordered by Virginia to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the east, South Carolina to the south, Georgia to the southwest, and Tennessee to the west. The state is the 28th-largest and ninth-most populous of the United States. Along with South Carolina, it makes up the Carolinas region of the East Coast. At the 2020 census, the state had a population of 10,439,388. Raleigh is the state's capital and Charlotte is its most populous and one of the fastest growing cities in the United States. The Charlotte metropolitan area, with an estimated population of 2,883,370 in 2024, is the most populous metropolitan area in North Carolina, the 21st-most populous in the United States, and the largest banking center in the nation after New York City. The Research Triangle, with an estimated population of 2,368,947 in 2023, is the second-most populous combined metropolitan area in the state, 31st-most populous in the United States, and is home to the largest research park in the United States, Research Triangle Park.\nThe earliest evidence of human occupation in North Carolina dates back 10,000 years, found at the Hardaway Site. North Carolina was inhabited by Carolina Algonquian, Iroquoian, and Siouan speaking tribes of Native Americans prior to the arrival of Europeans. King Charles II granted eight lord proprietors a colony they named Carolina after the king and which was established in 1670 with the first permanent settlement at Charles Town (now Charleston, South Carolina). Because of the difficulty of governing the entire colony from Charles Town, the colony was eventually divided and North Carolina was established as a royal colony in 1729 and was one of the Thirteen Colonies. The Halifax Resolves resolution adopted by North Carolina on April 12, 1776, was the first formal call for independence from Great Britain among the American Colonies during the American Revolution.\nOn November 21, 1789, North Carolina became the 12th state to ratify the United States Constitution. In the run-up to the American Civil War, North Carolina declared its secession from the Union on May 20, 1861, becoming the tenth of eleven states to join the Confederate States of America. Following the Civil War, the state was restored to the Union on July 4, 1868. On December 17, 1903, Orville and Wilbur Wright successfully piloted the world's first controlled, sustained flight of a powered, heavier-than-air aircraft at Kitty Hawk in North Carolina's Outer Banks. North Carolina often uses the slogan \"First in Flight\" on state license plates to commemorate this achievement, alongside a newer alternative design bearing the slogan \"First in Freedom\" in reference to the Mecklenburg Declaration and Halifax Resolves.\nNorth Carolina is defined by a wide range of elevations and landscapes. From west to east, North Carolina's elevation descends from the Appalachian Mountains to the Piedmont and Atlantic coastal plain. North Carolina's Mount Mitchell at is the highest point in North America east of the Black Hills South Dakota. Most of the state falls in the humid subtropical climate zone; however, the western, mountainous part of the state has a subtropical highland climate.\nHistory.\nNative Americans, lost colony, and permanent settlement.\nNorth Carolina was inhabited for at least 10,000 years by succeeding prehistoric Indigenous cultures. The Hardaway Site saw major periods of occupation dating to 10,000 years BCE. Before 200 AD, people were building earthwork platform mounds for ceremonial and religious purposes. Succeeding peoples, including those of the South Appalachian Mississippian culture, established by 1000 AD in the Piedmont and mountain region, continued to build this style of mounds. In contrast to some of the larger centers of the classic Mississippian culture in the area that became known as the western Carolinas, northeastern Georgia, and southeastern Tennessee, most of the larger towns had only one central platform mound. Smaller settlements had none, but were close to more prominent towns. This area became known as the homelands of the historic Cherokee people, who are believed to have migrated over time from the Great Lakes area.\nIn the 500\u2013700 years preceding European contact, the Mississippian culture built elaborate cities and maintained far-flung regional trading networks. Its largest city was Cahokia, which had numerous mounds for different purposes, a highly stratified society, and was located in present-day southwestern Illinois near the Mississippi River. Starting in 1540, the Native polities of the Mississippian culture fell apart and reformed as new groups, such as the Catawba, due to a series of destabilizing events known as the \"Mississippian shatter zone\". Introduction of colonial trading arrangements and hostile native groups from the north such as the Westo Indians hastened changes in an already tenuous regional hierarchy. As described by anthropologist Robbie Ethridge, the Mississippian shatter zone was a time of great instability in what is now the American South, caused by the instability of Mississippian chiefdoms, high mortality from new Eurasian diseases, conversion to an agricultural society and the accompanying population increase, and the emergence of Native \"militaristic slaving societies\".\nHistorically documented tribes in the North Carolina region include the Carolina Algonquian-speaking tribes of the coastal areas, such as the Chowanoc, Roanoke, Pamlico, Machapunga, and Coree, who were the first encountered by the English; the Iroquoian-speaking Meherrin, Cherokee, and Tuscarora of the interior; and Southeastern Siouan-speaking tribes, such as the Cheraw, Waxhaw, Saponi, Waccamaw, Cape Fear Indians, and Catawba of the Piedmont.\nIn the late 16th century, the first Spanish explorers traveling inland recorded meeting Mississippian culture people at Joara, a regional chiefdom near what later developed as Morganton. Records of Hernando de Soto attested to his meeting with them in 1540. In 1567, Captain Juan Pardo led an expedition to claim the area for the Spanish colony and to establish another route to reach silver mines in Mexico. Pardo made a winter base at Joara, which he renamed \"Cuenca\". His expedition built Fort San Juan and left a contingent of 30 Spaniards there, while Pardo traveled further. His forces built and garrisoned five other forts. He returned by a different route to Santa Elena on Parris Island, South Carolina, then a center of Spanish Florida. In the spring of 1568, natives killed all but seventy four of the Spaniards and burned the six forts in the interior, including Fort San Juan. Although the Spanish never returned to the interior, this effort marked the first European attempt at colonization of the interior of what became the United States. A 16th-century journal by Pardo's scribe Bandera, and archaeological findings since 1986 at Joara, have confirmed the settlement.\nAnglo-European settlement.\nIn 1584, Elizabeth I granted a charter to Sir Walter Raleigh, for whom the state capital is named, for land in present-day North Carolina (then part of the territory of Virginia). It was the second American territory that the English attempted to colonize. Raleigh established two colonies on the coast in the late 1580s, but both failed. The colony established in 1587 saw 118 colonists 'disappear' when John White was unable to return from a supply run during battles with the Spanish Armada. The fate of the \"Lost Colony\" of Roanoke Island remains one of the most widely debated mysteries of American history. Two native Chieftains, Manteo and Wanchese, of which the former helped the colonists and the latter was distrustful, had involvement in the colony and even accompanied Raleigh to England on a previous voyage in 1585. Manteo was also the first Indigenous North American to be baptized by English settlers. Upon White's return in 1590, neither native nor Englishman were to be found. Popular theory holds that the colonists either traveled away with or assimilated into local native culture. Virginia Dare, the first English person to be born in North America, was born on Roanoke Island on August 18, 1587; the surrounding Dare County is named for her.\nAs early as 1650, settlers from the Virginia colony had moved into the Albemarle Sound region. By 1663, King Charles\u00a0II of England granted a charter to start a new colony on the North American continent; this would generally establish North Carolina's borders. He named it \"Carolina\" in honor of his father, CharlesI. By 1665, a second charter was issued to attempt to resolve territorial questions. This charter rewarded the Lords Proprietors, eight Englishmen to whom King Charles II granted joint ownership of a tract of land in the state. All of these men either had remained loyal to the Crown or aided Charles's restoration to the English throne after Cromwell. In 1712, owing to disputes over governance, the Carolina colony split into North Carolina and South Carolina. North Carolina became a crown colony in 1729.\nMost of the English colonists had arrived as indentured servants, hiring themselves out as laborers for a fixed period to pay for their passage. In the early years the line between indentured servants and African slaves or laborers was fluid. Some Africans were allowed to earn their freedom before slavery became a lifelong status. Most of the free colored families formed in North Carolina before the Revolution were descended from unions or marriages between free whites and enslaved or free Africans or African-Americans. If the mothers were free, their children were born free. Many had migrated or were descendants of migrants from colonial Virginia. As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in Great Britain, planters imported more slaves, and the state's legal delineations between free and slave status tightened, effectively hardening the latter into a racial caste. Conditions for both slaves and workers worsened as the ranks of the former eclipsed the latter and expansion of farming operations into former Indigenous territories lowered prices. Unable to establish deep water ports such as at Charles Town and Norfolk, the economy's growth and prosperity was thus based on cheap labor and slave plantation systems, devoted primarily to the production of tobacco, then later cotton and textiles.\nIn 1738\u20131739, smallpox caused high fatalities among the Native Americans, who had no immunity to the new disease (it had become endemic over centuries in Europe). According to the historian Russell Thornton, \"The 1738 epidemic was said to have killed one-half of the Cherokee, with other tribes of the area suffering equally.\"\nColonial period.\nAfter the Spanish in the 16th century, the first permanent European settlers of North Carolina were English colonists who migrated south from Virginia. Virginia had grown rapidly and land was less available. Nathaniel Batts was documented as one of the first of these Virginian migrants. He settled south of the Chowan River and east of the Great Dismal Swamp in 1655. By 1663, this northeastern area of the Province of Carolina, known as the Albemarle Settlements, was undergoing full-scale English settlement. During the same period, the English monarch CharlesII gave provincial land grants to the Lords Proprietors, the group of noblemen who had helped restore him to the throne in 1660. These grants were predicated on an agreement that the Lords would use their influence to bring in colonists and establish ports of trade. This new Province of Carolina was named in honor and memory of his father, CharlesI (Latin: \"Carolus\").\nLacking a viable coastal port city due to geography, towns grew at a slower pace and remained small. By the late 17th century, Carolina was essentially two colonies, one centered in the Albemarle region in the north and the other located in the south around Charleston. In 1705 South Carolinian John Lawson purchased land on the Pamlico River and laid out Bath, North Carolina's first town. After returning to England, he published the book A New Voyage to Carolina, which became a travelogue and a marketing piece to encourage new colonists to Carolina. Lawson encouraged Baron Christoph von Graffenried, the leader of a group of Swiss and German Protestants, to immigrate to Carolina. Von Graffenried purchased land between the Neuse and the Trent Rivers and established the town of New Bern. After an attack on New Bern in which hundreds were killed or injured, Lawson was caught then executed by Tuscarora Indians. A large revolt happened in the state in 1711, known as Cary's Rebellion. In 1712, North Carolina became a separate colony, and in 1729 it became a royal colony, with the exception of the Earl Granville holdings.\nIn June 1718, \"Queen Anne's Revenge\", the flagship of pirate Blackbeard, ran aground at Beaufort Inlet, North Carolina, in present-day Carteret County. After the grounding, her crew and supplies were transferred to smaller ships. In November 1718, after appealing to the governor of North Carolina, who promised safe-haven and a pardon, Blackbeard was killed in an ambush by troops from Virginia. In 1996, Intersal, Inc., a private maritime research firm, discovered the remains of a vessel likely to be the \"Queen Anne's Revenge\", which was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.\nNorth Carolina became one of the Thirteen Colonies and with the territory of South Carolina was originally known as the Province of North Carolina. The northern and southern parts of the original province separated in 1712, with North Carolina becoming a royal colony in 1729. Originally settled by small farmers, sometimes having a few slaves, who were oriented toward subsistence agriculture, the colony lacked large cities or towns. Pirates menaced the coastal settlements, but by 1718 piracy in the Carolinas was on the decline. Growth was strong in the middle of the 18th century, as the economy attracted Scots-Irish, Quaker, English and German immigrants. A majority of the North Carolina colonists generally supported the American Revolution, although there were some Loyalists. Loyalists in North Carolina were fewer in number than in some other colonies such as Georgia, South Carolina, Delaware, and New York.\nDuring colonial times, Bath was the first provincial capital after the formation of North Carolina from the Province of Carolina in 1712, followed by Edenton beginning in 1722, followed by New Bern becoming the capital in 1766. Construction of Tryon Palace, which served as the residence and offices of the provincial governor William Tryon, began in 1767 and was completed in 1771. In 1788, Raleigh was chosen as the site of the new capital, as its central location protected it from coastal attacks. Officially established in 1792 as both county seat and state capital, the city was named after Sir Walter Raleigh, sponsor of Roanoke, the \"lost colony\" on Roanoke Island. The population of the colony more than quadrupled from 52,000 in 1740 to 270,000 in 1780 from high immigration from Virginia, Maryland and Pennsylvania, plus immigrants from abroad.\nNorth Carolina did not have any printer or print shops until 1749, when the North Carolina Assembly commissioned James Davis from Williamsburg Virginia to act as their official printer. Before this time the laws and legal journals of North Carolina were handwritten and were kept in a largely disorganized manner, prompting the hiring of Davis. Davis settled in New Bern, married, and in 1755 was appointed by Benjamin Franklin as North Carolina's first postmaster. In October of that year the North Carolina Assembly awarded Davis a contract to carry mail between Wilmington, North Carolina and Suffolk, Virginia. He was also active in North Carolina politics as a member of the Assembly and later as the Sheriff. Davis also founded and printed the \"North-Carolina Gazette\", North Carolina's first newspaper, printed in his printing house in New Bern.\nDifferences in the settlement patterns of eastern and western North Carolina, or the Atlantic coastal plain and uplands, affected the political, economic, and social life of the state from the 18th until the 20th century. Eastern North Carolina was settled chiefly by immigrants from rural England and Gaelic speakers from the Scottish Highlands. The Piedmont upcountry and western mountain region of North Carolina was settled chiefly by Scots-Irish, English, and German Protestants, the so-called \"cohee\". Arriving during the mid-to-late 18th century, the Scots-Irish, people of Scottish descent who migrated to and then emigrated from what is today Northern Ireland, were the largest non-English immigrant group before the Revolution; English indentured servants were overwhelmingly the largest immigrant group before the Revolution.\nRevolutionary War.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, the English and Gaelic speaking Highland Scots of eastern North Carolina tended to remain loyal to the British Crown, because of longstanding business and personal connections with Great Britain. The English, Welsh, Scots-Irish, and German settlers of western North Carolina tended to favor American independence from Britain. British loyalists dubbed the Mecklenburg County area to be 'a hornet's nest' of radicals, birthing the name of the future Charlotte NBA team. On April 12, 1776, the colony became the first to instruct its delegates to the Continental Congress to vote for independence from the British Crown, through the Halifax Resolves passed by the North Carolina Provincial Congress. The date of this event is memorialized on the state flag and state seal. Throughout the Revolutionary War, fierce guerrilla warfare erupted between bands of pro-independence and pro-British colonists. In some cases the war was also an excuse to settle private grudges and rivalries.\nNorth Carolina had around 7,800 Patriots join the Continental Army under General George Washington; and an additional 10,000 served in local militia units under such leaders as General Nathanael Greene. There was some military action, especially in 1780\u201381. Many Carolinian frontiersmen had moved west over the mountains, into the Washington District (later known as Tennessee), but in 1789, following the Revolution, the state was persuaded to relinquish its claim to the western lands. It ceded them to the national government so the Northwest Territory could be organized and managed nationally.\nA major American victory in the war took place at King's Mountain along the North Carolina\u2013South Carolina border; on October 7, 1780, a force of 1,000 Patriots from western North Carolina (including what is today the state of Tennessee) and southwest Virginia overwhelmed a force of some 1,000 British troops led by Major Patrick Ferguson. Most of the soldiers fighting for the British side in this battle were Carolinians who had remained loyal to the Crown (they were called \"Tories\" or Loyalists). The American victory at King's Mountain gave the advantage to colonists who favored American independence, and it prevented the British Army from recruiting new soldiers from the Tories.\nThe road to Yorktown and America's independence from Great Britain led through North Carolina. As the British Army moved north from victories in Charleston and Camden, South Carolina, the Southern Division of the Continental Army and local militia prepared to meet them. Following General Daniel Morgan's victory over the British Cavalry Commander Banastre Tarleton at the Battle of Cowpens on January 17, 1781, southern commander Nathanael Greene led British Lord Charles Cornwallis across the heartland of North Carolina, and away from the latter's base of supply in Charleston, South Carolina. This campaign is known as \"The Race to the Dan\" or \"The Race for the River\".\nIn the Battle of Cowan's Ford, Cornwallis met resistance along the banks of the Catawba River at Cowan's Ford on February 1, 1781, in an attempt to engage General Morgan's forces during a tactical withdrawal. Morgan had moved to the northern part of the state to combine with General Greene's newly recruited forces. Generals Greene and Cornwallis finally met at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse in present-day Greensboro on March 15, 1781. Although the British troops held the field at the end of the battle, their casualties at the hands of the numerically superior Continental Army were crippling. Following this \"Pyrrhic victory\", Cornwallis chose to move to the Virginia coastline to get reinforcements, and to allow the Royal Navy to protect his battered army. This decision would result in Cornwallis' eventual defeat at Yorktown, Virginia, later in 1781. The Patriots' victory there guaranteed American independence. On November 21, 1789, North Carolina became the twelfth state to ratify the U.S. Constitution.\nAntebellum period.\nAfter 1800, cotton and tobacco became important export crops. The eastern half of the state, especially the Coastal Plain region, developed a slave society based on a plantation system and slave labor. Planters owning large estates wielded significant political and socio-economic power in antebellum North Carolina. They placed their interests above those of the generally non-slave-holding yeoman farmers of North Carolina. While slaveholding was slightly less concentrated compared to some other Southern states, according to the 1860 census, more than 330,000 people, or 33% of the population out of 992,622 people in total, were enslaved African Americans. They lived and worked chiefly on plantations in the Piedmont and Coastal Plain regions of the state. In addition, 30,463 free people of color lived in the state. They were also mainly concentrated in the eastern coastal plain, especially at port cities such as Wilmington and New Bern, where a variety of jobs were available. Most were descendants from free African Americans who had migrated along with neighbors from Virginia during the 18th century. The majority were the descendants of unions in the working classes between white women, indentured servants or free, and African men, indentured, slave or free.\nAfter the American Revolution, Quakers and Mennonites worked to persuade slaveholders to free their slaves. Some were inspired by their efforts and the language of the Revolution to arrange for manumission of their slaves. The number of free people of color rose markedly in the first couple of decades after the Revolution. Many free people of color migrated to the frontier, along with their European-American neighbors, where the social system was looser. By 1810, nearly three percent of the free population consisted of free people of color, who numbered slightly more than 10,000. The western areas of North Carolina were mainly white families of European descent, especially Scotch-Irish, who operated small subsistence farms. In the early national period, the state became a center of Jeffersonian and Jacksonian democracy, with a strong Whig presence, especially in the western part of the state. After Nat Turner's slave uprising in 1831, North Carolina and other southern states reduced the rights of free blacks. In 1835, the legislature withdrew their right to vote.\nIn mid-century, the state's rural and commercial areas were connected by the construction of a wooden plank road, known as a \"farmer's railroad\", from Fayetteville in the east to Bethania (northwest of Winston-Salem). On October 25, 1836, construction began on the Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad to connect the port city of Wilmington with the state capital of Raleigh. In 1840, the state capitol building in Raleigh was completed, and still stands today.\nIn 1849, the North Carolina Railroad was created by act of the legislature to extend that railroad west to Greensboro, High Point, and Charlotte. During the Civil War, the Wilmington-to-Raleigh stretch of the railroad was vital to the Confederate war effort; supplies shipped into Wilmington were moved by rail through Raleigh to the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia.\nAmerican Civil War.\nIn 1860, North Carolina was a slave state, in which one-third of the state's total population were African-American slaves. The state did not vote to join the Confederacy until President Abraham Lincoln called on it to invade its sister state, South Carolina, becoming the last or penultimate state to officially join the Confederacy. The title of \"last to join the Confederacy\" has been disputed; although Tennessee's informal secession on May 7, 1861, preceded North Carolina's official secession on May 20, the Tennessee legislature did not formally vote to secede until June 8, 1861.\nAround 125,000 troops from North Carolina served in the Confederate Army, and about 15,000 North Carolina troops (both black and white) served in Union Army regiments, including those who left the state to join Union regiments elsewhere. Over 30,000 North Carolina troops died from combat or disease during the war. Elected in 1862, Governor Zebulon Baird Vance tried to maintain state autonomy against Confederate President Jefferson Davis in Richmond. The state government was reluctant to support the demands of the national government in Richmond, and the state was the scene of only small battles. In 1865, Durham County saw the largest single surrender of Confederate soldiers at Bennett Place, when Joseph E. Johnston surrendered the Army of Tennessee and all remaining Confederate forces still active in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida, totalling 89,270 soldiers.\nConfederate troops from all parts of North Carolina served in virtually all the major battles of the Army of Northern Virginia, the Confederacy's most famous army. The largest battle fought in North Carolina was at Bentonville, which was a futile attempt by Confederate General Joseph Johnston to slow Union General William Tecumseh Sherman's advance through the Carolinas in the spring of 1865. In April 1865, after losing the Battle of Morrisville, Johnston surrendered to Sherman at Bennett Place, in what is today Durham. North Carolina's port city of Wilmington, was the last Confederate port to fall to the Union, in February 1865, after the Union won the nearby Second Battle of Fort Fisher, its major defense downriver.\nThe first Confederate soldier to be killed in the Civil War was Private Henry Wyatt from North Carolina, in the Battle of Big Bethel in June 1861. At the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, the 26th North Carolina Regiment participated in Pickett/Pettigrew's Charge and advanced the farthest into Union lines of any Confederate regiment. During the Battle of Chickamauga, the 58th North Carolina Regiment advanced farther than any other regiment on Snodgrass Hill to push back the remaining Union forces from the battlefield. At Appomattox Court House in Virginia in April 1865, the 75th North Carolina Regiment, a cavalry unit, fired the last shots of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia in the Civil War. The phrase \"First at Bethel, Farthest at Gettysburg and Chickamauga, and Last at Appomattox\", later became used through much of the early 20th century.\nAfter secession, some North Carolinians refused to support the Confederacy. Some of the yeoman farmers chiefly in the state's mountains and western Piedmont region remained neutral during the Civil War, with others covertly supporting the Union cause during the conflict. Approximately 15,000 North Carolinians (both black and white) from across the state enlisted in the Union Army. Numerous slaves also escaped to Union lines, where they became essentially free.\nReconstruction era through late 19th century.\nFollowing the collapse of the Confederacy in 1865, North Carolina, along with other former Confederate States (except Tennessee), was put under direct control by the U.S. military and was relieved of its constitutional government and representation within the United States Congress in what is now referred to as the Reconstruction era. To earn back its rights, the state had to make concessions to Washington, one of which was ratifying the Thirteenth Amendment. Congressional Republicans during Reconstruction, commonly referred to as \"radical Republicans\", constantly pushed for new constitutions for each of the Southern states that emphasized equal rights for African-Americans. In 1868, a constitutional convention restored the state government of North Carolina. Though the Fifteenth Amendment was also adopted that same year, it remained in most cases ineffective for almost a century, not to mention paramilitary groups and their lynching with impunity.\nThe elections in April 1868 following the constitutional convention led to a narrow victory for a Republican-dominated government, with 19 African-Americans holding positions in the North Carolina State Legislature. In attempt to put the reforms into effect, the new Republican Governor William W. Holden declared martial law on any county allegedly not complying with law and order using the passage of the Shoffner Act.\nA Republican Party coalition of black freedmen, northern carpetbaggers and local scalawags controlled state government for three years. The white conservative Democrats regained control of the state legislature in 1870, in part by Ku Klux Klan violence and terrorism at the polls, to suppress black voting. Republicans were elected to the governorship until 1876, when the Red Shirts, a paramilitary organization that arose in 1874 and was allied with the Democratic Party, helped suppress black voting. More than 150 black Americans were murdered in electoral violence in 1876.\nPost\u2013Civil War-debt cycles pushed people to switch from subsistence agriculture to commodity agriculture. Among this time the notorious Crop-Lien system developed and was financially difficult on landless whites and blacks, due to high amounts of usury. Also due to the push for commodity agriculture, the free range was ended. Prior to this time people fenced in their crops and had their livestock feeding on the free range areas. After the ending of the free range people now fenced their animals and had their crops in the open.\nDemocrats were elected to the legislature and governor's office, but the Populists attracted voters displeased with them. In 1896 a biracial, Populist-Republican Fusionist coalition gained the governor's office and passed laws that would extend the voting franchise to blacks and poor whites. The Democrats regained control of the legislature in 1896 and passed laws to impose Jim Crow and racial segregation of public facilities. Voters of North Carolina's 2nd congressional district elected a total of four African-American congressmen through these years of the late 19th century.\nPolitical tensions ran so high a small group of white Democrats in 1898 planned to take over the Wilmington government if their candidates were not elected. In the Wilmington Insurrection of 1898, white Democrats led around 2,000 of their supporters that attacked the black newspaper and neighborhood, killed an estimated 60 to 300 people, and ran off the white Republican mayor and aldermen. They installed their own people and elected Alfred M. Waddell as mayor, in the only successful coup d'\u00e9tat in United States history.\nIn 1899, the state legislature passed a new constitution, with requirements for poll taxes and literacy tests for voter registration which disenfranchised most black Americans in the state. Exclusion from voting had wide effects: it meant black Americans could not serve on juries or in any local office. After a decade of white supremacy, many people forgot North Carolina had ever had thriving middle-class black Americans. Black citizens had no political voice in the state until after the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 were passed to enforce their constitutional rights. It was not until 1992 that another African American was elected as a U.S. Representative from North Carolina.\nEarly through mid-20th century.\nAfter the reconstruction era, North Carolina had become a one-party state, dominated by the Democratic Party. The state mainly continued with an economy based on tobacco, cotton textiles and commodity agriculture. Large towns and cities remained in few numbers. However, a major industrial base emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century, in the counties of the Piedmont Triad, based on cotton mills established at the fall line. Railroads were built to connect the new industrializing cities.\nThe state was the site of the first successful controlled, powered and sustained heavier-than-air flight, by the Wright brothers, near Kitty Hawk on December 17, 1903.\nIn the first half of the 20th century, many African Americans left the state to go North for better opportunities, in the Great Migration. Their departure changed the demographic characteristics of many areas.\nNorth Carolina was hard hit by the Great Depression, but the New Deal programs of Franklin D. Roosevelt for cotton and tobacco significantly helped the farmers. After World War\u00a0II, the state's economy grew rapidly, highlighted by the growth of such cities as Charlotte, Raleigh, and Durham in the Piedmont region.\nResearch Triangle Park, established in 1959, serves as the largest research park in the United States. Formed near Raleigh, Durham, and Chapel Hill, the Research Triangle metro is a major area of universities and advanced scientific and technical research. By holding a 1956 meeting which helped lead to the creation of the park, Governor Luther H. Hodges launched the transformation of his state from one of the poorest in the Union to one of the most prosperous. In contrast, South Carolina's leaders lacked such vision, explaining why that state was and still is among the poorest in the country.\nThe Greensboro sit-ins in 1960 played a crucial role in the Civil Rights Movement to bring full equality to American blacks. By the late 1960s, spurred in part by the increasingly leftward tilt of national Democrats, conservative whites began to vote for Republican national candidates and gradually for more Republicans locally.\nLate 20th century to present.\nSince the 1970s, North Carolina has seen steady increases in population growth. This growth has largely occurred in metropolitan areas located within the Piedmont Crescent, in places such as Charlotte, Concord, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Durham and Raleigh. The Charlotte metropolitan area has experienced large growth mainly due to its finance, banking, and tech industries.\nBy the 1990s, Charlotte had become a major regional and national banking center. Towards Raleigh, North Carolina State, Duke University, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, have helped the Research Triangle area attract an educated workforce and develop more jobs.\nIn 1988, North Carolina gained its first professional sports franchise, the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). The hornets team name stems from the American Revolutionary War, when British General Cornwallis described Charlotte as a \"hornet's nest of rebellion\". The Carolina Panthers of the National Football League (NFL) became based in Charlotte as well, with their first season being in 1995. The Carolina Hurricanes of the National Hockey League (NHL) moved to Raleigh in 1997, with their colors being the same as the NC State Wolfpack, who are also located in Raleigh.\nBy the late 20th century and into the early 21st century, economic industries such as technology, pharmaceuticals, banking, food processing, vehicle parts, and tourism started to emerge as North Carolina's main economic drivers. This marked a shift from the state's former main industries of tobacco, textiles, and furniture. Factors that played a role in this shift were globalization, the state's higher education system, national banking, the transformation of agriculture, and new companies moving to the state.\nGeography.\nNorth Carolina is bordered by South Carolina on the south, Georgia on the southwest, Tennessee on the west, Virginia on the north, and the Atlantic Ocean on the east. The United States Census Bureau places North Carolina in the South Atlantic division of the southern region. It has a total area of , of which is land and (9.66%) is water.\nNorth Carolina consists of three main geographic regions: the Atlantic coastal plain, occupying the eastern portion of the state; the central Piedmont region, and the mountain region in the west, which is part of the Appalachian Mountains. The coastal plain consists of more specifically defined areas known as the Outer Banks, a string of sandy, narrow barrier islands separated from the mainland by sounds or inlets, including Albemarle Sound and Pamlico Sound, the native home of the venus flytrap, and the inner coastal plain, where longleaf pine trees are native.\nSo many ships have been lost off Cape Hatteras that the area is known as the \"Graveyard of the Atlantic\"; more than a thousand ships have sunk in these waters since records began in 1526. The most famous of these is the \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" (flagship of the pirate Blackbeard), which went aground in Beaufort Inlet in 1718.\nThe coastal plain transitions to the Piedmont region along the Atlantic Seaboard fall line, the elevation at which waterfalls first appear on streams and rivers. The Piedmont region of central North Carolina is the state's most populous region, containing the six largest cities in the state by population. It consists of gently rolling countryside frequently broken by hills or low mountain ridges. Small, isolated, and deeply eroded mountain ranges and peaks are located in the Piedmont, including the Sauratown Mountains, Pilot Mountain, the Uwharrie Mountains, Crowder's Mountain, King's Pinnacle, the Brushy Mountains, and the South Mountains. The Piedmont ranges from about in elevation in the east to about in the west.\nThe western section of the state is part of the Blue Ridge Mountains of the larger Appalachian Mountain range. Among the subranges of the Blue Ridge Mountains located in the state are the Great Smoky Mountains and the Black Mountains. The Black Mountains are the highest in the eastern United States, and culminate in Mount Mitchell at , the highest point east of the Mississippi River.\nNorth Carolina has 17 major river basins. The five basins west of the Blue Ridge Mountains flow to the Gulf of Mexico, while the remainder flow to the Atlantic Ocean. Of the 17 basins, 11 originate within the state of North Carolina, but only four are contained entirely within the state's border\u2014the Cape Fear, the Neuse, the White Oak, and the Tar\u2013Pamlico basin.\nClimate.\nElevation above sea level is most responsible for temperature change across the state, with the mountainous regions being coolest year-round. The climate is also influenced by the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf Stream, especially in the coastal plain. These influences tend to cause warmer winter temperatures along the coast, where temperatures only occasionally drop below the freezing point at night. The coastal plain averages around of snow or ice annually, and in many years, there may be no snow or ice at all.\nThe Atlantic Ocean exerts less influence on the climate of the Piedmont region, which has hotter summers and colder winters than along the coast, though winters are still mild.\nNorth Carolina experiences severe weather both in summer and in winter, with summer bringing threat of hurricanes, tropical storms, heavy rain, and flooding. Destructive hurricanes that have hit North Carolina include Hurricane Fran, Hurricane Florence, Hurricane Floyd, Hurricane Hugo, and Hurricane Hazel, the latter being the strongest storm ever to make landfall in the state, as a Category4 in 1954. Hurricane Helene ranks as the most destructive of the 21st century.\nNorth Carolina averages fewer than 20 tornadoes per year, many of them produced by hurricanes or tropical storms along the coastal plain. Tornadoes from thunderstorms are a risk, especially in the eastern part of the state. The western Piedmont is often protected by the mountains, which tend to break up storms as they cross over; the storms will often re-form farther east. A phenomenon known as \"cold-air damming\" often occurs in the northwestern part of the state, which can weaken storms but can also lead to major ice events in winter.\nIn April 2011, the worst tornado outbreak in North Carolina's history occurred. Thirty confirmed tornadoes touched down, mainly in the Eastern Piedmont and Sandhills, killing at least 24 people. In September 2019 Hurricane Dorian hit the area.\nParks and recreation.\nNorth Carolina provides a large range of recreational activities, from swimming at the beach to skiing in the mountains. North Carolina offers fall colors, freshwater and saltwater fishing, hunting, birdwatching, agritourism, ATV trails, ballooning, rock climbing, biking, hiking, skiing, boating and sailing, camping, canoeing, caving (spelunking), gardens, and arboretums. North Carolina has theme parks, aquariums, museums, historic sites, lighthouses, elegant theaters, concert halls, and fine dining.\nNorth Carolinians enjoy outdoor recreation using numerous local bike paths, 34 state parks, and 14 national parks. National Park Service units include the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, the Blue Ridge Parkway, Cape Hatteras National Seashore, Cape Lookout National Seashore, Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site at Flat Rock, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site at Manteo, Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Great Smoky Mountains Railroad, Guilford Courthouse National Military Park in Greensboro, Moores Creek National Battlefield near Currie in Pender County, the Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail, Old Salem National Historic Site in Winston-Salem, the Trail of Tears National Historic Trail, and Wright Brothers National Memorial in Kill Devil Hills.\nNational Forests include Uwharrie National Forest in central North Carolina, Croatan National Forest in Eastern North Carolina, Pisgah National Forest in the western mountains, and Nantahala National Forest in the southwestern part of the state.\nMajor cities.\nIn 2024, the U.S. Census Bureau released the 2023 population estimates for municipalities in North Carolina. Charlotte has the largest population, while Raleigh has the second-largest population in North Carolina.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMost populous counties.\nAfter the 2020 census, Wake County\u2014with a population of 1,129,410\u2014became the most populous county in the state, overtaking Mecklenburg County\u2014with a population of 1,115,482\u2014by a margin of about 14,000. Both counties are still the only to have populations over one million in North Carolina and the Carolinas region.\nStatistical areas.\nNorth Carolina has four major combined statistical areas (CSA) with a population over 1\u00a0million (as of 2023):\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe United States Census Bureau determined the population of North Carolina was 10,439,388 at the 2020 census. Based on numbers in 2012 of the people residing in North Carolina 58.5% were born there; 33.1% were born in another state; 1.0% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s); and 7.4% were foreign-born.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 9,382 homeless people in North Carolina.\nThe top countries of origin for North Carolina's immigrants were Mexico, India, Honduras, China and El Salvador, as of 2018[ [update]].\nRace and ethnicity.\nAt the 2010 census, the racial composition of North Carolina was: White: 68.5% (65.3% non-Hispanic white, 3.2% White Hispanic), Black or African American: 21.5%, Latin and Hispanic American of any race: 8.4%, some other race: 4.3%, Multiracial American: 2.2%, Asian American: 2.2%, and Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander: 1%. In 2020, North Carolina like much of the U.S. experienced a decline in its non-Hispanic white population; at the 2020 census, non-Hispanic whites were 62.2%, Blacks or African Americans 20.5%, American Indian and Alaska Natives 1.2%, Asians 3.3%, Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders 0.1%, people from other race 5.9%, and multiracial Americans 6.8%.\nThe majority of the Black American population is concentrated in the urban areas and northeastern part of the state.\nNorth Carolina's Hispanic population has grown rapidly. The Hispanic population more than doubled in size between 1990 and 2000. Many of North Carolina's Hispanic residents are of Mexican descent. Many of North Carolina's newer Latino residents came from Mexico largely to work in agriculture, manufacturing, or on one of North Carolina's military installations.\nThe most common ancestries in North Carolina are African-American, American, German, English, and Irish.\nNorth Carolina has the eighth-largest Native American population in the country. The state is home to eight Native American tribes and four urban Native American organizations.\nLanguages.\nNorth Carolina is home to a spectrum of different dialects of Southern American English and Appalachian English.\nIn 2010, 89.66% (7,750,904) of North Carolina residents age five and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 6.93% (598,756) spoke Spanish, 0.32% (27,310) French, 0.27% (23,204) German, and Chinese (which includes Mandarin) was spoken as a main language by 0.27% (23,072) of the population five and older. In total, 10.34% (893,735) of North Carolina's population age five and older spoke a mother language other than English. In 2019, 87.7% of the population aged 5 and older spoke English and 12.3% spoke another language. The most common non-English language was Spanish at the 2019 American Community Survey.\nReligion.\nNorth Carolina residents since the colonial era have historically been overwhelmingly Protestant\u2014first Anglican, then Baptist and Methodist. In 2010, the Southern Baptist Convention was the single largest Christian denomination, with 4,241 churches and 1,513,000 members. The second largest in 2024 was the Roman Catholic Church which is organised into two dioceses. In the west is the Roman Catholic Diocese of Charlotte which includes Charlotte and has 530,000 members in 196 parishes. In the east is the Diocese of Raleigh with a total of 80 parishes and nearly 500,000 Catholics. The third largest was the United Methodist Church, with 660,000 members and 1,923 churches. The fourth largest was the Presbyterian Church (USA), with 186,000 members and 710 congregations; this denomination was brought by Scots-Irish immigrants who settled the backcountry in the colonial era. In 2020, the Southern Baptists remained the largest with 1,324,747 adherents, though Methodists and others were collectively overtaken by non/interdenominational Protestants numbering 1,053,564.\nIn 1845, the Baptists split into regional associations of the Northern United States and Southern U.S., over the issue of slavery. These new associations were the Northern Baptist Convention (today the American Baptist Churches USA) and Southern Baptist Convention. By the late 19th century, the largest Protestant denomination in North Carolina were Baptists. After emancipation, black Baptists quickly set up their own independent congregations in North Carolina and other states of the South, as they wanted to be free of white supervision. Black Baptists developed their own state and national associations, such as the National Baptist Convention. Other primarily African American Baptist conventions which grew in the state since the 20th century were the Progressive National Baptist Convention and Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship.\nMethodists (the second largest group among North Carolinian Protestants) were divided along racial lines in the United Methodist Church and African Methodist Episcopal Church. The Methodist tradition tends to be strong in the northern Piedmont, especially in populous Guilford County. Other prominent Protestant groups in North Carolina as of the Pew Research Center's 2014 study were non/interdenominational Protestants and Pentecostalism. The Assemblies of God and Church of God in Christ are the largest Pentecostal denominations operating in the state, while notable minorities include Oneness Pentecostals primarily affiliated with the United Pentecostal Church International.\nThe state also has a special history with the Moravian Church, as settlers of this faith (largely of German origin) settled in the Winston-Salem area in the 18th and 19th centuries. Historically Scots-Irish have had a strong presence in Charlotte and in Scotland County.\nA wide variety of non-Christian faiths are practiced by other residents in the state, including: Judaism, Islam, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, Buddhism, and Hinduism. The rapid influx of Northerners and immigrants from Latin America is steadily increasing ethnic and religious diversity within the state. The number of Roman Catholics and Jews in the state has increased, along with general religious diversity as a whole. There are also a substantial number of Quakers in Guilford County and northeastern North Carolina. Many universities and colleges in the state have been founded on religious traditions, and some currently maintain that affiliation, including:\nThe state also has several major seminaries, including the Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary in Wake Forest, and the Hood Theological Seminary (AME Zion) in Salisbury.\nEconomy.\nNorth Carolina's 2018 total gross state product was $496 billion. Based on American Community Survey 2010\u20132014 data, North Carolina's median household income was $46,693. It ranked forty-first out of fifty states plus the District of Columbia for median household income. North Carolina had the fourteenth highest poverty rate in the nation at 17.6%, with 13% of families that were below the poverty line.\nThe state has a very diverse economy because of its great availability of hydroelectric power, its pleasant climate, and its wide variety of soils. The state ranks third among the South Atlantic states in population, but leads the region in industry and agriculture. North Carolina leads the nation in the production of tobacco.\nCharlotte, the state's largest city, is a major textile and trade center. According to a Forbes article written in 2013, employment in the \"Old North State\" has gained many different industry sectors. Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) industries in the area surrounding North Carolina's capital have grown 17.9 percent since 2001. Raleigh ranked the third best city for technology in 2020 due to the state's growing technology sector. In 2010, North Carolina's total gross state product was $424.9 billion, while the state debt in November 2012, according to one source, totaled $2.4 billion, while according to another, was in 2012 $57.8 billion. In 2011, the civilian labor force was at around 4.5 million with employment near 4.1 million.\nNorth Carolina is the leading U.S. state in production of flue-cured tobacco and sweet potatoes, and comes second in the farming of pigs and hogs, trout, and turkeys. In the three most recent USDA surveys (2002, 2007, 2012), North Carolina also ranked second in the production of Christmas trees.\nNorth Carolina has 15 metropolitan areas, and in 2010 was chosen as the third-best state for business by Forbes Magazine, and the second-best state by chief executive officer Magazine. Since 2000, there has been a clear division in the economic growth of North Carolina's urban and rural areas. While North Carolina's urban areas have enjoyed a prosperous economy with steady job growth, low unemployment, and rising wages, many of the state's rural counties have suffered from job loss, rising levels of poverty, and population loss as their manufacturing base has declined. According to one estimate, one-half of North Carolina's 100 counties have lost population since 2010, primarily due to the poor economy in many of North Carolina's rural areas. However, the population of the state's urban areas is steadily increasing.\nArts and culture.\nNorth Carolina has traditions in art, music, and cuisine. The nonprofit arts and culture industry generates $1.2billion in direct economic activity in North Carolina, supporting more than 43,600 full-time equivalent jobs and generating $119million in revenue for local governments and the state of North Carolina. North Carolina established the North Carolina Museum of Art as the first major museum collection in the country to be formed by state legislation and funding and continues to bring millions into the NC economy.\nOne of the more famous arts communities in the state is Seagrove, the handmade-pottery capital of the U.S., where artisans create handcrafted pottery inspired by the same traditions that began in this community more than two hundred years ago.\nInternet.\nMrBeast (Jimmy Donaldson), the most subscribed individual on YouTube since 2024, hails from Greenville.\nGood Mythical Morning co-hosts Rhett McLaughlin and Link Neal were raised in Buies Creek, a small community in Harnett County.\nMusic.\nNorth Carolina boasts a large number of noteworthy jazz musicians, some among the most important in the history of the genre. These include: John Coltrane, (Hamlet, High Point); Thelonious Monk (Rocky Mount); Billy Taylor (Greenville); Woody Shaw (Laurinburg); Lou Donaldson (Durham); Max Roach (Newland); Tal Farlow (Greensboro); Albert, Jimmy and Percy Heath (Wilmington); Nina Simone (Tryon); and Billy Strayhorn (Hillsborough).\nNorth Carolina is also famous for its tradition of old-time music, and many recordings were made in the early 20th century by folk-song collector Bascom Lamar Lunsford. Musicians such as the North Carolina Ramblers helped solidify the sound of country music in the late 1920s, while the influential bluegrass musician Doc Watson also hailed from North Carolina. Both North and South Carolina are hotbeds for traditional rural blues, especially the style known as the Piedmont blues.\nBen Folds Five originated in Winston-Salem, and Ben Folds still records and resides in Chapel Hill.\nThe British band Pink Floyd is named, in part, after Chapel Hill bluesman Floyd Council.\nThe Research Triangle area has long been a well-known center for folk, rock, metal, jazz and punk. James Taylor grew up around Chapel Hill, and his 1968 song \"Carolina in My Mind\" has been called an unofficial anthem for the state. Other famous musicians from North Carolina include J. Cole, DaBaby, 9th Wonder, Shirley Caesar, Roberta Flack, Clyde McPhatter, Nnenna Freelon, Link Wray, Warren Haynes, Jimmy Herring, Michael Houser, Eric Church, Future Islands, Randy Travis, Ryan Adams, Ronnie Milsap, Anthony Hamilton, The Avett Brothers, Charlie Daniels, and Luke Combs.\nMetal and punk acts such as Corrosion of Conformity, Between the Buried and Me, and Nightmare Sonata are native to North Carolina.\nEDM producer Porter Robinson hails from Chapel Hill.\nNorth Carolina is the home of more \"American Idol\" finalists than any other state: Clay Aiken (season two), Fantasia Barrino (season three), Chris Daughtry (season five), Kellie Pickler (season five), Bucky Covington (season five), Anoop Desai (season eight), Scotty McCreery (season ten), and Caleb Johnson (season thirteen). North Carolina also has the most \"American Idol\" winners with Barrino, McCreery, and Johnson.\nIn the mountains, the Brevard Music Center hosts choral, operatic, orchestral, and solo performances during its annual summer schedule.\nNorth Carolina has five professional opera companies: Opera Carolina in Charlotte, NC Opera in Raleigh, Greensboro Opera in Greensboro, Piedmont Opera in Winston-Salem, and Asheville Lyric Opera in Asheville. Academic conservatories and universities also produce fully staged operas, such as the A. J. Fletcher Opera Institute of the University of North Carolina School of the Arts in Winston-Salem, the Department of Music of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and UNC Greensboro.\nAmong others, there are three high-level symphonic orchestras: NC Symphony in Raleigh, Charlotte Symphony, and Winston-Salem Symphony. The NC Symphony holds the North Carolina Master Chorale. The Carolina Ballet is headquartered in Raleigh, and there is also the Charlotte Ballet.\nThe state boasts three performing arts centers: DPAC in Durham, Duke Energy Center for the Performing Arts in Raleigh, and the Blumenthal Performing Art Centers in Charlotte. They feature concerts, operas, recitals, and traveling Broadway musicals.\nShopping.\nNorth Carolina has a variety of shopping choices. SouthPark Mall in Charlotte is the largest and most upscale mall in the Carolinas, featuring multiple luxury tenants with their sole location in the state. Other major malls in Charlotte include Northlake Mall and Carolina Place Mall in nearby suburb Pineville. Other major malls throughout the state include Hanes Mall in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, The Thruway Center in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, Crabtree Valley Mall, North Hills Mall, and Triangle Town Center in Raleigh; Friendly Center and Four Seasons Town Centre in Greensboro; Oak Hollow Mall in High Point; Concord Mills in Concord; Valley Hills Mall in Hickory; Cross Creek Mall in Fayetteville; and The Streets at Southpoint in Durham and Independence Mall in Wilmington, North Carolina, and Tanger Outlets in Charlotte, Nags Head, Blowing Rock, and Mebane, North Carolina.\nCuisine and agriculture.\nA culinary staple of North Carolina is pork barbecue. There are strong regional differences and rivalries over the sauces and methods used in making the barbecue. The common trend across Western North Carolina is the use of premium grade Boston butt. Western North Carolina pork barbecue uses a tomato-based sauce, and only the pork shoulder (dark meat) is used. Western North Carolina barbecue is commonly referred to as Lexington barbecue after the Piedmont Triad town of Lexington, home of the Lexington Barbecue Festival, which attracts more than 100,000 visitors each October. Eastern North Carolina pork barbecue uses a vinegar-and-red-pepper-based sauce and the \"whole hog\" is cooked, thus integrating both white and dark meat.\nKrispy Kreme, an international chain of doughnut stores, was started in North Carolina; the company's headquarters are in Winston-Salem. Pepsi-Cola was first produced in 1898 in New Bern. A regional soft drink, Cheerwine, was created and is still based in the city of Salisbury. Despite its name, the hot sauce Texas Pete was created in North Carolina; its headquarters are also in Winston-Salem. The Hardee's fast-food chain was started in Rocky Mount. Another fast-food chain, Bojangles', was started in Charlotte, and has its corporate headquarters there. A popular North Carolina restaurant chain is Golden Corral. Started in 1973, the chain was founded in Fayetteville, with headquarters located in Raleigh. Popular pickle brand Mount Olive Pickle Company was founded in Mount Olive in 1926. Fast casual burger chain Hwy 55 Burgers, Shakes &amp; Fries also makes its home in Mount Olive. Cook Out, a popular fast-food chain featuring burgers, hot dogs, and milkshakes in a wide variety of flavors, was founded in Greensboro in 1989 and has begun expanding outside North Carolina. In 2013 \"Southern Living\" named Durham\u2013Chapel Hill the South's \"Tastiest City\".\nOver the last decade, North Carolina has become a cultural epicenter and haven for internationally prize-winning wine (Noni Bacca Winery), internationally prized cheeses (Ashe County), \"L'institut International aux Arts Gastronomiques: Conquerront Les Yanks les Truffes, January 15, 2010\" international hub for truffles (Garland Truffles), and beer making, as tobacco land has been converted to grape orchards while state laws regulating alcohol by volume (ABV) in beer allowed a jump from six to fifteen percent. The Yadkin Valley in particular has become a strengthening market for grape production, while Asheville recently won the recognition of being named \"Beer City USA\". Asheville boasts the largest number of breweries per capita of any city in the United States. Recognized and marketed brands of beer in North Carolina include Highland Brewing, Duck Rabbit Brewery, Mother Earth Brewery, Weeping Radish Brewery, Big Boss Brewing, Foothills Brewing, Carolina Brewing Company, Lonerider Brewing, and White Rabbit Brewing Company.\nNorth Carolina has large grazing areas for beef and dairy cattle. Truck farms can be found in North Carolina. A truck farm is a small farm where fruits and vegetables are grown to be sold at local markets. The state's shipping, commercial fishing, and lumber industries are important to its economy. Service industries, including education, health care, private research, and retail trade, are also important. Research Triangle Park, a large industrial complex located in the Raleigh-Durham area, is one of the major centers in the country for electronics and medical research.\nTobacco was one of the first major industries to develop after the Civil War. Many farmers grew some tobacco, and the invention of the cigarette made the product especially popular. Winston-Salem is the birthplace of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR), founded by R. J. Reynolds in 1874 as one of sixteen tobacco companies in the town. By 1914 it was selling 425 million packs of Camels a year. Today it is the second-largest tobacco company in the U.S. (behind Altria Group). RJR is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Reynolds American Inc., which in turn is 42% owned by British American Tobacco.\nShips named for the state.\nSeveral ships have been named after the state, most famously in the Pacific Ocean theater of World War\u00a0II. Now decommissioned, she is part of the USS \"North Carolina\" Battleship Memorial in Wilmington. Another , a nuclear attack submarine, was commissioned in Wilmington on May 3, 2008.\nState parks.\nThe state maintains a group of protected areas known as the North Carolina State Park System, which is managed by the North Carolina Division of Parks &amp; Recreation (NCDPR), an agency of the North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources (NCDNCR).\nArmed forces installations.\nFort Bragg, near Fayetteville and Southern Pines, is a large and comprehensive military base and is the headquarters of the XVIII Airborne Corps, 82nd Airborne Division, and the U.S. Army Special Operations Command. Serving as the air wing for Fort Bragg is Pope Field, also located near Fayetteville.\nLocated in Jacksonville, Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, combined with nearby bases Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Cherry Point, MCAS New River, Camp Geiger, Camp Johnson, Stone Bay and Courthouse Bay, makes up the largest concentration of Marines and sailors in the world. MCAS Cherry Point is home of the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing. Located in Goldsboro, Seymour Johnson Air Force Base is home of the 4th Fighter Wing and 916th Air Refueling Wing. One of the busiest air stations in the United States Coast Guard is located at the Coast Guard Air Station in Elizabeth City. Also stationed in North Carolina is the Military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point in Southport.\nOn January 24, 1961, a B-52G broke up in midair and crashed after suffering a severe fuel loss, near Goldsboro, dropping two nuclear bombs in the process without detonation. In 2013, it was revealed that three safety mechanisms on one bomb had failed, leaving just one low-voltage switch preventing detonation.\nTourism.\nCharlotte is the most-visited city in the state, attracting 28.3million visitors in 2018. Area attractions include Carolina Panthers NFL football team and Charlotte Hornets basketball team, Carowinds amusement park, Catawba Two Kings Casino (in nearby Kings Mountain), Charlotte Motor Speedway, U.S. National Whitewater Center, Discovery Place, Great Wolf Lodge, Sea Life Aquarium, Bechtler Museum of Modern Art, Billy Graham Library, Carolinas Aviation Museum, Harvey B. Gantt Center for African-American Arts + Culture, Levine Museum of the New South, McColl Center for Art + Innovation, Mint Museum, and the NASCAR Hall of Fame.\nEvery year the Appalachian Mountains attract several million tourists to the western part of the state, including the historic Biltmore Estate. The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway and Great Smoky Mountains National Park are the two most visited national park and unit in the United States with more than 25million visitors in 2013. The City of Asheville is consistently voted as one of the top places to visit and live in the United States, known for its rich art deco architecture, mountain scenery and outdoor activities.\nIn Raleigh, many tourists visit the capital, African American Cultural Complex, Contemporary Art Museum of Raleigh, Gregg Museum of Art &amp; Design at NCSU, Haywood Hall House &amp; Gardens, Marbles Kids Museum, North Carolina Museum of Art, North Carolina Museum of History, North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame, Raleigh City Museum, J. C. Raulston Arboretum, Joel Lane House, Mordecai House, Montfort Hall, and the Pope House Museum. The Carolina Hurricanes NHL hockey team is also located in the city.\nIn the Conover\u2013Hickory area, attractions include Hickory Motor Speedway, RockBarn Golf and Spa, home of the Greater Hickory Classic at Rock Barn; Catawba County Firefighters Museum, the SALT Block, and Valley Hills Mall.\nThe Piedmont Triad, or center of the state, is home to Krispy Kreme, Mayberry, Texas Pete, the Lexington Barbecue Festival, and Moravian cookies. The internationally acclaimed North Carolina Zoo in Asheboro attracts visitors to its animals, plants, and a 57-piece art collection along of shaded pathways in the world's largest-land-area natural-habitat park. Seagrove, in the central portion of the state, attracts many tourists along Pottery Highway (NC Hwy 705). MerleFest in Wilkesboro attracts more than 80,000 people to its four-day music festival; and Wet 'n Wild Emerald Pointe water park in Greensboro is another attraction.\nThe Outer Banks and surrounding beaches attract millions of people to the Atlantic beaches every year.\nThe mainland northeastern part of the state, having recently adopted the name the Inner Banks, is also known as the Albemarle Region, for the Albemarle Settlements, some of the first settlements on North Carolina's portion of the Atlantic Coastal Plain. The region's historic sites are connected by the Historic Albemarle Tour.\nTransportation.\nTransportation systems in North Carolina consist of air, water, road, rail, and public transportation including intercity rail via Amtrak and light rail in Charlotte. North Carolina has the second-largest state highway system in the country as well as the largest ferry system on the East Coast.\nNorth Carolina's airports serve destinations throughout the United States and international destinations in Canada, Europe, Central America, and the Caribbean. In July 2022, Charlotte Douglas International Airport, which serves as the second busiest hub for American Airlines, ranked as the 11th busiest airport in the United States with Raleigh-Durham International Airport, a focus-city for Delta Air Lines and formerly a hub for American Airlines and Midway Airlines, ranked as the 37th busiest airport in the United States.\nNorth Carolina has a growing passenger rail system with Amtrak serving most major cities. Charlotte is also home to North Carolina's only light rail system known as LYNX.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nElementary and secondary public schools are overseen by the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. The North Carolina Superintendent of Public Instruction is the secretary of the North Carolina State Board of Education, but the board, rather than the superintendent, holds most of the legal authority for making public education policy. In 2009, the board's chairman also became the \"chief executive officer\" for the state's school system. North Carolina has 115 public school systems, each of which is overseen by a local school board. A county may have one or more systems within it. The largest school systems in North Carolina are the Wake County Public School System, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, Guilford County Schools, Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools, and Cumberland County Schools. In total there are 2,425 public schools in the state, including over 200 charter schools. North Carolina Schools were segregated until the \"Brown v. Board of Education\" trial and the release of the Pearsall Plan.\nPreviously the SAT was the dominant university entrance examination students took[Vague?]. In 2004 76% of NC high school students took the SAT. In 2012 state law changed which required 11th grade students to take the ACT. The SAT testing rate fell to 46% in 2019. Because students now can take that test for free, the ACT became the dominant university entrance examination. This also caused SAT average scores to rise, as in 1996 North Carolina was 48th nationally in SAT scores, but the profile of students taking the SAT has gotten smaller. In 2024, North Carolina's high school graduation rate was 87%, though just 36% of students met the state's benchmarks for \"college and career readiness.\"\nColleges and universities.\nIn 1795, North Carolina opened the first public university in the United States\u2014the University of North Carolina (now named the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill). More than 200 years later, the University of North Carolina System encompasses 16 public universities, which are Appalachian State University, East Carolina University, Elizabeth City State University, Fayetteville State University, North Carolina A&amp;T State University, North Carolina Central University, North Carolina State University, the University of North Carolina at Asheville, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, the University of North Carolina at Pembroke, the University of North Carolina School of the Arts, the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, Western Carolina University, and Winston-Salem State University, and one public, boarding high school, the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics. Along with its public universities, North Carolina has 58 public community colleges in its community college system. The largest university in North Carolina is currently North Carolina State University, with more than 34,000 students.\nNorth Carolina is also home to many well-known private colleges and universities, including Barton College, Belmont Abbey College (the only Catholic college in the Carolinas), Campbell University, Davidson College, Duke University, Elon University, Guilford College, High Point University, Laurel University, Lees-McRae College, Lenoir-Rhyne University (the only Lutheran university in North Carolina), Livingstone College, Meredith College, Methodist University, Montreat College, North Carolina Wesleyan University, Pfeiffer University, Salem College, Shaw University (the first historically black college or university in the South), University of Mount Olive, Wake Forest University, William Peace University, and Wingate University.\nNorth Carolina is also home to the oldest and largest folk school in the United States, the John C. Campbell Folk School.\nHealth.\nThe residents of North Carolina have a lower life expectancy than the U.S. national average of life expectancy. According to the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, in 2014, males in North Carolina lived an average of 75.4 years compared to the national average of 76.7 years. Females in North Carolina lived an average of 80.2 years compared to the national average of 81.5 years. Male life expectancy in North Carolina between 1980 and 2014 increased by an average of 6.9 years, slightly higher than the male national average of a 6.7-year increase. Life expectancy for females in North Carolina between 1980 and 2014 increased by 3.2 years, lower than the female national average of a 3.9-year increase.\nUsing 2017\u20132019 data, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation calculated that life expectancy for North Carolina counties ranged from 71.4 years for Swain County to 82.3 years for Orange County. Life expectancy for the state was 78.1 years. The Foundation estimated that life expectancy for the United States as a whole in 2021 was 79.2 years.\nMedia.\nEarly newspapers were established in the eastern part of North Carolina in the mid-18th century. The Fayetteville Observer, established in 1816, is the oldest newspaper still in publication in North Carolina. The Wilmington Star-News, established 1867, is the oldest continuously running newspaper. As of January 1, 2020, there were approximately 240 North Carolina newspapers in publication in the state of North Carolina.\nThe News and Observer was founded in 1871 and is the largest in circulation in the state. In 2006, The Charlotte Observer was acquired by the company, it is the second largest circulating news paper in the state.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe government of North Carolina is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. These consist of the Council of State (led by the Governor), the bicameral legislature (called the General Assembly), and the state court system (headed by the North Carolina Supreme Court). The state constitution delineates the structure and function of the state government. Most municipalities in North Carolina operate under council\u2013manager governments.\nNorth Carolina's party loyalties have undergone a series of important shifts in the last few years: While the 2010 midterms saw Tarheel voters elect a bicameral Republican majority legislature for the first time in more than a century, North Carolina has also become a Southern swing state in presidential races. Since Southern Democrat Jimmy Carter's comfortable victory in the state in 1976, the state had consistently leaned Republican in presidential elections until Democrat Barack Obama narrowly won the state in 2008. In the 1990s, Democrat Bill Clinton came within a point of winning the state in 1992 and also only narrowly lost the state in 1996. In 2000, Republican George W. Bush easily won the state by more than 13 points.\nBy 2008, demographic shifts, population growth, and increased liberalization in densely populated areas such as the Research Triangle, Charlotte, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Fayetteville, and Asheville, propelled Barack Obama to victory in North Carolina, the first Democrat to win the state since 1976. In 2012, North Carolina was again considered a competitive swing state, with the Democrats even holding their 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte. However, Republican Mitt Romney ultimately eked out a two-point win in North Carolina, the only 2012 swing state Obama lost, and one of only two states (along with Indiana) to flip from Obama in 2008 to the GOP in 2012. Furthermore, Republican Donald Trump carried the state in 2016, 2020, and 2024.\nIn 2012, the state elected a Republican governor (Pat McCrory) and lieutenant governor (Dan Forest) for the first time in more than two decades, while also giving the Republicans veto-proof majorities in both the State House of Representatives and the State Senate. Several U.S. House of Representatives seats flipped control in 2012, with the Republicans holding nine seats to the Democrats' four. In the 2014 midterm elections, Republican David Rouzer won the state's 7th congressional district seat, increasing the congressional delegation party split to 10\u20133 in favor of the GOP, a split they retained in subsequent elections until 2020, when it narrowed to 8\u20135 in favor of the GOP. In 2016, despite Donald Trump winning the state, North Carolina voters elected Democrat Roy Cooper as governor, in part due to an unpopular law passed by former governor Pat McCrory known as HB2. Cooper went on to win re-election in 2020, despite Donald Trump narrowly winning the state again against Joe Biden.\nAs a result of the 2020 census, North Carolina gained another seat in the 118th United States Congress, for a total of 14. After the 2024 elections, the state was represented by 10 Republicans and 4 Democrats.\nIn a 2020 study, North Carolina was ranked as the 23rd easiest state for citizens to vote in.\nGerrymandering.\nThe state has been sued for racially gerrymandering the districts, which resulted in minority voting power being diluted in some areas, resulting in skewed representation. In 2000, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina ruled that the 12th congressional district was an illegal racial gerrymander. This was again appealed, now as \"Easley v. Cromartie\". The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Eastern District of North Carolina in 2001 and ruled that the 12th district boundaries were not racially based but was a partisan gerrymander. They said this was a political question that the courts should not rule upon.\nIn 2015, federal courts again ordered redistricting. Two lawsuits challenging the state congressional district map were led by \"two dozen voters, the state Democratic Party, the state chapter of the League of Women Voters, and the interest group Common Cause\". They contend that the redistricting resulted in deliberate under-representation of a substantial portion of voters. This case reached the U.S. Supreme Court in March 2019, which also heard a related partisan gerrymandering case from Maryland.\nOn February 4, 2022, the North Carolina Supreme Court struck down the congressional and state legislative district maps drawn by the GOP-controlled General Assembly on terms of partisan gerrymandering in a 4\u20133 ruling. Later that month, a panel of three former judges chosen by the Wake County Superior Court drew and approved a remedial congressional map after the new map proposed by the General Assembly was struck down by the North Carolina Supreme Court. Though, the state legislative maps proposed by the General Assembly were allowed to be used. The General Assembly would then redraw all three maps for the 2024 elections in the state.\nOn April 28, 2023, the North Carolina Supreme Court\u2014after Republicans gained a majority in the court following the 2022 judicial elections\u2014overturned the same ruling in a 5\u20132 decision, which cleared the way for gerrymandering in the next redistricting cycle. New maps were approved by the General Assembly on October 25, 2023. All three new maps heavily favor the GOP, with allegations of racial bias made against the maps as well.\nIn November 2023, a lawsuit was filed against the North Carolina Senate district map\u2014specifically the 1st and 2nd Senate districts\u2014in the Eastern District of North Carolina, arguing the map violates Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In December 2023, two lawsuits were filed in the Middle District of North Carolina, with the first challenging the 1st, 6th, 12th, and 14th congressional districts in the map, and the second, challenging multiple specific districts in all three maps, as racial gerrymanders. Both lawsuits were consolidated together in March 2024.\nOn January 26, 2024\u2014regarding the lawsuit currently in the Eastern District of North Carolina\u2014a preliminary injunction to block the current North Carolina Senate district map was denied, citing the \"Purcell\" principle. The ruling was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which upheld the lower court's decision on March 28, 2024. The lawsuit will continue in the district court, but no ruling will be made until after the 2024 elections.\nSports.\nNorth Carolina is home to four major league sports franchises: the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League, the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association, and Charlotte FC of Major League Soccer are based in Charlotte, while the Raleigh-based Carolina Hurricanes play in the National Hockey League. The Panthers and Hurricanes are the only two major professional sports teams that have the same geographical designation while playing in different metropolitan areas. The Hurricanes are the only major professional team from North Carolina to have won a league championship, having captured the Stanley Cup in 2006. North Carolina is also home to two other top-level professional teams\u2014the Charlotte Hounds of Major League Lacrosse and the North Carolina Courage of the National Women's Soccer League.\nWhile North Carolina has no Major League Baseball team, it does have numerous Minor League Baseball teams, with the highest level of play coming from the Triple-A Charlotte Knights and Durham Bulls. Additionally, North Carolina has minor league teams in other team sports including soccer and ice hockey, most notably North Carolina FC and the Charlotte Checkers, both of which play in the second tier of their respective sports.\nIn addition to professional team sports, North Carolina has a strong affiliation with NASCAR and stock-car racing, with Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord hosting races every year. Charlotte also hosts the NASCAR Hall of Fame, while Concord is the home of several top-flight racing teams, including Hendrick Motorsports, RFK Racing, and Haas Factory Team. Numerous other tracks around North Carolina host races from other racing circuits as well.\nGolf is a popular summertime leisure activity, and North Carolina has hosted several important professional golf tournaments. Pinehurst Resort in Pinehurst has hosted a PGA Championship, Ryder Cup, two U.S. Opens, and one U.S. Women's Open. The Wells Fargo Championship is a regular stop on the PGA Tour and is held at Quail Hollow Club in Charlotte, and Quail Hollow has also played host to the PGA Championship. The Wyndham Championship is played annually in Greensboro at Sedgefield Country Club.\nCollege sports are also popular in North Carolina, with 18 schools competing at the Division I level. The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) is headquartered in Greensboro, and both the ACC Football Championship Game (Charlotte) and the ACC men's basketball tournament (Greensboro) were most recently held in North Carolina. Additionally, the city of Charlotte is home to the National Junior College Athletics Association's (NJCAA) headquarters. College basketball is very popular in North Carolina, buoyed by the Tobacco Road rivalries between ACC members North Carolina, Duke, North Carolina State, and Wake Forest. The ACC Championship Game and the Duke's Mayo Bowl are held annually in Charlotte's Bank of America Stadium, featuring teams from the ACC and the Southeastern Conference. Additionally, the state has hosted the NCAA Men's Basketball Final Four on two occasions, in Greensboro in 1974 and in Charlotte in 1994.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21651", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21651", "title": "North Dakota", "text": "U.S. state\nNorth Dakota ( ) is a U.S. state in the Upper Midwest, named after the indigenous Dakota and Sioux peoples. It is bordered by the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba to the north and by the U.S. states of Minnesota to the east, South Dakota to the south, and Montana to the west. North Dakota is part of the Great Plains region, characterized by broad prairies, steppe, temperate savanna, badlands, and farmland. North Dakota is the 19th-largest state by area, but with a population of just under 800,000, the fourth-least populous and fourth-least densely populated. The state capital is Bismarck and the most populous city is Fargo, which accounts for nearly a fifth of the state's population; both cities are among the fastest-growing in the U.S., although half of North Dakotans live in rural areas.\nWhat is now North Dakota was inhabited for thousands of years by various Native American tribes, including the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara along the Missouri River; the Ojibwe and Cree in the northeast; and several Sioux groups (the Nakota, Dakota, and Lakota) in the rest of the state. European explorers and traders first arrived in the early 18th century, mostly in pursuit of furs.\nThe United States acquired the region in the early 19th century, gradually settling it amid growing resistance by increasingly displaced natives. The Dakota Territory, established in 1861, became central to American pioneers, with the Homestead Act of 1862 precipitating significant population growth and development. The traditional fur trade declined in favor of farming, particularly of wheat. The Dakota Boom of 1878 to 1886 saw giant farms stretched across the rolling prairies, with the territory becoming a regional economic power. The Northern Pacific and Great Northern railway companies competed for access to lucrative grain centers; farmers banded together in political and socioeconomic alliances that were central to the Midwest's broader Populist Movement. North and South Dakota were admitted to the Union on November 2, 1889, as the 39th and 40th states. President Benjamin Harrison shuffled the statehood papers before signing them so that no one could tell which became a state first; consequently, the two states are officially numbered in alphabetical order. Statehood marked the gradual winding-down of the pioneer period, with the state fully settled by around 1920. Subsequent decades saw a rise in radical agrarian movements and economic cooperatives, of which one legacy is the Bank of North Dakota, the nation's only state-run bank.\nBeginning in the mid-20th century, North Dakota's rich natural resources became more critical to economic development; into the 21st century, oil extraction from the Bakken formation in the northwest has played a major role in the state's prosperity. Such development has led to population growth (along with high birth rates) and reduced unemployment. It is believed to contain North America's geographic center, in Rugby, and is home to what was once the tallest artificial structure in the Western Hemisphere, the KVLY-TV mast.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial history.\nNative American people lived in what is now North Dakota for thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans. The known tribes included the Mandan people (from around the 11th century), while the first Hidatsa group arrived a few hundred years later. They both assembled in villages on tributaries of the Missouri River in what would become west-central North Dakota. Crow Indians traveled the plains from the west to visit and trade with the related Hidatsas after the split between them, probably in the 17th century.\nLater came divisions of the Sioux: the Lakota, the Santee and the Yanktonai. The Assiniboine and the Plains Cree undertook southward journeys to the village Indians, either for trade or for war. The Shoshone Indians in present-day Wyoming and Montana may have carried out attacks on Indian enemies as far east as the Missouri. A group of Cheyennes lived in a village of earth lodges at the lower Sheyenne River (Biesterfeldt Site) for decades in the 18th century.\nDue to attacks by Crees, Assiniboines and Chippewas armed with firearms, they left the area around 1780 and crossed Missouri some time after. A band of the few Sotaio Indians lived east of Missouri River and met the uprooted Cheyennes before the end of the century. They soon followed the Cheyennes across Missouri and lived among them south of Cannonball River.\nEventually, the Cheyenne and the Sutaio became one tribe and turned into mounted buffalo hunters with ranges mainly outside North Dakota. Before the middle of the 19th century, the Arikara entered the future state from the south and joined the Mandan and Hidatsa. With time, a number of Indians entered into treaties with the United States. Many of the treaties defined the territory of a specific tribe.\nEuropean exploration and colonization.\nThe first European to reach the area was the French-Canadian trader Pierre Gaultier, sieur de La V\u00e9rendrye, who led an exploration and trading party to the Mandan villages in 1738 guided by Assiniboine Indians.\nFrom 1762 to 1800, the region formed part of Spanish Louisiana, part of New Spain, administered from Mexico City.\nOn 1 October 1800, the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso was signed, and the territory of Spanish Louisiana was transferred to France as part of French Louisiana, which was later sold to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase.\nThe northeastern portion of the state, corresponding to the Red River Valley and the drainage basin to the Hudson Bay was, at the time, part of Rupert's Land, a British North American territory. It remained under control of the Hudson's Bay Company until the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, which set the border between it and the United States to the 49th parallel.\nSettlement and statehood.\nEuropean Americans settled in Dakota Territory only sparsely until the late 19th century, when railroads opened up the region. With the advantage of grants of land, they vigorously marketed their properties, extolling the region as ideal for agriculture.\nDifferences between the northern and southern part caused resentments between the settlers. The northern part was seen by the more populated southern part as somewhat disreputable, \"too much controlled by the wild folks, cattle ranchers, fur traders\" and too frequently the site of conflict with the indigenous population. The northern part was generally content with remaining a territory. However, following the territorial capital being moved from Yankton in the southern part to Bismarck, the southern part began to call for division. Finally, at the 1887 territorial election, the voters approved splitting the territory into two. The division was done by the seventh standard parallel. Other account(s) state that the real reason for the split was a political lure for four Republican senators instead of two from the Republican dominated Dakota Territory and in their push to split the territory, Republican congressmen also ignored the uncomfortable fact that much of the land in the anticipated state of South Dakota belonged to the Sioux.\nCongress passed an omnibus bill for statehood for North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Washington, titled the Enabling Act of 1889, on February 22, 1889, during the administration of President Grover Cleveland. His successor, Benjamin Harrison, signed the proclamations formally admitting North Dakota and South Dakota to the Union on November 2, 1889.\nThere was a rivalry between the two new states over which one would be admitted first. So Harrison directed Secretary of State James G. Blaine to shuffle the papers and obscure from him which he was signing first to keep both the states happy and to avoid showing favor to either state. The actual order went unrecorded, thus no one knows which of the Dakotas was admitted first. However, since \"North Dakota\" alphabetically appears before \"South Dakota\", its proclamation was published first in the Statutes At Large.\n20th century.\nUnrest among wheat farmers, especially among Norwegian immigrants, led to a populist political movement centered in the Non Partisan League (\"NPL\") around the time of World War I. The NPL ran candidates on the Republican ticket (but merged into the Democratic Party after World War II). It tried to insulate North Dakota from the power of out-of-state banks and corporations.\nIn addition to founding the state-owned Bank of North Dakota and North Dakota Mill and Elevator (both still in existence), the NPL established a state-owned railroad line (later sold to the Soo Line Railroad). Anti-corporate laws virtually prohibited a corporation or bank from owning title to land zoned as farmland. These laws, still in force today, after having been upheld by state and federal courts, make it almost impossible to foreclose on farmland, as even after foreclosure, the property title cannot be held by a bank or mortgage company. Furthermore, the Bank of North Dakota, having powers similar to a Federal Reserve branch bank, exercised its power to limit the issuance of subprime mortgages and their collateralization in the form of derivative instruments, and so prevented a collapse of housing prices within the state in the wake of 2008's financial crisis.\nThe original North Dakota State Capitol in Bismarck burned to the ground on December 28, 1930. It was replaced by a limestone-faced art-deco skyscraper that still stands today. A round of federal investment and construction projects began in the 1950s, including the Garrison Dam and the Minot and Grand Forks Air Force bases.\nWestern North Dakota saw a boom in oil exploration in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as rising petroleum prices made development profitable. This boom came to an end after petroleum prices declined.\n21st century.\nIn 2010, the state had lower rates of unemployment than the national average, and increased job and population growth. Much of the growth has been based on development of the Bakken oil fields in the western part of the state. Estimates as to the remaining amount of oil in the area vary, with some estimating over 100 years' worth.\nFor decades, North Dakota's annual murder and violent crime rates were regularly the lowest in the United States. In recent years, however, while still below the national average, crime has risen sharply. In 2016, the violent crime rate was three times higher than in 2004, with the rise occurring mostly in the late 2000s, coinciding with the oil boom era. This happened at a time when the national violent crime rate declined slightly. Workers in the oil boom towns have been blamed for much of the increase.\nGeography.\nNorth Dakota is located in the Upper Midwest region of the United States. It lies at the center of the North American continent and borders Canada to the north. The geographic center of North America is near the town of Rugby. Bismarck is the capital of North Dakota, and Fargo is the most populous city.\nNorth Dakota is in the U.S. region known as the Great Plains. The state shares the Red River of the North with Minnesota to the east. South Dakota is to the south, Montana is to the west, and the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba are to the north. North Dakota is near the middle of North America with a stone marker in Rugby, North Dakota marking the \"Geographic Center of the North American Continent\". With an area of , of which is land, North Dakota is the 19th largest state.\nThe western half of the state consists of the hilly Great Plains as well as the northern part of the Badlands, which are to the west of the Missouri River. The state's high point, White Butte at , and Theodore Roosevelt National Park are in the Badlands. The region is abundant in fossil fuels including natural gas, crude oil and lignite coal. \nThe Missouri River forms Lake Sakakawea, the third largest artificial lake in the United States, behind the Garrison Dam.\nThe central region of N.D. is divided into the Drift Prairie and the Missouri Plateau. The eastern part of N.D. consists of the flat Red River Valley, the bottom of glacial Lake Agassiz. Its fertile soil, drained by the meandering Red River flowing northward into Lake Winnipeg, supports a large agriculture industry. Devils Lake, the largest natural lake in the state, is also found in the east.\nMost of N.D. is covered in grassland; crops cover most of eastern North Dakota but become increasingly sparse in the center and farther west. Natural trees in North Dakota are found usually where there is good drainage, such as the ravines and valley near the Pembina Gorge and Killdeer Mountains, the Turtle Mountains, the hills around Devils Lake, in the dunes area of McHenry County in central North Dakota, and along the Sheyenne Valley slopes and the Sheyenne delta. This diverse terrain supports nearly 2,000 species of plants.\nSoil is North Dakota's most precious resource. It is the base of the state's great agricultural wealth. North Dakota also has enormous mineral resources. These mineral resources include billions of tons of lignite coal. In addition, North Dakota has large oil reserves. Petroleum was discovered in the state in 1951 and quickly became one of North Dakota's most valuable mineral resources. In the early 2000s, the emergence of hydraulic fracturing technologies enabled mining companies to extract huge amounts of oil from the Bakken shale rock formation in the western part of the state.\nNorth Dakota public lands\n5 national parks, 5 state forests, 63 national wildlife refuges, 3 national grassland, and 13 state parks plus there are state trust land, bureau of land management, waterfowl production areas, bureau of reclamation, bureau of land management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, state wildlife management areas\nNorth Dakota wildlife\nCurrently there are 36 Level I species, 44 Level II species, and 35 Level III species.\nList of birds of North Dakota The basic NDGFD list contains 420 confirmed and extant species, two extinct species. Three additional species have been added from the North Dakota Bird Records Committee (NDBRC) review list with some additions from Avibase. The combined lists contain 420 species. Of them, 194 and a subspecies are on the review list (see below). The NDGFD list considers 44 species to be accidental, and eight species have been introduced to North America.\nList of mammals of North Dakota 87 species are known to live in the state. This includes mammals that are currently extirpated or locally extinct in North Dakota such as the gray wolf, swift fox, caribou and grizzly bear.\nhttps:// 1,126 Species known in North Dakota\nhttps:// 98 Species are currently known in North Dakota\nhttps:// \n16 Species of Reptiles and 12 Amphibians have been found in the state.\nhttps://\n Three species of crawfish are found in North Dakota: Devil, Calico, and Virile\nNorth Dakota is home to three freshwater shrimp species (gammarus, hyalella and mysis). The latter is an introduced species stocked in Lake Sakakawea in the early 1970s to add to the forage base.\n Cvancara's \"Aquatic Mussels of North Dakota\" from 1983. He documented 13 species of what are generally referred to as clams in the state along with 13 species of pill clams, which are very small clams, in the order of a few millimeters in length. He also documented 22 species of snails in N.D.\nClimate.\nNorth Dakota has a continental climate with warm summers and cold winters. The temperature differences are significant because of its far inland position and being roughly equal distance from the North Pole and the Equator.\nOn February 21, 1918, Granville, North Dakota experienced a record-breaking 83\u00a0\u00b0F temperature increase over a 12-hour period, from a low of -33\u00a0\u00b0F to a high of 50\u00a0\u00b0F. \nAnother weather record set in Langdon in the winter of 1935\u201336, with the temperature staying below 0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221217.8\u00a0\u00b0C) for 41 consecutive days, January 11 though February 20. This is a record for any location in the contiguous United States.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nAt the 2023 estimate North Dakota's population was 783,926 on July 1, 2023, a 0.62% increase since the 2020 United States census. North Dakota is the fourth least-populous state in the country; only Alaska, Vermont, and Wyoming have fewer residents.\nFrom fewer than 2,000 people in 1870, North Dakota's population grew to near 680,000 by 1930. Growth then slowed, and the population fluctuated slightly over the next seven decades, hitting a low of 617,761 in the 1970 census, with 642,200 in the 2000 census. In the 21st Century North Dakota has experienced significant growth reaching a record population of 783,926 in 2023. Except for Native Americans, the North Dakota population has a lesser percentage of minorities than in the nation as a whole. As of 2011, 20.7% of North Dakota's population younger than age1 were minorities. The center of population of North Dakota is in Wells County, near Sykeston.\nAccording to HUD's 2023 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 784 homeless people in North Dakota.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRace and ethnicity.\n\"Note: Births in table don't add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number\".\n\"Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one Hispanic group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.\"\nFrom the 1930s until the end of the 20th century, North Dakota's population gradually declined, interrupted by a couple of brief increases. Young adults with university degrees were particularly likely to leave the state. With the advancing process of mechanization of agricultural practices, and environmental conditions requiring larger landholdings for successful agriculture, subsistence farming proved to be too risky for families. Many people moved to urban areas for jobs.\nSince the late 20th century, one of the major causes of migration from North Dakota is the lack of skilled jobs for college graduates. Expansion of economic development programs has been urged to create skilled and high-tech jobs, but the effectiveness of such programs has been open to debate. During the first decade of the 21st century, the population increased in large part because of jobs in the oil industry related to development of unconventional tight oil (shale oil) fields. Elsewhere, the Native American population has increased as some reservations have attracted people back from urban areas.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the racial and ethnic composition of North Dakota was 88.7% non-Hispanic white, 5.4% Native American, 1.2% Black or African American, 1.0% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.5% some other race, and 0.2% from two or more races. At the 2019 American Community Survey, North Dakota's racial and ethnic makeup was 83.6% non-Hispanic white, 2.9% Black or African American, 5.0% Native American and Alaska Native, 1.4% Asian, 0.4% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, 0.1% some other race, 2.7% multiracial, and 4.0% Hispanic or Latin American of any race.\nNorth Dakota is one of the top resettlement locations for refugees proportionally. According to the U.S. Office of Refugee Resettlement, in 2013\u20132014 \"more than 68 refugees\" per 100,000 North Dakotans were settled in the state. In fiscal year 2014, 582 refugees settled in the state. Fargo Mayor Mahoney said North Dakota accepting the most refugees per capita should be celebrated given the benefits they bring to the state. In 2015, Lutheran Social Services of North Dakota, the state's only resettlement agency, was \"awarded $458,090 in federal funding to improve refugee services\". 29.8% of immigrants in North Dakota are from Africa leading to a rapid increase in the black proportion of the population in recent decades from 0.6% in 2000 to 3.9% in 2020.\nImmigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 3,323 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 21,110 people. Of the residents of North Dakota in 2009, 69.8% were born in North Dakota, 27.2% were born in a different state, 0.6% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 2.4% were born in another country. The age and gender distributions approximate the national average. In 2019, 4.1% were foreign-born residents. The Philippines, Bhutan, Nepal, Canada and Liberia are the top countries of origin for North Dakota's immigrants.\nNative American tribes.\nThe five federally recognized tribes in North Dakota are Mandan, Hidatsa, &amp; Arikara Nation (Three Affiliated Tribes), the Spirit Lake Nation, the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate Nation.\nLanguages.\nIn 2010, 94.86% (584,496) of North Dakotans over 5 years old spoke English as their primary language. 5.14% (31,684) of North Dakotans spoke a language other than English. 1.39% (8,593) spoke German, 1.37% (8,432) spoke Spanish, and 0.30% (1,847) spoke Norwegian. Other languages spoken included Serbo-Croatian (0.19%), Chinese and Japanese (both 0.15%), and Native American languages and French (both 0.13%). In 2000, 2.5% of the population spoke German in addition to English, reflecting early 20th century immigration.\nIn 1940, (355,400) of North Dakotans spoke English, (128,700) spoke German, (81,300) spoke Norwegian, (12,600) spoke Swedish, and (54,640) spoke some other language.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Pew Research Center determined 77% of the adult population was Christian in 2014. In contrast with many southern U.S. states, mainline Protestantism was the largest form of Protestantism practiced (28%). The largest mainline Protestant denomination in North Dakota was the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and the United Methodist Church was the second largest. Evangelical Protestants, forming the second largest Protestant branch (22%), were also dominated by Lutherans; the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod was the largest Evangelical denomination. Among the Christian population of North Dakota, the Roman Catholic Church was the single largest Christian denomination. According to the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, 75% of the adult population were Christian, with mainline Protestantism remaining the majority and evangelical Protestantism at 18% of the population. In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 80% of the population were Christian.\nPer the Pew Research Center in 2014, non-Christian religions accounted for 3% of the adult population, with Islam being the largest non-Christian religion. Other faiths such as Unitarians and New Agers collectively made up 1% of the practicing population. At the 2014 survey, 20% were unaffiliated with any religion, and 2% of North Dakotans were atheist; 13% of the population practiced nothing in particular. The 2020 Public Religion Research Institute's survey determined 22% were unaffiliated with any religion, and 12% in 2022.\nThe largest church bodies by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 167,349; the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 163,209; and the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod with 22,003. In 2006, North Dakota had the most churches per capita of any state. Additionally, North Dakota had the highest percentage of church-going population of any state in 2006. By 2020, the Association of Religion Data Archives numbered 164,843, remaining the largest Christian body by attendance; it had an adherence rate of 211.58 per 1,000 people.\nA 2001 survey indicated 35% of North Dakota's population was Lutheran, and 30% was Catholic. Other religious groups represented were Methodists (7%), Baptists (6%), the Assemblies of God (3%), Presbyterians (1.27%), and Jehovah's Witnesses (1%). Christians with unstated or other denominational affiliations, including other Protestants and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), totaled 3%, bringing the total Christian population to 86%. There were an estimated 920 Muslims and 730 Jews in the state in 2000. Three percent of respondents answered \"no religion\" on the survey, and 6% declined to answer.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture is North Dakota's largest industry, although petroleum, food processing, and technology are also major industries. Its growth rate is about 4.1%. According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis the economy of North Dakota had a gross domestic product of $55.180 billion in the second quarter of 2018. The per capita income for the state was $34,256, when measured from 2013 to 2017 by the United States Department of Commerce. The three-year median household income from 2013 to 2017 was $61,285.\nAccording to Gallup data, North Dakota led the U.S. in job creation in 2013 and has done so since 2009. The state has a Job Creation Index score of 40, nearly 10 points ahead of its nearest competitors. North Dakota has added 56,600 private-sector jobs since 2011, creating an annual growth rate of 7.32 percent. According to statistics released in December 2020, by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, North Dakota had the highest rate of annual growth in personal consumption expenditures of all 50 states, from 2009 to 2018. During this time period, annual nominal personal income growth averaged 6% per year, compared to the U.S. average of 4.4%. North Dakota's personal income growth is tied to various private business sectors such as agriculture, energy development, and construction. North Dakota also had the highest growth in personal expenditures on housing and utilities of all states, reflecting the sharply increased demand for housing in the 2010s.\nJust over 21% of North Dakota's total 2013 gross domestic product (GDP) of $49.77 billion comes from natural resources and mining.\nNorth Dakota is the only state with a state-owned bank, the Bank of North Dakota in Bismarck, and a state-owned flour mill, the North Dakota Mill and Elevator in Grand Forks. These were established by the NPL before World War II.\nAs of 2012, Fargo is home to the second-largest campus of Microsoft with 1,700 employees, and Amazon.com employs several hundred in Grand Forks.\nAs of \u00a02019[ [update]], the state's unemployment rate is among the lowest in the nation at 2.4 percent. With the exception of a five-month period in 2020, the unemployment rate remained below five percent each month since 1987. At end of 2010, the state per capita income was ranked 17th in the nation, the biggest increase of any state in a decade from rank 38th. The reduction in the unemployment rate and growth in per capita income is attributable to the oil boom in the state. Due to a combination of oil-related development and investing in technology and service industries, North Dakota has had a budget surplus every year since the 2008 market crash.\nSince 1976, the highest that North Dakota's unemployment rate has reached is just 6.2%, recorded in 1983. Every U.S. state except neighboring South Dakota has had a higher unemployment rate during that period.\nAgriculture.\nNorth Dakota's earliest industries were fur trading and agriculture. Although less than 10% of the population is employed in the agricultural sector, it remains a major part of the state's economy. With industrial-scale farming, it ranks 9th in the nation in the value of crops and 18th in total value of agricultural products sold. Large farms generate the most crops. The share of people in the state employed in agriculture is comparatively high: as of 2008[ [update]], only two to three percent of the population of the United States is directly employed in agriculture. North Dakota has about 90% of its land area in farms with of cropland, the third-largest amount in the nation. Between 2002 and 2007, total cropland increased by about a million acres (4,000\u00a0km2); North Dakota was the only state showing an increase. Over the same period, were shifted into soybean and corn monoculture production, the largest such shift in the United States. Agriculturalists are concerned about too much monoculture, as it makes the economy at risk from insect or crop diseases affecting a major crop. In addition, this development has adversely affected habitats of wildlife and birds, and the balance of the ecosystem.\nThe state is the largest producer in the U.S. of many cereal grains, including barley (36% of U.S. crop), durum wheat (58%), hard red spring wheat (48%), oats (17%), and combined wheat of all types (15%). It is the second leading producer of buckwheat (20%). As of 2007[ [update]], corn became the state's largest crop produced, although it is only 2% of total U.S. production. The Corn Belt extends to North Dakota but is more on the edge of the region instead of in its center. Corn yields are high in the southeast part of the state and smaller in other parts of the state. Most of the cereal grains are grown for livestock feed.\nThe state is the leading producer of many oilseeds, including 92% of the U.S. canola crop, 94% of flax seed, 53% of sunflower seeds, 18% of safflower seeds, and 62% of mustard seed. Canola is suited to the cold winters and it matures fast. Processing of canola for oil production produces canola meal as a by-product. The by-product is a high-protein animal feed.\nSoybeans are also an increasingly important crop, with additional planted between 2002 and 2007. Soybeans are a major crop in the eastern part of the state, and cultivation is common in the southeast part of the state. Soybeans were not grown at all in North Dakota in the 1940s, but the crop has become especially common since 1998. In North Dakota soybeans have to mature fast, because of the comparatively short growing season. Soybeans are grown for livestock feed.\nNorth Dakota is the second leading producer of sugarbeets, which are grown mostly in the Red River Valley. The state is also the largest producer of honey, dry edible peas and beans, lentils, and the third-largest producer of potatoes.\nNorth Dakota's Top Agricultural Commodities (according to the USDA as of 2011[ [update]])\nEnergy.\nThe energy industry is a major contributor to the economy. North Dakota has both coal and oil reserves. On average, the state's production of oil production grew at average annual rate of 48.4% from 2009 to 2018. During these years, oil production increased each year from 2009 to 2015, with 2016 marked by a slight decline and a return to growth since. As of 2006, Shale gas was produced and Lignite coal reserves in Western North Dakota were used to generate about 90% of the electricity consumed, and electricity was also exported to nearby states. \nIn 2009, North Dakota had the second largest lignite coal production in the U.S. \nLignite coal is the lowest grade coal (latent high moisture content and low energy density). There are larger and higher grade coal reserves (anthracite, bituminous coal and subbituminous coal) in other U.S. states.\nOil was discovered near Tioga in 1951, generating of oil a year by 1984. \nRecoverable oil reserves have jumped dramatically recently. The oil reserves of the Bakken Formation may hold up to of oil, 25\u00a0times larger than the reserves in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. \nA report issued in April 2008 by the U.S. Geological Survey estimated the oil recoverable by current technology in the Bakken formation is two orders of magnitude less, in the range of to , with a mean of .\nThe northwestern part of the state has been the center of the North Dakota oil boom. The Williston, Tioga, Stanley and Minot-Burlington communities are having rapid growth that strains housing and local services. As of 2022[ [update]], the state is the 2nd-largest oil producer in the U.S., with an average of per day while producing per day of natural gas for a total of of oil equivalent (BOE).\nThe Great Plains region, which includes the state of North Dakota, has been referred to as \"the Saudi Arabia of wind energy\".\nThere, wind speeds seldom go below .\nTourism.\nNorth Dakota is considered the least visited state, owing, in part, to its not having a major tourist attraction. \nNonetheless, tourism is North Dakota's third largest industry, contributing more than $3 billion into the state's economy annually. Outdoor attractions such as the 144-mile (232\u00a0km) Maah Daah Hey Trail and activities such as fishing and hunting attract visitors. The state is known for the Lewis &amp; Clark Trail and being the winter camp of the Corps of Discovery. Areas popular with visitors include Theodore Roosevelt National Park in the western part of the state. In 2024, the park received 732,000 recreational visitors.\nRegular events in the state that attract tourists include \"Norsk H\u00f8stfest\" in Minot, billed (as of 2006) as North America's largest Scandinavian festival; the Medora Musical; and the North Dakota State Fair. The state also receives a significant number of visitors from the neighboring Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan, particularly when the exchange rate is favorable.\nInternational tourists have also come to visit the Oscar-Zero Missile Alert Facility.\nHealth care.\nNorth Dakota has one level-I trauma center, six level-II trauma centers, 44 hospitals, 52 rural health clinics, and 80 nursing homes. Major provider networks include Sanford, St. Alexius, Trinity, and Altru.\nBlue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota is the largest medical insurer in the state. North Dakota expanded Medicaid in 2014, and its health insurance exchange is the federal site, HealthCare.gov.\nNorth Dakota law requires pharmacies, other than hospital dispensaries and pre-existing stores, to be majority-owned by pharmacists. Voters rejected a proposal to change the law in 2014.\nCulture.\nNative American First Nations.\nIn the 21st century, North Dakota has an increasing population of Native Americans, who in 2010 made up 5.44% of the population. By the early 19th century the territory was dominated by Siouan-speaking peoples, whose territory stretched west from the Great Lakes area. The word \"Dakota\" is a Sioux (Lakota/Dakota) word meaning \"allies\" or \"friends\".\nThe primary historic tribal nations in or around North Dakota, are the Lakota and the Dakota (\"The Great Sioux Nation\" or \"Oceti Sakowin\", meaning the seven council fires), the Blackfoot, the Cheyenne, the Chippewa (known as Ojibwe in Canada), and the Mandan. There are six Indian reservations in North Dakota--Spirit Lake Tribe, Standing Rock Sioux Reservation, Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate, Fort Berthold Indian Reservation, Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation, and The Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation.\nPow wows.\nSocial gatherings known as \"powwows\" (or wacipis in Lakota/Dakota) continue to be an important part of Native American culture and are held regularly throughout the state. Throughout Native American history, powwows were held, usually in the spring, to rejoice at the beginning of new life and the end of the winter cold. These events brought Native American tribes together for singing and dancing and allowed them to meet with old friends and acquaintances, as well as to make new ones. Many powwows also held religious significance for some tribes. Today, powwows are still a part of the Native American culture and are attended by Natives and non-Natives alike. In North Dakota, the United Tribes International Powwow held each September in the capital of Bismarck, is one of the largest powwows in the United States.\nA pow wow is an occasion for parades and Native American dancers in regalia, with many dancing styles presented. It is traditional for male dancers to wear regalia decorated with beads, quills, and eagle feathers; male grass dancers wear colorful fringe regalia, and male fancy dancers wear brightly colored feathers. Female dancers dance much more subtly than male dancers. Fancy female dancers wear cloth, beaded moccasins, and jewelry, while the jingle dress dancer wears a dress made of metal cones. Inter-tribal dances during the powwow, allow everyone (even spectators) to take part in the dancing.\nNorwegian and Icelandic influences.\nAround 1870 many European immigrants from Norway settled in North Dakota's northeastern corner, especially near the Red River. Icelanders also arrived from Canada. Pembina was a town of many Norwegians when it was founded; they worked on family farms. They started Lutheran churches and schools, greatly outnumbering other denominations in the area. This group has unique foods such as \"lefse\" and \"lutefisk\". The continent's largest Scandinavian event, \"Norsk H\u00f8stfest\", is celebrated each September in Minot's North Dakota State Fair Center, a local attraction featuring art, architecture, and cultural artifacts from all five Nordic countries. The Icelandic State Park in Pembina County and an annual Icelandic festival reflect immigrants from that country, who are also descended from Scandinavians.\nOld World folk customs have persisted for decades in North Dakota, with the revival of techniques in weaving, silver crafting, and wood carving. Traditional turf-roof houses are displayed in parks; this style originated in Iceland. A stave church is a landmark in Minot. Norwegian-Americans constitute nearly one-third or 32.3% of Minot's total population and 30.8% of North Dakota's total population.\nGermans from Russia.\nSome months after she had become empress of the Russian Empire in 1762, Catherine the Great invited Ethnic Germans to migrate to Russia. Many came, settled for several generations and became Russia Germans. They grew dissatisfied in the nineteenth century because of economic problems and because of the revocation of religious freedoms for Mennonites and Hutterites, in particular after in 1871, the exemption from military service in the Imperial Russian Army was revocated. Most Mennonites and Hutterites migrated to America in the late 1870s. \nBy 1900, about 100,000 had immigrated to the U.S., settling primarily in North Dakota, South Dakota, Kansas, and Nebraska. The south-central part of North Dakota became known as \"the German-Russian triangle\". By 1910, about 60,000 ethnic Germans from Russia lived in Central North Dakota. These individuals were Lutherans, Mennonites, Hutterites and Roman Catholics who had kept most of their German customs of the time when their ancestors immigrated to Russia. They were committed to agriculture. Traditional iron cemetery grave markers were a famous art form practiced by ethnic Germans.\nFine and performing arts.\nNorth Dakota's major fine art museums and venues include the Chester Fritz Auditorium, Empire Arts Center, the Fargo Theatre, North Dakota Museum of Art, and the Plains Art Museum. The Bismarck-Mandan Symphony Orchestra, Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra, Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra, Minot Symphony Orchestra and Great Plains Harmony Chorus are full-time professional and semi-professional musical ensembles who perform concerts and offer educational programs to their communities.\nEntertainment.\nNorth Dakotan musicians of many genres include blues guitarist Jonny Lang, country music singer Lynn Anderson, jazz and traditional pop singer and songwriter Peggy Lee, big band leader Lawrence Welk, and pop singer Bobby Vee.\nHollywood and TV star Angie Dickinson was born in Kulm and moved to Burbank, California as a ten-year-old. Ed Schultz was known around the country as the host of progressive talk radio show, \"The Ed Schultz Show\", and \"The Ed Show\" on MSNBC. Shadoe Stevens hosted \"American Top 40\" from 1988 to 1995. Josh Duhamel is an Emmy Award-winning actor known for his roles in \"All My Children\" and \"Las Vegas\". Nicole Linkletter and CariDee English were winning contestants of Cycles 5 and 7, respectively, of \"America's Next Top Model\". Kellan Lutz has appeared in movies such as \"Stick It\", \"Accepted\", \"Prom Night\", and \"Twilight\".\nSports.\nBismarck was home of the Dakota Wizards of the NBA Development League and the Bismarck Bucks of the Indoor Football League.\nNorth Dakota has two NCAA Division I teams, the North Dakota Fighting Hawks and North Dakota State Bison, and three Division II teams, the Mary Marauders, Minot State Beavers and Jamestown Jimmies.\nFargo is home to the USHL ice hockey team the Fargo Force. Fargo is also the home of the Fargo-Moorhead RedHawks of the American Association.\nThe North Dakota High School Activities Association features more than 25,000 participants.\nOutdoor activities such as hunting and fishing are hobbies for many North Dakotans. Ice fishing, skiing, and snowmobiling are also popular during the winter months. Residents of North Dakota may own or visit a cabin along a lake. Popular sport fish include walleye, perch, and northern pike.\nThe western terminus of the North Country National Scenic Trail is on Lake Sakakawea, where it abuts the Lewis and Clark Trail.\nMedia.\nThe state has 10 daily newspapers, the largest being \"The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead\". Other weekly and monthly publications (most of which are fully supported by advertising) are also available. The most prominent of these is the alternative weekly \"High Plains Reader\".\nThe state's oldest radio station, WDAY-AM, was launched on May 23, 1922. North Dakota's three major radio markets center around Fargo, Bismarck, and Grand Forks, though stations broadcast in every region of the state. Several new stations were built in Williston in the early 2010s. North Dakota has 34 AM and 88 FM radio stations. KFGO in Fargo has the largest audience.\nBroadcast television in North Dakota started on April 3, 1953, when KCJB-TV (now KXMC-TV) in Minot started operations. North Dakota's television media markets are Fargo-Grand Forks (117th largest nationally), including the eastern half of the state, and Minot-Bismarck (152nd), making up the western half of the state. There are currently 31 full-power television stations, arranged into 10 networks, with 17 digital subchannels.\nPublic broadcasting in North Dakota is provided by Prairie Public, with statewide television and radio networks affiliated with PBS and NPR. Public access television stations open to community programming are offered on cable systems in Bismarck, Dickinson, Fargo, and Jamestown.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nThe state has 11 public colleges and universities, five tribal community colleges, and four private schools. The largest institutions are North Dakota State University and the University of North Dakota.\nThe higher education system consists of the following institutions:\nNorth Dakota University System (public institutions):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*Bismarck State College in Bismarck\n*Dickinson State University in Dickinson\n*Lake Region State College in Devils Lake\n*Mayville State University in Mayville\n*Minot State University in Minot\n*Dakota College at Bottineau in Bottineau\n*North Dakota State University in Fargo\n*North Dakota State College of Science in Wahpeton and Fargo\n*University of North Dakota in Grand Forks\n*Valley City State University in Valley City\n*Williston State College in Williston\nTribal institutions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*Cankdeska Cikana Community College in Fort Totten\n*Fort Berthold Community College in New Town\n*Sitting Bull College in Fort Yates\n*Turtle Mountain Community College in Belcourt\n*United Tribes Technical College in Bismarck\nPrivate institutions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*University of Mary in Bismarck\n*University of Jamestown in Jamestown\n*Rasmussen College in Fargo\n*Trinity Bible College in Ellendale\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThere were 142 schools in North Dakota cities and 4,722 one room schools in the state in 1917. The urban schools had 36,008 students, and 83,167 students attended the one room schools. 1,889 of the one room schools closed between 1929 and 1954. In 1954 North Dakotan cities had 513 schools while 2,447 one room schools were in the state. At that time the urban schools had 94,019 students while the one room schools had 25,212 students. The Nation's Report Card ranks North Dakota fifteenth in the country in K-12 education based on standardized test scores.\nEmergency services.\nThe North Dakota Department of Emergency Services provides 24/7 communication and coordination for more than 50 agencies. In addition, \"it administers federal disaster recovery programs and the Homeland Security Grant Program\". In 2011, the Department selected Geo-Comm, Inc. \"for the Statewide Seamless Base Map Project\", which will facilitate \"identifying locations 9\u20131\u20131 callers\" and route emergency calls based on locations. In 1993 the state adopted the Burkle addressing system numbering rural roads and buildings to aid in the delivery of emergency services.\nTransportation.\nTransportation in North Dakota is overseen by the North Dakota Department of Transportation. The major Interstate highways are Interstate 29 and Interstate 94, with I-29 and I-94 meeting at Fargo, with I-29 oriented north to south along the eastern edge of the state, and I-94 bisecting the state from east to west between Minnesota and Montana. A unique feature of the North Dakota Interstate Highway system is virtually all of it is paved in concrete, not blacktop, because of the extreme weather conditions it must endure. BNSF and the Canadian Pacific Railway operate the state's largest rail systems. Many branch lines formerly used by BNSF and Canadian Pacific Railway are now operated by the Dakota, Missouri Valley and Western Railroad and the Red River Valley and Western Railroad.\nNorth Dakota's principal airports are the Hector International Airport (FAR) in Fargo, Grand Forks International Airport (GFK), Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Minot International Airport (MOT) and Williston Basin International Airport (XWA) in Williston.\nAmtrak's Empire Builder runs through North Dakota, making stops at Fargo (2:13\u00a0am westbound, 3:35\u00a0am eastbound), Grand Forks (4:52\u00a0am westbound, 12:57\u00a0am eastbound), Minot (around 9\u00a0am westbound and around 9:30\u00a0pm eastbound), and four other stations. It is the descendant of the famous line of the same name run by the Great Northern Railway, which was built by the tycoon James J. Hill and ran from St. Paul to Seattle.\nIntercity bus service is provided by Greyhound and Jefferson Lines. Public transit in North Dakota includes daily fixed-route bus systems in Fargo, Bismarck-Mandan, Grand Forks, and Minot, paratransit service in 57 communities, along with multi-county rural transit systems.\nLaw and government.\nAs with the federal government of the United States, political power in North Dakota state government is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.\nThe Constitution of North Dakota and the North Dakota Century Code form the formal law of the state; the \"North Dakota Administrative Code\" incorporates additional rules and policies of state agencies.\nIn a 2020 study, North Dakota was ranked as the 8th easiest state for citizens to vote in.\nExecutive.\nThe executive branch is headed by the elected governor. The 34th and current governor is Kelly Armstrong, a Republican who took office December 15, 2024, after his predecessor, Doug Burgum did not seek reelection and was subsequently nominated to be United States Secretary of the Interior. Armstrong previously served as a member of the North Dakota Senate, chair of the North Dakota Republican Party, and most recently as a member of the United States House of Representatives. The current Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota is Michelle Strinden, who is also the President of the Senate. The offices of governor and lieutenant governor have four-year terms, which are next up for election in 2028. The governor has a cabinet consisting of appointed leaders of various state government agencies, called commissioners. The other elected constitutional offices are secretary of state, attorney general, state auditor, state insurance commissioner and state treasurer.\nLegislative.\nThe North Dakota Legislative Assembly is a bicameral body consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives. The state has 47 districts, each with one senator and two representatives. Both senators and representatives are elected to four-year terms. The state's legal code is named the North Dakota Century Code.\nJudicial.\nNorth Dakota's court system has four levels, one of which is dormant. Municipal courts serve the cities. Decisions from municipal courts are generally appealable to district court. Most cases start in the district courts, which are courts of general jurisdiction. There are 42 district court judges in seven judicial districts. Appeals from final district court decisions are made to the North Dakota Supreme Court. An intermediate court of appeals was provided for by statute in 1987, but the North Dakota Court of Appeals has only heard 65 cases since its inception. The North Dakota Court of Appeals is essentially dormant, but capable of meeting if the North Dakota Supreme Court's case load necessitates the reestablishment of intermediate review.\nIndian tribes and reservations.\nHistorically, North Dakota was populated by the Mandan, Hidatsa, Lakota, and Ojibwe, and later by the Sanish and M\u00e9tis. Today, five federally recognized tribes within the boundaries of North Dakota have independent, sovereign relationships with the federal government and territorial reservations:\nFederal.\nNorth Dakota's United States Senators are John Hoeven (R) and Kevin Cramer (R). The state has one at-large congressional district represented by Representative Julie Fedorchak (R).\nFederal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of North Dakota, which holds court in Bismarck, Fargo, Grand Forks, and Minot. Appeals are heard by the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals based in St. Louis, Missouri.\nPolitics.\nMIT's Election Performance Index ranked North Dakota #1 in overall election administration policy and performance in the 2018, 2014, 2012, 2010, and 2008 elections. \nThe major political parties in North Dakota are the Democratic-NPL and the Republican Party. As of 2007[ [update]], the Constitution Party and the Libertarian Party are also organized parties in the state.\nAt the state level, the governorship has been held by the Republican Party since 1992, along with a majority of the state legislature and statewide officers. Dem-NPL showings were strong in the 2000 governor's race, and in the 2006 legislative elections, but the League has not had a major breakthrough since the administration of former state governor George Sinner.\nThe Republican Party presidential candidate usually carries the state by a considerable margin; in 2024, Donald Trump won nearly 67% of the vote. Of all the Democratic presidential candidates since 1892, only Grover Cleveland (1892, one of three votes), Woodrow Wilson (1912 and 1916), Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932 and 1936), and Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) received Electoral College votes from North Dakota.\nOn the other hand, Dem-NPL candidates for North Dakota's federal Senate and House seats won every election between 1982 and 2008, and the state's federal delegation was entirely Democratic from 1987 to 2011. However, both of the current U.S. senators, John Hoeven and Kevin Cramer, are Republicans, as is the sole House member, Julie Fedorchak.\nA six-week abortion ban is active in North Dakota. Despite this, a simple majority of the state's citizens oppose the legislation.\nState taxes.\nNorth Dakota has a slightly progressive income tax structure; the five brackets of state income tax rates are 1.1%, 2.04%, 2.27%, 2.64%, and 2.90% as of 2017. In 2005 North Dakota ranked 22nd highest by per capita state taxes. The sales tax in North Dakota is 6% for most items. The state allows municipalities to institute local sales taxes and special local taxes, such as the 1.75% supplemental sales tax in Grand Forks. Excise taxes are levied on the purchase price or market value of aircraft registered in North Dakota. The state imposes a use tax on items purchased elsewhere but used within North Dakota. Owners of real property in North Dakota pay property tax to their county, municipality, school district, and special taxing districts.\nThe Tax Foundation ranks North Dakota as the state with the 20th most \"business friendly\" tax climate in the nation. Tax Freedom Day arrives on April 1, 10\u00a0days earlier than the national Tax Freedom Day. In 2006, North Dakota was the state with the lowest number of returns filed by taxpayers with an adjusted gross income of over $1M\u2014only 333.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21652", "revid": "45435589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21652", "title": "Natural language processing", "text": "Processing of natural language by a computer\nNatural language processing (NLP) is the processing of natural language information by a computer. The study of NLP, a subfield of computer science, is generally associated with artificial intelligence. NLP is related to information retrieval, knowledge representation, computational linguistics, and more broadly with linguistics.\nMajor processing tasks in an NLP system include: speech recognition, text classification, natural language understanding, and natural language generation.\nHistory.\nNatural language processing has its roots in the 1950s. Already in 1950, Alan Turing published an article titled \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\" which proposed what is now called the Turing test as a criterion of intelligence, though at the time that was not articulated as a problem separate from artificial intelligence. The proposed test includes a task that involves the automated interpretation and generation of natural language.\nSymbolic NLP (1950s \u2013 early 1990s).\nThe premise of symbolic NLP is well-summarized by John Searle's Chinese room experiment: Given a collection of rules (e.g., a Chinese phrasebook, with questions and matching answers), the computer emulates natural language understanding (or other NLP tasks) by applying those rules to the data it confronts.\nStatistical NLP (1990s\u2013present).\nUp until the 1980s, most natural language processing systems were based on complex sets of hand-written rules. Starting in the late 1980s, however, there was a revolution in natural language processing with the introduction of machine learning algorithms for language processing. This was due to both the steady increase in computational power (see Moore's law) and the gradual lessening of the dominance of Chomskyan theories of linguistics (e.g. transformational grammar), whose theoretical underpinnings discouraged the sort of corpus linguistics that underlies the machine-learning approach to language processing. \nApproaches: Symbolic, statistical, neural networks.\nSymbolic approach, i.e., the hand-coding of a set of rules for manipulating symbols, coupled with a dictionary lookup, was historically the first approach used both by AI in general and by NLP in particular: such as by writing grammars or devising heuristic rules for stemming.\nMachine learning approaches, which include both statistical and neural networks, on the other hand, have many advantages over the symbolic approach: \nRule-based systems are commonly used:\nStatistical approach.\nIn the late 1980s and mid-1990s, the statistical approach ended a period of AI winter, which was caused by the inefficiencies of the rule-based approaches.\nThe earliest decision trees, producing systems of hard if\u2013then rules, were still very similar to the old rule-based approaches.\nOnly the introduction of hidden Markov models, applied to part-of-speech tagging, announced the end of the old rule-based approach.\nNeural networks.\nA major drawback of statistical methods is that they require elaborate feature engineering. Since 2015, the statistical approach has been replaced by the neural networks approach, using semantic networks and word embeddings to capture semantic properties of words. \nIntermediate tasks (e.g., part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing) are not needed anymore. \nNeural machine translation, based on then-newly invented sequence-to-sequence transformations, made obsolete the intermediate steps, such as word alignment, previously necessary for statistical machine translation.\nCommon NLP tasks.\nThe following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing. Some of these tasks have direct real-world applications, while others more commonly serve as subtasks that are used to aid in solving larger tasks.\nThough natural language processing tasks are closely intertwined, they can be subdivided into categories for convenience. A coarse division is given below.\nGiven an image representing printed text, determine the corresponding text.\nGiven a text, transform those units and produce a spoken representation. Text-to-speech can be used to aid the visually impaired.\nTokenization is a process used in text analysis that divides text into individual words or word fragments. This technique results in two key components: a word index and tokenized text. The word index is a list that maps unique words to specific numerical identifiers, and the tokenized text replaces each word with its corresponding numerical token. These numerical tokens are then used in various deep learning methods.\nFor a language like English, this is fairly trivial, since words are usually separated by spaces. However, some written languages like Chinese, Japanese and Thai do not mark word boundaries in such a fashion, and in those languages text segmentation is a significant task requiring knowledge of the vocabulary and morphology of words in the language. Sometimes this process is also used in cases like bag of words (BOW) creation in data mining.\nThe process of reducing inflected (or sometimes derived) words to a base form (e.g., \"close\" will be the root for \"closed\", \"closing\", \"close\", \"closer\" etc.). Stemming yields similar results as lemmatization, but does so on grounds of rules, not a dictionary.\n Generate a formal grammar that describes a language's syntax.\n Given a chunk of text, find the sentence boundaries. Sentence boundaries are often marked by periods or other punctuation marks, but these same characters can serve other purposes (e.g., marking abbreviations).\n Sentiment analysis is a computational method used to identify and classify the emotional intent behind text. This technique involves analyzing text to determine whether the expressed sentiment is positive, negative, or neutral. Models for sentiment classification typically utilize inputs such as word n-grams, Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) features, hand-generated features, or employ deep learning models designed to recognize both long-term and short-term dependencies in text sequences. The applications of sentiment analysis are diverse, extending to tasks such as categorizing customer reviews on various online platforms.\nThe goal of terminology extraction is to automatically extract relevant terms from a given corpus.\nGiven a single sentence, identify and disambiguate semantic predicates (e.g., verbal frames), then identify and classify the frame elements (semantic roles).\nGiven a single sentence, identify and disambiguate semantic predicates (e.g., verbal frames) and their explicit semantic roles in the current sentence (see Semantic role labelling above). Then, identify semantic roles that are not explicitly realized in the current sentence, classify them into arguments that are explicitly realized elsewhere in the text and those that are not specified, and resolve the former against the local text. A closely related task is zero anaphora resolution, i.e., the extension of coreference resolution to pro-drop languages.\nGiven a chunk of text, separate it into segments each of which is devoted to a topic, and identify the topic of the segment.\nThe goal of argument mining is the automatic extraction and identification of argumentative structures from natural language text with the aid of computer programs. Such argumentative structures include the premise, conclusions, the argument scheme and the relationship between the main and subsidiary argument, or the main and counter-argument within discourse.\nGrammatical error detection and correction involves a great band-width of problems on all levels of linguistic analysis (phonology/orthography, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics). Grammatical error correction is impactful since it affects hundreds of millions of people that use or acquire English as a second language. It has thus been subject to a number of shared tasks since 2011. As far as orthography, morphology, syntax and certain aspects of semantics are concerned, and due to the development of powerful neural language models such as GPT-2, this can now (2019) be considered a largely solved problem and is being marketed in various commercial applications.\nTranslate a text from a natural language into formal logic.\nAutomatically translate text from one human language to another. This is one of the most difficult problems, and is a member of a class of problems colloquially termed \"AI-complete\", i.e. requiring all of the different types of knowledge that humans possess (grammar, semantics, facts about the real world, etc.) to solve properly.\nConvert information from computer databases or semantic intents into readable human language.\nNot an NLP task proper but an extension of natural language generation and other NLP tasks is the creation of full-fledged books. The first machine-generated book was created by a rule-based system in 1984 (Racter, \"The policeman's beard is half-constructed\"). The first published work by a neural network was published in 2018, \"1 the Road\", marketed as a novel, contains sixty million words. Both these systems are basically elaborate but non-sensical (semantics-free) language models. The first machine-generated science book was published in 2019 (Beta Writer, \"Lithium-Ion Batteries\", Springer, Cham). Unlike \"Racter\" and \"1 the Road\", this is grounded on factual knowledge and based on text summarization.\nA Document AI platform sits on top of the NLP technology enabling users with no prior experience of artificial intelligence, machine learning or NLP to quickly train a computer to extract the specific data they need from different document types. NLP-powered Document AI enables non-technical teams to quickly access information hidden in documents, for example, lawyers, business analysts and accountants.\nComputer systems intended to converse with a human.\nGeneral tendencies and (possible) future directions.\nBased on long-standing trends in the field, it is possible to extrapolate future directions of NLP. As of 2020, three trends among the topics of the long-standing series of CoNLL Shared Tasks can be observed:\nCognition.\nMost higher-level NLP applications involve aspects that emulate intelligent behaviour and apparent comprehension of natural language. More broadly speaking, the technical operationalization of increasingly advanced aspects of cognitive behaviour represents one of the developmental trajectories of NLP (see trends among CoNLL shared tasks above).\nCognition refers to \"the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses.\" Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary, scientific study of the mind and its processes. Cognitive linguistics is an interdisciplinary branch of linguistics, combining knowledge and research from both psychology and linguistics. Especially during the age of symbolic NLP, the area of computational linguistics maintained strong ties with cognitive studies.\nAs an example, George Lakoff offers a methodology to build natural language processing (NLP) algorithms through the perspective of cognitive science, along with the findings of cognitive linguistics, with two defining aspects:\nformula_1\n\"Where\"\nRMM is the relative measure of meaning\ntoken is any block of text, sentence, phrase or word\nN is the number of tokens being analyzed\nPMM is the probable measure of meaning based on a corpora\nd is the non zero location of the token along the sequence of N tokens\nPF is the probability function specific to a language\nTies with cognitive linguistics are part of the historical heritage of NLP, but they have been less frequently addressed since the statistical turn during the 1990s. Nevertheless, approaches to develop cognitive models towards technically operationalizable frameworks have been pursued in the context of various frameworks, e.g., of cognitive grammar, functional grammar, construction grammar, computational psycholinguistics and cognitive neuroscience (e.g., ACT-R), however, with limited uptake in mainstream NLP (as measured by presence on major conferences of the ACL). More recently, ideas of cognitive NLP have been revived as an approach to achieve explainability, e.g., under the notion of \"cognitive AI\". Likewise, ideas of cognitive NLP are inherent to neural models multimodal NLP (although rarely made explicit) and developments in artificial intelligence, specifically tools and technologies using large language model approaches and new directions in artificial general intelligence based on the free energy principle by British neuroscientist and theoretician at University College London Karl J. Friston.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21653", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21653", "title": "Neointuitionism", "text": ""}
{"id": "21654", "revid": "50263362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21654", "title": "New South Wales", "text": "State of Australia\nNew South Wales (commonly abbreviated as NSW) is a state on the east coast of :Australia. It borders Queensland to the north, Victoria to the south, and South Australia to the west. Its coast borders the Coral and Tasman Seas to the east. The Australian Capital Territory and Jervis Bay Territory are enclaves within the state. New South Wales' state capital is Sydney, which is also Australia's most populous city. In December 2024[ [update]], the population of New South Wales was over 8.5\u00a0million, making it Australia's most populous state. Almost two-thirds of the state's population, 5.3\u00a0million, live in the Greater Sydney area.\nThe Colony of New South Wales was founded as a British penal colony in 1788. It originally comprised more than half of the Australian mainland with its western boundary set at 129th meridian east in 1825. The colony then also included the island territories of Van Diemen's Land, Lord Howe Island, and Norfolk Island. During the 19th century, most of the colony's area was detached to form separate British colonies that eventually became the various states and territories of Australia. The Swan River Colony (later called the Colony of Western Australia) was never administered as part of New South Wales.\nLord Howe Island remains part of New South Wales, while Norfolk Island became a federal territory, as have the areas now known as the Australian Capital Territory and the Jervis Bay Territory.\nHistory.\nAboriginal Australians.\nThe original inhabitants of New South Wales were the Aboriginal people who arrived in Australia about 40,000 to 60,000 years ago. Before European settlement, there were an estimated 250,000 Aboriginal people in the region.\nThe Wodi wodi people, who spoke a variant of the Dharawal language, are the original custodians of an area south of Sydney which was approximately bounded by modern Campbelltown, Shoalhaven River and Moss Vale and included the Illawarra.\nThe Bundjalung people are the original custodians of parts of the northern coastal areas.\nThere are other Aboriginal peoples whose traditional lands are within what is now New South Wales, including the Wiradjuri, Gamilaray, Yuin, Ngarigo, Gweagal and Ngiyampaa peoples.\n1788: British settlement.\nIn 1825, Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania) became a separate colony and the western border of New South Wales was extended to the 129th meridian east (now the West Australian border).\nIn 1770, James Cook charted the unmapped eastern coast of the continent of New Holland, now Australia, and claimed the entire coastline that he had just explored as British territory. Contrary to his instructions, Cook did not gain the consent of the Aboriginal inhabitants. Cook originally named the land \"New Wales\", but on his return voyage to Britain he settled on the name \"New South Wales\".\nIn January 1788, Arthur Phillip arrived in Botany Bay with the First Fleet of 11 vessels, which carried over a thousand settlers, including 736 convicts. A few days after arrival at Botany Bay, the fleet moved to the more suitable Port Jackson, where Phillip established a settlement at the place he named Sydney Cove (in honour of the Secretary of State, Lord Sydney) on 26 January 1788. This date later became Australia's national day, Australia Day. He formally proclaimed the colony on 7 February 1788 at Sydney. Phillip, as Governor of New South Wales, exercised nominal authority over all of Australia east of the 135th meridian east between the latitudes of 10\u00b037'S and 43\u00b039'S, and \"all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean\". The area included modern New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania. He remained as governor until 1792.\nThe settlement was initially planned to be a self-sufficient penal colony based on subsistence agriculture. Trade and shipbuilding were banned to keep the convicts isolated. However, after the departure of Phillip, the colony's military officers began acquiring land and importing consumer goods obtained from visiting ships. Former convicts also farmed land granted to them and engaged in trade. Farms spread to the more fertile lands surrounding Parramatta, Windsor and Camden, and by 1803, the colony was self-sufficient in grain. Boat building was developed to make travel easier and exploit the marine resources of the coastal settlements. Sealing and whaling became important industries.\nIn March 1804, Irish convicts led around 300 rebels in the Castle Hill Rebellion, an attempt to march on Sydney, commandeer a ship, and sail to freedom. Poorly armed, and with their leader Philip Cunningham captured, the main body of insurgents was routed by about 100 troops and volunteers at Rouse Hill. At least 39 convicts were killed in the uprising and subsequent executions.\nLachlan Macquarie (governor 1810\u20131821) commissioned the construction of roads, wharves, churches and public buildings, sent explorers out from Sydney, and employed a planner to design the street layout of Sydney. A road across the Blue Mountains was completed in 1815, opening the way for large scale farming and grazing in the lightly wooded pastures west of the Great Dividing Range.\nNew South Wales established a military outpost on King George Sound in Western Australia in 1826 which was later transferred to the Swan River colony.61\nIn 1839 the UK decided to formally annex at least part of New Zealand to New South Wales. It was administered as a dependency until becoming the separate Colony of New Zealand on 3 May 1841.\nFrom the 1820s, squatters increasingly established unauthorised cattle and sheep runs beyond the official limits of the settled colony. In 1836, an annual licence was introduced in an attempt to control the pastoral industry, but booming wool prices and the high cost of land in the settled areas encouraged further squatting. The expansion of the pastoral industry led to violent episodes of conflict between settlers and traditional Aboriginal landowners, such as the Myall Creek massacre of 1838. By 1844, wool accounted for half of the colony's exports and by 1850, most of the eastern third of New South Wales was controlled by fewer than 2,000 pastoralists.\nThe transportation of convicts to New South Wales ended in 1840, and in 1842, a Legislative Council was introduced, with two-thirds of its members elected and one-third appointed by the governor. Former convicts were granted the vote, but a property qualification meant that only one in five adult males were enfranchised.\nBy 1850, the settler population of New South Wales had grown to 180,000, not including the 70,000 living in the area which became the separate colony of Victoria in 1851.\n1850s to 1890s.\nIn 1856, New South Wales achieved responsible government with the introduction of a bicameral parliament comprising a directly elected Legislative Assembly and a nominated Legislative Council. William Charles Wentworth was instrumental in this process, but his proposal for a hereditary upper house was widely ridiculed and subsequently dropped.\nThe property qualification for voters had been reduced in 1851, and by 1856, 95 per cent of adult males in Sydney, and 55 per cent in the colony as a whole, were eligible to vote. Full adult male suffrage was introduced in 1858. In 1859, Queensland became a separate colony.\nIn 1861, the NSW parliament legislated land reforms intended to encourage family farms and mixed farming and grazing ventures. The amount of land under cultivation subsequently increased from 246,000 acres in 1861 to 800,000 acres in the 1880s. Wool production also continued to grow, and by the 1880s, New South Wales produced almost half of Australia's wool. Coal had been discovered in the early years of settlement and gold in 1851, and by the 1890s wool, gold and coal were the main exports of the colony.\nThe NSW economy also became more diversified. From the 1860s, New South Wales had more people employed in manufacturing than any other Australian colony. The NSW government also invested strongly in infrastructure such as railways, telegraph, roads, ports, water and sewerage. By 1889, it was possible to travel by train from Brisbane to Adelaide via Sydney and Melbourne. The extension of the rail network inland also encouraged regional industries and the development of the wheat belt.\nIn the 1880s, trade unions grew and were extended to lower-skilled workers. In 1890, a strike in the shipping industry spread to wharves, railways, mines, and shearing sheds. The defeat of the strike was one of the factors leading the Trades and Labor Council to form a political party. The Labor Electoral League won a quarter of seats in the NSW elections of 1891 and held the balance of power between the Free Trade Party and the Protectionist Party.\nThe suffragette movement was developing at this time. The Womanhood Suffrage League of New South Wales was founded in 1891.\n1901: Federation of Australia.\nA Federal Council of Australasia was formed in 1885, but New South Wales declined to join. A major obstacle to the federation of the Australian colonies was the protectionist policies of Victoria which conflicted with the free trade policies dominant in New South Wales. Nevertheless, the NSW premier, Henry Parkes, was a strong advocate of federation and his Tenterfield Oration in 1889 was pivotal in gathering support for the cause. Parkes also struck a deal with Edmund Barton, leader of the NSW Protectionist Party, whereby they would work together for federation and leave the question of a protective tariff for a future Australian government to decide.\nIn early 1893, the first Citizens' Federation League was established in the Riverina region of New South Wales and many other leagues were soon formed in the colony. The leagues organised a conference in Corowa in July 1893, which developed a plan for federation. The new NSW premier, George Reid, endorsed the \"Corowa plan\" and in 1895 convinced the majority of other premiers to adopt it. A constitutional convention held sessions in 1897 and 1898, which resulted in a proposed constitution for a Commonwealth of federated states. However, a referendum on the constitution failed to gain the required majority in New South Wales after that colony's Labor party campaigned against it and Premier Reid gave it such qualified support that he earned the nickname \"yes-no Reid\".\nThe premiers of the other colonies agreed to some concessions to New South Wales (particularly that the future Commonwealth capital would be located in NSW), and in 1899, further referendums were held in all the colonies except Western Australia. All resulted in yes votes, with the yes vote in New South Wales meeting the required majority. The Imperial Parliament passed the necessary enabling legislation in 1900, and Western Australia subsequently voted to join the new federation. The Commonwealth of Australia was inaugurated on 1 January 1901, and Barton was sworn in as Australia's first prime minister.\n1901 to 1945.\nThe first post-federation NSW governments were Progressive or Liberal Reform and implemented a range of social reforms with Labor support. Women won the right to vote in NSW elections in 1902, but were ineligible to stand for parliament until 1918. Labor increased its parliamentary representation in every election from 1904 before coming to power in 1910 with a majority of one seat.\nThe outbreak of the First World War in 1914 saw more NSW volunteers for service than the federal authorities could handle, leading to unrest in camps as recruits waited for transfer overseas. In 1916, the premier, William Holman, and a number of his supporters were expelled from the Labor Party over their support for military conscription. Holman subsequently formed a Nationalist government which remained in power until 1920. Despite a huge victory for Holman's pro-conscription Nationalists in the elections of March 1917, a second conscription referendum held in December that year was defeated in New South Wales and nationally.\nFollowing the war, NSW governments embarked on large public works programs including road building, the extension and electrification of the rail network and the construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. The works were largely funded by loans from London, leading to a debt crisis after the onset of the Great Depression in 1929. New South Wales was hit harder by the depression than other states, and by 1932, one-third of union members in the state were unemployed, compared with 20 per cent nationally.\nLabor won the November 1930 NSW elections and Jack Lang became premier for the second time. In 1931, Lang proposed a plan to deal with the depression which included a suspension of interest payments to British creditors, diverting the money to unemployment relief. The Commonwealth and state premiers rejected the plan and later that year Lang's supporters in the Commonwealth parliament brought down James Scullin's federal Labor government. The NSW Lang government subsequently defaulted on overseas interest payments and was dismissed from office in May 1932 by the governor, Sir Phillip Game.\nThe following elections were won comfortably by the United Australia Party in coalition with the Country Party. Bertram Stevens became premier, remaining in office until 1939, when he was replaced by Alexander Mair.\nA contemporary study by sociologist A. P. Elkin found that the population of New South Wales responded to the outbreak of war in 1939 with pessimism and apathy. This changed with the threat of invasion by Japan, which entered the war in December 1941. In May 1942, three Japanese midget submarines entered Sydney Harbour and sank a naval ship, killing 29 men aboard. The following month, Sydney and Newcastle were shelled by Japanese warships. American troops began arriving in the state in large numbers. Manufacturing, steelmaking, shipbuilding and rail transport all grew with the war effort and unemployment virtually disappeared.\nA Labor government led by William McKell was elected in May 1941. The McKell government benefited from full employment, budget surpluses, and a co-operative relationship with John Curtin's federal Labor government. McKell became the first Labor leader to serve a full term and to be re-elected for a second term. The Labor Party was to govern New South Wales until 1965.\nPost-war period.\nThe Labor government introduced two weeks of annual paid leave for most NSW workers in 1944, and the 40-hour working week was implemented by 1947. The post-war economic boom brought near-full employment and rising living standards, and the government engaged in large spending programs on housing, dams, electricity generation and other infrastructure. In 1954, the government announced a plan for the construction of an opera house on Bennelong Point. The design competition was won by J\u00f8rn Utzon. Controversy over the cost of the Sydney Opera House and construction delays became a political issue and was a factor in the eventual defeat of Labor in 1965 by the conservative Liberal Party and Country Party coalition led by Robert Askin.\nThe Askin government promoted private development, law and order issues and greater state support for non-government schools. However, Askin, a former bookmaker, became increasingly associated with illegal bookmaking, gambling and police corruption.\nIn the late 1960s, a secessionist movement in the New England region of the state led to a 1967 referendum on the issue which was narrowly defeated. The new state would have consisted of much of northern NSW including Newcastle.\nAskin's resignation in 1975 was followed by several short-lived premierships by Liberal Party leaders. When a general election came in 1976, the ALP under Neville Wran came to power. Wran was able to transform this narrow one seat victory into landslide wins (known as Wranslides) in 1978 and 1981.\nAfter winning a comfortable though reduced majority in 1984, Wran resigned as premier and left parliament. His replacement Barrie Unsworth struggled to emerge from Wran's shadow and lost a 1988 election against a resurgent Liberal Party led by Nick Greiner. The Greiner government embarked on an efficiency program involving public sector cost-cutting, the corporatisation of government agencies and the privatisation of some government services. An Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) was created. Greiner called a snap election in 1991 which the Liberals were expected to win. However, the ALP polled extremely well and the Liberals lost their majority and needed the support of independents to retain power.\nIn 1992, Greiner was investigated by ICAC for possible corruption over the offer of a public service position to a former Liberal MP. Greiner resigned but was later cleared of corruption. His replacement as Liberal leader and premier was John Fahey, whose government narrowly lost the 1995 election to the ALP under Bob Carr, who was to become the longest-serving premier of the state.\nThe Carr government (1995\u20132005) largely continued its predecessors' focus on the efficient delivery of government services such as health, education, transport and electricity. There was an increasing emphasis on public-private partnerships to deliver infrastructure such as freeways, tunnels and rail links. The Carr government gained popularity for its successful organisation of international events, especially the 2000 Sydney Olympics, but Carr himself was critical of the federal government over its high immigration intake, arguing that a disproportionate number of new migrants were settling in Sydney, putting undue pressure on state infrastructure.\nCarr unexpectedly resigned from office in 2005 and was replaced by Morris Iemma, who remained premier after being re-elected in the March 2007 state election, until he was replaced by Nathan Rees in September 2008. Rees was subsequently replaced by Kristina Keneally in December 2009, who became the first female premier of New South Wales. Keneally's government was defeated at the 2011 state election and Barry O'Farrell became premier on 28 March. On 17 April 2014, O'Farrell stood down as premier after misleading an ICAC investigation concerning a gift of a bottle of wine. The Liberal Party then elected Treasurer Mike Baird as party leader and premier. Baird resigned as premier on 23 January 2017, and was replaced by Gladys Berejiklian.\nOn 23 March 2019, Berejiklian led the Coalition to a third term in office. She maintained high personal approval ratings for her management of a bushfire crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. However, Berejiklian resigned as premier on 5 October 2021, following the opening of an ICAC investigation into her actions between 2012 and 2018. She was replaced by Dominic Perrottet.\nGeography.\nNew South Wales is bordered on the north by Queensland, on the west by South Australia, on the south by Victoria and the east by the Coral and Tasman Seas. The Australian Capital Territory and the Jervis Bay Territory form a separately administered entity that is bordered entirely by New South Wales. The state can be divided geographically into four areas. New South Wales's three largest cities, Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, lie near the centre of a narrow coastal strip extending from cool temperate areas on the far south coast to subtropical areas near the Queensland border. Gulaga National Park in the South Coast features the southernmost subtropical rainforest in the state.\nThe Illawarra region is centred on the city of Wollongong, with the Shoalhaven, Eurobodalla, and the Sapphire Coast to the south. The Central Coast lies between Sydney and Newcastle, with the Mid North Coast and Northern Rivers regions reaching northwards to the Queensland border. Tourism is important to the economies of coastal towns such as Coffs Harbour, Lismore, Nowra and Port Macquarie, but the region also produces seafood, beef, dairy, fruit, sugar cane and timber.\nThe Great Dividing Range extends from Victoria in the south through New South Wales to Queensland, parallel to the narrow coastal plain. This area includes the Snowy Mountains, the Northern, Central and Southern Tablelands, the Southern Highlands and the South West Slopes. Whilst not particularly steep, many peaks of the range rise above , with the highest Mount Kosciuszko at . Skiing in Australia began in this region at Kiandra around 1861. The relatively short ski season underwrites the tourist industry in the Snowy Mountains. Agriculture, particularly the wool industry, is important throughout the highlands. Major centres include Armidale, Bathurst, Bowral, Goulburn, Inverell, Orange, Queanbeyan and Tamworth.\nThere are numerous forests in New South Wales, with such tree species as Red Gum Eucalyptus and Crow Ash (\"Flindersia australis\"), being represented. Forest floors have a diverse set of understory shrubs and fungi. One of the widespread fungi is Witch's Butter (\"Tremella mesenterica\").\nThe western slopes and plains fill a significant portion of the state's area and have a much sparser population than areas nearer the coast. Agriculture is central to the economy of the western slopes, particularly the Riverina region and Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area in the state's south-west. Regional cities such as Albury, Dubbo, Griffith and Wagga Wagga and towns such as Deniliquin, Leeton and Parkes exist primarily to service these agricultural regions. The western slopes descend slowly to the western plains that comprise almost two-thirds of the state and are largely arid or semi-arid. The mining town of Broken Hill is the largest centre in this area.\nOne possible definition of the centre for New South Wales is located west-north-west of Tottenham.\nClimate.\nA little more than half of the state has an arid to semi-arid climate, where the rainfall averages from a year throughout most of this climate zone. Summer temperatures can be very hot, while winter nights can be quite cold in this region. Rainfall varies throughout the state. The far north-west receives the least, less than annually, while the east receives between of rain.\nThe climate along the flat, coastal plain east of the range varies from oceanic in the south to humid subtropical in the northern half of the state, right above Wollongong. Rainfall is highest in this area; however, it still varies from around to as high as in the wettest areas, for example Dorrigo. In the state's south, on the westward side of the Great Dividing Range, rainfall is heaviest in winter due to cold fronts which move across southern Australia, while in the north, around Lismore, rain is heaviest in summer from tropical systems and occasionally even cyclones. During late winter, the coastal plain is relatively dry due to foehn winds that originate from the Great Dividing Range; the mountain range block the moist, westerly cold fronts that arrive from the Southern Ocean, whereby providing generally clear conditions on the leeward side.\nThe climate in the southern half of the state is generally warm to hot in summer and cool in the winter. The seasons are more defined in the southern half of the state, especially as one moves inland towards South West Slopes, Central West and the Riverina region. The climate in the northeast region of the state, or the North Coast, bordering Queensland, is hot and humid in the summer and mild in winter. The Northern Tablelands, which are also on the North coast, have relatively mild summers and cold winters, due to their high elevation on the Great Dividing Range.\nPeaks along the Great Dividing Range vary from to over above sea level. Temperatures can be cool to cold in winter with frequent frosts and snowfall, and are rarely hot in summer due to the elevation. Lithgow has a climate typical of the range, as do the regional cities of Orange, Cooma, Oberon and Armidale. Such places fall within the subtropical highland (\"Cwb\") variety. Rainfall is moderate in this area, ranging from .\nSnowfall is common in the higher parts of the range, sometimes occurring as far north as the Queensland border. On the highest peaks of the Snowy Mountains, the climate can be subpolar oceanic and even alpine on the higher peaks with very cold temperatures and heavy snow. The Blue Mountains, Southern Tablelands and Central Tablelands, which are situated on the Great Dividing Range, have mild to warm summers and cold winters, although not as severe as those in the Snowy Mountains.\nThe highest maximum temperature recorded was at Menindee in the west of the state on 10 January 1939. The lowest minimum temperature was at Charlotte Pass in the Snowy Mountains on 29 June 1994. This is also the lowest temperature recorded in the whole of Australia excluding the Antarctic Territory.\nDemographics.\nThe estimated population of New South Wales at the end of December 2021 was 8,095,430 people, representing approximately 31.42% of the nationwide population.\nIn June 2017, Sydney was home to almost two-thirds (65.3%) of the NSW population.\nAncestry and immigration.\nAt the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \nAt the 2021 census, 2,794,666 people were living in New South Wales who were born overseas, accounting for 34.6% of the population. Only 43.7% of the population had both parents born in Australia.\n3.4% of the population, or 278,043 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2021.\nLanguage.\nAccording to the 2021 census, 29.5% of people in New South Wales speak a language other than English at home with Mandarin (3.4%), Arabic (2.8%), Cantonese (1.8%), Vietnamese (1.5%) and Hindi (1.0%) being the most popular.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, Christianity was the primary religious affiliation in New South Wales (NSW), comprising 47.6% of the population, mostly Roman Catholicism (22.4%) and Anglicanism (11.9%). This percentage has declined over time, while the number of people identifying with no religious affiliation has risen. In 2016, the Christian affiliation rate was 55.2%, and in 1971 it was 88.4%. About 33.2% of people in NSW reported having no religious affiliation in 2021.\nAbout 12.1% of the population in 2021 identified with a non-Christian religion, with Islam (4.3%), Hinduism (3.4%), and Buddhism (2.8%) being the most common.\nGovernment.\nExecutive power is formally exercised by the Executive Council, which consists of the Governor and senior ministers. The current governor is Margaret Beazley. The governor commissions as premier the leader of the parliamentary political party that can command a simple majority of votes in the Legislative Assembly. The premier then recommends the appointment of other members of the two Houses to the Ministry, under the principle of responsible or Westminster government. As in other Westminster systems, there is no constitutional requirement in New South Wales for the government to be formed from the parliament, merely a convention. As of early July 2023, the premier is Chris Minns of the Labor Party.\nConstitution.\nThe form of the Government of New South Wales is prescribed in its Constitution, dating from 1856 and currently the \"Constitution Act 1902\" (NSW). Since 1901 New South Wales has been a state of the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Australian Constitution regulates its relationship with the Commonwealth.\nIn 2006, the Constitution Amendment Pledge of Loyalty Act 2006 No 6, was enacted to amend the NSW Constitution Act 1902 to require Members of the New South Wales Parliament and its Ministers to take a pledge of loyalty to Australia and to the people of New South Wales instead of swearing allegiance to Elizabeth II her heirs and successors, and to revise the oaths taken by Executive Councillors. The Pledge of Loyalty Act was officially assented to by the Queen on 3 April 2006. The option to swear allegiance to the Queen was restored as an alternative option in June 2012.\nUnder the Australian Constitution, New South Wales ceded certain legislative and judicial powers to the Commonwealth, but retained independence in all other areas. The New South Wales Constitution says: \"The Legislature shall, subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, have power to make laws for the peace, welfare, and good government of New South Wales in all cases whatsoever\".\nParliament.\nThe first responsible self-government of New South Wales was formed on 6 June 1856 with Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson appointed by Governor Sir William Denison as its first Colonial Secretary which in those days accounted also as the premier. The Parliament of New South Wales is composed of the Sovereign and two houses: the Legislative Assembly (lower house), and the Legislative Council (upper house). Elections are held every four years on the fourth Saturday of March, the most recent being on 25 March 2023. At each election one member is elected to the Legislative Assembly from each of 93 electoral districts and half of the 42 members of the Legislative Council are elected by a statewide electorate.\nLocal government.\nNew South Wales is divided into 128 local government areas. There is also the Unincorporated Far West Region which is not part of any local government area, in the sparsely inhabited Far West, and Lord Howe Island, which is also unincorporated but self-governed by the Lord Howe Island Board.\nEmergency services.\nNew South Wales is policed by the New South Wales Police Force, a statutory authority. Established in 1862, the New South Wales Police Force investigates Summary and Indictable offences throughout the State of New South Wales. The state has two fire services: the volunteer-based New South Wales Rural Fire Service, which is responsible for the majority of the state, and the Fire and Rescue NSW, a government agency responsible for protecting urban areas. There is some overlap due to suburbanisation. Ambulance services are provided through the New South Wales Ambulance. Rescue services (i.e., vertical, road crash, confinement) are a joint effort by all emergency services, with Ambulance Rescue, Police Rescue Squad and Fire Rescue Units contributing. Volunteer rescue organisations include Marine Rescue New South Wales, State Emergency Service (SES), Surf Life Saving NSW and Volunteer Rescue Association (VRA).\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary.\nThe NSW school system comprises a kindergarten to year 12 system with primary schooling up to year 6 and secondary schooling between years 7 and 12. Schooling is compulsory from before 6 years old until the age of 17 (unless Year 10 is completed earlier). Between 1943 and 2009, schooling was only compulsory in NSW until age 15.\nPrimary and secondary schools include government and non-government schools. Government schools are further classified as comprehensive and selective schools. Non-government schools include Catholic schools, other denominational schools, and non-denominational independent schools.\nTypically, a primary school provides education from kindergarten level to year 6. A secondary school, usually called a \"high school\", provides education from years 7 to 12.\nThe NSW Education Standards Authority classifies the 13 years of primary and secondary schooling into six stages, beginning with Early Stage 1 (Kindergarten) and ending with Stage 6 (years 11 and 12).\nRecord of School Achievement.\nA Record of School Achievement (RoSA) is awarded by the NSW Education Standards Authority to students who have completed at least Year 10 but leave school without completing the Higher School Certificate. The RoSA was introduced in 2012 to replace the former School Certificate.\nHigher School Certificate.\nThe Higher School Certificate (HSC) is the usual Year 12 leaving certificate in NSW. The HSC is the most popular high school credential in Australia with 75,493 students studying one or more HSC courses in 2022. Most students complete the HSC before entering the workforce or going on to study at university or TAFE (although the HSC itself can be completed at TAFE). The HSC must be completed for a student to get an Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (formerly Universities Admission Index), which determines the student's rank against fellow students who completed the Higher School Certificate.\nTertiary.\nEleven universities primarily operate in New South Wales. Sydney is home to Australia's first university, the University of Sydney founded in 1850. Other universities include the University of New South Wales, Macquarie University, University of Technology, Sydney and Western Sydney University. The Australian Catholic University has three of its seven campuses in Sydney, and the private University of Notre Dame Australia also operates a secondary campus in the city.\nOutside Sydney, the leading universities are the University of Newcastle and the University of Wollongong. Armidale is home to the University of New England, and Charles Sturt University. Southern Cross University has campuses spread across cities in the state's north coast.\nThe public universities are state government agencies; however, they are largely regulated by the federal government, which also administers their public funding. Admission to NSW universities is arranged together with universities in the Australian Capital Territory by another organisation, the Universities Admission Centre.\nPrimarily, vocational training up to the level of advanced diplomas is provided by the state government's ten Technical and Further Education (TAFE) institutes. These institutes run courses on 138 campuses throughout the state.\nEconomy.\nNSW is the largest state economy in Australia, with service industries contributing almost 80% of the state's economic activity and 90% of its employment. Business services, which include financial services, professional, scientific and technical services, property services, information media, and telecommunications, account for nearly a third of the state economy. Major merchandise exports include coal, copper, beef and aluminium. In recent years, there has been strong growth in exports of education, tourism, and financial and business services.\nConstruction accounted for 8% of the NSW economy in 2020\u201321, while manufacturing contributed 6%, mining 2%, and agriculture, forestry and fishing just under 2%.\nCoal and related products are the state's biggest merchandise export. Its value to the state's economy is over A$5\u00a0billion, accounting for about 19% of all merchandise exports from NSW. Tourism is worth over $18.1\u00a0billion to the New South Wales economy and employs 3.1% of the workforce.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture accounts for just under 2% of the NSW economy. NSW has the second-highest value of agricultural production of the Australian states. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Wheat is the most extensive crop in the state by hectare amounting to 39% of the continent's harvest. The most important wheat-growing areas are the Central West, Orana, New England, North-West and Riverina.\nBarley, cotton and canola are also important broadacre crops. Most cotton production is in the New England, Orana, North West, and Far West regions. However, the southern regions of the state now produce almost one-third of the state's crop by value.NSW produces about 20% of Australia's fruit and nuts, and about 12% of its vegetables by value. The major regions for fruit and nut production are the Riverina, Coffs Harbour-Grafton and the Murray. About of vineyards lie across the eastern region of the state, with the Hunter Valley and the Riverina being major wine producing regions.\nCattle, sheep and pigs are the predominant livestock of NSW. The state has over one-third of the country's sheep, and one-fifth of its cattle and pigs. Australia's largest and most valuable Thoroughbred horse breeding area is centred on Scone in the Hunter Valley.\nTransport.\nPassage through New South Wales is vital for cross-continent transport. Rail and road traffic from Brisbane (Queensland) to Perth (Western Australia), or to Melbourne (Victoria) must pass through New South Wales.\nRailways.\nThe majority of railways in New South Wales are currently operated by the state government. Some lines began as branch lines of railways starting in other states. For instance, Balranald near the Victorian border was connected by a rail line coming up from Victoria and into New South Wales. Another line beginning in Adelaide crossed over the border and stopped at Broken Hill.\nRailways management are conducted by Sydney Trains and NSW TrainLink which maintain rolling stock. Sydney Trains operates trains within Sydney while NSW TrainLink operates outside Sydney, intercity, country and interstate services.\nBoth Sydney Trains and NSW TrainLink have their main terminus at Sydney's Central station. NSW TrainLink regional and long-distance services consist of XPT services to Grafton, Casino, Brisbane, Melbourne and Dubbo, as well as Xplorer services to Canberra, Griffith, Broken Hill, Armidale and Moree. NSW TrainLink intercity trains operate on the Blue Mountains Line, Central Coast &amp; Newcastle Line, South Coast Line, Southern Highlands Line and Hunter Line.\nRoads.\nMajor roads are the concern of both federal and state governments. The latter maintains these through the Transport for NSW agency.\nThe main roads in New South Wales are\nOther roads are usually the concern of the TfNSW or the local government authority.\nAir.\nSydney Airport located in the Sydney suburb of Mascot is the principal airport for not just the state but the whole nation. It is a hub for Australia's national airline Qantas.\nOther airlines serving regional New South Wales include: NSW Rural and Regional Air Transport Operators\nFerries.\nTransdev Sydney Ferries operates Sydney Ferries services within Sydney Harbour and the Parramatta River, while Newcastle Transport has a ferry service within Newcastle. All other ferry services are privately operated.\nSpirit of Tasmania ran a commercial ferry service between Sydney and Devonport, Tasmania. This service was terminated in 2006.\nPrivate boat services operated between South Australia, Victoria and New South Wales along the Murray and Darling Rivers but these only exist now as the occasional tourist paddle-wheeler service.\nNational parks.\nNew South Wales has more than 780 national parks and reserves covering more than 8% of the state. These parks range from rainforests, waterfalls, rugged bush to marine wonderlands and outback deserts, including World Heritage sites.\nThe Royal National Park on the southern outskirts of Sydney became Australia's first national park when proclaimed on 26 April 1879. Originally named simply 'National Park' until 1955, this park was the second national park to be established in the world after Yellowstone National Park in the U.S. Kosciuszko National Park is the largest park in state encompassing New South Wales' alpine region.\nThe National Parks Association was formed in 1957 to create a system of national parks all over New South Wales which led to the formation of the National Parks and Wildlife Service in 1967. This government agency is responsible for developing and maintaining the parks and reserve system, and conserving natural and cultural heritage, in the state of New South Wales. These parks preserve special habitats, plants and wildlife, such as the Wollemi National Park where the Wollemi Pine grows and areas sacred to Australian Aboriginals such as Mutawintji National Park in western New South Wales.\nSport.\nThe most popular sports by participation in the state are soccer and tennis. The National Rugby League, which is based in Sydney, is the dominant professional spectator sport. In rugby league, the state is represented by the New South Wales Blues in the State of Origin series. The state hosts 10 of the 17 NRL teams: the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs, Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks, Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles, Newcastle Knights, Parramatta Eels, Penrith Panthers, St George Illawarra Dragons, South Sydney Rabbitohs, Sydney Roosters, and Wests Tigers. Other rugby league competitions in the state include the NSW Cup, the Sydney A-Grade, and regional competitions administered by the NSWRL's Country Rugby League division.\nThe main summer sport is cricket, and the Sydney Cricket Ground hosts the 'New Year' cricket Test match in January each year. The NSW Blues play in the One-Day Cup and Sheffield Shield competitions. Sydney Sixers and Sydney Thunder both play in the Big Bash League.\nThe state is represented in the Australian Football League by the Sydney Swans, and the Greater Western Sydney Giants who entered the competition in 2012.\nThe state is represented by five teams in soccer's A-League: Sydney FC, Western Sydney Wanderers (2014 Asian champions), Central Coast Mariners, Newcastle Jets and Macarthur FC.\nOther teams in major national competitions include the Sydney Kings and Illawarra Hawks in the National Basketball League, Sydney Uni Flames in the Women's National Basketball League, New South Wales Waratahs in Super Rugby and New South Wales Swifts in Super Netball.\nSydney was the host of the 1938 British Empire Games and 2000 Summer Olympics. The Stadium Australia hosts major events including the NRL Grand Final, State of Origin, rugby union and soccer internationals.\nThe annual Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race begins in Sydney Harbour on Boxing Day. Bathurst hosts the annual Bathurst 1000 as part of the Supercars Championship at Mount Panorama Circuit.\nThe equine sports of campdrafting and polocrosse were developed in New South Wales and competitions are now held across Australia. Polocrosse is now played in many overseas countries.\nOther professional teams include:\nCulture.\nAs Australia's most populous state, New South Wales is home to several cultural institutions of importance to the nation. In music, New South Wales is home to the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, Australia's busiest and largest orchestra. Australia's largest opera company, Opera Australia, is headquartered in Sydney. Both of these organisations perform a subscription series at the Sydney Opera House. Other major musical bodies include the Australian Chamber Orchestra. Sydney is host to the Australian Ballet for its Sydney season (the ballet is headquartered in Melbourne). Apart from the Sydney Opera House, major musical performance venues include the City Recital Hall and the Sydney Town Hall.\nNew South Wales is home to several major museums and art galleries, including the Australian Museum, the Powerhouse Museum, the Museum of Sydney, the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the Museum of Contemporary Art.\nSydney is home to five Arts teaching organisations, which have all produced world-famous students: The National Art School, The College of Fine Arts, the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA), the Australian Film, Television &amp; Radio School and the Conservatorium of Music (now part of the University of Sydney).\nNew South Wales is the setting and shooting location of many Australian films, including \"Mad Max 2\", which was shot near the mining town of Broken Hill. The state has also attracted international productions, both as a setting, such as in \"\", and as a stand-in for other locations, as seen in \"The Matrix\" franchise, \"The Great Gatsby\" and \"Unbroken\". 20th Century Fox operates Fox Studios Australia in Sydney. Screen NSW, which controls the state film industry, generates approximately $100\u00a0million into the New South Wales economy each year.\nSister states.\nNew South Wales in recent history has pursued bilateral partnerships with other federated states/provinces and metropolises through establishing a network of sister state relationships.\nThe state currently has 7 sister states:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21655", "revid": "42158200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21655", "title": "Nitric acid", "text": "Highly corrosive mineral acid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nNitric acid is an inorganic compound with the formula . It is a highly corrosive mineral acid. The compound is colorless, but samples tend to acquire a yellow cast over time due to decomposition into oxides of nitrogen. Most commercially available nitric acid has a concentration of 68% in water. When the solution contains more than 86% , it is referred to as \"fuming nitric acid\". Depending on the amount of nitrogen dioxide present, fuming nitric acid is further characterized as red fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 86%, or white fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 95%.\nNitric acid is the primary reagent used for nitration \u2013 the addition of a nitro group, typically to an organic molecule. While some resulting nitro compounds are shock- and thermally-sensitive explosives, a few are stable enough to be used in munitions and demolition, while others are still more stable and used as synthetic dyes and medicines (e.g. metronidazole). Nitric acid is also commonly used as a strong oxidizing agent.\nHistory.\nMedieval alchemy.\nThe discovery of mineral acids such as nitric acid is generally presumed to go back to 13th-century European alchemy. The conventional view is that nitric acid was first described in pseudo-Geber's \"De inventione veritatis\" (\"On the Discovery of Truth\", after c.\u20091300).\nHowever, according to Eric John Holmyard and Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, nitric acid was also referenced in various earlier Arabic works such as the (\"Chest of Wisdom\") attributed to Jabir ibn Hayyan (8th century) or the attributed to the Fatimid caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah (985\u20131021).\nThe recipe in the attributed to Jabir has been translated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take five parts of pure flowers of nitre, three parts of Cyprus vitriol and two parts of Yemen alum. Powder them well, separately, until they are like dust and then place them in a flask. Plug the latter with a palm fibre and attach a glass receiver to it. Then invert the apparatus and heat the upper portion (i.e. the flask containing the mixture) with a gentle fire. There will flow down by reason of the heat an oil like cow's butter.\nNitric acid is also found in post-1300 works falsely attributed to Albert the Great and Ramon Llull (both 13th century). These works describe the distillation of a mixture containing niter and green vitriol, which they call (aqua fortis).\nModern era.\nIn the 17th century, Johann Rudolf Glauber devised a process to obtain nitric acid by distilling potassium nitrate with sulfuric acid. In 1776 Antoine Lavoisier cited Joseph Priestley's work to point out that it can be converted from nitric oxide (which he calls \"nitrous air\"), \"combined with an approximately equal volume of the purest part of common air, and with a considerable quantity of water.\" In 1785 Henry Cavendish determined its precise composition and showed that it could be synthesized by passing a stream of electric sparks through moist air. In 1806, Humphry Davy reported the results of extensive distilled water electrolysis experiments concluding that nitric acid was produced at the anode from dissolved atmospheric nitrogen gas. He used a high voltage battery and non-reactive electrodes and vessels such as gold electrode cones that doubled as vessels bridged by damp asbestos.\nThe industrial production of nitric acid from atmospheric air began in 1905 with the Birkeland\u2013Eyde process, also known as the arc process. This process is based upon the oxidation of atmospheric nitrogen by atmospheric oxygen to nitric oxide with a very high temperature electric arc. Yields of up to approximately 4\u20135% nitric oxide were obtained at 3,000\u00a0\u00b0C, and less at lower temperatures. The nitric oxide was cooled and oxidized by the remaining atmospheric oxygen to nitrogen dioxide, and this was subsequently absorbed in water in a series of packed column or plate column absorption towers to produce dilute nitric acid. The first towers bubbled the nitrogen dioxide through water and non-reactive quartz fragments. About 20% of the produced oxides of nitrogen remained unreacted so the final towers contained an alkali solution to neutralize the rest. The process was very energy intensive and was rapidly displaced by the Ostwald process once cheap ammonia became available.\nAnother early production method was invented by French engineer Albert Nodon around 1913. His method produced nitric acid from electrolysis of calcium nitrate converted by bacteria from nitrogenous matter in peat bogs. A pit was dug into the peat, then lined with tarred timber stakes around the sides. Into this pit was placed a porous earthenware vessel, surrounded by crushed limestone. The interior was filled with coke around a graphite anode. Nitric acid was pumped out via a glass tube that was sunk down nearly to the bottom of the pot, while fresh water was pumped into the top through another glass pipe to replace the fluid removed. Cast iron cathodes were sunk into the peat surrounding it. Resistance was about 3 ohms per cubic meter and the power supplied was around 10 volts. Production from a one hectare deposit, 6.5 feet deep, was estimated to be in excess of 600 tons per year.\nOnce the Haber process for the efficient production of ammonia was introduced in 1913, nitric acid production from ammonia using the Ostwald process overtook production from the Birkeland\u2013Eyde process. This method of production is still in use today.\nPhysical and chemical properties.\nCommercially available nitric acid is an azeotrope with water at a concentration of 68% . This solution has a boiling temperature of at . It is known as \"concentrated nitric acid\". The azeotrope of nitric acid and water is a colourless liquid at room temperature.\nTwo solid hydrates are known: the monohydrate or oxonium nitrate and the trihydrate .\nAn older density scale is occasionally seen, with concentrated nitric acid specified as 42\u00a0Baum\u00e9.\nContamination with nitrogen dioxide.\nNitric acid is subject to thermal or light decomposition and for this reason it was often stored in brown glass bottles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis reaction may give rise to some non-negligible variations in the vapor pressure above the liquid because the nitrogen oxides produced dissolve partly or completely in the acid.\nThe nitrogen dioxide () and/or dinitrogen tetroxide () remains dissolved in the nitric acid coloring it yellow or even red at higher temperatures. While the pure acid tends to give off white fumes when exposed to air, acid with dissolved nitrogen dioxide gives off reddish-brown vapors, leading to the common names \"red fuming nitric acid\" and \"white fuming nitric acid\". Nitrogen oxides () are soluble in nitric acid.\nFuming nitric acid.\nCommercial-grade fuming nitric acid contains 98% and has a density of 1.50\u00a0g/cm3. This grade is often used in the explosives industry. It is not as volatile nor as corrosive as the anhydrous acid and has the approximate concentration of 21.4\u00a0M.\nRed fuming nitric acid, or RFNA, contains substantial quantities of dissolved nitrogen dioxide () leaving the solution with a reddish-brown color. The presence of dissolved nitrogen dioxide increases the density of the aqueous and the anhydrous acid, anhydrous nitric acid containing 25% NO2 has a density of around 1.60\u00a0g/cm3, the density is lower in water-containing mixtures. The maximum density of anhydrous nitric acid is attained at 40% (w/w) NO2.\nAn \"inhibited\" fuming nitric acid, either white inhibited fuming nitric acid (IWFNA), or red inhibited fuming nitric acid (IRFNA), can be made by the addition of 0.6 to 0.7% hydrogen fluoride (HF). This fluoride is added for corrosion resistance in metal tanks. The fluoride creates a metal fluoride layer that protects the metal.\nAnhydrous nitric acid.\nWhite fuming nitric acid, pure nitric acid or WFNA, is very close to anhydrous nitric acid. It is available as 99.9% nitric acid by assay, or about 24\u00a0molar. One specification for white fuming nitric acid is that it has a maximum of 2% water and a maximum of 0.5% dissolved . Anhydrous nitric acid is a colorless, low-viscosity (mobile) liquid with a density of 1.512\u20133\u00a0g/cm3 that solidifies at to form white crystals. Its dynamic viscosity under standard conditions is 0.76\u00a0mPa\u00b7s. As it decomposes to and water, it obtains a yellow tint. It boils at . It is usually stored in a glass shatterproof amber bottle with twice the volume of head space to allow for pressure build up, but even with those precautions the bottle must be vented monthly to release pressure.\nStructure and bonding.\nThe two terminal N\u2013O bonds are nearly equivalent and relatively short, at 1.20 and 1.21 \u00c5. This can be explained by theories of resonance; the two major canonical forms show some double bond character in these two bonds, causing them to be shorter than N\u2013O single bonds. The third N\u2013O bond is elongated because its O atom is bonded to H atom, with a bond length of 1.41 \u00c5 in the gas phase. The molecule is slightly aplanar (the and NOH planes are tilted away from each other by 2\u00b0) and there is restricted rotation about the N\u2013OH single bond.\nReactions.\nAcid-base properties.\nNitric acid is normally considered to be a strong acid at ambient temperatures. There is some disagreement over the value of the acid dissociation constant, though the p\"K\"a value is usually reported as less than \u22121. This means that the nitric acid in diluted solution is fully dissociated except in extremely acidic solutions. The p\"K\"a value rises to 1 at a temperature of 250\u00a0\u00b0C.\nNitric acid can act as a base with respect to an acid such as sulfuric acid:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe nitronium ion, , is the active reagent in aromatic nitration reactions. Since nitric acid has both acidic and basic properties, it can undergo an autoprotolysis reaction, similar to the self-ionization of water:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReactions with metals.\nNitric acid reacts with most metals, but the details depend on the concentration of the acid and the nature of the metal. Dilute nitric acid behaves as a typical acid in its reaction with most metals. Magnesium, manganese, and zinc liberate :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNitric acid can oxidize non-active metals such as copper and silver. With these non-active or less electropositive metals the products depend on temperature and the acid concentration. For example, copper reacts with dilute nitric acid at ambient temperatures with a 3:8 stoichiometry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe nitric oxide produced may react with atmospheric oxygen to give nitrogen dioxide. With more concentrated nitric acid, nitrogen dioxide is produced directly in a reaction with 1:4 stoichiometry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUpon reaction with nitric acid, most metals give the corresponding nitrates. Some metalloids and metals give the oxides; for instance, Sn, As, Sb, and Ti are oxidized into , , , and respectively.\nSome precious metals, such as pure gold and platinum-group metals do not react with nitric acid, though pure gold does react with \"aqua regia\", a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and hydrochloric acid. However, some less noble metals (Ag, Cu, ...) present in some gold alloys relatively poor in gold such as colored gold can be easily oxidized and dissolved by nitric acid, leading to colour changes of the gold-alloy surface. Nitric acid is used as a cheap means in jewelry shops to quickly spot low-gold alloys (&lt;\u00a014 karats) and to rapidly assess the gold purity.\nBeing a powerful oxidizing agent, nitric acid reacts with many non-metallic compounds, sometimes explosively. Depending on the acid concentration, temperature and the reducing agent involved, the end products can be variable. Reaction takes place with all metals except the noble metals series and certain alloys. As a general rule, oxidizing reactions occur primarily with the concentrated acid, favoring the formation of nitrogen dioxide (). However, the powerful oxidizing properties of nitric acid are thermodynamic in nature, but sometimes its oxidation reactions are rather kinetically non-favored. The presence of small amounts of nitrous acid () greatly increases the rate of reaction.\nAlthough chromium (Cr), iron (Fe), and aluminium (Al) readily dissolve in dilute nitric acid, the concentrated acid forms a metal-oxide layer that protects the bulk of the metal from further oxidation. The formation of this protective layer is called passivation. Typical passivation concentrations range from 20% to 50% by volume. Metals that are passivated by concentrated nitric acid are iron, cobalt, chromium, nickel, and aluminium.\nReactions with non-metals.\nBeing a powerful oxidizing acid, nitric acid reacts with many organic materials, and the reactions may be explosive. The hydroxyl group will typically strip a hydrogen from the organic molecule to form water, and the remaining nitro group takes the hydrogen's place. Nitration of organic compounds with nitric acid is the primary method of synthesis of many common explosives, such as nitroglycerin and trinitrotoluene (TNT). As very many less stable byproducts are possible, these reactions must be carefully thermally controlled, and the byproducts removed to isolate the desired product.\nReaction with non-metallic elements, with the exceptions of nitrogen, oxygen, noble gases, silicon, and halogens other than iodine, usually oxidizes them to their highest oxidation states as acids with the formation of nitrogen dioxide for concentrated acid and nitric oxide for dilute acid.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConcentrated nitric acid oxidizes , , and into , , and , respectively. Although it reacts with graphite and amorphous carbon, it does not react with diamond; it can separate diamond from the graphite that it oxidizes.\nXanthoproteic test.\nNitric acid reacts with proteins to form yellow nitrated products. This reaction is known as the xanthoproteic reaction. This test is carried out by adding concentrated nitric acid to the substance being tested, and then heating the mixture. If proteins that contain amino acids with aromatic rings are present, the mixture turns yellow. Upon adding a base such as ammonia, the color turns orange. These color changes are caused by nitrated aromatic rings in the protein. Xanthoproteic acid is formed when the acid contacts epithelial cells. Respective local skin color changes are indicative of inadequate safety precautions when handling nitric acid.\nProduction.\nIndustrial nitric acid production uses the Ostwald process. The combined Ostwald and Haber processes are extremely efficient, requiring only air and natural gas feedstocks.\nThe Ostwald process' technical innovation creates the proper conditions under which anhydrous ammonia burns to nitric oxide (NO) instead of dinitrogen (). The nitric oxide is then oxidized, often with atmospheric oxygen, to nitrogen dioxide ():\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe dioxide then disproportionates in water to nitric acid and the nitric oxide feedstock:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe net reaction is maximal oxidation of ammonia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDissolved nitrogen oxides are either stripped (in the case of white fuming nitric acid) or remain in solution to form red fuming nitric acid.\nCommercial grade nitric acid solutions are usually between 52% and 68% nitric acid by mass, the maximum distillable concentration. Further dehydration to 98% can be achieved with concentrated . Historically, higher acid concentrations were also produced by dissolving additional nitrogen dioxide in the acid, but the last plant in the United States ceased using that process in 2012.\nMore recently, electrochemical means have been developed to produce anhydrous acid from concentrated nitric acid feedstock.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nLaboratory-scale nitric acid syntheses abound. Most take inspiration from the industrial techniques.\nA wide variety of nitrate salts metathesize with sulfuric acid () \u2013 for example, sodium nitrate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDistillation at nitric acid's 83\u00a0\u00b0C boiling point then separates the solid metal-salt residue. The resulting acid solution is the 68.5% azeotrope, and can be further concentrated (as in industry) with either sulfuric acid or magnesium nitrate.\nAlternatively, thermal decomposition of copper(II) nitrate gives nitrogen dioxide and oxygen gases; these are then passed through water or hydrogen peroxide as in the Ostwald process:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nThe main industrial use of nitric acid is for the production of fertilizers. Nitric acid is neutralized with ammonia to give ammonium nitrate. This application consumes 75\u201380% of the 26 million tonnes produced annually (1987). The other main applications are for the production of explosives, nylon precursors, and specialty organic compounds.\nPrecursor to organic nitrogen compounds.\nIn organic synthesis, industrial and otherwise, the nitro group is a versatile functional group. A mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids introduces a nitro substituent onto various aromatic compounds by electrophilic aromatic substitution. Many explosives, such as TNT, are prepared this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEither concentrated sulfuric acid or oleum absorbs the excess water.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe nitro group can be reduced to give an amine group, allowing synthesis of aniline compounds from various nitrobenzenes:\nUse as an oxidant.\nThe precursor to nylon, adipic acid, is produced on a large scale by oxidation of \"KA oil\"\u2014a mixture of cyclohexanone and cyclohexanol\u2014with nitric acid.\nRocket propellant.\nNitric acid has been used in various forms as the oxidizer in liquid-fueled rockets. These forms include red fuming nitric acid, white fuming nitric acid, mixtures with sulfuric acid, and these forms with HF inhibitor. IRFNA (inhibited red fuming nitric acid) was one of three liquid fuel components for the BOMARC missile.\nNiche uses.\nMetal processing.\nNitric acid can be used to convert metals to oxidized forms, such as converting copper metal to cupric nitrate. It can also be used in combination with hydrochloric acid as aqua regia to dissolve noble metals such as gold (as chloroauric acid). These salts can be used to purify gold and other metals beyond 99.9% purity by processes of recrystallization and selective precipitation. Its ability to dissolve certain metals selectively or be a solvent for many metal salts makes it useful in gold parting processes.\nAnalytical reagent.\nIn elemental analysis by ICP-MS, ICP-AES, GFAA, and Flame AA, dilute nitric acid (0.5\u20135.0%) is used as a matrix compound for determining metal traces in solutions. Ultrapure trace metal grade acid is required for such determination, because small amounts of metal ions could affect the result of the analysis.\nIt is also typically used in the digestion process of turbid water samples, sludge samples, solid samples as well as other types of unique samples which require elemental analysis via ICP-MS, ICP-OES, ICP-AES, GFAA and flame atomic absorption spectroscopy. Typically these digestions use a 50% solution of the purchased mixed with Type 1 DI Water.\nIn electrochemistry, nitric acid is used as a chemical doping agent for organic semiconductors, and in purification processes for raw carbon nanotubes.\nWoodworking.\nIn a low concentration (approximately 10%), nitric acid is often used to artificially age pine and maple. The color produced is a grey-gold very much like very old wax- or oil-finished wood (wood finishing).\nEtchant and cleaning agent.\nThe corrosive effects of nitric acid are exploited for some specialty applications, such as etching in printmaking, pickling stainless steel or cleaning silicon wafers in electronics.\nA solution of nitric acid, water and alcohol, nital, is used for etching metals to reveal the microstructure. ISO 14104 is one of the standards detailing this well known procedure.\nNitric acid is used either in combination with hydrochloric acid or alone to clean glass cover slips and glass slides for high-end microscopy applications. It is also used to clean glass before silvering when making silver mirrors.\nCommercially available aqueous blends of 5\u201330% nitric acid and 15\u201340% phosphoric acid are commonly used for cleaning food and dairy equipment primarily to remove precipitated calcium and magnesium compounds (either deposited from the process stream or resulting from the use of hard water during production and cleaning). The phosphoric acid content helps to passivate ferrous alloys against corrosion by the dilute nitric acid.\nNitric acid can be used as a spot test for alkaloids like LSD, giving a variety of colours depending on the alkaloid.\nNuclear fuel reprocessing.\nNitric acid plays a key role in PUREX and other nuclear fuel reprocessing methods, where it can dissolve many different actinides. The resulting nitrates are converted to various complexes that can be reacted and extracted selectively in order to separate the metals from each other.\nSafety.\nNitric acid is a corrosive acid and a powerful oxidizing agent. The major hazard posed by it is chemical burns, as it carries out acid hydrolysis with proteins (amide) and fats (ester), which consequently decomposes living tissue (e.g. skin and flesh). Concentrated nitric acid stains human skin yellow due to its reaction with the keratin. These yellow stains turn orange when neutralized. Systemic effects are unlikely, and the substance is not considered a carcinogen or mutagen.\nThe standard first-aid treatment for acid spills on the skin is, as for other corrosive agents, irrigation with large quantities of water. Washing is continued for at least 10\u201315 minutes to cool the tissue surrounding the acid burn and to prevent secondary damage. Contaminated clothing is removed immediately and the underlying skin washed thoroughly.\nBeing a strong oxidizing agent, nitric acid can react violently with many compounds.\nUse in acid attacks.\nNitric acid is one of the most common types of acid used in acid attacks.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21656", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21656", "title": "Nobel Prize in economic sciences", "text": ""}
{"id": "21657", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21657", "title": "Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences", "text": ""}
{"id": "21658", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21658", "title": "Nobel Prize in economics", "text": ""}
{"id": "21663", "revid": "40347300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21663", "title": "Nihilism", "text": "Denial of certain aspects of existence\nNihilism is a family of philosophical views arguing that life is meaningless, that moral values are baseless, or that knowledge is impossible. Thus, such views reject the basis of certain ideas. Nihilistic views span several branches of philosophy, including ethics, value theory, epistemology, and metaphysics. Nihilism is also described as a broad cultural phenomenon or historical movement that pervades modernity in the Western world.\nExistential nihilism asserts that life is inherently meaningless and lacks a higher purpose. By suggesting that all individual and societal achievements are ultimately pointless, it can lead to indifference, lack of motivation, and existential crises. In response, some philosophers propose detachment from worldly concerns, while others seek to discover or create values. Moral nihilism, a related view, denies the objective existence of morality, arguing that moral evaluations and practices rest on misguided assumptions without any foundation in external reality.\nIn epistemology or the theory of knowledge, nihilism challenges knowledge and truth. According to relativism, knowledge, truth, or meaning are relative to the perspectives of specific individuals or cultural contexts. This implies that there is no independent framework to assess which opinion is ultimately correct. Skeptical interpretations go further by denying the existence of knowledge or truth altogether. In metaphysics, one form of nihilism states that the universe could have been empty without any objects. This view holds that there is no fundamental reason for why something exists rather than nothing. Mereological nihilism asserts that there are only simple objects, like elementary particles, but no composite objects, like tables. Cosmological nihilism is the view that reality is unintelligible and indifferent to human understanding. Other nihilist positions include political, semantic, logical, and therapeutic nihilism.\nSome aspects of nihilism have their roots in ancient philosophy in the form of challenges to established beliefs, values, and practices. However, nihilism is primarily associated with modernity, emerging in the 18th and 19th centuries, particularly in Germany and Russia through the works of Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi and Ivan Turgenev. It took center stage in the thought of Friedrich Nietzsche, who understood nihilism as a pervasive cultural trend in which people lose the values and ideals guiding their lives as a result of secularization. In the 20th century, nihilist themes were explored by Dadaism, existentialism, and postmodern philosophy.\nDefinition, related terms, and etymology.\nNihilism is a family of views that reject or deny certain aspects of existence. Different forms of nihilism deny different features of reality. For example, existential nihilism denies that life has a higher meaning, and moral nihilism rejects the existence of moral phenomena. Similarly, epistemological nihilism questions the possibility of objective knowledge, while political nihilism advocates the destruction of established political institutions. The precise definition of nihilism is disputed, and many other definitions and types of nihilism have been proposed, covering a wide range of topics studied by different branches of philosophy, such as ethics, value theory, epistemology, and metaphysics.\nIn addition to philosophical theories, nihilism can also refer to a broader cultural phenomenon or historical movement. In this context, it is primarily associated with modernity in the Western world, characterized by deep skepticism toward established norms and values alongside indifference, despair, and a lack of purpose. Outside the academic discourse, the term \"nihilism\" is used more loosely in everyday language to describe negative, destructive, or antisocial attitudes, expressing that someone fails to care about a particular issue. For instance, conservatives may be labeled as nihilistic for not valuing progress, while progressives may be described as such for disregarding established norms.\nNihilism is closely associated with other disillusioned attitudes toward the world, like pessimism, absurdism, existentialism, cynicism, and apathy. Although the meanings of these terms overlap, they have distinct connotations and do not necessarily imply one another. Pessimism contrasts with optimism as a negative outlook focused on bad outcomes and characterized by hopelessness. A key difference to nihilism, according to one interpretation, is that pessimists see the world as inherently bad, whereas nihilists deny that it has any positive or negative meaning. Absurdism argues that the world is not just meaningless, as existential nihilism asserts, but also absurd. It examines the absurdity arising from paradoxical attempts to find meaning in an inherently meaningless universe. Existentialism is a philosophical tradition that addresses absurdist and nihilist views while exploring the human condition through themes like anxiety, death, freedom, and authenticity. Cynicism is a distrustful attitude toward the motives of other people or society in general. Apathy is a state of mind in which a person does not care about things, characterized by indifference and a lack of desires and emotions.\nThe word \"nihilism\" is a combination of the Latin term , meaning 'nothing', and the suffix \"-ism\", indicating an ideology. Its literal meaning is 'ideology of nothing' or 'ideology of negation', reflected in terms like \"annihilate\" and \"nihility\". The word emerged in 18th-century Germany, first as a literary term and later as a philosophical notion, which Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi conceptualized to criticize philosophical thought that rejects meaning or existence. Its first recorded use in English dates to the 1810s. The term became popular in 19th-century Russia through Ivan Turgenev's novel \"Fathers and Sons\" and the Russian nihilist movement. Interest in it increased more broadly in the 20th century in response to Friedrich Nietzsche's works, while its meaning expanded to cover a wider range of philosophical and cultural phenomena.\nEthics and value theory.\nForms of nihilism belonging to the fields of ethics and value theory question the existence of values, morality, and the meaning of life.\nExistential nihilism.\nExistential nihilism asserts that life is meaningless. It is not limited to the idea that some people fail to find meaning in their lives but makes the broader claim that human existence in general or the world as a whole lacks a higher purpose. This view suggests that living a genuinely meaningful life is impossible, that there is no higher reason to continue living, and that all efforts, achievements, happiness, and suffering are ultimately pointless. \nExistential nihilism has diverse practical implications since people usually act with a purpose in mind, sometimes with the explicit goal of making their lives meaningful. As a result, the belief that there is no higher meaning or purpose can bring about indifference, a lack of motivation, and anxiety. In extreme cases, this can result in depression and despair or trigger an existential crisis. Some philosophers, such as Martin Heidegger, highlight the connection to boredom, arguing that the lack of engagement and goals experienced in this mood makes life appear pointless.\nDiverse possible reactions to existential nihilism have been proposed. Inspired by Indian philosophy, Arthur Schopenhauer suggested a pessimistic and ascetic response, advocating detachment from the world by renouncing desires and stopping to affirm life. Friedrich Nietzsche sought to use the disruptive force of nihilism to re-interpret or re-evaluate all established ideals and values in an attempt to overcome nihilism and replace it with an affirmative attitude toward life. Jean-Paul Sartre suggested that people can create their own values through the free choices they make, despite the cosmic lack of meaning. After considering the possibility of committing suicide, Albert Camus argued instead for a defiant attitude in which individuals rebel against meaninglessness. Other responses include a destructive attitude aiming to violently tear down political authorities and social institutions, attempts to undermine nihilism by identifying genuine sources of meaning, and a passive resignation or quiet acceptance.\nArguments for and against existential nihilism are discussed in the academic discourse. Arguments from a cosmological perspective assert that human existence is a minor and insignificant aspect of the universe as a whole, which is indifferent to human concerns and aspirations. This outlook aligns with an atheistic view, stating that, without a God, there is no source of higher values that transcend the natural world. Another viewpoint highlights the pervasiveness of senseless suffering and violence while emphasizing the fleeting nature of happiness. Some theorists link this view to human mortality, suggesting that the inevitability of death renders all human accomplishments transient and ultimately futile. A different perspective from biology argues that life is driven by blind natural selection on a large scale and the satisfaction of innate needs on an individual scale, neither of which aims at a higher purpose. Subjectivists, by contrast, focus on the subjective nature of all value experiences, asserting that they lack any objective ground.\nOpponents of existential nihilism have responded with counterarguments to these statements. For example, some reject the pessimistic outlook that life is primarily characterized by suffering, violence, and death, claiming instead that these negative phenomena are counterbalanced by positive experiences such as happiness and love. Many non-nihilistic theories of the meaning of life are examined in the academic discourse. Supernaturalistic views focus on God or the soul as sources of meaning. Naturalistic views, by contrast, assert that subjective or objective values are inherent in the physical world. They include the discussion of fields where humans actively find meaning, such as exercising freedom, committing oneself to a cause, pursuing altruism, and engaging in positive social relationships.\nMoral nihilism.\nUnlike existential nihilism, moral nihilism focuses specifically on moral phenomena rather than a higher meaning or purpose. In its broadest form, it is the metaethical view that there are no moral facts. Also called \"amoralism\" and \"error theory\", it denies the objective existence of morality, arguing that the theories and practices categorized under this label rest on misguided assumptions without any substantial link to reality. On a practical level, some moral nihilists, such as Nietzsche, assert that without moral obligations, anything is permitted, suggesting that people are allowed to act however they want. Other moral nihilists reject this conclusion and argue that the denial of morality affects not only moral obligations, or what people are required to do, but also moral permissions, or what people are allowed to do. Axiological nihilism, a related view, disputes the objective existence of values in general. This rejection is not limited to moral values and also concerns other types, like aesthetic and religious values.\nOne argument for moral nihilism suggests that moral properties do not exist because of their odd nature, prescribing what to do rather than describing facts, such as shape and size. Science-based versions of this view hold that scientific inquiry does not reveal objective moral facts or that humans lack a source of moral knowledge. A related argument for moral nihilism focuses on the conventional aspects of moral evaluations and the difficulties in resolving moral disagreements. Another line of thought emphasizes the evolutionary origin of morality, viewing it as a mere product of natural selection without a deeper metaphysical foundation.\nMoral realists have raised objections to moral nihilism. Naturalists argue that moral facts belong to the natural world and can be empirically observed. Non-naturalists propose that moral phenomena are different from natural phenomena, but are real nonetheless. Common-sense philosophers assert that moral beliefs are deeply ingrained in practical experience and everyday reasoning, making the wholesale denial of moral facts implausible. A similar objection asserts that moral nihilism is incoherent and rests on a misunderstanding of moral language. Some critics focus on negative practical consequences rather than truth, suggesting that moral nihilism erodes social trust and leads to antisocial conduct.\nSome philosophers use the term \"moral nihilism\" in a more restricted sense that does not imply a rejection of all forms of morality. In one alternative sense, moral nihilism is the same as moral subjectivism, arguing that moral evaluations are purely subjective and lack rational objective justification. As a result, moral judgments are seen as expressions of arbitrary personal preferences, making moral disagreements rationally unresolvable. In another sense, moral nihilism refers to ethical egoism, the theory that morality is determined by self-interest. This view denies that the well-being of others has moral implications unless it has external consequences for one's own well-being.\nEpistemology.\nRelativism.\nEpistemological or epistemic nihilism is a family of views that challenge the existence or universal nature of knowledge. Some versions embrace relativism, denying that objectivity is possible. For example, truth-relativism asserts that truth is relative to the perspectives of specific individuals, groups, historical epochs, or cultural contexts. According to this view, statements like \"the sun rises in the east\" and \"killing is wrong\" are true in some perspectives and false in others. This theory not only claims that different people have different opinions but additionally asserts that no independent framework exists to assess which opinion is ultimately correct. As a result, there is no absolute truth on which observers from different perspectives can agree.\nA related form of relativistic nihilism focuses on meaning rather than truth. It argues that different people rely on incompatible conceptual schemes to make sense of the world. In the absence of a universal framework, genuine communication and shared understanding are deemed impossible since each viewpoint has its own interpretation of reality. Without a common ground, these incommensurable belief systems are arbitrary constructions, limiting reason to operations within a specific system without the ability to reconcile them.\nProponents of relativism emphasize the diversity of human viewpoints and the frequent inability to resolve disagreements and reach a shared understanding. Another argument asserts that theories are usually underdetermined by the data supporting them. As a result, there are different equally valid interpretations without an objective standard to resolve their differences. An influential criticism argues that relativism undermines itself: if all truths are relative to a viewpoint, then relativism itself is only true for some viewpoints and false for others. Another objection is that the absence of absolute epistemic standards may have odd consequences, for example, that people should not argue if they disagree or that they should generally suspend their judgments.\nNietzsche was an influential proponent of relativistic nihilism. He saw belief systems as an expression of the will to power, arguing that their goal is to assert dominance rather than represent reality. In postmodern philosophy, epistemological nihilism is associated with antifoundationalism, arguing that there is no ultimate rational ground of knowledge or action. It challenges universal frameworks, termed \"grand metanarratives\", that claim to provide such a ground.\nSkepticism.\nWhile relativist versions of epistemological nihilism allow that knowledge exists relative to a perspective, skeptic versions deny the existence of knowledge in general. Also called \"radical skepticism\", this view argues that there is no foundation or justification of knowledge claims. Unlike more moderate forms of skepticism, it questions even the most reasonable knowledge claims grounded in basic common sense. A closely related form of epistemological nihilism, sometimes called \"alethiological nihilism\", centers on truth rather than knowledge, stating that truth does not exist.\nOne argument in favor of radical skepticism asserts that absolute certainty is required for knowledge. It attempts to show that doubt can never be fully expelled. For example, the dream argument, suggested by philosophers such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes, points out that, while dreaming, people usually cannot distinguish between dream and reality. Based on this observation, it argues that there is no knowledge since an individual can never be certain that they are not currently dreaming. A related approach, inspired by Roderick Chisholm, asserts that a criterion or a standard of evaluation is required to judge what counts as knowledge. It holds that knowledge is impossible because people cannot have this criterion without prior knowledge, meaning that knowledge and its criterion cannot be established independently, as each relies on the other, similar to the chicken-or-the-egg problem.\nDespite these arguments, radical skepticism is a rare position, accepted only by few philosophers and challenged by many criticisms. Its main influence stems from attempts by non-skeptical philosophers to prove that their theories overcome the challenge of skepticism. Some objections state that radical skepticism is incoherent or self-refuting. For example, if there is no knowledge then skeptics cannot know that there is no knowledge, making it questionable why anyone should believe their theories. Another counterargument is that common sense gives stronger support for the existence of knowledge than the abstract arguments used to defend skepticism.\nEpistemological nihilism can lead to other forms of nihilism. For instance, the inability to discern the meaning of life can lead to the conclusion that there is no such meaning, resulting in existential nihilism. Moral skepticism, the view that there is no moral knowledge, can have a similar effect: the incapacity to distinguish right from wrong behavior can lead to the rejection of moral facts. Some theorists associate epistemological nihilism primarily with moral skepticism.\nMetaphysics.\nMetaphysical nihilism.\nMetaphysical or ontological nihilism encompasses views about the fundamental nature of reality. One version addresses the question of why there is anything at all. It suggests that, at least in principle, an empty world is possible. While this view recognises that the world contains concrete objects, it argues that their existence is not inevitable, because there could have been nothing. In such a scenario, the universe would be entirely empty, without any people, animals, planets, and no other forms of matter or energy.\nThe subtraction argument proposes a procedure to support this view. It states that the world does not depend on any particular concrete object. For example, the world could still exist if a specific rock was removed. The argument concludes that an empty world is possible since it is the result of continuously reapplying this idea, subtracting objects at each step until an empty universe remains. Opponents of metaphysical nihilism assert that an empty world is impossible, meaning that something must exist. A theologically inspired version asserts that God is a necessary object that must be present even if nothing else is. Another version accepts that any individual concrete object can be removed, but not all at once. It asserts that abstract objects, such as natural numbers, have necessary existence and that they require the existence of at least some concrete objects without depending on any specific object in particular.\nA more radical and controversial form of metaphysical nihilism denies the actual existence of objects. It states that there is no world, arguing that the experience of the universe is a mere illusion without an underlying reality. As a result, nothing at all is real. This view is sometimes interpreted as a form of solipsism, proposing that only the self exists and that the external world is merely an idea held by the self without a substantial reality.\nMereological nihilism.\nMereological or compositional nihilism is the view that complex or composite objects do not exist. Composite objects are objects made up of proper parts. For example, a house is a composite object made up of parts like walls, windows, and doors. Each of these parts is itself a composite object made up of smaller parts, such as molecules and atoms. Mereological nihilists argue that only noncomposite or simple objects exist, such as elementary particles. As a result, composite objects are understood as mere collections of simple objects. According to this view, there are no houses or tables; there are only elementary particles arranged house-wise or table-wise.\nProponents of mereological nihilism highlight the parsimony and simplicity of a minimal ontology that excludes everything except simple objects, citing metaphysical principles like Ockham's Razor in its favor. Another supporting argument suggests that mereological nihilism avoids certain metaphysical paradoxes associated with the relation between parts and wholes, like the Ship of Theseus. Opponents of mereological nihilism highlight the counterintuitive consequences of denying the existence of ordinary objects, contradicting common sense. Other criticisms assert that mereological nihilism is unable to provide a coherent framework for how to understand collections of elementary particles or fails to explain phenomena like emergent properties.\nCosmic nihilism.\nCosmic or cosmological nihilism is the view that reality is unintelligible and lacks inherent meaning. Closely related to epistemological and existential nihilism, it asserts that the world is blank, featureless, or chaotic, making it indifferent to human attempts to understand it. Cosmic nihilists often emphasize the vastness of the universe, arguing that it shows the insignificance of humans and their endeavors.\nA broad form of cosmic nihilism states that reality as a whole is unintelligible. According to this view, the chaotic nature of the world makes it impossible to comprehend the universe at any level or find meaningful patterns in it, leading to alienation as human understanding fails to grasp reality. For example, Max Stirner characterized the world as a \"metaphysical chaos\" without \"a comprehensive structure of objective meanings\". In response to arguments stating that it is possible in certain cases to discern patterns and predict outcomes, some cosmic nihilists have proposed more narrow versions. One version acknowledges that humans can understand some aspects of reality, for example, through rigorous scientific study. Nonetheless, this view maintains that the universe remains impenetrable to comprehension and indifferent to human aspirations on other levels, lacking intelligible structures that correspond to objective values, moral principles, and a higher purpose.\nOther forms.\nIn addition to the main nihilistic theories discussed in ethics, value theory, epistemology, and metaphysics, nihilism is also examined in other areas. Discussions include fields such as literature, art, culture, and politics. Various literary works portray characters or attitudes that reject established norms, exhibit disillusionment with life, or struggle with existential despair. Bazarov, the protagonist of Ivan Turgenev's novel \"Fathers and Sons\", is an early and influential example. Driven by a deep distrust of established authorities, Bazarov follows a cold scientific rationalism. He openly expresses his hate toward conventional beliefs, societal norms, and sentimentality, aiming to dismantle them without a vision of what should replace them. In response to Turgenev's novel, Nikolay Chernyshevsky's \"What Is to Be Done?\" explored nihilism from the perspective of rational egoism. Many of Fyodor Dostoevsky's works explore the problem of nihilism, particularly the idea that without God, there is no moral basis for right or wrong. For example, his novel \"The Brothers Karamazov\" examines the tensions between faith, free will, and nihilism through the perspectives of the protagonists. Nothingness is a central concern for many characters in the works of Samuel Beckett, either as the object of desire or fear. Nihilist themes are also present in the literary works of Franz Kafka, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Albert Camus.\nIn the field of art, Dadaism emerged during the First World War as a nihilistic rejection of established moral, societal, and artistic standards. Dadaists embraced chaos, spontaneity, and irrationality, infusing their art with irreverence, nonsense, and humor to provoke and challenge traditional conceptions of art. For example, Marcel Duchamp presented \"Fountain\", a readymade urinal, at an art exhibition, which became one of the most iconic pieces of the movement. In cinema, the movie \"Citizen Kane\" suggests a form of epistemic nihilism, showcasing moral ambiguity and the impossibility of arriving at an objective assessment of the protagonist's character. Elements of nihilism are also found in movies such as \"Taxi Driver\", \"A Clockwork Orange\", \"Fight Club\", \"The Big Lebowski\", and \"American Psycho\".\nIn the field of law, legal nihilists assert that laws lack an inherent meaning or a moral foundation, viewing them as unjust or arbitrary constructs used to maintain control and exercise power. Religious or theological nihilism is associated with atheism and denies the existence of God. Some theorists identify this view as the root of other nihilist outlooks, such as existential and moral nihilism.\nIn the philosophy of language, semantic nihilism denies that linguistic meaning is possible, arguing that there is no genuine communication since language fails to describe reality. Logical nihilism is a theory about the relation between formal logic and natural language inference. It asserts that the logical consequence relation studied by logicians is unable to accurately reflect inferential practices in natural language. In Africana philosophy, black nihilism is a negative outlook on discrimination and the possibility of reforming political and social systems to avoid antiblack racism.\nTherapeutic or medical nihilism is the position that medical interventions are largely ineffective. Against the advances of modern medicine, it argues that the methodology of medical research is fundamentally flawed and further distorted by financial incentives, resulting in a systematic overestimation of the benefits of treatments.\nPolitical nihilism.\nPolitical nihilism is a negative outlook on existing political and social structures, similar to anarchism. It seeks to uphold individual freedom against oppressive governmental controls and societal norms. Its radical and nihilistic tendencies are expressed in the revolutionary aim to dismantle these established forms of order. It targets political institutions, and the traditional beliefs and social practices supporting them, without offering new systems to take their place.\nPolitical nihilism is mainly linked to the Russian nihilist movement of the late 19th century. It emerged as a reaction to the rigid social structures and authoritarian rule in Tsarist Russia. In their rejection of established institutions and norms, Russian nihilists resorted to extreme means to promote a radical social revolution, leading to forms of violence and terrorism, including assassinations and arson. Some of the revolutionaries saw Turgenev's character Bazarov as their inspiration and role model.\nHistory.\nAlthough nihilism is primarily associated with modernity, some of its origins trace back to ancient philosophy. Some Sophists, like Protagoras (c.\u2009490\u2013420 BCE), disputed the existence of objective truth, arguing for a relativistic nihilism according to which \"man is the measure of all things\". Socrates's (c.\u2009470\u2013399 BCE) method of radical questioning served as a precursor of nihilism by challenging established beliefs, values, and practices, often with the goal of exposing their lack of a solid foundation. Pyrrho (c.\u2009360\u2013270 BCE) formulated a broad version of epistemological nihilism in his attempt to show that knowledge is impossible.\nNegative attitudes toward objective knowledge and the world are also found in ancient Indian philosophy. However, it is controversial to what extent they constitute forms of nihilism in a strict sense, and some interpreters limit nihilism to the Western tradition. In the 6th century BCE, the school of Aj\u00f1ana developed a radical skepticism, questioning the possibility and usefulness of knowledge. Buddhist thought, starting in the 6th and 5th centuries BCE, focuses on the pervasiveness of suffering, identifying it as a fundamental aspect of existence. It teaches renunciation of worldly desires to achieve liberation from suffering in the state of nirvana. According to a common interpretation, the school of M\u0101dhyamaka, which emerged in the 2nd century CE, defends metaphysical nihilism, rejecting the existence of an ultimate foundation or absolute reality underlying the multiplicity of experienced phenomena.\nIn the early modern period, secularization and the Scientific Revolution undermined established religious beliefs and values prevalent in the Western world during the medieval period, preparing the emergence of nihilism. Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) considered an extreme form of epistemological nihilism in his quest for absolute certainty. He suggested that humans cannot trust even their most fundamental beliefs unless they can rule out that a malevolent God-like being is constantly deceiving them. Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804) drew a sharp distinction between appearances and things underlying those appearances. By limiting knowledge to the sphere of appearances, he prepared a type of existential nihilism, making the deeper meaning of things in themselves inaccessible. In criticizing the rationalism of the Kantian philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762\u20131814), Friedrich Jacobi (1743\u20131819) coined the philosophical concept of nihilism to describe philosophical thought that leads to the denial of existence and meaning.\nIn Russia, the term \"nihilism\" gained popularity through Ivan Turgenev's (1818\u20131883) portrayal of the nihilist character Bazarov in his novel \"Fathers and Sons\". Starting in the second half of the 19th century, the Russian nihilist movement was a form of political nihilism, characterized by a radical rejection of traditional social, political, and aesthetic norms. Meanwhile in Western Europe, the nihilistic egoism of Max Stirner (1806\u20131856) reduced other people to their usefulness without respect for their personhood. Stirner also formulated a cosmic nihilism that sees the universe as an unintelligible, metaphysical chaos. S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard (1813\u20131855) explored different lifestyles or \"spheres of existence\" through which people seek meaning in their lives. He warned against an aesthetic lifestyle of pursuing sensory pleasures without ulterior goals, arguing that it leads to a nihilistic outlook marked by meaninglessness. Instead, he recommended a leap of faith that trusts in God as a higher source of meaning.\nArthur Schopenhauer (1788\u20131860) developed a pessimistic philosophy, characterizing the world as a place of suffering, brought into being by a blind, irrational will. Influenced by Schopenhauer, the problem of nihilism took center stage in the thought of Friedrich Nietzsche (1844\u20131900). He understood it as a broad cultural phenomenon in which people lose the values and ideals guiding their lives. He explored the causes and consequences of this shift in evaluative outlook, examining reactions to it and ways of overcoming it. According to Nietzsche, nihilism often manifests in a distorted form as passive nihilism, masking its life-denying nature behind religious dogmas, conventional morality, and societal norms. Against this tendency, Nietzsche recommended active nihilism, which openly acknowledges the lack of meaning and uses its negative force to dismantle established values. He saw this as a transitional phase to overcome nihilism in general, leading to a vital affirmation of life through a revaluation of all values.\nMany subsequent developments in the 20th-century history of nihilism were responses to Nietzsche's philosophy. Martin Heidegger (1889\u20131976) agreed with Nietzsche's description of the pervasive and corrosive nature of nihilism, seeing it as a fundamental historical movement in Western thought reaching back to the ancient period. Interpreting Nietzsche's concept of the will to power and modern technological developments, Heidegger came to the conclusion that Nietzsche's attempt to overcome nihilism fails and leads to an even more complete nihilism. As an alternative, Heidegger turned to early Presocratic philosophy to recover a non-nihilistic understanding of being.\nBertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) proposed a view aligned with cosmic nihilism, characterizing humanity as an accidental and insignificant byproduct of cosmic forces that are alien and indifferent to human concerns. Against the backdrop of World War I, Dadaists expressed aspects of nihilism through art, seeking to undermine established norms and values while embracing nonsense and absurdity. The question of nihilism and its denial of the meaning of life played a central role for existentialist philosophers. Jean-Paul Sartre (1905\u20131980) asserted that humans have no inborn essence defining who they are or what their purpose is. He argued that they can overcome this lack of predefined meaning through freedom, proposing that people make their lives meaningful by inventing themselves and their values. In his absurdist philosophy, Albert Camus (1913\u20131960) explored the psychological paradox that arises from the inherent drive to seek meaning in an objectively meaningless world. He termed this condition \"the absurd\" and advocated for a defiant stance or rebellion against the lack of meaning.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, certain aspects of nihilism emerged in postmodern philosophy, often in response to Nietzsche and Heidegger. Jacques Derrida's (1930\u20132004) philosophy of deconstruction challenged the existence of absolute truth and stable meaning. Derrida aimed to expose the hidden assumptions and biases on which this viewpoint rests. Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Lyotard (1924\u20131998) explored antifoundationalism, rejecting the existence of universal frameworks of understanding, termed metanarratives. He aimed to undermine their validity as standards of truth claims, proposing instead that they are merely different language games people play without a clear hierarchy prioritizing one language game over the others. Similarly, Richard Rorty (1931\u20132007) dismissed the notion of objective truths, suggesting that people rely on their own judgment and creativity instead of privileging established perspectives, like the scientific worldview. Against Nietzsche's and Heidegger's attempts to overcome nihilism, Gianni Vattimo (1936\u20132023) embraced it, viewing nihilism as the only viable alternative in the postmodern era.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21664", "revid": "1315654232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21664", "title": "Nebula", "text": "Body of interstellar clouds\nA nebula (; pl.\u2009nebulae or nebulas) is a distinct luminescent part of interstellar medium, which can consist of ionized, neutral, or molecular hydrogen and also cosmic dust. Nebulae are often star-forming regions, such as the Pillars of Creation in the Eagle Nebula. In these regions, the formations of gas, dust, and other materials \"clump\" together to form denser regions, which attract further matter and eventually become dense enough to form stars. The remaining material is then thought to form planets and other planetary system objects. \nMost nebulae are of vast size; some are hundreds of light-years in diameter. A nebula that is visible to the human eye from Earth would appear larger, but no brighter, from close by. The Orion Nebula, the brightest nebula in the sky and occupying an area twice the angular diameter of the full Moon, can be viewed with the naked eye but was missed by early astronomers. Although denser than the space surrounding them, most nebulae are far less dense than any vacuum created on Earth (105 to 107 molecules per cubic centimeter) \u2013 a nebular cloud the size of the Earth would have a total mass of only a few kilograms. Earth's air has a density of approximately 1019 molecules per cubic centimeter; by contrast, the densest nebulae can have densities of 104 molecules per cubic centimeter. Many nebulae are visible due to fluorescence caused by embedded hot stars, while others are so diffused that they can be detected only with long exposures and special filters. Some nebulae are variably illuminated by T Tauri variable stars.\nOriginally, the term \"nebula\" was used to describe any diffused astronomical object, including galaxies beyond the Milky Way. The Andromeda Galaxy, for instance, was once referred to as the \"Andromeda Nebula\" (and spiral galaxies in general as \"spiral nebulae\") before the true nature of galaxies was confirmed in the early 20th century by Vesto Slipher, Edwin Hubble, and others. Edwin Hubble discovered that most nebulae are associated with stars and illuminated by starlight. He also helped categorize nebulae based on the type of light spectra they produced.\nObservational history.\nAround 150 AD, Ptolemy recorded, in books VII\u2013VIII of his \"Almagest\", five stars that appeared nebulous. He also noted a region of nebulosity between the constellations Ursa Major and Leo that was not associated with any star. The first true nebula, as distinct from a star cluster, was mentioned by the Muslim Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his \"Book of Fixed Stars\" (964). He noted \"a little cloud\" where the Andromeda Galaxy is located. He also cataloged the Omicron Velorum star cluster as a \"nebulous star\" and other nebulous objects, such as Brocchi's Cluster. The supernovas that created the Crab Nebula, SN 1054, was observed by Arabic and Chinese astronomers in 1054.\nIn 1610, Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc discovered the Orion Nebula using a telescope. This nebula was also observed by Johann Baptist Cysat in 1618. However, the first detailed study of the Orion Nebula was not performed until 1659 by Christiaan Huygens, who also believed he was the first person to discover this nebulosity.\nIn 1715, Edmond Halley published a list of six nebulae. This number steadily increased during the century, with Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux compiling a list of 20 (including eight not previously known) in 1746. From 1751 to 1753, Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille cataloged 42 nebulae from the Cape of Good Hope, most of which were previously unknown. Charles Messier then compiled a catalog of 103 \"nebulae\" (now called Messier objects, which included what are now known to be galaxies) by 1781; his interest was detecting comets, and these were objects that might be mistaken for them.\nThe number of nebulae was then greatly increased by the efforts of William Herschel and his sister, Caroline Herschel. Their \"Catalogue of One Thousand New Nebulae and Clusters of Stars\" was published in 1786. A second catalog of a thousand was published in 1789, and the third and final catalog of 510 appeared in 1802. During much of their work, William Herschel believed that these nebulae were merely unresolved clusters of stars. In 1790, however, he discovered a star surrounded by nebulosity and concluded that this was a true nebulosity rather than a more distant cluster.\nBeginning in 1864, William Huggins examined the spectra of about 70 nebulae. He found that roughly a third of them had the emission spectrum of a gas. The rest showed a continuous spectrum and were thus thought to consist of a mass of stars. A third category was added in 1912 when Vesto Slipher showed that the spectrum of the nebula that surrounded the star Merope matched the spectra of the Pleiades open cluster. Thus, the nebula radiates by reflected star light.\nIn 1923, following the Great Debate, it became clear that many \"nebulae\" were in fact galaxies far from the Milky Way.\nSlipher and Edwin Hubble continued to collect the spectra from many different nebulae, finding 29 that showed emission spectra and 33 that had the continuous spectra of star light. In 1922, Hubble announced that nearly all nebulae are associated with stars and that their illumination comes from star light. He also discovered that the emission spectrum nebulae are nearly always associated with stars having spectral classifications of B or hotter (including all O-type main sequence stars), while nebulae with continuous spectra appear with cooler stars. Both Hubble and Henry Norris Russell concluded that the nebulae surrounding the hotter stars are transformed in some manner.\nFormation.\nThere are a variety of formation mechanisms for the different types of nebulae. Some nebulae form from gas that is already in the interstellar medium while others are produced by stars. Examples of the former case are giant molecular clouds, the coldest, densest phase of interstellar gas, which can form by the cooling and condensation of more diffuse gas. Examples of the latter case are planetary nebulae formed from material shed by a star in late stages of its stellar evolution.\nStar-forming regions are a class of emission nebula associated with giant molecular clouds. These form as a molecular cloud collapses under its own weight, producing stars. Massive stars may form in the center, and their ultraviolet radiation ionizes the surrounding gas, making it visible at optical wavelengths. The region of ionized hydrogen surrounding the massive stars is known as an H II region while the shells of neutral hydrogen surrounding the H II region are known as photodissociation region. Examples of star-forming regions are the Orion Nebula, the Rosette Nebula and the Omega Nebula. Feedback from star-formation, in the form of supernova explosions of massive stars, stellar winds or ultraviolet radiation from massive stars, or outflows from low-mass stars may disrupt the cloud, destroying the nebula after several million years. \nOther nebulae form as the result of supernova explosions; the death throes of massive, short-lived stars. The materials thrown off from the supernova explosion are then ionized by the energy and the compact object that its core produces. One of the best examples of this is the Crab Nebula, in Taurus. The supernova event was recorded in the year 1054 and is labeled SN 1054. The compact object that was created after the explosion lies in the center of the Crab Nebula and its core is now a neutron star.\nStill other nebulae form as planetary nebulae. This is the final stage of a low-mass star's life, like Earth's Sun. Stars with a mass up to 8\u201310 solar masses evolve into red giants and slowly lose their outer layers during pulsations in their atmospheres. When a star has lost enough material, its temperature increases and the ultraviolet radiation it emits can ionize the surrounding nebula that it has thrown off. The Sun will produce a planetary nebula and its core will remain behind in the form of a white dwarf.\nTypes.\nClassical types.\nObjects named nebulae belong to four major groups. Before their nature was understood, galaxies (\"spiral nebulae\") and star clusters too distant to be resolved as stars were also classified as nebulae, but no longer are.\nNot all cloud-like structures are nebulae; Herbig\u2013Haro objects are an example.\nDiffuse nebulae.\nMost nebulae can be described as diffuse nebulae, which means that they are extended and contain no well-defined boundaries. Diffuse nebulae can be divided into emission nebulae, reflection nebulae and dark nebulae.\nVisible light nebulae may be divided into emission nebulae, which emit spectral line radiation from excited or ionized gas (mostly ionized hydrogen); they are often called H II regions, (H II referring to ionized hydrogen), and reflection nebulae which are visible primarily due to the light they reflect.\nReflection nebulae themselves do not emit significant amounts of visible light, but are near stars and reflect light from them. Similar nebulae not illuminated by stars do not exhibit visible radiation, but may be detected as opaque clouds blocking light from luminous objects behind them; they are called dark nebulae.\nAlthough these nebulae have different visibility at optical wavelengths, they are all bright sources of infrared emission, chiefly from dust within the nebulae.\nPlanetary nebulae.\nPlanetary nebulae are the remnants of the final stages of stellar evolution for mid-mass stars (varying in size between 0.5-~8 solar masses). Evolved asymptotic giant branch stars expel their outer layers outwards due to strong stellar winds, thus forming gaseous shells while leaving behind the star's core in the form of a white dwarf. Radiation from the hot white dwarf excites the expelled gases, producing emission nebulae with spectra similar to those of emission nebulae found in star formation regions. They are H II regions, because mostly hydrogen is ionized, but planetary are denser and more compact than nebulae found in star formation regions.\nPlanetary nebulae were given their own name by the first astronomical observers who were initially unable to distinguish them from planets, which were of more interest to them. The Sun is expected to spawn a planetary nebula about 12\u00a0billion years after its formation.\nSupernova remnants.\nA supernova occurs when a high-mass star reaches the end of its life. When nuclear fusion in the core of the star stops, the star collapses. The gas falling inward either rebounds or gets so strongly heated that it expands outwards from the core, thus causing the star to explode. The expanding shell of gas forms a supernova remnant, a special diffuse nebula. Although much of the optical and X-ray emission from supernova remnants originates from ionized gas, a great amount of the radio emission is a form of non-thermal emission called synchrotron emission. This emission originates from high-velocity electrons oscillating within magnetic fields.\nExamples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21665", "revid": "6525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21665", "title": "Natural theology", "text": "Theology reliant on rational and empirical arguments\nNatural theology is a type of theology that seeks to provide arguments for theological topics, such as the existence of a deity, based on human reason. It is distinguished from revealed theology, which is based on supernatural sources such as scripture or religious experiences. It is thus a form of theology open to critical examination, aimed at understanding the divine.\nNatural theology does not preclude the concept of divine intervention nor presuppose a clockwork universe; however, it demands that any position be supported through reasoned arguments based on natural reason.\nIn contemporary philosophy, natural theology is not limited to approaches based on empirical facts, such as natural phenomena, nor are its conclusions limited to pantheism. It was once also termed \"physico-theology\".\nNatural theology includes theology based on scientific discoveries, arguments for God's existence grounded in observed natural facts, and interpretations of natural phenomena or complexities as evidence of a divine plan (see predestination) or God's Will. It also includes efforts to explain the nature of celestial motors, gods, or a supreme god responsible for heavenly motion. Natural theologians have offered their own explanations for some unsolved problems in science.\nOverview.\nNatural theology and physico-theology.\nIn the modern understanding, natural theology does not solely refer to the study of God based on natural facts but rather to the study of God based on natural reason. Although the term \"physico-theology\" is still occasionally used to describe an earlier understanding, natural theology does not necessarily involve teleological arguments, such as the defense of creationism or the intelligent design hypothesis, as seen in 19th\u2013century England. Also, a posteriori cosmological arguments such as Aristotle's first mover theory and a priori ontological arguments such as those of Anselm and Descartes fall within the scope of natural theology.\nFurthermore, natural theology is not limited to Christian theology. As will be described later, natural theology\u2014i.e., the study of God through reason rather than revelation\u2014has been explored by ancient Greeks such as Plato and by Islamic philosophers such as Ibn Sina.\nHistory.\nFor monotheistic religions, this principally involves arguments about the attributes or non-attributes of a deity, and especially the deity's existence, using arguments that do not involve recourse to revelation.\nThe ideals of natural theology can be traced back to the Old Testament and Greek philosophy. Early sources evident of these ideals come from Jeremiah and the Wisdom of Solomon (c. 50 BCE) and Plato's dialogue Timaeus (c.\u2009360 BCE). Aristotle's tractate on metaphysics claims to demonstrate the necessary existence of an unmoved prime mover.\nMarcus Terentius Varro (116\u201327 BCE) established a distinction between political theology (the social functions of religion), natural theology and mythical theology. His terminology became part of the Stoic tradition and then Christianity through Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas.\nAncient Greece.\nBesides Hesiod's \"Works and Days\" and Zarathushtra's Gathas, Plato gives the earliest surviving account of a natural theology.\nPlato.\nIn the \"Timaeus\", written c.\u2009360 BCE, in the preamble to the account of the origin of the cosmos, we read: \"We must first investigate concerning [the whole Cosmos] that primary question which has to be investigated at the outset in every case ... namely, whether it has always existed, having no beginning or generation, or whether it has come into existence, having begun from some beginning.\" The subsequent parts of the text argues for the necessity of a divine craftsman, who rationally constructed the cosmos out of pre-existing chaos (\"Timaeus\" 27d-30c) In the \"Laws\", in answer to the question as to what arguments justify faith in the gods, Plato affirms: \"One is our dogma about the soul...the other is our dogma concerning the ordering of the motion of the stars\".\nIn Book II of the \"Republic\" and Book X of the \"Laws\", Plato argues against the following ideas: \nAristotle.\nAristotle's tractate on metaphysics claims to demonstrate the necessary existence of an unmoved prime mover.\nAncient Rome.\nMarcus Terentius Varro in his (lost) \"Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum\" (\"Antiquities of Human and Divine Things\", 1st century BCE) established a distinction between three kinds of theology: civil (political) (\"theologia civilis\"), natural (physical) (\"theologia naturalis\") and mythical (\"theologia mythica\"). The theologians of civil theology are \"the people\", asking how the gods relate to daily life and the state (imperial cult). The theologians of natural theology are the philosophers, asking about the nature of the gods, and the theologians of mythical theology are the poets, crafting mythology.\nMiddle Ages.\nFrom the 8th century CE, the Mutazilite school of Islam, compelled to defend their principles against the orthodox Islam of their day, used philosophy for support, and were among the first to pursue a rational Islamic theology, termed \"Ilm-al-Kalam\" (scholastic theology). The teleological argument was later presented by the early Islamic philosophers Alkindus and Averroes, while Avicenna presented both the cosmological argument and the ontological argument in \"The Book of Healing\" (1027).\nThomas Aquinas (c.\u20091225\u00a0\u2013 1274) presented several versions of the cosmological argument in his \"Summa Theologica\", and of the teleological argument in his \"Summa contra Gentiles\". He presented the ontological argument, but rejected it in favor of proofs that invoke cause and effect alone. His \"quinque viae\" (\"five ways\") in those books attempted to demonstrate the existence of God in different ways, including (as way No. 5) the goal-directed actions seen in nature.\nEarly modern.\nRaymond of Sabunde's (c. 1385\u20131436) \"Theologia Naturalis sive Liber Creaturarum\", written 1434\u20131436, but published posthumously (1484), marks an important stage in the history of natural theology. John Ray (1627\u20131705) also known as John Wray, was an English naturalist, sometimes referred to as the father of English natural history. He published important works on plants, animals, and natural theology, with the objective \"to illustrate the glory of God in the knowledge of the works of nature or creation\". Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646\u20131716) established another term for natural theology as theodicy, defined exactly as \"the justification of God\". He viewed the science in a positive light as it supported his personal ethical belief system.\nWilliam Derham (1657\u20131735) continued Ray's tradition of natural theology in two of his own works, \"Physico-Theology\", published during 1713, and \"Astro-Theology\", 1714. These later influenced the work of William Paley.\nNineteenth century.\nIn \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\", published during 1798, Thomas Malthus ended with two chapters on natural theology and population. Malthus\u2014a devout Christian\u2014argued that revelation would \"damp the soaring wings of intellect\", and thus never let \"the difficulties and doubts of parts of the scripture\" interfere with his work.\nWilliam Paley, an important influence on Charles Darwin, gave a well-known rendition of the teleological argument for God. During 1802 he published \"Natural Theology, or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity collected from the Appearances of Nature\". In this he described the Watchmaker analogy, for which he is probably best known. His book, which was one of the most-published books of the 19th and 20th centuries, presents a number of teleological and cosmological arguments for the existence of God. The book served as a template for many subsequent natural theologies during the 19th century.\nThe Bridgewater Treatises were eight works \"the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifested in the Creation\" published during the years 1833 to 1836. They were written by eight scientific authors appointed by the President of the Royal Society using an \u00a38000 bequest from Francis Henry Egerton, 8th Earl of Bridgewater. The series, which was widely read, offered extensive discussion concerning the relationship between religion and science, and many of the authors offered observations on natural theology, although their views on the subject differed widely. Responding critically to one of the series, Charles Babbage published what he termed \"The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise: A Fragment\".\nProfessor of chemistry and natural history Edward Hitchcock also studied and wrote on natural theology. He attempted to unify and reconcile science and religion, emphasizing geology. His major work of this type was \"The Religion of Geology and its Connected Sciences\" (1851).\nThe Gifford Lectures were established by the will of Adam Lord Gifford to \"promote and diffuse the study of Natural Theology in the widest sense of the term\u2014in other words, the knowledge of God.\" The term \"natural theology\", as used by Gifford, refers to theology supported by science and not dependent on the miraculous.\nCriticism.\nThe ideas of natural theology did not come without criticism. Many opposed the idea of natural theology, but some philosophers had a greater influence, including David Hume, Immanuel Kant, S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, and Charles Darwin. Karl Barth's \"Church Dogmatics\" also heavily opposed the entirety of natural theology.\nDavid Hume's \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\" played a major role in Hume's standpoint on natural theology. Hume's ideas heavily stem from the idea of natural belief. It was stated that, \"Hume's doctrine of natural belief allows that certain beliefs are justifiably held by all men without regard to the quality of the evidence which may be produced in their favour\". However, Hume's argument also stems from the design argument. The design argument comes from people being labeled as morally good or evil. Hume's argument claims that if we restrict ourselves to the idea of good and evil, that we must also assign this to the designer as well. Hume states, \"I will allow that pain or misery in man is compatible with infinite power and goodness in the Deity...A mere possible compatibility is not sufficient. You must prove these pure, unmixt, and uncontrollable attributes...\". Hume argues for the idea of a morally perfect deity and requires evidence for anything besides that. Hume's arguments against natural theology had a wide influence on many philosophers.\nCharles Darwin's criticism of the theory had a broader impact on scientists and commoners. Darwin's theories showed that humans and animals developed through an evolutionary process. This implied that a chemical reaction was occurring; but it had no influence from the idea of God. However, Darwin's ideas did not erase the question of how the original ideas of matter came to be.\nHume and Kant's ire was not directed at Christian theology, but at the danger of Pagan theology; through refusing natural theology they were denying the legitimacy of Pagan theology.\nFaith and fideism.\nImmanuel Kant and S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard had similar ideas about natural theology. Kant's ideas focused more on the natural dialect of reason, while Kierkegaard focused more on the dialect of understanding. Both men suggest that \"the natural dialect leads to the question of God\". Kant argues for the idea that reason leads to the ideas of God as a regulative principle. Kierkegaard argues that the idea of understanding will ultimately lead itself to becoming faith. Both of these men argue that the idea of God cannot be based solely on the idea of reason, that the dialect and ideals will transcend into faith.\nKarl Barth opposed the entirety of natural theology. Barth argued that \"by starting from such experience, rather that from the gracious revelation through Jesus Christ, we produce a concept of God that is the projection of the highest we know, a construct of human thinking, divorced from salvation history\". Barth argues that God is restricted by the construct of human thinking if he is divorced from salvation. Barth also acknowledges that God is knowable because of his grace. Barth's argument stems from the idea of faith rather than reason. Barth held that God can be known only through Jesus Christ, as revealed in scripture, and that any such attempts should be considered idolatry. As Thomas F. Torrance wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So far as theological content is concerned, Barth's argument runs like this. If the God whom we have actually come to know through Jesus Christ really \"is\" Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in his own eternal and undivided Being, then what are we to make of an independent natural theology that terminates, not upon the Being of the Triune God\u2014i.e., upon God as he really is in himself\u2014but upon some Being of God in general? Natural theology by its very operation abstracts the existence of God from his act, so that if it does not begin with deism, it imposes deism upon theology.\u2014\u200a\nS\u00f8ren Kierkegaard questioned the existence of God, rejecting all rational arguments for God's existence (including the teleological argument) on the grounds that reason is inevitably accompanied by doubt. He proposed that the argument from design does not take into consideration future events which may serve to undermine the proof of God's existence: the argument would never finish proving God's existence. In the \"Philosophical Fragments\", Kierkegaard writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The works of God are such that only God can perform them. Just so, but where then are the works of the God? The works from which I would deduce his existence are not directly and immediately given. The wisdom in nature, the goodness, the wisdom in the governance of the world \u2013 are all these manifest, perhaps, upon the very face of things? Are we not here confronted with the most terrible temptations to doubt, and is it not impossible finally to dispose of all these doubts? But from such an order of things I will surely not attempt to prove God's existence; and even if I began I would never finish, and would in addition have to live constantly in suspense, lest something so terrible should suddenly happen that my bit of proof would be demolished.\u2014\u200a\nFideists may reject attempts to prove God's existence.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21667", "revid": "46033525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21667", "title": "November 7", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 7 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21670", "revid": "28564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21670", "title": "New Zealand English", "text": "Variant of English language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nNew Zealand English (NZE) is the variant of the English language spoken and written by most English-speaking New Zealanders. Its language code in ISO and Internet standards is en-NZ. It is the first language of the majority of the population.\nThe English language was established in New Zealand by colonists during the 19th century. It is one of \"the newest native-speaker variet[ies] of the English language in existence, a variety which has developed and become distinctive only in the last 150 years\". The variety of English that had the biggest influence on the development of New Zealand English was Australian English, itself derived from Southeastern England English, with considerable influence from Scottish and Hiberno-English, and with lesser influences the British prestige accent Received Pronunciation (RP) and American English. An important source of vocabulary is the M\u0101ori language of the indigenous people of New Zealand, whose contribution distinguishes New Zealand English from other varieties.\nNon-rhotic New Zealand English is most similar to Australian English in pronunciation, but has key differences. A prominent difference is the realisation of (the vowel): in New Zealand English this is pronounced as a schwa. New Zealand English has several increasingly distinct varieties, and while most New Zealanders speak non-rhotic English, rhoticity is increasing quickly, especially among Pasifika and M\u0101ori in Auckland and the upper North Island.\nDictionaries.\nThe first dictionary with entries documenting New Zealand English was probably the \"Heinemann New Zealand Dictionary\" published in 1979. Edited by Harry Orsman (1928\u20132002), it is a 1,337-page book with information relating to the usage and pronunciation of terms that were widely accepted throughout the English-speaking world, and those peculiar to New Zealand. It includes a one-page list of the approximate date of entry into common parlance of the many terms found in New Zealand English but not elsewhere, such as \"haka\" (1827), \"boohai\" (1920), and \"bach\" (1905). A second edition was published in 1989 with the cover subtitle \"The first dictionary of New Zealand English and New Zealand pronunciation\". A third edition, edited by Nelson Wattie, was published as \"The Reed Dictionary of New Zealand English\" by Reed Publishing in 2001.\nThe first dictionary fully dedicated to the New Zealand variety of English was \"The New Zealand Dictionary\" published by New House Publishers in 1994 and edited by Elizabeth and Harry Orsman. A second edition was published in 1995.\nIn 1997, Oxford University Press produced the Harry Orsman-edited \"The Dictionary of New Zealand English: A Dictionary of New Zealandisms on Historical Principles\", a 981-page book, which it claimed was based on over 40 years of research. This research started with Orsman's 1951 thesis and continued with his editing this dictionary. To assist with and maintain this work, the New Zealand Dictionary Centre was founded in 1997 by Victoria University of Wellington and Oxford University Press. This was followed by \"The New Zealand Oxford Paperback Dictionary\" in 1998, edited by New Zealand lexicographer Tony Deverson. It is based on \"The Oxford Paperback Dictionary, fourth edition\", and \"The Australian Oxford Paperback Dictionary, second edition\". \nFurther lexicographical work culminated in the 1,374-page \"The New Zealand Oxford Dictionary\" published in 2004, by Tony Deverson and Graeme Kennedy. The dictionary contains over 100,000 definitions, including over 12,000 New Zealand entries and a wide range of encyclopedic information. A second, revised edition of \"The New Zealand Oxford Paperback Dictionary\" was published in 2006, this time using standard lexicographical regional markers to identify the New Zealand content, which were absent from the first edition. The NZ Dictionary Centre ceased active operations after the retirement of its second Director, Dianne Bardsley, in 2012.\nAnother source of well-cited New Zealand words and phrases is the \"Collins English Dictionary\", first published in 1979 by HarperCollins. Though this dictionary primarily draws from the Bank of English, a corpus of English literature maintained by the University of Birmingham with HarperCollins' support since 1980, a New Zealand advisor informs the content of each edition. The first advisor to perform this role was Professor Ian Gordon of Victoria University, who was succeeded by Professor Elizabeth Gordon (no relation) of the University of Canterbury in 2003. Elizabeth Gordon has since stepped down from the role. \nAustralia's \"Macquarie Dictionary\" was first published in 1981, and has since become the authority on Australian English. It has always included an abundance of New Zealand words and phrases additional to the mutually shared words and phrases of both countries. Every edition has retained a New Zealand resident advisor for the New Zealand content, the first being Harry Orsman. and the most recent being Victoria University of Wellington lexicographer Laurie Bauer.\nHistorical development.\nFrom the 1790s, New Zealand was visited by British, French and American whaling, sealing and trading ships. Their crews traded European and American goods with the indigenous M\u0101ori. The first European settlers to New Zealand were mainly from Australia, some of them ex-convicts or escaped convicts. Sailors, explorers and traders from Australia and other parts of Europe also settled.\nWhen in 1788 the , most of New Zealand was nominally included, but no real legal authority or control was exercised. As a non-sovereign nation, New Zealand remained ungoverned and most European settlers intermarried with and lived among the M\u0101ori iwi in harmony. Settlers were greatly outnumbered by M\u0101ori and relied on them for security and safety. The first official missionaries, who were from England, arrived in New Zealand in 1814, bringing formal education and farming skills as well as Christianity to the communities, many of which by this time had become bi-lingual.\nWhen the New Zealand Company announced in 1839 its plans to establish formal colonies in New Zealand, this and the increased commercial interests of merchants in Sydney and London spurred the British to take stronger action to establish British sovereignty over New Zealand. Captain William Hobson was sent to New Zealand to persuade M\u0101ori to cede their sovereignty to the British Crown and on 6 February 1840 Hobson and about forty M\u0101ori chiefs (rangatira) signed the Treaty of Waitangi at Waitangi in the Bay of Islands. \nNew Zealand broke its connection with New South Wales and became the Colony of New Zealand on 1 July 1841. From this point there was considerable European settlement, primarily from England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and to a lesser extent the United States, South Africa, and various parts of continental Europe. Some 400,000 settlers came from Britain, of whom 300,000 stayed permanently. Most were young people and 250,000 babies were born. \nAfter the Treaty of Waitangi, the next few years saw tensions grow over disputed land purchases by settlers as well as some communities refusing to accept British rule. Conflicts escalated into what became the New Zealand Wars from 1845 to 1872. The colonial government summoned thousands of British troops from Britain and Australia, as well as locally recruited pro-British militia forces, to mount major campaigns to overpower the M\u0101ori and M\u0101ori-allied separatist movements, eventually resulting in the defeat of the rebel forces.\nDespite the wars, gold discoveries in Otago (1861) and Westland (1865) caused a worldwide gold rush that more than doubled the New Zealand population from 71,000 in 1859 to 164,000 in 1863. Between 1864 and 1865, under the New Zealand Settlements Act 1863, 13 ships carrying citizens of England, Scotland, Ireland and South Africa arrived in New Zealand under the Waikato Immigration Scheme. According to census data from 1871, around half the early settlers were English, a quarter Scots, a quarter Irish and 5% Australian. \nThe European population of New Zealand grew explosively from fewer than 1000 in 1831 to 500,000 by 1881. By 1911 the population of New Zealand had reached a million, of which 49,844 were M\u0101ori. 702,779 were New Zealand-born. The largest foreign-born demographics were those born in England and Scotland, followed by Australia and Ireland. \nA distinct New Zealand variant of the English language has been recognised since at least 1912, when Frank Arthur Swinnerton described it as a \"carefully modulated murmur\". From the beginning of the haphazard Australian and European settlements and latter official British migrations, a new dialect began to form by adopting M\u0101ori words to describe the different flora and fauna of New Zealand, for which English did not have words.\nThe New Zealand accent first appeared in towns with mixed populations of immigrants from Australia, England, Ireland, and Scotland. These included the militia towns of the North Island and the gold-mining towns of the South Island. In more homogeneous towns such as those in Otago and Southland, settled mainly by people from Scotland, the New Zealand accent took longer to appear, while the accent was quick to develop in schools starting from the 1890s.\nSince the latter 20th century New Zealand society has gradually divested itself of its fundamentally British roots and has adopted influences from all over the world, especially in the early 21st century when New Zealand experienced an increase of non-British immigration, which has brought about a more prominently multi-ethnic society. The Internet, television, movies and popular music have all brought international influences into New Zealand society and the New Zealand lexicon. Americanisation of New Zealand society and language has subtly and gradually been taking place since World War II and especially since the 1970s.\nLegal status.\nWhile the M\u0101ori language and New Zealand Sign Language are statutory official languages of New Zealand, English is a \"de facto\" official language, which may be used in any public or official context. In 2018, MP Clayton Mitchell of New Zealand First put forward a bill for English to be recognised as an official language in legislation.\nPhonology.\nNot all New Zealanders have the same accent, as the level of cultivation (i.e. the closeness to Received Pronunciation) of every speaker's accent differs. An identifiable feature of New Zealand English is its chain shift where the TRAP vowel has moved up to the place of the traditional DRESS vowel, which in turn has moved up towards the traditional KIT vowel, which in turn is centralised. This makes \"bat\" sound like \"bet\", \"bet\" sound like \"bit\", and \"bit\" sound like \"but\" to foreign ears. For example \"six\" is in New Zealand English but in Australian English. General New Zealand English is non-rhotic, however Southland/Otago is semi-rhotic due to the accent's Scottish influence.\nVocabulary.\nNew Zealand English has a number of dialectal words and phrases. These are mostly informal terms that are more common in casual speech. Numerous loanwords have been taken from the M\u0101ori language or from Australian English.\nNew Zealand adopted decimal currency in 1967 and the metric system in 1974. Despite this, several imperial measures are still widely encountered and usually understood, such as feet and inches for a person's height, pounds and ounces for an infant's birth weight, and in colloquial terms such as referring to drinks in pints. In the food manufacturing industry in New Zealand both metric and non-metric systems of weight are used and usually understood, owing to raw food products being imported from both metric and non-metric countries. However, per the December 1976 Weights and Measures Amendment Act, all foodstuffs must be retailed using the metric system. In general, the knowledge of non-metric units is lessening.\nBoth the words \"amongst\" and \"among\" are used, as in British English. The same is true for two other pairs, \"whilst\" and \"while\" and \"amidst\" and \"amid\".\nAustralian English influences.\nNew Zealand English terms of Australian origin include \"bushed\" (lost or bewildered), \"chunder\" (to vomit), \"cooker\" (a derogatory term for conspiracy theorists), \"drongo\" (a foolish or stupid person), \"fossick\" (to search), \"larrikin\" (mischievous person), \"Maccas\" (slang for McDonald's), \"maimai\" (a duckshooter's hide; originally a makeshift shelter, from aboriginal \"mia-mia\"), \"paddock\" (for field, or meadow), \"pom\" or \"pommy\" (an Englishman), \"skite\" (verb: to boast), \"station\" (for a very large farm), \"wowser\" (non-drinker of alcohol, or killjoy), and \"ute\" (pickup truck).\nAmerican English influences.\nAlthough it has British and Australian English origins, New Zealand English has also evolved to include many terms of American origin, or which are otherwise used in American English, in preference to, or alongside the equivalent contemporary British terms. Many American borrowings are not unique to New Zealand English, and may be found in other varieties of English, including British English. Some examples of such words in New Zealand English are the preferred usage of the American \"bobby pin\" over the British \"hair pin\", \"muffler\" for \"silencer\", \"truck\" for \"lorry\", \"station wagon\" for \"estate car\", \"stove\" for \"cooker\", \"creek\" over \"brook\" or \"stream\", \"eggplant\" for \"aubergine\", \"median strip\" for \"central reservation\", and \"pushup\" for \"press-up\". New Zealanders, like Australians, use \"chip\" for both what British English would call a \"chip\" and a \"crisp\", in case of ambiguity the British \"chip\" is called a \"hot chip\".\nOther examples of vocabulary directly borrowed from American English include \"the boonies\", \"bucks\" (dollars), \"butt\" (bum or arse), \"ding\" (dent), \"dude\", \"duplex\", \"faggot\" or \"fag\" (interchangeable with the British \"poof\" and \"poofter\"), \"figure\" (to think or conclude; consider), \"hightail it\", \"homeboy\", \"hooker\", \"lagoon\", \"lube\" (oil change), \"man\" (in place of \"mate\" or \"bro\" in direct address), \"major\" (to study or qualify in a subject), \"to be over\" [some situation] (be fed up), \"rig\" (large truck), \"sheltered workshop\" (workplace for disabled persons), \"spat\" (a small argument), and \"subdivision\", and \"tavern\".\nRegarding grammar, \"gotten\" can be used as opposed to the standard British \"got\" in New Zealand English in active contexts, though some speakers do not use it. It has been increasing in usage in recent years and is rarely written down.\nNew Zealandisms.\nSome English words are used almost exclusively in New Zealand.\nDifferences from Australian English.\nMany of these relate to words used to refer to common items, often based on which major brands become eponyms.\nUsage.\nSome New Zealanders often reply to a question with a statement spoken with a rising intonation at the end. This often has the effect of making their statement sound like another question. There is enough awareness of this that it is seen in exaggerated form in comedy parody of New Zealanders, such as in the 1970s comedy character \"Lyn Of Tawa\". This rising intonation can also be heard at the end of statements that are not in response to a question but to which the speaker wishes to add emphasis. High rising terminals are also heard in Australia.\nIn informal speech, some New Zealanders use the third person feminine \"she\" in place of the third person neuter \"it\" as the subject of a sentence, especially when the subject is the first word of the sentence. The most common use of this is in the phrase \"She'll be right\" meaning either \"It will be okay\" or \"It is close enough to what is required\". Similar to Australian English are uses such as \"she was great car\" or \"she's a real beauty, this [object]\".\nAnother specific New Zealand usage is the way in which New Zealanders refer to the country's two main islands. They are always (except on maps) referred to as \"the North Island\" and \"the South Island\". And because of their size, New Zealanders tend to think of these two islands as being 'places', rather than 'pieces of land', so the preposition \"in\" (rather than \"on\") is usually used \u2013 for example, \"my mother lives in the North Island\", \"Christchurch is in the South Island\". This is true only for the two main islands; for smaller islands, the usual preposition \"on\" is used \u2013 for example, \"on Stewart Island\", or \"on Waiheke Island\".\nAs in some other varieties of English, \"us\" is sometimes used in place of \"me\". A common example is \"give us a go\", meaning \"give me a go\". About half the country pronounce the words \"grown\" and \"known\" with two syllables, as \"growen\" and \"knowen\". Similarly to other English varieties, when follows a vowel it is often vocalised, dropping the usual contact of the tongue and the sound becomes a vowel. An example of this is changing the words \"feel\" to \"fee-u\" or \"railway\" to \"rai-u-way\".\nM\u0101ori influence.\nMany local everyday words are loanwords that have been assimilated from the M\u0101ori language, including words for local flora, fauna, place names and the natural environment.\nThe dominant influence of M\u0101ori on New Zealand English is lexical. A 1999 estimate based on the Wellington corpora of written and spoken New Zealand English put the proportion of words of M\u0101ori origin at approximately 0.6%, mostly place and personal names.\nSome M\u0101ori words occur in New Zealand English, such as \"kia ora\" (hello).\nM\u0101ori is ever present and has a significant conceptual influence in the legislature, government, and community agencies (e.g. health and education), where legislation requires that proceedings and documents be translated into M\u0101ori (under certain circumstances, and when requested). Political discussion and analysis of issues of sovereignty, environmental management, health, and social well-being thus rely on M\u0101ori at least in part. M\u0101ori as a spoken language is particularly important wherever community consultation occurs.\nDialects and accents.\nRecognisable regional variations are slight, except for Southland and the southern part of neighbouring Otago, with its semi-rhotic \"Southland burr\", where the postvocalic R is pronounced rather than clipped. This southern area traditionally received heavy immigration from Scotland (see Dunedin). Several words and phrases common in Scots or Scottish English persist there; examples include the use of \"wee\" for \"small\", and phrases such as \"to do the messages\" meaning \"to go shopping\". Other Southland/Otago features which may also relate to early Scottish settlement are the use of the TRAP (short A) vowel in a set of words which usually use the PALM vowel (long A), such as \"dance\" or \"castle\", which is also common in Australian English. Another feature is the maintaining of the ~ distinction (e.g. where \"which\" and \"witch\" are not homophones).\nRecent research (2012) suggests that postvocalic is not restricted to Southland &amp; Otago, but is found also in the central North Island where there may be a Pasifika influence, but also a possible influence from modern New Zealand hip\u2010hop music, which has been shown to have high levels of non\u2010prevocalic after the NURSE vowel.\nTaranaki has been said to have a minor regional accent, possibly due to the high number of immigrants from the south-west of England. However, this is becoming less pronounced.\nSome M\u0101ori have an accent distinct from the general New Zealand accent; and also tend to include M\u0101ori words more frequently. Comedian Billy T. James and the \"bro'Town\" TV programme were notable for featuring exaggerated versions of this. Linguists recognise this as \"M\u0101ori English\", and describe it as strongly influenced by syllable-timed M\u0101ori speech patterns. Linguists count \"P\u0101keh\u0101 English\" as the other main accent, and note that it is beginning to adopt similar rhythms, distinguishing it from other stress-timed English accents.\nIt is commonly held that New Zealand English is spoken very quickly. This idea is given support by a study comparing adult New Zealand English and American English speakers which observed faster speaking and articulation rates among the New Zealand English group overall. However, a similar study with American and New Zealand English-speaking children found the opposite, with the speaking and articulation rates of the New Zealand children being slower. The same study proposed that differences in the relative number of tense and lax vowels between the two speaker groups may have influenced the speaking and articulation rates.\nSpelling.\nSince the advent of word processors with spell-checkers, in modern assignment writing in New Zealand universities the rule is to use either 100% British spelling or 100% American spelling, the emphasis being consistency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21672", "revid": "41719476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21672", "title": "Nucleariida", "text": ""}
{"id": "21673", "revid": "45558566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21673", "title": "North American English", "text": "Set of varieties of English language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nNorth American English (NAmE) encompasses the English language as spoken in both the United States and Canada. Because of their related histories and cultures, plus the similarities between the pronunciations (accents), vocabulary, and grammar of U.S. English and Canadian English, linguists often group the two together. Canadians are generally tolerant of both British and American spellings, although certain words always take British spellings (e.g., \"cheque\" rather than \"check\") and others American spellings (e.g., \"tire\" rather than \"tyre\"). \nDialects of English spoken by United Empire Loyalists who fled the American Revolution (1775\u20131783) have had a large influence on Canadian English from its early roots. Some terms in North American English are used almost exclusively in Canada and the United States (for example, the terms \"diaper\" and \"gasoline\" are widely used instead of \"nappy\" and \"petrol\"). Although many English speakers from outside North America regard those terms as distinct Americanisms, they are just as common in Canada, mainly due to the effects of heavy cross-border trade and cultural penetration by the American mass media. The list of divergent words becomes longer if considering regional Canadian dialects, especially as spoken in the Atlantic provinces and parts of Vancouver Island where significant pockets of British culture still remain.\nThere are a considerable number of different accents within the regions of both the United States and Canada. In North America, different English dialects of immigrants from England, Scotland, Ireland, and other regions of the British Isles mixed together in the 17th and 18th centuries. These were developed, built upon, and blended together as new waves of immigration, and migration across the North American continent, developed new dialects in new areas, and as these ways of speaking merged with and assimilated to the greater American dialect mixture that solidified by the mid-18th century.\nDialects.\nENE \n \n \n \n \nSOUTH \nTexas \nCalifornia \nAppalachia \nBoston \nPacific &lt;/br&gt;Northwest \nChesapeake &amp; Outer Banks \nMaine \nNew Orleans \nBaltimore \n The American English major regional dialects (in all caps), plus smaller and more local dialects, as demarcated primarily by William Labov et al.'s \"The Atlas of North American English\", as well as the related Telsur Project's http://. Many regions also contain speakers of a \"General American\" accent that resists the marked features of their region. This map does not account for speakers of ethnic or racial dialects.\nPacific &lt;br&gt;Northwest \nIndigenous Canadian \nQuebec \nOttawa-Valley \nMTE \nLunenburg \nNewfoundland \n The Canadian English's major regional dialects (in all caps), plus smaller and more local dialects, as demarcated primarily by William Labov et al.'s \"The Atlas of North American English\", as well as the related Telsur Project's http://. Many regions also contain speakers of a \"General American\" accent that resists the marked features of their region. This map does not account for speakers of ethnic or racial dialects.\nTable of accents.\nBelow, several major North American English accents are defined by particular characteristics:\nPhonology.\nA majority of North American English (for example, in contrast to British English) includes phonological features that concern consonants, such as rhoticity (full pronunciation of all sounds), conditioned T-glottalization (with \"satin\" pronounced , not ), T- and D-flapping (with \"metal\" and \"medal\" pronounced the same, as ), L-velarization (with \"filling\" pronounced , not ), as well as features that concern vowel sounds, such as various vowel mergers before (so that, \"Mary\", \"marry\", and \"merry\" are all commonly pronounced the same), raising of pre-voiceless (with \"price\" and \"bright\" using a higher vowel sound than \"prize\" and \"bride\"), the weak vowel merger (with \"affected\" and \"effected\" often pronounced the same), at least one of the LOT vowel mergers (the LOT\u2013PALM merger is completed among virtually all Americans and the LOT\u2013THOUGHT merger among nearly half, while both are completed among virtually all Canadians), and yod-dropping (with \"tuesday\" pronounced , not ). The last item is more advanced in American English than Canadian English.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21675", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21675", "title": "Natural resource", "text": "Resources that exist without actions of humankind\nNatural resources are resources that are drawn from nature and used with few modifications. This includes the sources of valued characteristics such as commercial and industrial use, aesthetic value, scientific interest, and cultural value. On Earth, it includes sunlight, atmosphere, water, land, all minerals along with all vegetation, and wildlife.\nNatural resources are part of humanity's natural heritage or protected in nature reserves. Particular areas (such as the rainforest in Fatu-Hiva) often feature biodiversity and geodiversity in their ecosystems. Natural resources may be classified in different ways. Natural resources are materials and components (something that can be used) found within the environment. Every man-made product is composed of natural resources (at its fundamental level).\nA natural resource may exist as a separate entity such as freshwater, air, or any living organism such as a fish, or it may be transformed by extractivist industries into an economically useful form that must be processed to obtain the resource such as metal ores, rare-earth elements, petroleum, timber and most forms of energy. Some resources are renewable, which means that they can be used at a certain rate and natural processes will restore them. In contrast, many extractive industries rely heavily on non-renewable resources that can only be extracted once.\nNatural resource allocations can be at the centre of many economic and political confrontations both within and between countries. This is particularly true during periods of increasing scarcity and shortages (depletion and overconsumption of resources). Resource extraction is also a major source of human rights violations and environmental damage. The Sustainable Development Goals and other international development agendas frequently focus on creating more sustainable resource extraction, with some scholars and researchers focused on creating economic models, such as circular economy, that rely less on resource extraction, and more on reuse, recycling and renewable resources that can be sustainably managed.\nClassification.\nThere are various criteria for classifying natural resources. These include the source of origin, stages of development, renewability and ownership.\nExtraction.\nResource extraction involves any activity that withdraws resources from nature. This can range in scale from the traditional use of preindustrial societies to global industry. Extractive industries are, along with agriculture, the basis of the primary sector of the economy. Extraction produces raw material, which is then processed to add value. Examples of extractive industries are hunting, trapping, mining, oil and gas drilling, and forestry. Natural resources can be a substantial part of a country's wealth; however, a sudden inflow of money caused by a resource extraction boom can create social problems including inflation harming other industries (\"Dutch disease\") and corruption, leading to inequality and underdevelopment, this is known as the \"resource curse\".\nExtractive industries represent a large growing activity in many less-developed countries but the wealth generated does not always lead to sustainable and inclusive growth. People often accuse extractive industry businesses as acting only to maximize short-term value, implying that less-developed countries are vulnerable to powerful corporations. Alternatively, host governments are often assumed to be only maximizing immediate revenue. Researchers argue there are areas of common interest where development goals and business cross. These present opportunities for international governmental agencies to engage with the private sector and host governments through revenue management and expenditure accountability, infrastructure development, employment creation, skills and enterprise development, and impacts on children, especially girls and women. A strong civil society can play an important role in ensuring the effective management of natural resources. Norway can serve as a role model in this regard as it has good institutions and open and dynamic public debate with strong civil society actors that provide an effective checks and balances system for the government's management of extractive industries, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), a global standard for the good governance of oil, gas and mineral resources. It seeks to address the key governance issues in the extractive sectors. However, in countries that do not have a very strong and unified society, meaning that there are dissidents who are not as happy with the government as in Norway's case, natural resources can actually be a factor in whether a civil war starts and how long the war lasts.\nDepletion.\nIn recent years, the depletion of natural resources has become a major focus of governments and organizations such as the United Nations (UN). This is evident in the UN's Agenda 21 Section Two, which outlines the necessary steps for countries to take to sustain their natural resources. The depletion of natural resources is considered a sustainable development issue. The term \"sustainable development\" has many interpretations, most notably the Brundtland Commission's 'to ensure that it meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs'; however, in broad terms it is balancing the needs of the planet's people and species now and in the future. In regards to natural resources, depletion is of concern for sustainable development as it has the ability to degrade current environments and the potential to impact the needs of future generations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The conservation of natural resources is the fundamental problem. Unless we solve that problem, it will avail us little to solve all others.\"\nTheodore Roosevelt\nDepletion of natural resources is associated with social inequity. Considering most biodiversity are located in developing countries, depletion of this resource could result in losses of ecosystem services for these countries. Some view this depletion as a major source of social unrest and conflicts in developing nations.\nAt present, there is a particular concern for rainforest regions that hold most of the Earth's biodiversity. According to Nelson, deforestation and degradation affect 8.5% of the world's forests with 30% of the Earth's surface already cropped. If we consider that 80% of people rely on medicines obtained from plants and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 of the world's prescription medicines have ingredients taken from plants, loss of the world's rainforests could result in a loss of finding more potential life-saving medicines.\nThe depletion of natural resources is caused by 'direct drivers of change' such as mining, petroleum extraction, fishing, and forestry as well as 'indirect drivers of change' such as demography (e.g. population growth), economy, society, politics, and technology. The current practice of agriculture is another factor causing depletion of natural resources. For example, the depletion of nutrients in the soil due to excessive use of nitrogen and desertification.\nThe depletion of natural resources is a continuing concern for society. This is seen in the cited quote given by Theodore Roosevelt, a well-known conservationist and former United States president, who was opposed to unregulated natural resource extraction.\nProtection.\nIn 1982, the United Nations developed the World Charter for Nature, which recognized the need to protect nature from further depletion due to human activity. It states that measures must be taken at all societal levels, from international to individual, to protect nature. It outlines the need for sustainable use of natural resources and suggests that the protection of resources should be incorporated into national and international systems of law. To look at the importance of protecting natural resources further, the World Ethic of Sustainability, developed by the IUCN, WWF and the UNEP in 1990, set out eight values for sustainability, including the need to protect natural resources from depletion. Since the development of these documents, many measures have been taken to protect natural resources including establishment of the scientific field and practice of conservation biology and habitat conservation, respectively.\nConservation biology is the scientific study of the nature and status of Earth's biodiversity with the aim of protecting species, their habitats, and ecosystems from excessive rates of extinction. It is an interdisciplinary subject drawing on science, economics and the practice of natural resource management. The term \"conservation biology\" was introduced as the title of a conference held at the University of California, San Diego, in La Jolla, California, in 1978, organized by biologists Bruce A. Wilcox and Michael E. Soul\u00e9.\nHabitat conservation is a type of land management that seeks to conserve, protect and restore habitat areas for wild plants and animals, especially conservation reliant species, and prevent their extinction, fragmentation or reduction in range.\nManagement.\nNatural resource management is a discipline in the management of natural resources such as land, water, soil, plants, and animals\u2014with a particular focus on how management affects quality of life for present and future generations. Hence, sustainable development is followed according to the judicious use of resources to supply present and future generations. The disciplines of fisheries, forestry, and wildlife are examples of large subdisciplines of natural resource management.\nManagement of natural resources involves identifying who has the right to use the resources and who does not to define the management boundaries of the resource. The resources may be managed by the users according to the rules governing when and how the resource is used depending on local condition or the resources may be managed by a governmental organization or other central authority.\nA \"...successful management of natural resources depends on freedom of speech, a dynamic and wide-ranging public debate through multiple independent media channels and an active civil society engaged in natural resource issues...\" because of the nature of the shared resources, the individuals who are affected by the rules can participate in setting or changing them. The users have rights to devise their own management institutions and plans under the recognition by the government. The right to resources includes land, water, fisheries, and pastoral rights. The users or parties accountable to the users have to actively monitor and ensure the utilisation of the resource compliance with the rules and impose penalties on those people who violate the rules. These conflicts are resolved quickly and efficiently by the local institution according to the seriousness and context of the offense. The global science-based platform to discuss natural resources management is the World Resources Forum, based in Switzerland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21683", "revid": "51060988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21683", "title": "Nancy Sinatra", "text": "American singer (born 1940)\nNancy Sandra Sinatra (born June 8, 1940) is an American singer, actress, film producer and author. She is the elder daughter of Frank Sinatra and Nancy Sinatra (n\u00e9e Barbato) and is known for her 1965 signature hit \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\".\nNancy Sinatra began her career as a singer in November 1957 with an appearance on her father's ABC television variety series \"The Frank Sinatra Show\" but initially achieved success only in Europe and Japan. In early 1966 she had a transatlantic number-one hit with \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\". A TV promo clip from the era features Sinatra in high boots, accompanied by colorfully dressed go-go dancers, in what is now considered an iconic Swinging Sixties look. The song was written by Lee Hazlewood, who wrote and produced most of her hits and sang with her on several duets. As with all of Sinatra's 1960s hits, \"Boots\" featured Billy Strange as arranger and conductor.\nBetween early 1966 and early 1968, Sinatra charted on \"Billboard\"'s Hot 100 with 14 titles, 10 of which reached the Top 40. In addition to \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\", defining recordings during this period include \"Sugar Town\", \"Love Eyes\", the transatlantic 1967 number one \"Somethin' Stupid\" (a duet with her father), two versions of the title song from the James Bond film \"You Only Live Twice\" (1967), several collaborations with Lee Hazlewood \u2013 including \"Summer Wine\", \"Jackson\", \"Lady Bird\" and \"Some Velvet Morning\" \u2013 and a non-single 1966 cover of the Cher hit \"Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)\". In 1971 Sinatra and Hazlewood achieved their first collaborative success in the UK singles chart with the no. 2 hit \"Did You Ever?\", and the 2005 UK no. 3 hit by Audio Bullys, \"Shot You Down\", sampled Sinatra's version of \"Bang Bang\".\nBetween 1964 and 1968, Sinatra appeared in several feature films, co-starring with Peter Fonda in Roger Corman's biker-gang movie \"The Wild Angels\" (1966) and alongside Elvis Presley in the musical drama \"Speedway\" (1968). Frank and Nancy Sinatra played a fictional father and daughter in the 1965 comedy \"Marriage on the Rocks\".\nEarly life.\nSinatra was born on June 8, 1940, in Jersey City, New Jersey. She is the eldest of the three children born to Frank Sinatra and his first wife, Nancy Barbato. Both of her parents were of Italian ancestry. When she was a toddler, the family moved to Hasbrouck Heights, New Jersey. They later moved again to Toluca Lake, California, for her father's Hollywood career. There she spent many years in piano, dance and dramatic performance lessons, and undertook months of voice lessons.\nJill St. John was one of Sinatra's elementary school classmates and later dated her father. She graduated from University High School (Los Angeles) in June 1958.\nCareer.\n1950s and 1960s.\nSinatra began to study music, dancing and voice at UCLA in the late 1950s, but she dropped out after one year. She made her professional debut on her father's television show \"The Frank Sinatra Show\" in November 1957 and then appeared on his 1960 television special \"\", which celebrated the return of Elvis Presley from Europe following his discharge from military service. Nancy was sent to the airport on behalf of her father to welcome Presley when his plane landed. On the special, Sinatra and her father danced and sang a duet, \"You Make Me Feel So Young/Old\". That same year, she began a five-year marriage to Tommy Sands.\nSinatra was signed to her father's label, Reprise Records, in 1961. Her first single, \"Cuff Links and a Tie Clip,\" went largely unnoticed. However, subsequent singles charted in Europe and Japan. By 1965, without a hit in the United States, she was on the verge of being dropped by the label. Her singing career received a boost with the help of songwriter/producer/arranger Lee Hazlewood, who had been making records for ten years, notably with Duane Eddy. Hazlewood's collaboration with Sinatra began when Frank Sinatra asked Lee to help boost his daughter's career. When recording \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\", Hazlewood is said to have suggested to Nancy, \"You can't sing like Nancy Nice Lady anymore. You have to sing for the truckers.\" She later described him as \"part Henry Higgins and part Sigmund Freud\".\nHazlewood had Sinatra sing in a lower key and crafted songs for her. Bolstered by an image overhaul\u00a0\u2013 including bleached-blond hair, frosted lips, heavy eye makeup and Carnaby Street fashions\u00a0\u2013 Sinatra made her mark on the American (and British) music scene in early 1966 with \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\", its title inspired by a line from Robert Aldrich's 1963 western comedy \"4 for Texas\", starring her father and Dean Martin. One of her many hits written by Hazlewood, it received three Grammy Award nominations at the 9th Annual Grammy Awards, including two for Sinatra and one for arranger Billy Strange. It sold more than one million copies and was awarded a gold disc. A TV promotional clip featured Sinatra in high boots, accompanied by colorfully dressed go-go dancers, to iconic Swinging Sixties effect.\nA run of chart singles followed, including two 1966 US Top Ten hits: \"How Does That Grab You, Darlin'?\" (no. 7) and \"Sugar Town\" (no. 5). \"Sugar Town\" became Sinatra's second million-seller. The ballad \"Somethin' Stupid\" \u2013 a duet with her father \u2013 reached number one in the US and the UK in April 1967 and spent nine weeks at the top of \"Billboard\"'s easy listening chart. Frank and Nancy became the only father-daughter duo to top the Hot 100, but DJs dubbed the track \"the incest song\" because it was sung as if by two lovers. The record earned a Grammy Award nomination for Record of the Year at the 10th Annual Grammy Awards and remains the only father-daughter duet to hit number one in the US; it became Nancy's third million-selling disc.\nOther singles showcasing Sinatra's forthright delivery include \"Friday's Child\" (US no. 36, 1966) and the 1967 hits \"Love Eyes\" (US no. 15) and \"Lightning's Girl\" (US no. 24). She rounded out 1967 with the low-charting \"Tony Rome\" (US no. 83), the title track from the detective film \"Tony Rome\" starring her father. Her first solo single in 1968 was the more wistful \"100 Years\" (US no. 69). That same year she recorded \"Highway Song\", written by Kenny Young and produced by Mickie Most, for the European markets. The song reached the Top 20 in the UK and other European countries.\nSinatra enjoyed a parallel recording career cutting duets with the husky-voiced, country-and-western-inspired Hazlewood, starting with \"Summer Wine\" (originally the B-side of \"Sugar Town\"). Their biggest hit was a cover of the 1963 country song \"Jackson\". The single peaked at no. 14 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the summer of 1967, just a few months after Johnny Cash and June Carter Cash hit big on the country chart with their cover of the song.\nIn December 1967 Sinatra and Hazlewood released the single \"Some Velvet Morning\" (US no. 26), accompanied by a promo clip. The recording is regarded as one of pop's more unusual singles; critic Cathi Unsworth wrote, \"The puzzle of its lyrics and otherworldly beauty of its sound [offer] seemingly endless interpretations.\" The British broadsheet \"The Daily Telegraph\" placed \"Some Velvet Morning\" atop its 2003 list of the Top 50 Best Duets Ever (\"Somethin' Stupid\" ranked no. 27.) The song appeared on the duo's 1968 album \"Nancy &amp; Lee\", about which National Public Radio commented in 2017, \"... its sly, sultry movements both are a gem of traditional '60s pop and an inversion of traditional conceptions of romance.\"\nSinatra recorded the theme song for the James Bond film \"You Only Live Twice\" in 1967. In the liner notes of the CD reissue of her 1966 album \"Nancy In London\", Sinatra states that she was \"scared to death\" of recording the song, and asked the songwriters Leslie Bricusse and John Barry: \"Are you sure you don't want Shirley Bassey?\" There are two versions of the Bond theme. The first is the lushly orchestrated track featured during the opening and closing credits of the film. The second\u00a0\u2013 and more guitar-heavy\u00a0\u2013 version appeared on the double A-sided single with \"Jackson\", though the Bond theme stalled at no. 44 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Jackson\"/\"You Only Live Twice\" was even more successful in the UK, reaching no. 11 on the singles chart during a 19-week chart run (in the Top 50); it ranked 70 in the year-end chart.\nSinatra traveled to Vietnam to perform for US troops in 1966 and 1967. Many soldiers adopted her song \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\" as their anthem, as shown in Pierre Schoendoerffer's documentary \"The Anderson Platoon\" (1967) and reprised in a scene in Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\" (1987). Sinatra recorded several antiwar songs, including \"My Buddy\", which was featured on her album \"Sugar\", \"Home\", co-written by Mac Davis and \"It's Such a Lonely Time of Year\", which appeared on the 1968 LP \"The Sinatra Family Wish You a Merry Christmas\". Sinatra recreated her Vietnam concert appearances on a 1988 episode of the television show \"China Beach\". Sinatra still performs for charitable causes supporting Vietnam veterans, including Rolling Thunder.\nFilms and television.\nSinatra played a secretary in the 1963 \"Burke's Law\" episode \"Who Killed Wade Walker?\" She starred in three beach party films: \"For Those Who Think Young\" (1964), \"Get Yourself a College Girl\" (1964) and \"The Ghost in the Invisible Bikini\" (1966), performing songs in the latter film. After securing the role that eventually went to Linda Evans in \"Beach Blanket Bingo\", she withdrew because the film's character is kidnapped\u00a0\u2013 a parallel she found too close to actual events when her brother Frank Sinatra Jr. was kidnapped in December 1963.\nSinatra appeared as a guest with Woody Allen on the game show \"Password\" in 1965. She appeared as herself in \"The Oscar\" (1966), and also starred in \"The Last of the Secret Agents?\", in which she sang the title song, and \"The Wild Angels\" the same year. She appeared in the 1968 Elvis Presley musical comedy \"Speedway\", her final film.\nSinatra appeared on \"The Virginian\", \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\", \"Rowan &amp; Martin's Laugh-In\", \"The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour\", and \"The Kraft Music Hall\", hosted by Sandler &amp; Young. She also appeared in her father's 1966 special \"A Man and His Music \u2013 Part II\" and a 1967 Christmas-themed episode of \"The Dean Martin Show\" which featured the Sinatra and Martin families.\nNBC aired Sinatra's own special, \"Movin' with Nancy\", in 1967. It featured Lee Hazlewood, her father and his Rat Pack pals Dean Martin and Sammy Davis Jr., her brother Frank Sinatra Jr. and \"West Side Story\" dancer David Winters, who choreographed the show. Jack Haley Jr. directed and produced the special, for which he received an Emmy Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Music or Variety at the 20th Primetime Emmy Awards. During the special, Sinatra shared a kiss with Davis Jr., about which she has stated, \"The kiss [was] one of the first interracial kisses seen on television and it caused some controversy then, and now. [But] contrary to some inaccurate online reports, the kiss was unplanned and spontaneous.\" Winters was nominated for an Emmy in the Special Classification of Individual Achievements category for his choreography but lost to co-winners \"The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour\" and \"The Jackie Gleason Show\". \"Movin' With Nancy\" was sponsored by RC Cola.\n1970s and 1980s.\nSinatra remained with Reprise until 1970. In 1971, she signed with RCA Records, resulting in three albums: \"Nancy &amp; Lee \u2013 Again\" (1971), \"Woman\" (1972) and a compilation of some of her Reprise recordings called \"This Is Nancy Sinatra\" (1973). She released the non-LP single \"Sugar Me\" b/w \"Ain't No Sunshine\" in 1973. \"Sugar Me\" was written by Lynsey De Paul and Barry Blue and, with other covers of works by early-'70s popular songwriters, resurfaced on the 1998 album \"How Does It Feel?\"\nIn the autumn of 1971, Sinatra and Hazlewood's duet \"Did You Ever?\" reached no. 2 in the UK In 1972 they performed for a Swedish documentary, \"Nancy &amp; Lee In Las Vegas\", which chronicled their Las Vegas concerts at the Riviera Hotel and Casino and featured solo numbers and duets from concerts, behind-the-scenes footage and scenes of Sinatra's mother and her husband, Hugh Lambert. The film did not appear until 1975.\nBy 1975, Sinatra was releasing singles on the Private Stock Records label. Among the singles were \"Kinky Love\", \"Annabell of Mobile\", \"It's for My Dad\" and \"Indian Summer\" (with Hazlewood). \"Kinky Love\" was banned by some radio stations for its suggestive lyrics. It appeared on \"Sheet Music: A Collection of Her Favorite Love Songs\" in 1998, and Pale Saints covered the song in 1991.\nBy the mid-1970s, Sinatra had slowed her musical activity and ceased acting to concentrate on her family. She returned to the studio in 1981 to record a country album with Mel Tillis called \"Mel &amp; Nancy\". Two of their songs made the \"Billboard\" country chart: \"Texas Cowboy Night\" (no.. 23) and \"Play Me or Trade Me\" (no. 43).\nIn 1985, Sinatra wrote the book \"Frank Sinatra, My Father\".\n1990s\u2013present.\nAt 54, Sinatra posed for \"Playboy\" in the May 1995 issue and made appearances on TV shows to promote her album \"One More Time\". The magazine appearance caused some controversy. On the talk-show circuit, she said that her father was proud of the photos. Sinatra told Jay Leno on a 1995 \"Tonight Show\" that her daughters gave their approval, but her mother said that she should ask her father before committing to the project. Sinatra said that when she told her father what \"Playboy\" would be paying her, he said, \"Double it\".\nIn 1995, Nancy wrote the book \"Frank Sinatra, An American Legend\". This was followed by an updated version in 1998 following Frank's death.\nTaking her father's advice to own her masters, Sinatra owns or holds an interest in most of her material, including videos. Sinatra appeared live at the Edinburgh International Festival in August 2002. The sold-out, one-off concert was filmed by the BBC and later aired on BBC Four. She collaborated with former Los Angeles neighbor Morrissey on a 2004 version of his song \"Let Me Kiss You\", which was featured on her album \"Nancy Sinatra\". The single\u00a0\u2013 released the same day as Morrissey's version\u00a0\u2013 charted at no. 46 in the UK, providing Sinatra with her first hit in more than 30 years. The follow-up single, \"Burnin' Down the Spark,\" failed to chart. The album featured U2, Sonic Youth, Calexico, Pete Yorn, Jon Spencer, Pulp's Jarvis Cocker and Steven Van Zandt, all of whom have cited Sinatra as an influence. Each artist crafted a song for Sinatra to sing on the album. EMI released \"The Essential Nancy Sinatra\", a UK-only greatest-hits compilation featuring the previously unreleased track \"Machine Gun Kelly\", in 2006. The album was Sinatra's first to make the UK charts (no. 73) since 1971's \"Did You Ever?\" reached no. 31. Sinatra recorded \"Another Gay Sunshine Day\" for \"Another Gay Movie\" in 2006.\nSinatra received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on May 11, 2006. A Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to her in 2002.\nSinatra appeared as herself on one of the final episodes (\"Chasing It\") of the HBO mob drama \"The Sopranos\". Her brother Frank Jr. had previously appeared in the 2000 episode \"The Happy Wanderer\". Sinatra and Anoushka Shankar recorded a 2007 public-service announcement for Deejay Ra's Hip-Hop Literacy campaign, encouraging reading of music and film-related books and screenplays. Sinatra's digital-only album \"Cherry Smiles: The Rare Singles\", featuring previously unreleased tracks and songs only available as singles, was released in 2009. She released the 2013 digital-only album \"Shifting Gears\", featuring 15 previously unreleased tracks, including a rendition of Neil Diamond's \"Holly Holy\". The orchestra tracks were recorded in the 1970s while Sinatra was touring with a 40-piece orchestra, and her vocal tracks were recorded within 10 years of the release of the collection. Sinatra's 1967 hit duet with Lee Hazlewood, \"Summer Wine\", was featured in retail apparel giant H&amp;M's \"The Summer Shop 2017\" ad campaign.\nIn October 2020, Sinatra and Light in the Attic Records announced plans to release the Nancy Sinatra Archival Series. The first release was a Record Store Day Black Friday exclusive 7\" vinyl single featuring two Sinatra/Hazlewood duets, \"Some Velvet Morning\" and \"Tired of Waiting for You\". A new 23-track compilation, \"Start Walkin' 1965\u20131976\", followed in February 2021. The first single, a remastered reissue of Nancy &amp; Lee's 1976 Private Stock single \"(L'\u00e9t\u00e9 Indien) Indian Summer\", was released as a digital exclusive on October 21, 2020. Some of Sinatra's past albums were issued on CD for the first time, including her first record with Hazlewood, 1968's \"Nancy &amp; Lee\", and its follow-up, 1972's \"Nancy &amp; Lee Again\". Sinatra's debut album, \"Boots\", was reissued on vinyl, picture disc, compact disc, 4-track, 8-track, and digital by Light In The Attic Records on September 17, 2021. The second wave of the Nancy Sinatra Archival Series kicked off on September 29, 2023 with the digital release of a new 25-song compilation \"Keep Walkin': Singles, Demos &amp; Rarities 1965-1978.\" Physical release followed on October 20, 2023. Sinatra participated in her first YouTube live chat on November 2, 2023.\nPolitical views.\nSinatra has publicly stated her personal opposition to the affairs and presidency of U.S. president Donald Trump.\nSinatra has progressive positions on political issues, advocating for advances in women's rights, healthcare and reversal of climate change.\nUnion activism.\nOn March 30, 2012, the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA) completed a merger of equals forming a new union SAG-AFTRA. As a result of this merger, a group of actors including Sinatra, Michael Bell, Wendy Schaal, Schaal's former stepmother Valerie Harper, Clancy Brown, former SAG President Edward Asner, Martin Sheen, and Ed Harris immediately sued against the current SAG President Ken Howard and several SAG Vice Presidents to overturn the merger and separate the (now merged) two unions because of their claims that the election was improper. The plaintiffs dropped their lawsuit several months later.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages:\nChildren (with Lambert):\nBoth women were left US$1 million from their grandfather Frank Sinatra's will, in a trust fund started in 1983.\nBetween marriages, Nancy was engaged to producer Jack Haley Jr., who later married Liza Minnelli. She has also dated Michael Caine and Phil Spector. She also lived with architect David Clinton, who designed and built both of her homes in Beverly Hills.\nDiscography.\nSolo studio albums\nCollaborative studio albums\nSoundtracks\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21684", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21684", "title": "Northern alliance", "text": ""}
{"id": "21685", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21685", "title": "New Amsterdam", "text": "Dutch settlement (1624\u20131664)\nNew Amsterdam (, ) was a 17th-century Dutch settlement established at the southern tip of Manhattan Island that served as the seat of the colonial government in New Netherland. The initial trading \"factory\" gave rise to the settlement around Fort Amsterdam. The fort was situated on the strategic southern tip of the island of Manhattan and was meant to defend the fur trade operations of the Dutch West India Company in the North River (Hudson River). In 1624, it became a provincial extension of the Dutch Republic and was designated as the capital of the province in 1625. New Amsterdam became a city when it received municipal rights on February 2, 1653.\nBy 1655, the population of New Netherland had grown to over 2,000 people, with a 1,500 majority residing in the city of New Amsterdam. By 1664, the population of New Netherland had risen to almost 9,000 people, 2,500 of whom lived in New Amsterdam, 1,000 lived near Fort Orange, and the remainder in other towns and villages.\nIn 1664, the English military seized control over New Amsterdam and renamed it New York after the Duke of York (later James II &amp; VII). After the Second Anglo-Dutch War of 1665\u201367, England and the United Provinces of the Netherlands agreed to the status quo in the Treaty of Breda. The English kept the island of Manhattan, the Dutch giving up their claim to New Amsterdam and the rest of the colony, while the English formally abandoned Surinam in South America, and the island of Run in the East Indies to the Dutch, confirming their control of the valuable Spice Islands. The area occupied by New Amsterdam is now Lower Manhattan.\nEtymology.\nThe indigenous Munsee term for the southern tip of the island was Manhattoe, and variations of this name were also applied to the first Dutch settlement there. With the construction of Fort Amsterdam, the town also became variously known as \"Amsterdam\" or \"New Amsterdam\". New Amsterdam's city limits did not extend north of the wall of Wall Street, and neither the remainder of the island of Manhattan nor of wider New Netherland fell under its definition.\nHistory.\nEarly exploration and settlement (1609\u20131624).\nIn 1524, nearly a century before the arrival of the Dutch, the site that would later become New Amsterdam was named Nouvelle Angoul\u00eame by the Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano, to commemorate his patron King Francis I of France, whose family consisted of the Counts of Angoul\u00eame. The first recorded exploration by the Dutch of the area around what is now called New York Bay was in 1609 with the voyage of the ship \"Halve Maen\" (English: \"Half Moon\"), commanded by Henry Hudson in the service of the Dutch Republic, as the emissary of Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange and stadholder of Holland. Hudson named the river the Mauritius River. He was also covertly attempting to find the Northwest Passage for the Dutch East India Company. Instead, he brought back news about the possibility of exploitation of beaver by the Dutch who sent commercial, private missions to the area the following years.\nAt the time, beaver pelts were highly prized in Europe, because the fur could be felted to make waterproof hats. A by-product of the trade in beaver pelts was castoreum\u2014the secretion of the animals' anal glands\u2014which was used for its medicinal properties and for perfumes. The expeditions by Adriaen Block and Hendrick Christiaensen in 1611, 1612, 1613 and 1614, resulted in the surveying and charting of the region from the 38th parallel to the 45th parallel. On their 1614 map, which gave them a four-year trade monopoly under a patent of the States General, they named the newly discovered and mapped territory New Netherland for the first time. It also showed the first year-round trading presence in New Netherland, Fort Nassau, which would be replaced in 1624 by Fort Orange, which eventually grew into the town of Beverwijck, renamed Albany in 1664.\nSpanish trader Juan Rodriguez (rendered in Dutch as Jan Rodrigues), was born in the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo, the first Spanish Colony in the Americas. Allegedly of Portuguese and African descent, he arrived on Manhattan Island during the winter of 1613\u20131614 under the command of Thijs Volckenz Mossel captain of the \"Jonge Tobias\", trapping beavers and trading with the local population as a representative of the Dutch East India Company. He is the first recorded non-Indigenous inhabitant of what would eventually become New York City.\nThe territory of New Netherland was originally a private, profit-making commercial enterprise focused on cementing alliances and conducting trade with the local Indigenous peoples. Surveying and exploration of the region was conducted as a prelude to an anticipated official settlement by the Dutch Republic, which occurred in 1624.\nPilgrims' attempt to settle in the Hudson River area.\nIn 1620 the Pilgrims attempted to sail to the Hudson River from England. However, \"Mayflower\" reached Cape Cod (now part of Massachusetts) on November 9, 1620, after a voyage of 64 days. For a variety of reasons, primarily a shortage of supplies, \"Mayflower\" could not proceed to the Hudson River, and the colonists decided to settle near Cape Cod, establishing the Plymouth Colony.\nDutch return.\nThe mouth of the Hudson River was selected as the ideal place for initial settlement as it had easy access to the ocean while also securing an ice-free lifeline to the beaver trading post near present-day Albany. Here, Indigenous hunters supplied them with pelts in exchange for European-made trade goods and wampum, which was soon being made by the Dutch on Long Island. In 1621, the Dutch West India Company was founded. Between 1621 and 1623, orders were given to the private, commercial traders to vacate the territory, thus opening up the territory to Dutch settlers and company traders. It also allowed the laws and ordinances of the states of Holland to apply. Previously, during the private, commercial period, only the law of the ship had applied.\nOn May 20, 1624, the first settlers in New Netherland arrived on Noten Eylandt (Nut or Nutten Island, now Governors Island) aboard the ship \"Nieu Nederlandt\" under the command of Cornelius Jacobsen May, who disembarked on the island with thirty families to take legal possession of the New Netherland territory. The landing on Governors Island in 1624 brought with it the \"legal and cultural DNA\" of the Republic of the United Netherlands, including progressive values such as freedom of conscience and tolerance, which were foundational to the culture of early New Netherland. Compared to many parts of Europe at that time, New Netherland embraced a relatively progressive philosophy of inclusion, allowing various nationalities, religions, and races to coexist. The ideals of popular sovereignty and free trade formed the backbone of this diverse society, setting it apart from other colonial powers. However, despite these advanced ideals, the colony also engaged in practices that reflected the broader colonial context, such as the mistreatment of Indigenous populations and the introduction of slavery in 1626. These actions show that while the early settlers were ahead of their time in embracing tolerance, they were also part of the colonial systems that perpetuated injustice and exploitation. The WIC ordered engineer and surveyor Crijn Fredericxsz for the construction of Fort Amsterdam. A fortification was completed in 1626.\nThe families were then dispersed to Fort Wilhelmus on Verhulsten Island (Burlington Island) in the South River (now the Delaware River), to Kievitshoek (now Old Saybrook, Connecticut) at the mouth of the Verse River (now the Connecticut River) and further north at Fort Nassau on the Mauritius or North River (now the Hudson River), near what is now Albany.\nA fort and sawmill were soon erected at Nut Island. The windmill was constructed by Franchoys Fezard and was taken apart for iron in 1648.\nFort Amsterdam (1624).\nThe threat of attack from other European colonial powers prompted the directors of the Dutch West India Company to formulate a plan to protect the entrance to the Hudson River. In 1624, 30 families were sponsored by Dutch West India Company moving from Nut Island to Manhattan Island, where a citadel to contain Fort Amsterdam was being laid out by Cryn Frederickz van Lobbrecht at the direction of Willem Verhulst. By the end of 1625, the site had been staked out directly south of Bowling Green on the site of the present U.S. Custom House. The Mohawk-Mahican War in the Hudson Valley led the company to relocate even more settlers to the vicinity of the new Fort Amsterdam. In the end, colonizing was a prohibitively expensive undertaking, only partly subsidized by the fur trade. This led to a scaling back of the original plans. By 1628, a smaller fort was constructed with walls containing a mixture of clay and sand.\nThe fort also served as the center of trading activity. It contained a barracks, the church, a house for the West India Company director and a warehouse for the storage of company goods. Troops from the fort used the triangle between the \"Heerestraat\" and what came to be known as Whitehall Street for marching drills.\n1624\u20131664.\nVerhulst, with his council, was responsible for the selection of Manhattan as a permanent place of settlement and for situating Fort Amsterdam. He was replaced as the company director of New Netherland by Peter Minuit in 1626. According to the writer Nathaniel Benchley, to legally safeguard the settlers' investments, possessions and farms on Manhattan island, Minuit negotiated the \"purchase\" of Manhattan from a band of Canarse from Brooklyn who occupied the bottom quarter of Manhattan, known then as the Manhattoes, for 60 guilders' worth of trade goods. Minuit conducted the transaction with the Canarse chief Seyseys, who was only too happy to accept valuable merchandise in exchange for an island that was actually mostly controlled by the Weckquaesgeeks.\nAn official letter of November 7, 1626 in which Pieter Schagen informed the States General of the purchase (by Peter Minuit) of Manhattan (\"'t eylant Manhettes\", groot 11000 morgen) from the \"wilden\" (wild ones). This area amounts to . Schagen also mentioned the successful first harvest and the shipload of 7,246 beaver skins (Nationaal Archief, The Hague). For a transcription of the text, see Schagenbrief and Transcriptie Schagenbrief\nThe deed itself has not survived, so the specific details are unknown. A textual reference to the deed became the foundation for the legend that Minuit had purchased Manhattan from the Native Americans for twenty-four dollars' worth of trinkets and beads, the guilder rate at the time being about two and a half to a Spanish dollar. The price of 60 Dutch guilders in 1626 amounts to around $1,100 in 2012 dollars. Further complicating the calculation is that the value of goods in the area would have been different from the value of those same goods in the developed market of the Netherlands.\nThe Dutch introduced windmills first at \"Noten Eylandt\" for a sawmill, to exploit the stand of hardwoods found there. Later they exploited the hydropower of existing creeks by constructing mills at Turtle Bay (between present-day East 45th\u201348th Streets) and Montagne's Kill, later called Harlem Mill Creek (East 108th Street). In 1639 a sawmill was located in the northern forest at what was later the corner of East 74th Street and Second Avenue, at which African slaves cut lumber.\nThe New Amsterdam settlement had a population of approximately 270 people, including infants. In 1642 the new director Willem Kieft decided to build a stone church within the fort. The work was carried out by recent English immigrants, the brothers John and Richard Ogden. The church was finished in 1645 and stood until destroyed in the Slave Insurrection of 1741.\nA pen-and-ink view of New Amsterdam, drawn on-the-spot and discovered in the map collection of the Austrian National Library in Vienna in 1991, provides a unique view of New Amsterdam as it appeared from Capske (small Cape) Rock in 1648. It was associated with Adriaen van der Donck's \"Remonstrance of New Netherland\", and may have inspired later views as by Claes Jansz. Visscher. Capske Rock was situated in the water close to Manhattan between Manhattan and Noten Eylant, and signified the start of the East River roadstead.\nNew Amsterdam received municipal rights by a charter from New Netherland Governor Peter Stuyvesant on February 2, 1653, thus becoming a city.\nAlbany, then named \"Beverwyck\", received its city rights in 1652. \"Nieuw Haarlem\", now known as Harlem, was formally recognized in 1658.\nThe first Dutch Jews known to have arrived in New Amsterdam arrived in 1654. First to arrive were Solomon Pietersen and Jacob Barsimson, who sailed during the summer of 1654 directly from Holland, with passports that gave them permission to trade in the colony. Then in early September, 23 Jewish refugees arrived from the Brazilian city of Recife, which had been conquered by the Portuguese in January 1654. The director-general of New Netherland, Peter Stuyvesant, sought to turn them away but was ultimately overruled by the directors of the Dutch West India Company in Amsterdam. Asser Levy, an Ashkenazi Jew who was one of the 23 refugees, eventually prospered and in 1661 became the first Jew to own a house in New Amsterdam, which also made him the first Jew known to have owned a house anywhere in North America.\nOn September 15, 1655, New Amsterdam was occupied by several hundred Munsee, possibly in response to a Dutch colonist killing a woman stealing peaches from his orchard. No bloodshed occurred until the Munsee were fired upon as they were preparing to depart. This triggered attacks on Pavonia and Staten Island. Stuyvesant reported 28 farms destroyed, 40 deaths and 100 captives taken in what later became known as the Peach War.\nIn 1661, the Communipaw ferry was founded and began a long history of trans-Hudson ferry and ultimately rail and road transportation.\nIn 1664, Jan van Bonnel built a Saw mill on East 74th Street and the East River, where an long stream that began in the north of today's Central Park, which became known as the Saw Kill or Saw Kill Creek, emptied into the river. Later owners of the property George Elphinstone and Abraham Shotwell replaced the sawmill with a leather mill in 1677. The Saw Kill was later redirected into a culvert, arched over, and its trickling little stream was called Arch Brook.\nEnglish capture.\nOn August 27, 1664, while England and the Dutch Republic were at peace, four English frigates sailed into New Amsterdam's harbor and demanded New Netherland's surrender, effecting the bloodless capture of New Amsterdam. On September 6, the local Dutch deciding not to offer resistance, Stuyvesant's lawyer Johannes de Decker and five other delegates signed the official Articles of Surrender of New Netherland. This was swiftly followed by the Second Anglo-Dutch War, between England and the Dutch Republic. In June 1665, New Amsterdam was reincorporated under English law as New York City, named after the Duke of York (later King James II). He was the brother of King Charles II, who had been granted the lands.\nIn 1667, the Treaty of Breda ended the conflict in favor of the Dutch. The Dutch did not press their claims on New Netherland but did demand control over the valuable sugar plantations and factories captured by them that year on the coast of Surinam, giving them full control over the coast of what is now Guyana and Suriname.\n On August 9, 1673, during the Third Anglo-Dutch War, the Dutch quickly but briefly retook the colony of New Netherland, which the English called \"New York\", with a combined fleet of a squadron of ships from Amsterdam and a squadron of ships from Zeeland. The commanders were Jacob Benckes (Koudum, 1637\u20131677) and Cornelis Evertsen de Jongste (Vlissingen, 1642\u20131706) under instruction of the States General of the Dutch Republic. Anthony Colve was installed as the first Dutch governor of the province. Previously there had only been West India Company Directors and a Director-General.\nAmidst the recapture, New York City would be again renamed, this time to New Orange. However, after the signing of the Treaty of Westminster in February 1674, both the Dutch territories were relinquished to the English. With the effective transfer of control on November 10, 1674, the names New Netherland and New Orange reverted to the English versions of \"New York\" and \"New York City\", respectively. Suriname became an official Dutch possession in return.\nCartography.\nThe beginnings of New Amsterdam, unlike most other colonies in the New World, were thoroughly documented in city maps. During the time of New Netherland's colonization, the Dutch were the pre-eminent cartographers in Europe. The delegated authority of the Dutch West India Company over New Netherland required maintaining sovereignty on behalf of the States General, generating cash flow through commercial enterprise for its shareholders, and funding the province's growth. Thus its directors regularly required that censuses be taken. These tools to measure and monitor the province's progress were accompanied by accurate maps and plans. These surveys, as well as grassroots activities to seek redress of grievances, account for the existence of some of the most important of the early documents.\nThere is a particularly detailed city map called the Castello Plan produced in 1660. Virtually every structure in New Amsterdam at the time is believed to be represented, and by cross-referencing the \"Nicasius de Sille List\" of 1660, which enumerates all the citizens of New Amsterdam and their addresses, it can be determined who resided in every house.\nThe city map known as the Duke's Plan probably derived from the same 1660 census as the Castello Plan. The Duke's Plan includes two outlying areas of development on Manhattan along the top of the plan. The work was created for James (1633\u20131701), the Duke of York and Albany, after whom New York, New York City, and New York's Capital \u2013 Albany, were named just after the seizure of New Amsterdam by the English. After that provisional relinquishment of New Netherland, Stuyvesant reported to his superiors that he \"had endeavored to promote the increase of population, agriculture and commerce...the flourishing condition which might have been more flourishing if the now afflicted inhabitants had been protected by a suitable garrison...and had been helped with the long sought for settlement of the boundary, or in default thereof had they been seconded with the oft besought reinforcement of men and ships against the continual troubles, threats, encroachments and invasions of the British neighbors and government of Hartford Colony, our too powerful enemies\".\nThe existence of these city maps has proven to be very useful in the archaeology of New York City. For instance, the Castello map aided the excavation of the Stadthuys (City Hall) of New Amsterdam in determining the exact location of the building.\nLayout.\nThe maps enable a precise reconstruction of the town. Fort Amsterdam was located at the southernmost tip of the island of Manhattan, which today is surrounded by Bowling Green. The Battery is a reference to its battery of cannon.\nBroadway was the main street that led out of town north towards Harlem. The town was surrounded to the north by a wall leading from the eastern to the western shore. Today, where the course of this city wall was, is Wall Street. Nearby, a canal which led from the harbor inland was filled in 1676, and is today Broad Street.\nThe layout of the streets was winding, as in a European city. Only starting from Wall Street going toward uptown did the typical grid become enforced long after the town ceased to be Dutch. Most of the Financial District overlaps with New Amsterdam and has retained its original street layout.\nLegacy.\nThe 1625 date of the founding of New Amsterdam is now commemorated in the official Seal of New York City. (Formerly, the year on the seal was 1664, the year of the provisional Articles of Transfer, assuring New Netherlanders that they \"shall keep and enjoy the liberty of their consciences in religion\", negotiated with the English by Peter Stuyvesant and his council.)\nSometimes considered a dysfunctional trading post by the English who later acquired it from the Dutch, Russell Shorto, author of \"The Island at the Center of the World\", suggests that the city left its cultural marks on later New York and, by extension, the United States as a whole.\nMajor recent historical research has been based on a set of documents that have survived from that period, untranslated. They are the administrative records of the colony, unreadable by most scholars. Since the 1970s, Charles Gehring of the New Netherland Institute has made it his life's work to translate this first-hand history of the Colony of New Netherland.\nThe scholarly conclusion has largely been that the settlement of New Amsterdam is much more like current New York than previously thought. Cultural diversity and a mindset that resembles the American Dream were already present in the first few years of this colony. Writers like Russell Shorto argue that the large influence of New Amsterdam on the American psyche has largely been overlooked in the classic telling of American beginnings, because of animosity between the English victors and the conquered Dutch.\nThe original 17th-century architecture of New Amsterdam has completely vanished (affected by the fires of 1776 and 1835), leaving only archaeological remnants. The original street plan of New Amsterdam has stayed largely intact, as have some houses outside Manhattan.\nThe presentation of the legacy of the unique culture of 17th-century New Amsterdam remains a concern of preservationists and educators. In 2009 the National Park Service celebrated the 400th anniversary of Henry Hudson's 1609 voyage on behalf of the Dutch with the New Amsterdam Trail.\nThe Dutch-American historian and journalist Hendrik Willem van Loon wrote in 1933 a work of alternative history entitled \"If the Dutch Had Kept Nieuw Amsterdam\" (in \"If, Or History Rewritten\", edited by J. C. Squire, 1931, Simon &amp; Schuster).\nA similar theme, at greater length, was taken up by writer Elizabeth Bear, who published the \"New Amsterdam\" series of detective stories that take place in a world where the city remained Dutch until the Napoleonic Wars and retained its name also afterward.\nOne of New York's Broadway theatres is the New Amsterdam Theatre. The name New Amsterdam is also written on the architrave situated on top of the row of columns in front of the Manhattan Municipal Building, commemorating the name of the Dutch colony.\nAlthough no architectural monuments or buildings have survived, the legacy lived on in the form of Dutch Colonial Revival architecture. A number of structures in New York City were constructed in the 19th and 20th centuries in this style, such as Wallabout Market in Brooklyn, South William Street in Manhattan, West End Collegiate Church at West 77th Street, and others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21686", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21686", "title": "Modern paganism", "text": "Religions shaped by historical paganism\nModern paganism, also known as neopaganism and contemporary paganism, is a range of new religious movements variously influenced by the beliefs of pre-modern peoples across Europe, North Africa, and the Near East. Despite some common similarities, contemporary pagan movements are diverse, sharing no single set of beliefs, practices, or religious texts. Scholars of religion may study the phenomenon as a movement divided into different religions, while others study neopaganism as a decentralized religion with an array of denominations.\nAdherents rely on pre-Christian, folkloric, and ethnographic sources to a variety of degrees; many of them follow a spirituality that they accept as entirely modern, while others claim to adhere to prehistoric beliefs, or else, they attempt to revive indigenous religions as accurately as possible. Modern pagan movements are frequently described on a spectrum ranging from reconstructive, which seeks to revive historical pagan religions; to eclectic movements, which blend elements from various religions and philosophies with historical paganism. Polytheism, animism, and pantheism are common features across pagan theology. Modern pagans can also include atheists, upholding virtues and principles associated with paganism while maintaining a secular worldview. Humanistic, naturalistic, or secular pagans may recognize deities as archetypes or useful metaphors for different cycles of life, or reframe magic as a purely psychological practice.\nContemporary paganism has been associated with the New Age movement, with scholars highlighting their similarities as well as their differences. The academic field of pagan studies began to coalesce in the 1990s, emerging from disparate scholarship in the preceding two decades.\nTerminology.\nDefinition.\nThere is \"considerable disagreement as to the precise definition and the proper usage\" of the term \"modern paganism\". Even within the academic field of pagan studies, there is no consensus about how contemporary paganism can best be defined. Most scholars describe modern paganism as a broad array of different religions, not a single one. The category of modern paganism could be compared to the categories of Abrahamic religions and Indian religions in its structure. A second, less common definition found within pagan studies\u2014promoted by the religious studies scholars Michael F. Strmiska and Graham Harvey\u2014characterises modern paganism as a single religion, of which groups like Wicca, Druidry, and Heathenry are denominations. This perspective has been critiqued, given the lack of core commonalities in issues such as theology, cosmology, ethics, afterlife, holy days, or ritual practices within the pagan movement.\nContemporary paganism has been defined as \"a collection of modern religious, spiritual, and magical traditions that are self-consciously inspired by the pre-Judaic, pre-Christian, and pre-Islamic belief systems of Europe, North Africa, and the Near East.\" Thus it has been said that although it is \"a highly diverse phenomenon\", \"an identifiable common element\" nevertheless runs through the pagan movement. Strmiska described paganism as a movement \"dedicated to reviving the polytheistic, nature-worshipping pagan religions of pre-Christian Europe and adapting them for the use of people in modern societies.\" The religious studies scholar Wouter Hanegraaff characterised paganism as encompassing \"all those modern movements which are, first, based on the conviction that what Christianity has traditionally denounced as idolatry and superstition actually represents/represented a profound and meaningful religious worldview and, secondly, that a religious practice based on this worldview can and should be revitalized in our modern world.\"\nDiscussing the relationship between the different pagan religions, religious studies scholars Kaarina Aitamurto and Scott Simpson wrote that they were \"like siblings who have taken different paths in life but still retain many visible similarities\". But there has been much \"cross-fertilization\" between these different faiths: many groups have influenced, and been influenced by, other pagan religions, making clear-cut distinctions among them more difficult for scholars to make. The various pagan religions have been academically classified as new religious movements, with the anthropologist Kathryn Rountree describing paganism as a whole as a \"new religious phenomenon\". A number of academics, particularly in North America, consider modern paganism a form of nature religion.\nSome practitioners completely eschew the use of the term \"pagan\", preferring to use more specific names for their religion, such as \"Heathen\" or \"Wiccan\". This is because the term \"pagan\" originates in Christian terminology, which individuals who object to the term wish to avoid. Some favor the term \"ethnic religion\"; the World Pagan Congress, founded in 1998, soon renamed itself the European Congress of Ethnic Religions (ECER), enjoying that term's association with the Greek \"ethnos\" and the academic field of ethnology. Within linguistically Slavic areas of Europe, the term \"Native Faith\" is often favored as a synonym for paganism, rendered as \"Ridnovirstvo\" in Ukrainian, \"Rodnoverie\" in Russian, and \"Rodzimowierstwo\" in Polish. Alternately, many practitioners in these regions view \"Native Faith\" as a category within modern paganism that does not encompass all pagan religions. Other terms some pagans favor include \"traditional religion\", \"indigenous religion\", \"nativist religion\", and \"reconstructionism\".\nVarious pagans who are active in pagan studies, such as Michael York and Prudence Jones, have argued that, due to the similarities of their worldviews, the modern pagan movement can be treated as part of the same global phenomenon as pre-Christian Ancient religions, living Indigenous religions, and world religions like Hinduism, Shinto, and Afro-American religions. They have also suggested that these could all be included under the rubric of \"paganism\". This approach has been received critically by many specialists in religious studies. Critics have pointed out that such claims would cause problems for analytic scholarship by lumping together belief systems with very significant differences, and that the term would serve modern pagan interests by making the movement appear far larger on the world stage. Doyle White writes that modern religions that draw upon the pre-Christian belief systems of other parts of the world, such as Sub-Saharan Africa or the Americas, cannot be seen as part of the contemporary pagan movement, which is \"fundamentally Eurocentric\". Similarly, Strmiska stresses that modern paganism should not be conflated with the belief systems of the world's Indigenous peoples because the latter lived under colonialism and its legacy, and that while some pagan worldviews bear similarities to those of indigenous communities, they stem from \"different cultural, linguistic, and historical backgrounds\".\nReappropriation of \"paganism\".\nMany scholars have favored the use of \"neopaganism\" to describe this phenomenon, with the prefix \"neo-\" serving to distinguish the modern religions from their ancient, pre-Christian forerunners. Some pagan practitioners also prefer \"neopaganism\", believing that the prefix conveys the reformed nature of the religion, such as its rejection of practices such as animal sacrifice. Conversely, most pagans do not use the word \"neopagan\", with some expressing disapproval of it, arguing that the term \"neo\" offensively disconnects them from what they perceive as their pre-Christian forebears. To avoid causing offense, many scholars in the English-speaking world have begun using the prefixes \"modern\" or \"contemporary\" rather than \"neo\". Several pagan studies scholars, such as Ronald Hutton and Sabina Magliocco, have emphasized the use of the upper-case \"Paganism\" to distinguish the modern movement from the lower-case \"paganism\", a term commonly used for pre-Christian belief systems. In 2015, Rountree opined that this lower case/upper case division was \"now [the] convention\" in pagan studies. Among the critics of the upper-case P are York and Andras Corban-Arthen, president of the ECER. Capitalizing the word, they argue, makes \"Paganism\" appear as the name of a cohesive religion rather than a generic religious category, and comes off as naive, dishonest, or as an unwelcome attempt to disrupt the spontaneity and vernacular quality of the movement.\nThe term \"neo-pagan\" was coined in the 19th century in reference to Renaissance and Romanticist Hellenophile classical revivalism. By the mid-1930s \"neopagan\" was being applied to new religious movements like Jakob Wilhelm Hauer's German Faith Movement and Jan Stachniuk's Polish Zadruga, usually by outsiders and often pejoratively. Pagan as a self-designation appeared in 1964 and 1965, in the publications of the Witchcraft Research Association; at that time, the term was in use by Wiccans in the United States and the United Kingdom, but unconnected to the broader, counterculture pagan movement. The modern popularisation of the terms pagan and neopagan as they are currently understood is largely traced to Oberon Zell-Ravenheart, co-founder of the 1st Neo-Pagan Church of All Worlds, who, beginning in 1967 with the early issues of \"Green Egg\", used both terms for the growing movement. This usage has been common since the pagan revival in the 1970s.\nAccording to Strmiska, the reappropriation of the term \"pagan\" by modern pagans served as \"a deliberate act of defiance\" against \"traditional, Christian-dominated society\", allowing them to use it as a source of \"pride and power\". In this, he compared it to the gay liberation movement's reappropriation of the term \"queer\", which had formerly been used only as a term of homophobic abuse. He suggests that part of the term's appeal lay in the fact that a large proportion of pagan converts were raised in Christian families, and that by embracing the term \"pagan\", a word long used for what was \"rejected and reviled by Christian authorities\", a convert summarizes \"in a single word his or her definitive break\" from Christianity. He further suggests that the term gained appeal through its depiction in romanticist and 19th-century European nationalist literature, where it had been imbued with \"a certain mystery and allure\", and that by embracing the word \"pagan\" modern pagans defy past religious intolerance to honor the pre-Christian peoples of Europe and emphasize those societies' cultural and artistic achievements.\nVarieties.\nEclectic and reconstructive.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We might say that Reconstructionist Pagans romanticize the past, while eclectic pagans idealize the future. In the first case, there is a deeply felt need to connect with the past as a source of spiritual strength and wisdom; in the second case, there is the idealistic hope that a spirituality of nature can be gleaned from ancient sources and shared with all humanity.\"\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Michael Strmiska\nModern pagan attitudes differ regarding the sources of pre-Christian belief systems. Strmiska notes that pagan groups can be \"divided along a continuum: at one end are those that aim to reconstruct the ancient religious traditions of a particular ethnic group or a linguistic or geographic area to the highest degree possible; at the other end are those that freely blend traditions of different areas, peoples, and time periods.\" Strmiska argues that these two poles could be termed \"reconstructionism\" and \"eclecticism\", respectively. Reconstructionists do not altogether reject innovation in their interpretation and adaptation of the source material; however, they do believe that the source material conveys greater authenticity and thus should be emphasized. They often follow scholarly debates about the nature of such pre-Christian religions, and some reconstructionists are themselves scholars. Eclectic pagans, conversely, seek general inspiration from the pre-Christian past, and do not attempt to recreate past rites or traditions with specific attention to detail.\nOn the reconstructionist side can be placed those movements which often favour the designation \"Native Faith\", including Romuva, Heathenry, Roman Traditionalism and Hellenism. On the eclectic side has been placed Wicca, Thelema, Adonism, Druidry, the Goddess Movement, Discordianism and the Radical Faeries.\nStrmiska also suggests that this division could be seen as being based on \"discourses of identity\", with reconstructionists emphasizing a deep-rooted sense of place and people, and eclectics embracing a universality and openness toward humanity and the Earth.\nStrmiska nevertheless notes that this reconstructionist-eclectic division is \"neither as absolute nor as straightforward as it might appear\". He cites the example of Dievtur\u012bba, a form of reconstructionist paganism that seeks to revive the pre-Christian religion of the Latvian people, by noting that it exhibits eclectic tendencies by adopting a monotheistic focus and ceremonial structure from Lutheranism. Similarly, while examining neo-shamanism among the Sami people of Northern Scandinavia, Siv Ellen Kraft highlights that despite the religion being reconstructionist in intent, it is highly eclectic in the manner in which it has adopted elements from shamanic traditions in other parts of the world.\nIn discussing Asatro \u2013 a form of Heathenry based in Denmark \u2013 Matthew Amster notes that it did not fit clearly within such a framework, because, while seeking a reconstructionist form of historical accuracy, Asatro strongly eschewed the emphasis on ethnicity common to other reconstructionist groups. While Wicca is identified as an eclectic form of paganism, Strmiska also notes that some Wiccans have moved in a more reconstructionist direction by focusing on a particular ethnic and cultural link, thus developing such variants as Norse Wicca and Celtic Wicca. Concern has also been expressed regarding the utility of the term \"reconstructionism\" when dealing with the paganisms of Central and Eastern Europe, because in many of the languages of these regions, equivalents of the term \"reconstructionism\" \u2013 such as the Czech and Lithuanian \u2013 are already used to define the secular hobby of historical re-enactment.\nEcologic and secular.\nThe spectrum of modern paganism includes a range of ecologic and explicitly ecocentric practices, which may overlap with scientific pantheism. Pagans may distinguish their beliefs and practices as a form of religious naturalism or naturalist philosophy, with some engaged as humanistic or atheopagans.\nEthnic and regional.\nFor some pagan groups, ethnicity is central to their religion, and some restrict membership to a single ethnic group. Some critics have described this approach as a form of racism. Other pagan groups allow people of any ethnicity, on the view that the gods and goddesses of a particular region can call anyone to their form of worship. Some such groups feel a particular affinity for the pre-Christian belief systems of a particular region with which they have no ethnic link because they see themselves as reincarnations of people from that society. There is greater focus on ethnicity within the pagan movements in continental Europe than within the pagan movements in North America and the British Isles. Such ethnic paganisms have variously been seen as responses to concerns about foreign ideologies, globalization, cosmopolitanism, and anxieties about cultural erosion.\nAlthough they acknowledged that it was \"a highly simplified model\", Aitamurto and Simpson wrote that there was \"some truth\" to the claim that leftist-oriented forms of paganism were prevalent in North America and the British Isles while rightist-oriented forms of paganism were prevalent in Central and Eastern Europe. They noted that in these latter regions, pagan groups emphasized \"the centrality of the nation, the ethnic group, or the tribe\". Rountree wrote that it was wrong to assume that \"expressions of Paganism can be categorized straight-forwardly according to region\", but acknowledged that some regional trends were visible, such as the impact of Catholicism on paganism in Southern Europe.\nHistoricity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern Pagans are reviving, reconstructing, and reimagining religious traditions of the past that were suppressed for a very long time, even to the point of being almost totally obliterated... Thus, with only a few possible exceptions, today's Pagans cannot claim to be continuing religious traditions handed down in an unbroken line from ancient times to the present. They are modern people with a great reverence for the spirituality of the past, making a new religion \u2013 a modern Paganism \u2013 from the remnants of the past, which they interpret, adapt, and modify according to modern ways of thinking.\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Michael Strmiska\nAlthough inspired by pre-Christian belief systems, modern paganism is not the same phenomenon as those systems and, in many respects, differs from them considerably. Strmiska stresses that modern paganism is a \"new\", \"modern\" religious movement, even if some of its content derives from ancient sources. Contemporary paganism as practiced in the United States in the 1990s has been described as \"a synthesis of historical inspiration and present-day creativity\".\nEclectic paganism takes an undogmatic religious stance and therefore potentially sees no one as having authority to deem a source apocryphal. Contemporary paganism has therefore been prone to fakelore, especially in recent years, as information and misinformation alike have been spread on the Internet and in print media. A number of Wiccan, pagan, and even some traditionalist or tribalist groups have histories of \"Grandmother Stories\"\u2014usually involving initiation by a grandmother, grandfather, or other elderly relative who is said to have taught them the secret, millennia-old traditions of their ancestors. Since this secret wisdom can almost always be traced to recent sources, tellers of these stories have often later admitted they made them up. Strmiska asserts that contemporary paganism could be viewed as a part of the \"much larger phenomenon\" of efforts to revive \"traditional, indigenous, or native religions\" that were occurring across the globe.\nThe case of the (OOE), known as the Osirian Egyptian Order in English, offers a striking example of how ancient religious traditions may have survived in continuity with the past. Tracing its roots to a group of Alexandrian priests who fled to Naples in the 4th century CE after the destruction of the Serapeum, the OOE preserved fragments of Greco-Egyptian ritual in southern Italy. This lineage is central to the Brotherhood of Myriam, founded in 1899 by Giuliano Kremmerz (a.k.a. Ciro Formisano) following his initiation into the OOE. The Brotherhood inherited not just the symbolism but also the ritual framework of the OOE. In this light, the influence of the OOE on certain modern pagan groups illustrates a form of survival rather than revival.\nBeliefs.\nBeliefs and practices vary widely among pagan groups; however, there is a set of core principles common to most, if not all, forms of modern paganism. The English academic Graham Harvey noted that pagans \"rarely indulge in theology\".\nPolytheism.\nOne principle of the pagan movement is polytheism, the belief in and veneration of multiple gods or goddesses. Within the pagan movement, there can be found many deities, both male and female, who have various associations and embody forces of nature, aspects of culture, and facets of human psychology. These deities are typically depicted in human form, and are viewed as having human faults. They are therefore not seen as perfect, but rather are venerated as being wise and powerful. Pagans feel that this understanding of the gods reflected the dynamics of life on Earth, allowing for the expression of humour.\nOne view in the pagan community is that these polytheistic deities are not viewed as literal entities, but as Jungian archetypes or other psychological constructs. Others adopt the belief that the deities have both a psychological and external existence. Many pagans believe adoption of a polytheistic worldview would be beneficial for Western society\u2014replacing the dominant monotheism they see as innately repressive. In fact, many American modern pagans first came to their adopted faiths because they offered greater freedom, diversity, and tolerance of worship within the community than other faiths. This religious pluralism has helped the varied factions of modern paganism exist in relative harmony. Most pagans adopt an ethos of \"unity in diversity\" regarding their religious beliefs.\nThe inclusion of female deities is one facet that distinguishes pagan religions from most of their Abrahamic counterparts. In Wicca, male and female deities are typically balanced in a form of duotheism. Among many pagans, there is a strong desire to incorporate the female aspects of the divine in their worship and within their lives, which can partially explain the attitude that sometimes manifests as the veneration of the sacred feminine.\nThere are exceptions to polytheism in paganism, as seen, for instance, in the form of Ukrainian paganism promoted by Lev Sylenko, which is devoted to a monotheistic veneration of the god Dazhbog. As noted above, pagans with naturalistic worldviews may not believe in or work with deities at all. Pagan religions commonly exhibit a metaphysical concept of an underlying order that pervades the universe, such as the concept of \"harmonia\" embraced by Hellenists and that of \"Wyrd\" found in Heathenry.\nAnimism and pantheism.\nA key part of most pagan worldviews is the holistic concept of an interconnected universe. This is connected with a belief in either pantheism or panentheism. In pantheistic systems, the universe and divinity are conceived as one and the same; in panentheistic systems, divinity is both coterminous with the universe and beyond it. For pagans, pantheism means that \"divinity is inseparable from nature and that [a] deity is immanent in nature\".\nDennis D. Carpenter noted that belief in a pantheistic or panentheistic deity has led to the idea that interconnectedness plays a key role in pagans' worldviews. The prominent Reclaiming priestess Starhawk related that a core part of goddess-centred pagan witchcraft was \"the understanding that all being is interrelated, that we are all linked with the cosmos as parts of one living organism. What affects one of us affects us all.\"\nAnother common belief in the contemporary pagan movement is that of animism. This has been interpreted in two distinct ways among the pagan community. First, it can refer to a belief that everything in the universe is imbued with a life force or spiritual energy. In contrast, some contemporary pagans believe that specific spirits inhabit various features of the natural world and can be actively communicated with. Some pagans have reported experiencing communication with spirits dwelling in rocks, plants, trees, and animals, as well as power animals or animal spirits that can act as spiritual helpers or guides.\nAnimism was also a concept common to many pre-Christian European religions, and in adopting it, contemporary pagans are attempting to \"reenter the primeval worldview\" and participate in a view of cosmology \"that is not possible for most Westerners after childhood.\"\nNature veneration.\nAll pagan movements place great emphasis on the divinity of nature as a primary source of divine will, and on humanity's membership of the natural world, bound in kinship to all life and the Earth itself. The animistic aspects of pagan theology assert that all things have a soul\u2014not just humans or organic life\u2014so this bond extends to mountains and rivers as well as trees and wild animals. As a result, pagans believe the essence of their spirituality is both ancient and timeless, regardless of the age of specific religious movements. Places of natural beauty are therefore treated as sacred and ideal for ritual, like the nemetons of the ancient Celts.\nMany pagans hold that different lands and/or cultures have their own natural religion, with many legitimate interpretations of divinity, and therefore reject religious exclusivism. While the pagan community has tremendous variety in political views spanning the whole of the political spectrum, environmentalism is often a common feature. Such views have also led many pagans to revere the planet Earth as Mother Earth, who is often referred to as Gaia after the ancient Greek goddess of the Earth.\nPractices.\nRitual.\nPagan ritual can take place in both a public and private setting. Contemporary pagan ritual is typically geared towards \"facilitating altered states of awareness or shifting mind-sets\". To induce such altered states of consciousness, pagans use such elements as drumming, visualization, chanting, singing, dancing, and meditation. American folklorist Sabina Magliocco came to the conclusion, based upon her ethnographic fieldwork in California that certain pagan beliefs \"arise from what they experience during religious ecstasy\".\nSociologist Margot Adler highlighted how several pagan groups, like the Reformed Druids of North America and the Erisian movement incorporate a great deal of play in their rituals rather than having them be completely serious and somber. She noted that there are those who would argue that \"the Pagan community is one of the only spiritual communities that is exploring humor, joy, abandonment, even silliness and outrageousness as valid parts of spiritual experience\".\nDomestic worship typically takes place in the home and is carried out by either an individual or family group. It typically involves offerings \u2013 including bread, cake, flowers, fruit, milk, beer, or wine \u2013 being given to images of deities, often accompanied with prayers and songs and the lighting of candles and incense.\nCommon pagan devotional practices have thus been compared to similar practices in Hinduism, Buddhism, Shinto, Roman Catholicism, and Orthodox Christianity, but contrasted with that in Protestantism, Judaism, and Islam.\nAlthough animal sacrifice was a common part of pre-Christian ritual in Europe, it is rarely practiced in contemporary paganism.\nFestival.\nPaganism's public rituals are generally calendrical, although the pre-Christian festivals that pagans use as a basis varied across Europe. Nevertheless, common to almost all pagan religions is an emphasis on an agricultural cycle and respect for the dead. Common pagan festivals include those marking the summer solstice and winter solstice as well as the start of spring and the harvest. In Wicca and Druidry, a Wheel of the Year has been developed which typically involves eight seasonal festivals.\nMagic.\nThe belief in magical rituals and spells is held by a \"significant number\" of contemporary pagans. Among those who believe in it, there are a variety of different views about what magic is. Many modern pagans adhere to the definition of magic provided by Aleister Crowley, the founder of Thelema: \"the Science and Art of causing change to occur in conformity with Will\". Also accepted by many is the related definition purportedly provided by the ceremonial magician Dion Fortune: \"magic is the art and science of changing consciousness according to the Will\".\nAmong those who practice magic are Wiccans, those who identify as neopagan witches, and practitioners of some forms of revivalist neo-Druidism, the rituals of which are at least partially based upon those of ceremonial magic and freemasonry.\nHistory.\nEarly modern period.\nDiscussions about prevailing, returning or new forms of paganism have existed throughout the modern period. Before the 20th century, Christian institutions regularly used paganism as a term for everything outside of Christianity, Judaism and \u2013 from the 18th century \u2013 Islam. They frequently associated paganism with idolatry, magic and a general concept of \"false religion\", which for example has made Catholics and Protestants accuse each other of being pagans. Various folk beliefs have periodically been labeled as pagan and churches have demanded that they should be purged. The Western attitude to paganism gradually changed during the early modern period. One reason was increased contacts with areas outside of Europe, which happened through trade, Christian mission and colonization. Increased knowledge of other cultures led to questions of whether their practices even fit into the definitions of religion, and paganism was incorporated in the idea of progress, where it was ranked as a low, undeveloped form of religion. Another reason for change was the circulation of ancient writings such as those attributed to Hermes Trismegistus; this made paganism an intellectual position some Europeans began to self-identify with, starting at the latest in the 15th century with people like Gemistus Pletho, who wanted to establish a new form of Greco-Roman polytheism.\nGemistus Pletho influenced Cosimo de Medici to establish the Florentine Neoplatonic Academy and consequentially Julius Pomponius Laetus (student of Pletho) also advocated for a revival and established the Roman academy which secretly celebrated the Natale di Roma and the birthday of Romulus. The Academy was dissolved in 1468 when Pope Paul II ordered the arrest and execution of some of the members, Pope Sixtus IV allowed Laetus to open the academy again until the Sack of Rome in 1527.\nPositive identification with paganism became more common in the 18th and 19th centuries, when it tied in with criticism of Christianity and organized religion, rooted in the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment and Romanticism. The approach to paganism varied during this period; Friedrich Schiller's 1788 poem \"Die G\u00f6tter Griechenlandes\" presents ancient Greek religion as a powerful alternative to Christianity, whereas others took interest in paganism through the concept of the noble savage, often associated with Jean-Jacques Rousseau. During the French Revolution and First French Republic, some public figures incorporated pagan themes in their worldviews. An explicit example was Gabriel Andr\u00e9 Aucler, who responded to both Christianity and Enlightenment atheism by performing pagan rites and arguing for renewed pagan religiosity in his book \"La Thr\u00e9icie\" (1799).\n19th and early 20th centuries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;Great God! I'd rather be\nA Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;\nSo might I, standing on this pleasant lea,\nHave glimpses that would make me less forlorn;\nHave sight of Proteus rising from the sea;\nOr hear old Triton blow his wreath\u00e8d horn.&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 William Wordsworth, \"The World Is Too Much with Us\", lines 9\u201314\nOne of the origins of modern pagan movements lies in the romanticist and national liberation movements that developed in Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries. The publications of studies into European folk customs and culture by scholars like Johann Gottfried Herder and Jacob Grimm resulted in a wider interest in these subjects and a growth in cultural self-consciousness. At the time, it was commonly believed that almost all such folk customs were survivals from the pre-Christian period. These attitudes would also be exported to North America by European immigrants in these centuries.\nThe Romantic movement of the 18th century led to the re-discovery of Old Gaelic and Old Norse literature and poetry. The 19th century saw a surge of interest in Germanic paganism with the Viking revival in Victorian Britain and Scandinavia, and the V\u00f6lkisch movement in Germany. These currents coincided with Romanticist interest in folklore and occultism, the widespread emergence of pagan themes in popular literature, and the rise of nationalism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe rise of modern Paganism is both a result and a measure of increased religious liberty and rising tolerance for religious diversity in modern societies, a liberty and tolerance made possible by the curbing of the sometimes oppressive power wielded by Christian authorities to compel obedience and participation in centuries past. To say it another way, modern Paganism is one of the happy stepchildren of modern multiculturalism and social pluralism.\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Michael Strmiska\nThe rise of modern paganism was aided by the decline in Christianity throughout many parts of Europe and North America, as well as by the concomitant decline in enforced religious conformity and greater freedom of religion that developed, allowing people to explore a wider range of spiritual options and form religious organisations that could operate free from legal persecution.\nHistorian Ronald Hutton has argued that many of the motifs of 20th century neo-paganism may be traced back to the utopian, mystical counter-cultures of the late-Victorian and Edwardian periods (also extending in some instances into the 1920s), via the works of amateur folklorists, popular authors, poets, political radicals and alternative lifestylers.\nPrior to the spread of the 20th-century modern pagan movements, a notable instance of self-identified paganism was in Sioux writer Zitkala-sa's essay \"Why I Am A Pagan\". Published in the \"Atlantic Monthly\" in 1902, the Native American activist and writer outlined her rejection of Christianity (referred to as \"the new superstition\") in favor of a harmony with nature embodied by the Great Spirit. She further recounted her mother's abandonment of Sioux religion and the unsuccessful attempts of a \"native preacher\" to get her to attend the village church.\nIn the 1920s Margaret Murray theorized that a secret pagan religion had survived the witchcraft persecutions enacted by the ecclesiastical and secular courts. Historians now reject Murray's theory, as she based it partially upon the similarities of the accounts given by those accused of witchcraft; such similarity is now thought to actually derive from there having been a standard set of questions laid out in the witch-hunting manuals used by interrogators.\nIn the transition between the 1800s and 1900s, efforts to incorporate pagan-Roman rituals into the Italian national identity were made by archaeologist Giacomo Boni and esoteric circles in Rome.\nIn 1927, philosopher and esotericist Julius Evola founded the Gruppo di Ur in Rome, along with its journal \"Ur\" (1927\u20131928), involving figures like Arturo Reghini. In 1928, Evola published \"Imperialismo Pagano\", advocating Italian political paganism to oppose the Lateran Pacts. The journal resumed in 1929 as \"Krur\".\nA mysterious document published in \"Krur\" in 1929, attributed to orientalist Leone Caetani, suggested that Italy's World War I victory and the rise of fascism were influenced by Etruscan-Roman rites.\nLate 20th century.\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw a resurgence in neo-Druidism as well as the rise of modern Germanic paganism in the United States and in Iceland. In the 1970s, Wicca was notably influenced by feminism, leading to the creation of an eclectic, Goddess-worshipping movement known as Dianic Wicca. The 1979 publication of Margot Adler's \"Drawing Down the Moon\" and Starhawk's \"The Spiral Dance\" opened a new chapter in public awareness of paganism. With the growth and spread of large, pagan gatherings and festivals in the 1980s, public varieties of Wicca continued to further diversify into additional, eclectic sub-denominations, often heavily influenced by the New Age and counter-culture movements. These open, unstructured or loosely structured traditions contrast with British Traditional Wicca, which emphasizes secrecy and initiatory lineage.\nIn 1998, the ECER (European Congress of Ethnic Religions) was founded with the aim of safeguarding pre-Christian or reconstructionist religions. Some of the organizations affiliated with this entity have contributed to the revival of paganism by building temples and organizing rituals and events in collaboration with various organizations.\nAfter the fall of fascism, the public focus on pre-Christian Roman spirituality was mainly promoted by Julius Evola. In the 1970s, interest in pagan Romanity and the \"Gruppo di Ur\" resurfaced among youth linked to Evola. He also introduced non-Roman religious concepts like Buddhism, Hinduism, and sexual magic.\nThe \"Gruppo dei Dioscuri\" was formed in Rome, Naples, and Messina, publishing four pamphlets before disappearing from public view, though it continued activities from 1969 and remained active in various Italian regions after its founder's death in 2000.\nThe Evolian journal \"Arthos\", founded in Genoa in 1972 by Renato del Ponte, expressed significant interest in Roman religion. In 1984, the \"Gruppo Arx\" revived Messina's \"Dioscuri\" activities, and the \"Pythagorean Association\" briefly resurfaced in Calabria and Sicily from 1984 to 1988, publishing \"Ygh\u00eceia\".\nOther publications include the Genoese \"Il Basilisco\" (1979\u20131989), which released several works on pagan studies, and \"Politica Romana\" (1994\u20132004), seen as a high-level Romano-pagan journal. One prominent figure was actor Roberto Corbiletto, who died in a mysterious fire in 1999.\nThe 1980s and 1990s also saw an increasing interest in serious academic research and reconstructionist pagan traditions. The establishment and growth of the Internet in the 1990s brought rapid growth to these, and other pagan movements. By the time of the collapse of the former Soviet Union in 1991, freedom of religion was legally established across Russia and a number of other newly independent states, allowing for the growth in both Christian and non-Christian religions.\nReligious paths and movements.\nReconstructionist.\nIn contrast to the eclectic traditions, Polytheistic Reconstructionists practice culturally specific ethnic traditions based on folklore, songs and prayers, as well as reconstructions from the historical record. Hellenic, Roman, Kemetic, Celtic, Germanic, Guanche, Baltic and Slavic reconstructionists aim to preserve and revive the practices and beliefs of Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, Ancient Egypt, the Celts, the Germanic peoples, the Guanche people, the Balts and the Slavs, respectively.\nGermanic.\nHeathenism, also known as Germanic neopaganism, refers to a series of contemporary pagan traditions based on the historical religions, culture and literature of Germanic-speaking Europe. Heathenry is spread out across northwestern Europe, North America and Australasia, where the descendants of historic Germanic-speaking people now live.\nMany Heathen groups adopt variants of Norse mythology as a basis for their beliefs, conceiving of the Earth as on the great world tree Yggdrasil. Heathens believe in multiple polytheistic deities adopted from historical Germanic mythologies. Most are polytheistic realists, believing that the deities are real entities, while others view them as Jungian archetypes.\nSlavic.\nSlavic neo-paganism, or Slavic nativism, is a reconstruction of the pre-Christian pagan beliefs of the ancient Slavs, a return to the worship of Perun, Veles, Makosh, etc. based on some historical information and one's own ideas, with borrowings from the teachings and rituals of polytheistic beliefs of other peoples and the occult.\nSemitic.\nBeit Asherah (the house of the Goddess Asherah) was one of the first modern pagan synagogues, founded in the early 1990s by Stephanie Fox, Steven Posch, and Magenta Griffiths (Lady Magenta). Magenta Griffiths is High Priestess of the Beit Asherah coven, and a former board member of the Covenant of the Goddess.\nChuvash.\nThe Chuvash people, a Turkic ethnic group native to an area stretching from the Volga Region to Siberia, have experienced a pagan revival since the fall of the Soviet Union. While potentially considered a peculiar form of Tengrism, a related revivalist movement of Central Asian traditional religion, Vattisen Yaly (, \"Tradition of the Old\") differs significantly: the Chuvash being a heavily Fennicised and Slavified ethnicity and having had exchanges also with other Indo-European ethnicities, their religion shows many similarities with Finnic and Slavic paganisms; moreover, the revival of Vattisen Yaly in recent decades has occurred following modern pagan patterns. Today the followers of the Chuvash Traditional Religion are called \"the true Chuvash\". Their main god is Tura, a deity comparable to the Estonian Taara, the Germanic Thunraz and the pan-Turkic Tengri.\nEclectic.\nWicca.\nWicca is the largest form of modern paganism, as well as the best-known and most extensively studied.\nReligious studies scholar Graham Harvey noted that the poem \"Charge of the Goddess\" remains central to the liturgy of most Wiccan groups. Originally written by Wiccan High Priestess Doreen Valiente in the mid-1950s, the poem allows Wiccans to gain wisdom and experience deity in \"the ordinary things in life.\"\nHistorian Ronald Hutton identified a wide variety of different sources that influenced Wicca's development, including ceremonial magic, folk magic, Romanticist literature, Freemasonry, and the witch-cult theory of English archaeologist Margaret Murray. English esotericist Gerald Gardner was at the forefront of the burgeoning Wiccan movement. He claimed to have been initiated by the New Forest coven in 1939, and that the religion he discovered was a survival of the pagan witch-cult described in Murray's theory. Various forms of Wicca have since evolved or been adapted from Gardner's British Traditional Wicca or Gardnerian Wicca, such as Alexandrian Wicca. Other forms loosely based on Gardner's teachings are Faery Wicca, Kemetic Wicca, Judeo-paganism or jewitchery, and Dianic Wicca or feminist Wicca, which emphasizes the divine feminine, often creating women-only or lesbian-only groups. In the academic community Wicca has also been interpreted as having close affinities with process philosophy.\nIn the 1990s, Wiccan beliefs and practices were used as a partial basis for a number of US films and television series, such as \"The Craft\", \"Charmed\" and \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", leading to a surge in teenagers' and young adults' interest and involvement in the religion.\nGoddess movement.\nGoddess spirituality, which is also known as the Goddess movement, is a pagan religion in which a singular, monotheistic Goddess is given predominance. Goddess Spirituality revolves around the sacredness of the female form, and of aspects of women's lives that adherents say have been traditionally neglected in Western society, such as menstruation, sexuality, and maternity.\nThe Goddess movement draws some of its inspiration from the work of archaeologists such as Marija Gimbutas, whose interpretation of artifacts excavated from \"Old Europe\" points to societies of Neolithic Europe that were matristic or goddess-centered worshipping a female deity of three primary aspects, which has inspired some modern pagan worshippers of the Triple Goddess.\nAdherents of the Goddess Spirituality movement typically envision a history of the world that is different from traditional narratives about the past, emphasising the role of women rather than that of men. According to this view, human society was formerly a matriarchy, with communities being egalitarian, pacifistic, and focused on the worship of the Mother goddess, which was subsequently overthrown by violent and warlike patriarchal hordes \u2013 usually Indo-European pastoralists who worshipped male sky-gods, and continued to rule through the form of Abrahamic religions, specifically Christianity in the West. Adherents look for elements of this human history in \"theological, anthropological, archaeological, historical, folkloric and hagiographic writings.\"\nDruidry.\nDruidry shows similar heterogeneity as Wicca. It draws inspirations from historical Druids, the priest caste of the ancient pagan Celts. Druidry dates to the earliest forms of modern paganism: the Ancient Order of Druids founded in 1781 had many aspects of freemasonry, and has practiced rituals at Stonehenge since 1905. George Watson MacGregor Reid founded the Druid Order in its current form in 1909. In 1964 Ross Nichols established the Order of Bards, Ovates and Druids. In the United States, the Ancient Order of Druids in America (AODA) was established in 1912, the Reformed Druids of North America (RDNA) in 1963, and \u00c1r nDra\u00edocht F\u00e9in (ADF) in 1983 by Isaac Bonewits.\nEco-paganism and Unitarian Universalism.\nEco-paganism and Eco-magic, which are offshoots of direct action environmental groups, strongly emphasize fairy imagery and a belief in the possibility of intercession by the fae (fairies, pixies, gnomes, elves, and other spirits of nature and the Otherworlds).\nSome Unitarian Universalists are eclectic pagans. Unitarian Universalists look for spiritual inspiration in a wide variety of religious beliefs. The Covenant of Unitarian Universalist Pagans, or CUUPs, encourages its chapters to \"use practices familiar to members who attend for worship services but not to follow only one tradition of paganism.\"\nOccultism and ethnic mysticism.\nIn 1925, the Czech esotericist Franz S\u00e4ttler founded the pagan religion Adonism, devoted to the ancient Greek god Adonis, whom S\u00e4ttler equated with the Christian Satan, and which purported that the end of the world would come in 2000. Adonism largely died out in the 1930s, but remained an influence on the German occult scene.\nDemographics.\nEstablishing precise figures on paganism is difficult. Due to the secrecy and fear of persecution still prevalent among pagans, limited numbers are willing to openly be counted. The decentralised nature of paganism and sheer number of solitary practitioners further complicates matters. Nevertheless, there is a slow growing body of data on the subject. In the US, there are estimated to be between 1 and 1.5\u00a0million practitioners.\nEurope.\nCaucasus region.\nAmong Circassians, the Adyghe Habze faith has been revived after the fall of the Soviet Union, and followers of modern pagan faiths were found to constitute 12% in Karachay-Cherkessia and 3% in Kabardino-Balkaria (both republics are multiethnic and also have many non-Circassians, especially Russians and Turkic peoples) In Abkhazia, the Abkhaz native faith has also been revived, and in the 2003 census, 8% of residents identified with it (note again that there are many non-Abkhaz in the state including Georgians, Russians and Armenians); on 3 August 2012 the Council of Priests of Abkhazia was formally constituted in Sukhumi. In North Ossetia, the Uatsdin faith was revived, and in 2012, 29% of the population identified with it (North Ossetia is about 2/3 Ossetian and 1/3 Russian). Modern pagan movements are also present to a lesser degree elsewhere; in Dagestan 2% of the population identified with folk religious movements, while data on modern pagans is unavailable for Chechnya and Ingushetia.\nVolga region.\nThe Mari native religion in fact has a continuous existence, but it has co-existed with Orthodox Christianity for centuries and experienced a renewal after the fall of the Soviet Union. A sociological survey conducted in 2004 found that about 15 percent of the population of Mari El consider themselves adherents of the Mari native religion. Since Mari make up just 45 percent of the republic's population of 700,000, this figure means that probably more than a third claim to follow the old religion. The percentage of pagans among the Mari of Bashkortostan and the eastern part of Tatarstan is even higher (up to 69% among women). Mari fled here from forced Christianization in the 17th to 19th centuries. A similar number was claimed by Victor Schnirelmann, for whom between a quarter and a half of the Mari either worship the pagan gods or are members of modern pagan groups.\nA modern pagan movement drawing from various syncretic practices that had survived among the Christianised Mari people was initiated in 1990 that was estimated in 2004 to have won the adherence of 2% of the Mordvin people.\nWestern Europe.\nA study by Ronald Hutton compared a number of different sources (including membership lists of major UK organizations, attendance at major events, subscriptions to magazines, etc.) and used standard models for extrapolating likely numbers. This estimate accounted for multiple membership overlaps, as well as the number of adherents represented by each attendee of a pagan gathering. Hutton estimated that there are 250,000 modern pagans in the United Kingdom, roughly equivalent to the national Hindu community.\nA smaller number is suggested by the results of the 2001 Census, in which a question about religious affiliation was asked for the first time. Respondents were able to write in an affiliation not covered by the checklist of common religions, and a total of 42,262 people from England, Scotland and Wales declared themselves to be pagans by this method. These figures were not released as a matter of course by the Office for National Statistics but were released after an application by the Pagan Federation of Scotland. This is more than many well known traditions such as Rastafarian, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed and Zoroastrian groups but fewer than the big six of Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, Judaism and Buddhism. It is also fewer than the adherents of Jediism, whose campaign made their faith the fourth largest religion after Christianity, Islam and Hinduism.\nThe 2001 UK Census figures did not allow an accurate breakdown of traditions within the pagan heading, as a campaign by the Pagan Federation before the census encouraged Wiccans, Heathens, Druids and others all to use the same write-in term 'pagan' to maximise the numbers reported. However, the 2011 census made it possible to describe oneself as pagan-Wiccan, pagan-Druid and so on. The figures for England and Wales showed 80,153 describing themselves as pagan (or some subgroup thereof). The largest subgroup was Wicca, with 11,766 adherents. The overall numbers of people self-reporting as pagan rose between 2001 and 2011. In 2001, about seven people per 10,000 UK respondents were pagan; in 2011, the number (based on the England and Wales population) was 14.3 people per 10,000 respondents.\nCensus figures in Ireland do not provide a breakdown of religions outside of the major Christian denominations and other major world religions. A total of 22,497 people stated Other Religion in the 2006 census; and a rough estimate is that there were 2,000\u20133,000 practicing pagans in Ireland in 2009. Numerous pagan groups \u2013 primarily Wiccan and Druidic \u2013 exist in Ireland though none is officially recognised by the Government. Irish paganism is often strongly concerned with issues of place and language.\nNorth America.\nCanada does not provide extremely detailed records of religious adherence. Its statistics service only collects limited religious information each decade. At the 2001 census, there were a recorded 21,080 pagans in Canada.\nThe United States government does not directly collect religious information. As a result such information is provided by religious institutions and other third-party statistical organisations. Based on the most recent survey by the Pew Research Center, there are approximately one million pagans in the United States; 0.3% of respondents answered \"Pagan\" or \"Wiccan\" when polled.\nAccording to Helen A. Berger's 1995 survey \"The Pagan Census\", most American pagans are middle-class, educated, and live in urban/suburban areas on the East and West coasts.\nOceania.\nIn the 2011 Australian Census, 32,083 respondents identified as pagan. Out of 21,507,717 recorded Australians, they compose approximately 0.15% of the population. The Australian Bureau of Statistics classifies paganism as an affiliation under which several sub-classifications may optionally be specified. This includes animism, nature religion, Druidism, pantheism, and Wicca/Witchcraft. As a result, fairly detailed breakdowns of pagan respondents are available.\nIn 2006, there were at least 6,804 (0.164%) pagans among New Zealand's population of approximately four million. Respondents were given the option to select one or more religious affiliations.\nPaganism in society.\nPropagation.\nBased upon her study of the pagan community in the United States, the sociologist Margot Adler noted that it is rare for pagan groups to proselytize to gain new converts to their faiths. Instead, she argued that \"in most cases,\" converts first become interested in the movement through \"word of mouth, a discussion between friends, a lecture, a book, an article or a Web site.\" She went on to put forward the idea that this typically confirmed \"some original, private experience, so that the most common experience of those who have named themselves pagan is something like 'I finally found a group that has the same religious perceptions I always had.'\" A practicing Wiccan herself, Adler used her own conversion to paganism as a case study, remarking that as a child she had taken a great interest in the gods and goddesses of ancient Greece, and had performed her own devised rituals in dedication to them. When she eventually came across the Wiccan religion many years later, she then found that it confirmed her earlier childhood experiences, and that \"I never converted in the accepted sense. I simply accepted, reaffirmed, and extended a very old experience\".\nFolklorist Sabina Magliocco supported this idea, noting that a great many of those Californian pagans whom she interviewed claimed that they had been greatly interested in mythology and folklore as children, imagining a world of \"enchanted nature and magical transformations, filled with lords and ladies, witches and wizards, and humble but often wise peasants\". Magliocco noted that it was this world that pagans \"strive to re-create in some measure\". Further support for Adler's ideas came from American Wiccan priestess Judy Harrow, who noted that among her comrades, there was a feeling that \"you don't \"become\" pagan, you discover that you always were\". They have also been supported by Pagan studies scholar Graham Harvey.\nMany pagans in North America encounter the movement through their involvement in other hobbies; particularly popular with US pagans are \"golden age-type\" pastimes such as the Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA), \"Star Trek\" fandom, \"Doctor Who\" fandom and comic book fandom. Other ways in which many North American pagans have gotten involved with the movement are through political or ecological activism, such as vegetarian groups, health food stores, or feminist university courses.\nAdler went on to note that from those she interviewed and surveyed in the US she could identify a number of common factors that led to people getting involved in paganism: the beauty, vision and imagination that was found within their beliefs and rituals, a sense of intellectual satisfaction and personal growth that they imparted, their support for environmentalism or feminism, and a sense of freedom.\nClass, gender and ethnicity.\nUnited States.\nBased upon her work in the United States, Adler found that the pagan movement was \"very diverse\" in its class and ethnic backgrounds. She went on to remark that she had encountered pagans in jobs that ranged from \"fireman to PhD chemist\" but that the one thing she thought made them into an \"elite\" was being avid readers, something that she found to be very common within the pagan community despite the fact that avid readers constituted less than 20% of the general population of the United States at the time. Magliocco came to a somewhat different conclusion based upon her ethnographic research of pagans in California, remarking that the majority were \"white, middle-class, well-educated urbanites\" but that they were united in finding \"artistic inspiration\" within \"folk and indigenous [American] spiritual traditions,\"\nThe sociologist Regina Oboler examined the role of gender in the American pagan community, arguing that although the movement had been constant in its support for the equality of men and women ever since its foundation, there was still an essentialist view of gender ingrained within it, with female deities being accorded traditional western feminine traits and male deities being similarly accorded what western society saw as masculine traits.\nRacism and nationalism.\nGenerally, modern pagan currents in Western countries do not advocate nationalist or far-right ideologies. Instead, they advocate individual self-improvement and liberal values of personal freedom, gender equality, and environmental protection. The nationalist sentiments expressed by modern pagans in Western countries are marginal, so the ideas of cosmopolitanism are prevalent. Faith and dogmas give way to active practices, including psychotechnics, which was extensively influenced by neo-Hinduism. In contrast, many areas of post-Soviet modern paganism, including Russian, are occupied not so much with individual self-improvement as they are occupied with social problems, and they also create nationalist ideologies based on the \"invented past\".\nModern paganism is one of the directions in the development of romantic nationalism with its components such as the idealization of a particular people's historical or mythological past, dissatisfaction with modernity, and the ease of transition to a radical stage with the postulation of national superiority.\nThe \"volksgeist\", which is given great attention within the framework of ethnic nationalism, is often identified with religion, so there is a desire to create or revive one's religion or nationalize one of the world's religions. Heinrich Heine linked nationalism with paganism. The philosopher Nikolai Berdyaev, who shared Heine's opinion, noted the regularity of the tendency of the transition of German antisemitism into anti-Christianity.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the spiritual crisis in Russia led to a fascination with paganism, at first ancient and then Slavic \"native gods,\" which was especially true for the symbolists. The publicist Daniil Pasmanik (1923) wrote that consistent antisemitism should reject Judaism and Christianity. He noted that this trend had already led Germany to worship Odin and, in the future, in his opinion, would inevitably lead Russia to worship Perun.\nGerman occultism and modern paganism arose in the early 20th century, and they became influential through teachings such as Ariosophy, gaining adherents within the far-right V\u00f6lkisch movement, which eventually culminated in Nazism. The development of such ideas after World War II gave rise to Wotanism, a white nationalist modern pagan movement at the end of the 20th century.\nIn Germany in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the V\u00f6lkisch movement, characterized by a racist antisemitic ideology of radical ethnic nationalism of the dominant population, spread. The central elements of the worldview were racism and elitism. The movement included a religious modern pagan component. The ideology developed out of German nationalist romanticism. Nazism is considered one of the movements within the v\u00f6lkisch or as strongly influenced by the v\u00f6lkisch. V\u00f6lkisch consisted of many religiopolitical groups whose leaders and followers were closely associated with each other and the developing Nazi Party. This ideology significantly impacted various aspects of German culture at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries.\nLiberalism and rationalism, which demystified the time-honored order that accepted authorities and prejudices, also caused an adverse reaction from supporters of the v\u00f6lkisch movement. A negative attitude towards modernity characterizes the writings of German nationalist \"prophets\" such as Paul Delagardie, Julius Lang, and Arthur Moeller van den Bruck. The movement combined a sentimental patriotic interest in German folklore and local history with anti-urban, back-to-the-earth populism. To overcome what they considered the ailment of scientific and rationalistic modernity, the authors of v\u00f6lkisch found a spiritual solution in the essence of the \"people,\" perceived as genuine, intuitive, even \"primitive,\" in the sense of the location of the \"people\" on the level with the original (primordial) cosmic order.\nV\u00f6lkisch thinkers tended to idealize the myth of the \"original nation\", which they believed could still be found in rural Germany, a form of \"primitive democracy freely subject to its natural elite\". The idea of the \"people\" () was subsequently transformed into the idea of \"racial essence\", and V\u00f6lkisch thinkers understood this term as a life-giving and quasi-eternal essence and not as a sociological category, in the same way as they considered \"Nature\".\nModern pagan ideas were present in Ariosophy, an esoteric teaching created by the Austrian occultists Guido von List and J\u00f6rg Lanz von Liebenfels in Austria between 1890 and 1930. The term \"ariosophy\" can also be used generically to describe the \"Aryan\"/esoteric teachings of the v\u00f6lkisch subset. The doctrine of Ariosophy was based on pseudoscientific ideas about \"Aryan\" purity and the mystical unity of spirit and body. It was influenced by the German nationalist v\u00f6lkisch movement, the theosophy of Helena Blavatsky, the Austrian pan-German movement, and social Darwinism and its racist conclusions. Ariosophy influenced the ideology of Nazism.\nThe works of the Ariosophists describe the prehistoric \"Aryan\" golden age when the wise keepers of knowledge learned and taught occult racial teachings and ruled over a \"racially pure\" society. It is alleged that there is an evil conspiracy of anti-German forces, including all \"non-Aryan\" races, Jews, and the Christian church, seeking to destroy the ideal \"Aryan\" German world by freeing the \"non-Aryan\" mob to establish a false equality of the illegitimate (representatives of \"non-Aryan\" races). History, including wars, economic crises, political uncertainty, and the weakening of the power of the German principle, is seen as the result of racial mixing.\nThe doctrine had followers in Austria and Germany. Occultism in the doctrines of the Ariosophists was of great importance as a sacral justification for an extreme political position and a fundamental rejection of reality, including socio-economic progress. The Ariosophists sought to predict and justify the \"coming era\" of the German world order. To counter the modern world, \"corrupted\" by racial mixing, the Ariosophists created many small circles and secret religious societies to revive the \"lost\" esoteric knowledge and racial virtues of the ancient Germans to create a new pan-German empire.\nTo recreate the religion of the ancient Germans, List used the Scandinavian epic and the work of contemporary theosophists, in particular Max Ferdinand Sebaldt von Werth, who described the eugenic practices of the \"Aryans\", as well as \"The Secret Doctrine\" by Helena Blavatsky and \"The Lost Lemuria\" by William Scott-Elliot. Influenced by these works, List used the terms \"Ario-Germans\" and \"race\" instead of \"Germans\" and \"people\", perhaps to emphasize the overlap with the fifth root race in Blavatsky's scheme. List and Lanz developed ideas about the struggle between the \"Aryan race of masters\" and the \"race of slaves\" and about the ancestral home of the \"Aryans\" on the sunken polar island of Arctogea.\nIn Nazi Germany, Germanic pagan folklore, as a source of primordial moral standards, was revered higher than Christianity associated with Judaism. Many Nazis saw anti-Christianity as a deeper form of antisemitism. Heinrich Himmler spoke of the need to create a \"neo-Germanic religion\" capable of replacing Christianity. The Old Testament was especially repugnant to the Nazis. Adolf Hitler called it \"Satan's Bible\". Rosenberg demanded that it be banned as a \"vehicle of Jewish influence\" and replaced by the Nordic sagas. The Nazi ideology combined the veneration of the \"pagan heritage of the ancestors\" with puritanical, Christian sexual morality, which the \"Nordic\" Apollo was supposed to personify.\nWhite supremacist ideologies and neo-Nazism, including ideas of racism, antisemitism, and anti-LGBTQ, have infiltrated or assimilated many Germanic modern pagan movements such as Odinism and some \u00c1satr\u00fa groups, including the Asatru Folk Assembly. These groups believe that the Germanic beliefs they hold constitute the true Caucasoid ethnic religion.\nThe issue of race is a major source of contention among modern pagans, especially in the United States. In the modern pagan community, one view is that race is entirely a matter of biological heredity, while the opposite position is that race is a social construct rooted in cultural heritage. In US modern pagan discourse, these views are described as v\u00f6lkische and universalist positions, respectively. The two factions, which Jeffrey Kaplan has called the \"racist\" and \"non-racist\" camps, often clash, with Kaplan claiming that there is a \"virtual civil war\" between them within the American modern pagan community. The division into universalists and v\u00f6lkisch also spread to other countries, but had less impact on the more ethnically homogeneous Iceland. A 2015 survey showed that more modern pagans adhere to universalist ideas than v\u00f6lkisch.\nGoing beyond this binary classification, religious scholar Mattias Gardell divides modern paganism in the United States into three factions according to their racial stance:\nReligious scholar Stephanie von Schnurbein accepted Gardell's tripartite division, and referred to these groups as the \"aracist\", \"racial-religious\", and \"ethnic\" factions, respectively.\nSupporters of the universalist and anti-racist approach believe that the deities of Germanic Europe can call anyone to worship them, regardless of ethnic origin. This group rejects the v\u00f6lkisch focus on race, believing that even unintentionally, such an approach can lead to racist attitudes towards people of non-Northern European origin. Practicing universalists such as Stephan Grundy emphasize that ancient northern Europeans married and had children with members of other ethnic groups, and in Norse mythology, the \u00c6sir did the same with the Vanir, j\u00f6tnar, and humans, so these modern pagans criticize racist views.\nUniversalists favorably accept practitioners of modern paganism who are not of Northern European origin; for example, The Troth, based in the United States, has Jewish and African American members, and many of its white members have spouses who belong to different racial groups. While some pagans continue to believe that Germanic paganism is an innate religion, universalists have sometimes argued that this paganism is an innate religion for the lands of Northern Europe and not for a particular race. Universalists often complain that some journalists portray modern paganism as an inherently racist movement, so they use the Internet to highlight their opposition to far-right politics.\nIn Heathenry, the terms \"v\u00f6lkisch\", \"neo-v\u00f6lkisch\", or the Anglicised \"folkish\" are used both as endonyms and exonyms for groups who believe that the religion is closely related to the claimed biological race. V\u00f6lkisch practitioners consider paganism to be an indigenous religion of a biologically distinct race that is conceptualized as \"White\", \"Nordic\", \"Aryan\", \"Northern European\", or \"English\". V\u00f6lkisch modern pagans generally regard these classifications as self-evident, despite the academic consensus that race is a cultural construct.\nV\u00f6lkisch groups often use ethnonationalist language and claim that only members of these racial groups are entitled to practice a given religion, taking the pseudoscientific view that \"gods and goddesses are encoded in the DNA\" of the members of a race. Some practitioners explain the idea of linking their race and religion by saying that religion is inextricably linked to the collective unconscious of that race. The American modern pagan Stephen McNallen developed these ideas into a concept he called \"metagenetics\". McNallen and many other members of the modern pagan \"ethnic\" faction explicitly state that they are not racist, although Gardell has noted that their views may be considered racist under specific definitions of the term. Gardell considered many \"ethnic\" modern pagans to be ethnic nationalists.\nMany v\u00f6lkisch practitioners disapprove of multiculturalism and racial mixing in modern Europe, advocating racial separatism. In online media, modern pagan v\u00f6lkische often express a belief in the threat of racial miscegenation, which they blame on the social and political establishment, sometimes claiming that their ideas of racial exclusivity are the result of the threat that other ethnic groups pose to \"white\" people. While these groups generally claim to be aiming to revive Germanic paganism, their race-centric views have their origins in 19th-century culture, not antiquity. This group's discourse contains the concepts of \"ancestors\" and \"homeland\", which are understood very vaguely. Researcher Ethan Doyle White characterizes the position of the Odinic Rite and the Odin Brotherhood as \"far right\".\nEthnocentric modern pagans are highly critical of their universalist counterparts, often claiming that the latter have been misled by New Age literature and political correctness. Members of the universalist and ethnocentric factions criticize those who adopt an \"ethnic\" stance. The former view \"ethnic\" modern paganism as a cover for racism, while the latter view its adherents as race traitors for their refusal to fully accept the superiority of the \"white race\".\nSome modern pagans of the v\u00f6lkisch movement are white supremacists and outright racists representing a \"radical racist\" faction that uses the names \"Odinism\", \"Wotanism\", and \"Wodenism\". According to Kaplan, these adepts occupy the \"most remote corners\" of modern paganism. The lines between this form of modern paganism and Nazism are \"extremely thin\" because its adherents praise Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany, claim that the \"white race\" is threatened with extinction by the efforts of a Jewish world conspiracy, and dismiss Christianity as a work of the Jews.\nMany in the inner circle of the terrorist organization The Order, a white supremacist militia operating in the US in the 1980s, called themselves Odinists. Various racist modern pagans supported the Fourteen Words slogan, which was developed by The Order member David Lane. Some racist organizations, such as the Order of Nine Angles and the Black Order, combine elements of modern paganism with Satanism, while other racist modern pagans, such as Wotanist Ron McVan, reject the syncretism of the two religions.\nAmerican neo-Nazi William Luther Pierce, the founder of the National Alliance, whose ideas stimulated neo-Nazi terrorism, also created the Cosmotheistic Community Church in 1978. He considered the teaching he created within the framework of this church to be pantheism and leaned towards the \"Panaryan\" Nordic cults. These cults emphasized the idea of a unique closeness of \"white people\" with nature and the natural \"spiritual essence\", which was influenced by the ideas of Savitri Devi. According to the doctrine, each race has its predestined role: \"whites\" are predisposed to strive for God, blacks strive for laziness, and Jews strive for corruption.\nIn 1985, Pierce purchased a large piece of land at Mill Point in West Virginia, fenced it in with barbed wire, and began selling books on Western culture and Western \"pagan traditions\" there. He aimed to save the \"white race\" away from the federal government. In part, he also drew on British Israelism and the racist religion of Identity Christianity. The \"National Alliance\" met regularly to discuss the ideas of \"cosmotheism\". Pierce dismissed Christianity as \"one of the chief mental illnesses of our people\" through which \"Jewish influence\" spreads. Pierce saw the proposed government after the \"racial revolution\" as religious, which would be \"more like a holy order.\" He considered the future religion of the \"white race\" the \"Aryan religion\" \u2013 the \"cosmotheism\" that he created.\nSociologist Marl\u00e8ne Laruelle notes the activation of \"Aryan\" modern paganism in the West and Russia. For example, social movements are thus developing that appeal to the Celtic past and call for a return to the \"druidic religions\" of pre-Christian Europe. For the most part, the French and German \"Nouvelle Droite\" share the common idea of a pan-European unity based on an \"Aryan\" identity and the desire to part with Christianity, the period of domination of which is seen as two thousand years of \"wandering in darkness.\"\nSlavic neopaganism (Rodnoverie) has a close connection with Nazism, reproducing its main ideas: the \"Aryan\" idea, including the idea of the northern ancestral home (in Rodnoverie, it is in the Russian North, the Northern Urals, or beyond the Arctic Circle); the connection of their people with the \"Aryans\" or complete identification with them (in Rodnovery, \"Slavic-Aryans\"); the antiquity of one's people and its racial or cultural superiority over others; their people (or the ancient \"Aryans\" identified with them) are regarded as cultural traegers, distributors of high culture, founders of great civilizations of antiquity, (in Rodnoverie, Slavic or \"Slavic-Aryan\" \"Vedic\" technological precivilization, \"taught\" all other peoples), and creators of ancient writing (in Rodnoverie, Slavic runes); \"Aryan\" proto-language (in Rodnoverie, \"Slavic-Aryan\" or Old Slavic), from which all or many other languages of the world originated; reliance on esotericism; orientation to the faith of ancestors (hence paganism); anti-Christianity (the idea that Christians seek to enslave the people) and antisemitism (Jews as \"racial enemies\"); \"Aryan\" socialism (an integral part of the ideology of Nazism) as the most natural for its people (in Rodnoverie, the \"original tribal system\" of the Slavs, which is thought of as a kind of \"Aryan\" socialism); symbols and gestures close to or derived from Nazism, etc. \nOne of the main starting points for the formation of Slavic neopaganism was the search for a rationale for the national idea. Hence follows an increased interest in the origins of national self-consciousness and the national type of religiosity. In the post-Soviet period, in the conditions of the loss of the great \"empire\" (USSR), land, and influence and in search of internal and external enemies, neopaganism became widespread among nationalist ideologues, just like in Germany in the 1930s. In Rodnoverie, the unity of the Russian people was undergoing a new re-mythologization with an appeal for support to the ideas of the \"golden age\", the primordial untainted tradition, and the native land.\nHistorian Dmitry Shlapentokh wrote that, as in Europe, neopaganism in Russia pushes some of its adherents to antisemitism. This antisemitism is closely related to negative attitudes towards Asians, and this emphasis on racial factors can lead neopagans to neo-Nazism. The tendency of neopagans to antisemitism is a logical development of the ideas of neopaganism and imitation of the Nazis and is also a consequence of some specific conditions of modern Russian politics.\nUnlike previous regimes, the current Russian political regime and the ideology of the middle class combine support for Orthodoxy with philosemitism and a positive attitude towards Muslims. These features of the regime contributed to the formation of specific views of neo-Nazi neopagans, which are represented to a large extent among the socially unprotected and marginalized Russian youth. In their opinion, power in Russia was usurped by a cabal of conspirators, including hierarchs of the Orthodox Church, Jews, and Muslims. Contrary to external differences, these forces are believed to have united in their desire to maintain power over the Russian \"Aryans\".\nSome associations of neopaganism, in particular Slavic, are evaluated by researchers as extremist, radical nationalists. In Russia, individual neopagan organizations and essays were included in the list of extremist organizations of the Ministry of Justice of Russia and the Federal List of Extremist Materials, respectively. In Belarus, the founder of the local Nazi Party, Aliaksei Dzermant, is also the founder of the Belarusian branch of the neo-Nazi pagan Allgermanische Heidnische Front, linked to arson and murder.\nThe historian and ethnologist Victor Schnirelmann considers Russian neopaganism as a direction of Russian nationalism that denies Russian Orthodoxy as an enduring national value and distinguishes two cardinal tasks that Russian neopaganism sets for itself: the salvation of Russian national culture from the leveling influence of modernization and the protection of the natural environment from the impact of modern civilization. According to Schnirelmann, \"Russian neopaganism is a radical variety of conservative ideology, which is distinguished by frank anti-intellectualism and populism.\"\nReligious scholar Alexei Gaidukov considers it wrong to reduce the diversity of native faith groups to nationalism only \u2013 he views the ecological direction of Rodnovery as no less significant. Historian and religious scholar Roman Shizhensky believes Rodnovery poses little danger and law enforcement agencies should deal with radical groups.\nThe Austrian occultist Guido von List, who created the doctrine of Ariosophy, argued that an ancient developed \"Ario-Germanic\" culture reached its dawn several millennia before Roman colonization and Christianity. According to him, before Charlemagne's forced introduction of Christianity, Wotanism was practiced in what is now the Danubian territory of Germany. List considered Charlemagne the killer of the Saxons in memory of the bloody baptism of the pagans of Northern Germany by him. List considered the entire Christian period as an era of cultural decline, oblivion of the true faith, and unnatural racial mixing, when the \"Aryan\" ruling caste of priest-kings was forced to hide, secretly saving their sacred knowledge, which now became available to List as a full-fledged aristocratic descendant of this caste.\nIn Slavic neopaganism, there is the idea of an ancient multi-thousand-year-old and developed civilization of the \"Slavs-Aryans\", while the entire Christian period seems to be an era of regression and decline, the enslavement of the \"Aryans\" by foreign missionaries who imposed on them a \"slave\" (Christian) ideology. Rodnovers often regard these missionaries as Jews, \"Judeo-Masons\", or their accomplices. At the same time, the Slavic \"Aryan\" volkhvs or priests had to hide in secret places, preserving the knowledge that was now passed onto their direct descendants, Rodnovers.\nThe idea of the Jewish-Khazar origin of Prince Vladimir the Great is popular, explaining why he introduced Christianity, an instrument for the enslavement of the \"Aryans\" by Jews, and staged the genocide of the pagan Slavs. Roman Shizhensky singles out the neopagan myth about Vladimir and characterizes it as one of the most \"odious\" neopagan historical myths and one of the leading Russian neopagan myths in terms of worldview significance.\nThe author of this myth is Valery Yemelyanov, one of the founders of Russian neopaganism, who expounded it in his book \"Dezionization\" (1970s). Shizhensky notes that the neopagan myth about Vladimir contradicts scientific work on the issue and the totality of historical sources.\nConcerning the trend of convergence of neopagan associations from different countries, Andrey Beskov notes that neopagan nationalism is not an obstacle to \"neopagan internationalism\", and anti-globalism, one of the manifestations of which was the popularity of ethnic religions, itself acquires a global character.\nLGBTQ.\nThe western LGBTQ community, often marginalized and/or outright rejected by Abrahamic-predominant mainstream religious establishments, has often sought spiritual acceptance and association in neopagan religious/spiritual practice. Pagan-specializing religious scholar Christine Hoff Kraemer wrote, \"Pagans tend to be relatively accepting of same-sex relationships, BDSM, polyamory, transgender people, and other expressions of gender and sexuality that are marginalized by mainstream society.\" Conflict naturally arises, however, as some neopagan belief systems and sect ideologies stem from fundamental beliefs in the male\u2013female gender binary, heterosexual pairing, resulting heterosexual reproduction, and/or gender essentialism.\nIn response, groups and sects inclusive of or specific to LGBTQ people have developed. Theologian Jone Salomonsen noted in the 1980s and 1990s that the reclaiming movement of San Francisco featured an unusually high number of LGBTQ people, particularly bisexuals. Margot Adler noted groups whose practices focused on male homosexuality, such as Eddie Buczynski's Minoan Brotherhood, a Wiccan sect that combines the iconography from ancient Minoan religion with a Wiccan theology and an emphasis on men who love men, and the eclectic pagan group known as the Radical Faeries. When Adler asked one gay male pagan what the pagan community offered members of the LGBTQ community, he replied, \"A place to belong. Community. Acceptance. And a way to connect with all kinds of people \u2013 gay, bi, straight, celibate, transgender \u2013 in a way that is hard to do in the greater society.\"\nTransgender existence and acceptability is especially controversial in many neopagan sects. One of the most notable of these is Dianic Wicca. This female-only, radical feminist variant of Wicca allows cisgender lesbians but not transgender women. This is due to Dianic belief in gender essentialism; according to founder Zsuzsanna Budapest, \"you have to have sometimes [sic] in your life a womb, and ovaries and [menstruate] and not die\". This belief and the way it is expressed is often denounced as transphobia and trans-exclusionary radical feminism.\nTrans exclusion can also be found in Alexandrian Wicca, whose founder views trans individuals as melancholy people who should seek other beliefs due to the Alexandrian focus on heterosexual reproduction and duality.\nRelationship with the New Age movement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNeopagan practices highlight the centrality of the relationship between humans and nature and reinvent religions of the past, while New Agers are more interested in transforming individual consciousness and shaping the future.\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Sarah Pike.\nSince the 1960s and 1970s, contemporary paganism, or neo-paganism, and the then emergent counterculture, New Age, and hippie movements experienced a degree of cross-pollination. An issue of academic debate has been regarding the connection between these movements. Religious studies scholar Sarah Pike asserted that in the United States, there was a \"significant overlap\" between modern paganism and New Age, while Aidan A. Kelly stated that paganism \"parallels the New Age movement in some ways, differs sharply from it in others, and overlaps it in some minor ways\". Ethan Doyle White stated that while the pagan and New Age movements \"do share commonalities and overlap\", they were nevertheless \"largely distinct phenomena.\" Hanegraaff suggested that whereas various forms of contemporary paganism were not part of the New Age movement \u2013 particularly those who pre-dated the movement \u2013 other pagan religions and practices could be identified as New Age. Various differences between the two movements have been highlighted; the New Age movement focuses on an improved future, whereas the focus of Paganism is on the pre-Christian past. Similarly, the New Age movement typically propounds a universalist message which sees all religions as fundamentally the same, whereas paganism stresses the difference between monotheistic religions and those embracing a polytheistic or animistic theology. Further, the New Age movement shows little interest in magic and witchcraft, which are conversely core interests of pagan religions such as Wicca.\nMany pagans have sought to distance themselves from the New Age movement, even using \"New Age\" as an insult within their community, while conversely many involved in the New Age have expressed criticism of paganism for emphasizing the material world over the spiritual. Many pagans have expressed criticism of the high fees charged by New Age teachers, something not typically present in the pagan movement.\nRelationship with Hinduism.\nBecause of their common links to the Proto-Indo-European culture, many adherents of modern paganism have come to regard Hinduism as a spiritual relative. Some modern pagan literature prominently features comparative religion involving European and Indian traditions. The ECER has made efforts to establish mutual support with Hindu groups, as has the Lithuanian Romuva movement.\nIn India, a prominent figure who made similar efforts was the Hindu revivalist Ram Swarup, who pointed out parallels between Hinduism and European and Arabic paganism. Swarup reached out to modern pagans in the West and also had an influence on Western converts to Hinduism or pro-Hindu activists, notably David Frawley and Koenraad Elst, who both have described Hinduism as a form of paganism. The modern pagan writer Christopher G\u00e9rard has drawn much inspiration from Hinduism and visited Swarup in India. Reviewing G\u00e9rard's book \"Parcours pa\u00efen\" in 2001, the historian of religion Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Mayer described G\u00e9rard's activities as part of the development of a \"Western-Hindu 'pagan axis'\".\nPrejudice and opposition.\nIn the Islamic world, pagans are not considered people of the book, so they do not have the same status as Abrahamic religions in Islamic religious law for example, Muslim men cannot marry pagan women while they are allowed to marry among people of the book; and Muslims can eat meat of halal animals that are slaughtered by people of the book, but not that slaughtered by methods of other religions.\nRegarding European paganism, In \"Modern Paganism in World Cultures: Comparative Perspectives\" Michael F. Strmiska writes that \"in pagan magazines, websites, and Internet discussion venues, Christianity is frequently denounced as an antinatural, antifemale, sexually and culturally repressive, guilt-ridden, and authoritarian religion that has fostered intolerance, hypocrisy, and persecution throughout the world.\" Further, there is a common belief in the pagan community that Christianity and paganism are opposing belief systems. This animosity is flamed by historical conflicts between Christian and pre-Christian religions, as well as the perceived ongoing Christian disdain from Christians. Some pagans have claimed that Christian authorities have never apologized for the religious displacement of Europe's pre-Christian belief systems, particularly following the Roman Catholic Church's apology for past antisemitism in its \"\". They also express disapproval of Christianity's continued missionary efforts around the globe at the expense of indigenous and other polytheistic faiths.\nSome Christian authors have published books criticizing modern paganism, while other Christian critics have equated paganism with Satanism, which is often portrayed as such in mainstream entertainment industry.\nIn areas such as the US Bible Belt, where conservative Christian dominance is strong, pagans have faced continued religious persecution. For instance, Strmiska highlighted instances in both the US and UK in which school teachers were fired when their employers discovered that they were pagan. Thus, many pagans keep their religion private to avoid discrimination and ostracism.\nPagan studies.\nThe earliest academic studies of contemporary paganism were published in the late 1970s and 1980s by scholars like Margot Adler, Marcello Truzzi and Tanya Luhrmann, although it was not until the 1990s that the actual academic field of pagan studies properly developed, pioneered by academics such as Graham Harvey and Chas S. Clifton. Increasing academic interest in paganism has been attributed to the new religious movement's increasing public visibility, as it began interacting with the interfaith movement and holding large public celebrations at sites like Stonehenge.\nThe first international academic conference on the subject of pagan studies was held at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, North-East England in 1993. It was organised by two British religious studies scholars, Graham Harvey and Charlotte Hardman. In April 1996 a larger conference dealing with contemporary paganism took place at Ambleside in the Lake District. Organised by the Department of Religious Studies at the University of Lancaster, North-West England, it was entitled \"Nature Religion Today: Western Paganism, Shamanism and Esotericism in the 1990s\", and led to the publication of an academic anthology, entitled \"Nature Religion Today: Paganism in the Modern World\". In 2004, the first peer-reviewed, academic journal devoted to pagan studies began publication. \"The Pomegranate: The International Journal of Pagan Studies\" was edited by Clifton, while the academic publishers AltaMira Press began release of the Pagan Studies Series. From 2008 onward, conferences have been held bringing together scholars specialising in the study of paganism in Central and Eastern Europe.\nThe relationship between pagan studies scholars and some practising pagans has at times been strained. The Australian academic and practising pagan Caroline Jane Tully argues that many pagans can react negatively to new scholarship regarding historical pre-Christian societies, believing that it is a threat to the structure of their beliefs and to their \"sense of identity\". She furthermore argues that some of those dissatisfied pagans lashed out against academics as a result, particularly on the Internet.\nCriticism.\nNeopaganism has been criticized on a variety of fronts, ranging from pseudohistory to racial issues to institutional issues. As neopaganism is not a unified religion, it means that the criticisms of certain groups often do not apply to other groups. Criticisms of specific neopagan groups range from criticisms of their belief in gender essentialism to criticisms of some belief in nationalism.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21688", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21688", "title": "Double negative elimination", "text": ""}
{"id": "21689", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21689", "title": "NTSC", "text": "Analog television system\nNTSC (from National Television System Committee) was the first American standard for analog television, published and adopted in 1941. In 1957, the EIA defined NTSC performance standards in EIS-170 (also known as RS-170). In 1961, the color version of NTSC was designated NTSC-M by the CCIR, with the Japanese variant, which used a somewhat different color implementation, designated NTSC-J.\nIn 1953, a second NTSC standard was adopted, which allowed for color television broadcast compatible with the then existing stock of black-and-white receivers. It was one of three major color formats for analog television, the others being PAL and SECAM. \"NTSC color\" was usually associated with the System M; this combination was sometimes called NTSC II. The only other broadcast television system to use NTSC color was the System J. Brazil used System M with PAL color. Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos used System M with SECAM color. Vietnam later switched to PAL in the early 1990s.\nThe NTSC/System M standard was used in most of the Americas (except Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay), Myanmar, South Korea, Taiwan, Philippines, Japan, and some Pacific Islands nations and territories (see map).\nSince the introduction of digital sources (ex: DVD); the term NTSC has been used to refer to digital formats with number of active lines between 480 and 487 having 30 or 29.97 frames per second rate, serving as a digital shorthand to System M. The so-called \"NTSC-Film standard\" has a digital standard resolution of 720\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0480 pixel for DVD-Videos, 480\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0480 pixel for Super Video CDs (SVCD, Aspect Ratio: 4:3) and 352\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0240 pixel for Video CDs (VCD). The digital video (DV) camcorder format that is equivalent to NTSC is 720\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0480 pixels. The digital television (DTV) equivalent is 704\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0480 pixels.\nHistory.\nThe National Television System Committee was established in 1940 by the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to resolve the conflicts between companies over the introduction of a nationwide analog television system in the United States. In March 1941, the committee issued a technical standard for black-and-white television that built upon a 1936 recommendation made by the Radio Manufacturers Association (RMA). Technical advancements of the vestigial side band technique allowed for the opportunity to increase the image resolution. The NTSC selected 525\u00a0scan lines as a compromise between RCA's 441-scan line standard (used by RCA's NBC TV network at the time) and Philco's and DuMont's desire to increase the number of scan lines to between 605 and 800. The standard recommended a frame rate of 30 frames (images) per second, consisting of two interlaced fields per frame at 262.5\u00a0lines per field and 60\u00a0fields per second. Other standards in the final recommendation were an aspect ratio of 4:3, and frequency modulation (FM) for the sound signal (which was an innovation).\nIn January 1950, the committee was reconstituted to standardize color television. The FCC had briefly approved a 405-line field-sequential color television standard in October 1950, which had been developed by CBS. The CBS system was incompatible with existing black-and-white receivers. It used a rotating color wheel, reduced the number of scan lines from 525 to 405, and increased the field rate from 60 to 144, but had an effective frame rate of only 24 frames per second. Legal action by rival RCA kept commercial use of the system off the air until June 1951, and regular broadcasts only lasted a few months before manufacture of all color television sets was banned by the Office of Defense Mobilization in October, ostensibly due to the Korean War. A variant of the CBS system was later used by NASA to broadcast pictures of astronauts from space. CBS rescinded its system in March 1953, and the FCC replaced it on December 17, 1953, with the NTSC color standard, which was cooperatively developed by several companies, including RCA and Philco.\nIn December 1953, the FCC unanimously approved what became the \"NTSC\" color television standard (later defined as RS-170a). The compatible color standard retained full backward compatibility with then-existing black-and-white television sets. Color information was added to the black-and-white image by introducing a color subcarrier of precisely 315/88\u00a0MHz (usually described as 3.579545\u00a0MHz\u00b110\u00a0Hz). The precise frequency was chosen so that horizontal line-rate modulation components of the chrominance signal fall exactly in between the horizontal line-rate modulation components of the luminance signal, such that the chrominance signal could easily be filtered out of the luminance signal on new television sets, and that it would be minimally visible in existing televisions. Due to limitations of frequency divider circuits at the time the color standard was promulgated, the color subcarrier frequency was constructed as composite frequency assembled from small integers, in this case 5\u00d77\u00d79/(8\u00d711)\u00a0MHz. The horizontal line rate was reduced to approximately 15,734 lines per second (3.579545\u00a0\u00d7 2/455\u00a0MHz\u00a0= 9/572\u00a0MHz) from 15,750 lines per second, and the frame rate was reduced to 30/1.001\u00a0\u2248 29.970 frames per second (the horizontal line rate divided by 525 lines/frame) from 30 frames per second. These changes amounted to 0.1 percent and were readily tolerated by then-existing television receivers.\nThe first publicly announced network television broadcast of a program using the NTSC \"compatible color\" system was an episode of NBC's \"Kukla, Fran and Ollie\" on August 30, 1953, although it was viewable in color only at the network's headquarters. The first nationwide viewing of NTSC color came on the following January 1 with the coast-to-coast broadcast of the Tournament of Roses Parade, viewable on prototype color receivers at special presentations across the country. The first color NTSC television camera was the RCA TK-40, used for experimental broadcasts in 1953; an improved version, the TK-40A, introduced in March 1954, was the first commercially available color television camera. Later that year, the improved TK-41 became the standard camera used throughout much of the 1960s.\nThe NTSC standard was adopted by other countries, including some in the Americas and Japan.\nDigital conversion.\nWith the advent of digital television, analog broadcasts were largely phased out. In the United States, NTSC broadcasters were required by the FCC to shut down their analog transmitters as of February 17, 2009, but this was later moved to June 12, 2009. Low-power stations, Class A stations and translators were required to shut down by 2015, although an FCC extension allowed some of those stations operating on Channel 6 to operate until July 13, 2021. The remaining Canadian analog TV transmitters, in markets not subject to the mandatory transition in 2011, were scheduled to be shut down by January 14, 2022, under a schedule published by Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada in 2017; however the scheduled transition dates have already passed for several stations listed that continue to broadcast in analog (e.g. CFJC-TV Kamloops, which has not yet transitioned to digital, is listed as having been required to transition by November 20, 2020).\nMost countries using the NTSC standard, as well as those using other analog television standards, have switched to, or are in process of switching to, newer digital television standards, with there being at least four different standards in use around the world. North America, parts of Central America, and South Korea are adopting or have adopted the ATSC standards, while other countries, such as Japan, are adopting or have adopted other standards instead of ATSC. After nearly 70\u00a0years, the majority of over-the-air NTSC transmissions in the United States ceased on June 12, 2009, and by August 31, 2011, in Canada and most other NTSC markets. The majority of NTSC transmissions ended in Japan on July 24, 2011, with the Japanese prefectures of Iwate, Miyagi, and Fukushima ending in 2012. After a pilot program in 2013, most full-power analog stations in Mexico went off the air in 2015, with some 500 low-power and repeater stations allowed to remain in analog until the end of 2016. Digital broadcasting allows higher-resolution television, but digital standard definition television continues to use the frame rate and number of lines of resolution established by the analog NTSC standard.\nTechnical details.\nResolution and refresh rate.\nNTSC color encoding is used with the System M television signal, which consists of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;30\u20441.001\u00a0(approximately 29.97)\u00a0interlaced frames of video per second. Each frame is composed of two fields, each consisting of 262.5\u00a0scan lines, for a total of 525\u00a0scan lines. The visible raster is made up of 486\u00a0scan lines. The later digital standard, Rec. 601, only uses 480 of these lines for visible raster. The remainder (the vertical blanking interval) allow for vertical synchronization and retrace. This blanking interval was originally designed to simply blank the electron beam of the receiver's CRT to allow for the simple analog circuits and slow vertical retrace of early TV receivers. However, some of these lines may now contain other data such as closed captioning and vertical interval timecode (VITC). In the complete raster (disregarding half lines due to interlacing) the even-numbered scan lines (every other line that would be even if counted in the video signal, e.g. {2, 4, 6, ..., 524}) are drawn in the first field, and the odd-numbered (every other line that would be odd if counted in the video signal, e.g. {1, 3, 5, ..., 525}) are drawn in the second field, to yield a flicker-free image at the field refresh frequency of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;60\u20441.001\u00a0Hz (approximately 59.94\u00a0Hz). For comparison, 625\u00a0lines (576\u00a0visible) systems, usually used with PAL-B/G and SECAM color, and so have a higher vertical resolution, but a lower temporal resolution of 25 frames or 50 fields per second.\nThe NTSC field refresh frequency in the black-and-white system originally exactly matched the nominal 60\u00a0Hz frequency of alternating current power used in the United States. Matching the field refresh rate to the power source avoided intermodulation (also called \"beating\"), which produces rolling bars on the screen. Synchronization of the refresh rate to the power incidentally helped kinescope cameras record early live television broadcasts, as it was very simple to synchronize a film camera to capture one frame of video on each film frame by using the alternating current frequency to set the speed of the synchronous AC motor-drive camera. This, as mentioned, is how the NTSC field refresh frequency worked in the original black-and-white system; when \"color\" was added to the system, however, the refresh frequency was shifted slightly downward by 0.1%, to approximately 59.94\u00a0Hz, to eliminate stationary dot patterns in the difference frequency between the sound and color carriers (as explained below in \u00a7Color encoding). By the time the frame rate changed to accommodate color, it was nearly as easy to trigger the camera shutter from the video signal itself.\nThe actual figure of 525\u00a0lines was chosen as a consequence of the limitations of the vacuum-tube-based technologies of the day. In early TV systems, a master voltage-controlled oscillator was run at twice the horizontal line frequency, and this frequency was divided down by the number of lines used (in this case 525) to give the field frequency (60\u00a0Hz in this case). This frequency was then compared with the 60\u00a0Hz power-line frequency and any discrepancy corrected by adjusting the frequency of the master oscillator. For interlaced scanning, an odd number of lines per frame was required in order to make the vertical retrace distance identical for the odd and even fields, which meant the master oscillator frequency had to be divided down by an odd number. At the time, the only practical method of frequency division was the use of a chain of vacuum tube multivibrators, the overall division ratio being the mathematical product of the division ratios of the chain. Since all the factors of an odd number also have to be odd numbers, it follows that all the dividers in the chain also had to divide by odd numbers, and these had to be relatively small due to the problems of thermal drift with vacuum tube devices. The closest practical sequence to 500 that meets these criteria was 3\u00d75\u00d75\u00d77\n525. (For the same reason, 625-line PAL-B/G and SECAM uses 5\u00d75\u00d75\u00d75, the old British 405-line system used 3\u00d73\u00d73\u00d73\u00d75, the French 819-line system used 3\u00d73\u00d77\u00d713 etc.)\nColorimetry.\nColorimetry refers to the specific colorimetric characteristics of the system and its components, including the specific primary colors used, the camera, the display, etc. Over its history, NTSC color had two distinctly defined colorimetries, shown on the accompanying chromaticity diagram as NTSC 1953 and SMPTE C. Manufacturers introduced a number of variations for technical, economic, marketing, and other reasons.\nNTSC 1953.\nThe original 1953 color NTSC specification, still part of the United States Code of Federal Regulations, defined the colorimetric values of the system as shown in the above table.\nEarly color television receivers, such as the RCA CT-100, were faithful to this specification (which was based on prevailing motion picture standards), having a larger gamut than most of today's monitors. Their low-efficiency phosphors (notably in the Red) were weak and long-persistent, leaving trails after moving objects. Starting in the late 1950s, picture tube phosphors would sacrifice saturation for increased brightness; this deviation from the standard at both the receiver and broadcaster was the source of considerable color variation.\nSMPTE C.\nTo ensure more uniform color reproduction, some manufacturers incorporated color correction circuits into sets, that converted the received signal\u2014encoded for the colorimetric values listed above\u2014adjusting for the actual phosphor characteristics used within the monitor. Since such color correction can not be performed accurately on the nonlinear gamma corrected signals transmitted, the adjustment can only be approximated, introducing both hue and luminance errors for highly saturated colors.\nSimilarly at the broadcaster stage, in 1968\u201369 the Conrac Corp., working with RCA, defined a set of controlled phosphors for use in broadcast color picture video monitors. This specification survives today as the SMPTE C phosphor specification:\nAs with home receivers, it was further recommended that studio monitors incorporate similar color correction circuits so that broadcasters would transmit pictures encoded for the original 1953 colorimetric values, in accordance with FCC standards.\nIn 1987, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) Committee on Television Technology, Working Group on Studio Monitor Colorimetry, adopted the SMPTE C (Conrac) phosphors for general use in Recommended Practice 145, prompting many manufacturers to modify their camera designs to directly encode for SMPTE C colorimetry without color correction, as approved in SMPTE standard 170M, \"Composite Analog Video Signal\u00a0\u2013 NTSC for Studio Applications\" (1994). As a consequence, the ATSC digital television standard states that for 480i signals, SMPTE C colorimetry should be assumed unless colorimetric data is included in the transport stream.\nJapanese NTSC never changed primaries and whitepoint to SMPTE C, continuing to use the 1953 NTSC primaries and whitepoint. Both the PAL and SECAM systems used the original 1953 NTSC colorimetry as well until 1970; unlike NTSC, however, the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) rejected color correction in receivers and studio monitors that year and instead explicitly called for all equipment to directly encode signals for the \"EBU\" colorimetric values.\nColor compatibility issues.\nIn reference to the gamuts shown on the CIE chromaticity diagram (above), the variations between the different colorimetries can result in significant visual differences. To adjust for proper viewing requires gamut mapping via LUTs or additional color grading. SMPTE Recommended Practice RP 167-1995 refers to such an automatic correction as an \"NTSC corrective display matrix.\" For instance, material prepared for 1953 NTSC may look desaturated when displayed on SMPTE C or ATSC/BT.709 displays, and may also exhibit noticeable hue shifts. On the other hand, SMPTE C materials may appear slightly more saturated on BT.709/sRGB displays, or significantly more saturated on P3 displays, if the appropriate gamut mapping is not performed.\nColor encoding.\nNTSC uses a luminance-chrominance encoding system, incorporating concepts invented in 1938 by Georges Valensi. Using a separate luminance signal maintained backward compatibility with black-and-white television sets in use at the time; only color sets would recognize the chroma signal, which was essentially ignored by black and white sets.\nThe red, green, and blue primary color signals formula_1 are weighted and summed into a single luma signal, designated formula_2 (Y prime) which takes the place of the original monochrome signal. The color difference information is encoded into the chrominance signal, which carries only the color information. This allows black-and-white receivers to display NTSC color signals by simply ignoring the chrominance signal. Some black-and-white TVs sold in the U.S. after the introduction of color broadcasting in 1953 were designed to filter chroma out, but the early B&amp;W sets did not do this and chrominance could be seen as a crawling dot pattern in areas of the picture that held saturated colors.\nTo derive the separate signals containing only color information, the difference is determined between each color primary and the summed luma. Thus the red difference signal is formula_3 and the blue difference signal is formula_4. These difference signals are then used to derive two new color signals known as formula_5 (in-phase) and formula_6 (in quadrature) in a process called QAM. The formula_7 color space is rotated relative to the difference signal color space, such that orange-blue color information (which the human eye is most sensitive to) is transmitted on the formula_5 signal at 1.3 MHz bandwidth, while the formula_6 signal encodes purple-green color information at 0.4 MHz bandwidth; this allows the chrominance signal to use less overall bandwidth without noticeable color degradation. The two signals each amplitude modulate 3.58\u00a0MHz carriers which are 90\u00a0degrees out of phase with each other and the result added together but with the carriers themselves being suppressed. The result can be viewed as a single sine wave with varying phase relative to a reference carrier and with varying amplitude. The varying phase represents the instantaneous color hue captured by a TV camera, and the amplitude represents the instantaneous color saturation. The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;315\u204488\u00a0MHz subcarrier is then added to the Luminance to form the composite color signal which modulates the video signal carrier. 3.58\u00a0MHz is often stated as an abbreviation instead of 3.579545\u00a0MHz.\nFor a color TV to recover hue information from the color subcarrier, it must have a zero-phase reference to replace the previously suppressed carrier. The NTSC signal includes a short sample of this reference signal, known as the colorburst, located on the back porch of each horizontal synchronization pulse. The color burst consists of a minimum of eight cycles of the unmodulated (pure original) color subcarrier. The TV receiver has a local oscillator, which is synchronized with these color bursts to create a reference signal. Combining this reference phase signal with the chrominance signal allows the recovery of the formula_5 and formula_6 signals, which in conjunction with the formula_2 signal, is reconstructed to the individual formula_13 signals, that are then sent to the CRT to form the image.\nIn CRT televisions, the NTSC signal is turned into three color signals: red, green, and blue, each controlling an electron gun that is designed to excite only the corresponding red, green, or blue phosphor dots. TV sets with digital circuitry use sampling techniques to process the signals but the result is the same. For both analog and digital sets processing an analog NTSC signal, the original three color signals are transmitted using three discrete signals (Y, I and Q) and then recovered as three separate colors (R, G, and B) and presented as a color image.\nWhen a transmitter broadcasts an NTSC signal, it amplitude-modulates a radio-frequency carrier with the NTSC signal just described, while it frequency-modulates a carrier 4.5\u00a0MHz higher with the audio signal. If non-linear distortion happens to the broadcast signal, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;315\u204488\u00a0MHz color carrier may beat with the sound carrier to produce a dot pattern on the screen. To make the resulting pattern less noticeable, designers adjusted the original 15,750\u00a0Hz scanline rate down by a factor of 1.001 (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;100\u20441,001%) to match the audio carrier frequency divided by the factor 286, resulting in a field rate of approximately 59.94\u00a0Hz. This adjustment ensures that the difference between the sound carrier and the color subcarrier (the most problematic intermodulation product of the two carriers) is an odd multiple of half the line rate, which is the necessary condition for the dots on successive lines to be opposite in phase, making them least noticeable.\nThe 59.94\u00a0rate is derived from the following calculations. Designers chose to make the chrominance subcarrier frequency an \"n\" + 0.5 multiple of the line frequency to minimize interference between the luminance signal and the chrominance signal. (Another way this is often stated is that the color subcarrier frequency is an odd multiple of half the line frequency.) They then chose to make the audio subcarrier frequency an integer multiple of the line frequency to minimize visible (intermodulation) interference between the audio signal and the chrominance signal. The original black-and-white standard, with its 15,750\u00a0Hz line frequency and 4.5\u00a0MHz audio subcarrier, does not meet these requirements, so designers had to either raise the audio subcarrier frequency or lower the line frequency. Raising the audio subcarrier frequency would prevent existing (black and white) receivers from properly tuning in the audio signal. Lowering the line frequency is comparatively innocuous, because the horizontal and vertical synchronization information in the NTSC signal allows a receiver to tolerate a substantial amount of variation in the line frequency. So the engineers chose the line frequency to be changed for the color standard. In the black-and-white standard, the ratio of audio subcarrier frequency to line frequency is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4.5\u00a0MHz\u204415,750\u00a0Hz\u00a0\n\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;285+5\u20447. In the color standard, this becomes rounded to the integer 286, which means the color standard's line rate is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4.5\u00a0MHz\u2044286\u00a0\u2248\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;15,734+266\u20441,001\u00a0Hz. Maintaining the same number of scan lines per field (and frame), the lower line rate must yield a lower field rate. Dividing &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4,500,000\u2044286 lines per second by 262.5\u00a0lines per field gives approximately 59.94\u00a0fields per second.\nTransmission modulation method.\nAn NTSC television channel as transmitted occupies a total bandwidth of 6\u00a0MHz. The actual video signal, which is amplitude-modulated, is transmitted between 500\u00a0kHz and 5.45\u00a0MHz above the lower bound of the channel. The video carrier is 1.25\u00a0MHz above the lower bound of the channel. Like most AM signals, the video carrier generates two sidebands, one above the carrier and one below. The sidebands are each 4.2\u00a0MHz wide. The entire upper sideband is transmitted, but only 1.25\u00a0MHz of the lower sideband, known as a vestigial sideband, is transmitted. The color subcarrier, as noted above, is 3.579545\u00a0MHz above the video carrier, and is quadrature-amplitude-modulated with a suppressed carrier. The audio signal is frequency modulated, like the audio signals broadcast by FM radio stations in the 88\u2013108\u00a0MHz band, but with a 25\u00a0kHz maximum frequency deviation, as opposed to 75\u00a0kHz as is used on the FM band, making analog television audio signals sound quieter than FM radio signals as received on a wideband receiver. The main audio carrier is 4.5\u00a0MHz above the video carrier, making it 250\u00a0kHz below the top of the channel. Sometimes a channel may contain an MTS signal, which offers more than one audio signal by adding one or two subcarriers on the audio signal, each synchronized to a multiple of the line frequency. This is normally the case when stereo audio and/or second audio program signals are used. The same extensions are used in ATSC, where the ATSC digital carrier is broadcast at 0.31\u00a0MHz above the lower bound of the channel.\n\"Setup\" is a 54\u00a0mV (7.5\u00a0IRE) voltage offset between the \"black\" and \"blanking\" levels. It is unique to NTSC. CVBS stands for Color, Video, Blanking, and Sync.\nThe following table shows the values for the basic RGB colors, encoded in NTSC\nFrame rate conversion.\nThere is a large difference in frame rate between film, which runs at 24 frames per second, and the NTSC standard, which runs at approximately 29.97 (10\u00a0MHz\u00a0\u00d7 63/88/455/525) frames per second.\nIn regions that use 25-fps television and video standards, this difference can be overcome by speed-up.\nFor 30-fps standards, a process called \"3:2 pulldown\" is used. One film frame is transmitted for three video fields (lasting &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442\u00a0video frames), and the next frame is transmitted for two video fields (lasting 1\u00a0video frame). Two film frames are thus transmitted in five video fields, for an average of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442\u00a0video fields per film frame. The average frame rate is thus 60\u00a0\u00f7 2.5\u00a0= 24 frames per second, so the average film speed is nominally exactly what it should be. (In reality, over the course of an hour of real time, 215,827.2 video fields are displayed, representing 86,330.88 frames of film, while in an hour of true 24-fps film projection, exactly 86,400 frames are shown: thus, 29.97-fps NTSC transmission of 24-fps film runs at 99.92% of the film's normal speed.) Still-framing on playback can display a video frame with fields from two different film frames, so any difference between the frames will appear as a rapid back-and-forth flicker. There can also be noticeable jitter/\"stutter\" during slow camera pans (telecine judder).\nFilm shot specifically for NTSC television is usually taken at 30 (instead of 24) frames per second to avoid 3:2 pulldown.\nTo show 25-fps material (such as European television series and some European movies) on NTSC equipment, every fifth frame is duplicated and then the resulting stream is interlaced.\nFilm shot for NTSC television at 24 frames per second has traditionally been accelerated by 1/24 (to about 104.17% of normal speed) for transmission in regions that use 25-fps television standards. This increase in picture speed has traditionally been accompanied by a similar increase in the pitch and tempo of the audio. More recently, frame-blending has been used to convert 24\u00a0FPS video to 25\u00a0FPS without altering its speed.\nFilm shot for television in regions that use 25-fps television standards can be handled in either of two ways:\nBecause both film speeds have been used in 25-fps regions, viewers can face confusion about the true speed of video and audio, and the pitch of voices, sound effects, and musical performances, in television films from those regions. For example, they may wonder whether the Jeremy Brett series of Sherlock Holmes television films, made in the 1980s and early 1990s, was shot at 24\u00a0fps and then transmitted at an artificially fast speed in 25-fps regions, or whether it was shot at 25\u00a0fps natively and then slowed to 24\u00a0fps for NTSC exhibition.\nThese discrepancies exist not only in television broadcasts over the air and through cable, but also in the home-video market, on both tape and disc, including LaserDisc and DVD.\nIn digital television and video, which are replacing their analog predecessors, single standards that can accommodate a wider range of frame rates still show the limits of analog regional standards. The initial version of the ATSC standard, for example, allowed frame rates of 23.976, 24, 29.97, 30, 59.94, 60, 119.88 and 120 frames per second, but not 25 and 50. Modern ATSC allows 25 and 50\u00a0FPS.\nModulation for analog satellite transmission.\nBecause satellite power is severely limited, analog video transmission through satellites differs from terrestrial TV transmission. AM is a linear modulation method, so a given demodulated signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) requires an equally high received RF SNR. The SNR of studio quality video is over 50\u00a0dB, so AM would require prohibitively high powers and/or large antennas.\nWideband FM is used instead to trade RF bandwidth for reduced power. Increasing the channel bandwidth from 6 to 36\u00a0MHz allows a RF SNR of only 10\u00a0dB or less. The wider noise bandwidth reduces this 40\u00a0dB power saving by 36\u00a0MHz / 6\u00a0MHz = 8\u00a0dB for a substantial net reduction of 32\u00a0dB.\nSound is on an FM subcarrier as in terrestrial transmission, but frequencies above 4.5\u00a0MHz are used to reduce aural/visual interference. 6.8, 5.8 and 6.2\u00a0MHz are commonly used. Stereo can be multiplex, discrete, or matrix and unrelated audio and data signals may be placed on additional subcarriers.\nA triangular 60\u00a0Hz energy dispersal waveform is added to the composite baseband signal (video plus audio and data subcarriers) before modulation. This limits the satellite downlink power spectral density in case the video signal is lost. Otherwise the satellite might transmit all of its power on a single frequency, interfering with terrestrial microwave links in the same frequency band.\nIn half transponder mode, the frequency deviation of the composite baseband signal is reduced to 18\u00a0MHz to allow another signal in the other half of the 36\u00a0MHz transponder. This reduces the FM benefit somewhat, and the recovered SNRs are further reduced because the combined signal power must be \"backed off\" to avoid intermodulation distortion in the satellite transponder. A single FM signal is constant amplitude, so it can saturate a transponder without distortion.\nField order.\nAn NTSC \"frame\" consists of two \"fields,\" F1 (field one) and F2 (field two). The field dominance depends on a combination of factors, including decisions by various equipment manufacturers as well as historical conventions. As a result, most professional equipment has the option to switch between a dominant upper or dominant lower field. It is not advisable to use the terms \"even\" or \"odd\" when speaking of fields, due to substantial ambiguity. For instance if the line numbering for a particular system starts at zero, while another system starts its line numbering at one. As such the same field could be even or odd.\nWhile an analog television set does not care about field dominance per se, field dominance is important when editing NTSC video. Incorrect interpretation of field order can cause a shuddering effect as moving objects jump forward and behind on each successive field.\nThis is of particular importance when interlaced NTSC is transcoded to a format with a different field dominance and vice versa. Field order is also important when transcoding progressive video to interlaced NTSC, as any place there is a cut between two scenes in the progressive video, there could be a flash field in the interlaced video if the field dominance is incorrect. The film telecine process where a three-two pull down is utilized to convert 24 frames to 30, will also provide unacceptable results if the field order is incorrect.\nBecause each field is temporally unique for material captured with an interlaced camera, converting interlaced to a digital progressive-frame medium is difficult, as each progressive frame will have artifacts of motion on every alternating line. This can be observed in PC-based video-playing utilities and is frequently solved simply by transcoding the video at half resolution and only using one of the two available fields.\nVariants.\nNTSC-M.\nUnlike PAL and SECAM, with its many varied underlying broadcast television systems in use throughout the world, NTSC color encoding is almost invariably used with broadcast system M, giving NTSC-M.\nNTSC-N and NTSC 50.\nNTSC-N was originally proposed in the 1960s to the CCIR as a 50\u00a0Hz broadcast method for System N countries Paraguay, Uruguay, and Argentina before they chose PAL. In 1978, with the introduction of Apple II Europlus, it was effectively reintroduced as NTSC 50, a pseudo-system combining 625-line video with 3.58\u00a0MHz NTSC color. For example, an Atari ST running PAL software on their NTSC color display used this system as the monitor could not decode PAL color. Most analog NTSC television sets and monitors with a V-Hold knob can display this system after adjusting the vertical hold.\nNTSC-J.\nOnly Japan's variant \"NTSC-J\" is slightly different: in Japan, black level and blanking level of the signal are identical (at 0\u00a0IRE), as they are in PAL, while in American NTSC, black level is slightly higher (7.5\u00a0IRE) than blanking level. Since the difference is quite small, a slight turn of the brightness knob is all that is required to correctly show the \"other\" variant of NTSC on any set as it is supposed to be; most watchers might not even notice the difference in the first place. The channel encoding on NTSC-J differs slightly from NTSC-M. In particular, the Japanese VHF band runs from channels 1\u201312 (located on frequencies directly above the 76\u201390\u00a0MHz Japanese FM radio band) while the North American VHF TV band uses channels 2\u201313 (54\u201372\u00a0MHz, 76\u201388\u00a0MHz and 174\u2013216\u00a0MHz) with 88\u2013108\u00a0MHz allocated to FM radio broadcasting. Japan's UHF TV channels are therefore numbered from 13 up and not 14 up, but otherwise uses the same UHF broadcasting frequencies as those in North America.\nNTSC 4.43.\nNTSC 4.43 is a pseudo-system that transmits a NTSC color subcarrier of 4.43\u00a0MHz instead of 3.58\u00a0MHz The resulting output is only viewable by TVs that support the resulting pseudo-system (such as most PAL TVs). Using a native NTSC TV to decode the signal yields no color, while using an incompatible PAL TV to decode the system yields erratic colors (observed to be lacking red and flickering randomly). The format was used by the USAF TV based in Germany during the Cold War and Hong Kong Cable Television. It was also found as an optional output on some LaserDisc players sold in markets where the PAL system is used.\nThe NTSC 4.43 system, while not a broadcast format, appears most often as a playback function of PAL cassette format VCRs, beginning with the Sony 3/4\" U-Matic format and then following onto Betamax and VHS format machines, commonly advertised as \"NTSC playback on PAL TV\".\nMulti-standard video monitors were already in use in Europe to accommodate broadcast sources in PAL, SECAM, and NTSC video formats. The heterodyne color-under process of U-Matic, Betamax &amp; VHS lent itself to minor modification of VCR players to accommodate NTSC format cassettes. The color-under format of VHS uses a 629\u00a0kHz subcarrier while U-Matic &amp; Betamax use a 688\u00a0kHz subcarrier to carry an \"amplitude modulated\" chroma signal for both NTSC and PAL formats. Since the VCR was ready to play the color portion of the NTSC recording using PAL color mode, the PAL scanner and capstan speeds had to be adjusted from PAL's 50\u00a0Hz field rate to NTSC's 59.94\u00a0Hz field rate, and faster linear tape speed.\nThe changes to the PAL VCR are minor thanks to the existing VCR recording formats. The output of the VCR when playing an NTSC cassette in NTSC 4.43 mode is 525 lines/29.97 frames per second with PAL compatible heterodyned color. The multi-standard receiver is already set to support the NTSC H &amp; V frequencies; it just needs to do so while receiving PAL color.\nThe existence of those multi-standard receivers was probably part of the drive for region coding of DVDs. As the color signals are component on disc for all display formats, almost no changes would be required for PAL DVD players to play NTSC (525/29.97) discs as long as the display was frame-rate compatible.\nOSKM (USSR-NTSC).\nIn January 1960, (7 years prior to adoption of the modified SECAM version) the experimental TV studio in Moscow started broadcasting using the OSKM system. OSKM was the version of NTSC adapted to European D/K 625/50 standard. The OSKM abbreviation means \"Simultaneous system with quadrature modulation\" (In Russian: \u041e\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0432\u0440\u0435\u043c\u0435\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0421\u0438\u0441\u0442\u0435\u043c\u0430 \u0441 \u041a\u0432\u0430\u0434\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0443\u0440\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u041c\u043e\u0434\u0443\u043b\u044f\u0446\u0438\u0435\u0439). It used the color coding scheme that was later used in PAL (U and V instead of I and Q).\nThe color subcarrier frequency was 4.4296875\u00a0MHz and the bandwidth of U and V signals was near 1.5\u00a0MHz. Only circa 4000 TV sets of 4 models (Raduga, Temp-22, Izumrud-201 and Izumrud-203) were produced for studying the real quality of TV reception. These TV's were not commercially available, despite being included in the goods catalog for trade network of the USSR.\nThe broadcasting with this system lasted about 3 years and was ceased well before SECAM transmissions started in the USSR. None of the current multi-standard TV receivers can support this TV system.\nNTSC-film.\nFilm content commonly shot at 24\u00a0frames/s can be converted to 30\u00a0frames/s through the telecine process to duplicate frames as needed.\nformula_14\nMathematically for NTSC this is relatively simple as it is only needed to duplicate every fourth frame. Various techniques are employed. NTSC with an actual frame rate of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;24\u20441.001 (approximately 23.976)\u00a0frames/s is often defined as NTSC-film. A process known as pullup, also known as pulldown, generates the duplicated frames upon playback. This method is common for H.262/MPEG-2 Part 2 digital video so the original content is preserved and played back on equipment that can display it or can be converted for equipment that cannot.\nComparative quality.\nFor NTSC, and to a lesser extent, PAL, reception problems can degrade the color accuracy of the picture where ghosting can dynamically change the phase of the color burst with picture content, thus altering the color balance of the signal. The only receiver compensation is in the professional TV receiver ghost canceling circuits used by cable companies. The vacuum-tube electronics used in televisions through the 1960s led to various technical problems. Among other things, the color burst phase would often drift. In addition, the TV studios did not always transmit properly, leading to hue changes when channels were changed, which is why NTSC televisions were equipped with a tint control. PAL and SECAM televisions had less of a need for one. SECAM in particular was very robust, but PAL, while excellent in maintaining skin tones which viewers are particularly sensitive to, nevertheless would distort other colors in the face of phase errors. With phase errors, only \"Deluxe PAL\" receivers would get rid of \"Hanover bars\" distortion. Hue controls are still found on NTSC TVs, but color drifting generally ceased to be a problem for more modern circuitry by the 1970s. When compared to PAL, in particular, NTSC color accuracy and consistency were sometimes considered inferior, leading to video professionals and television engineers jokingly referring to NTSC as \"Never The Same Color\", \"Never Twice the Same Color\", or \"No True Skin Colors\", while for the more expensive PAL system it was necessary to \"Pay for Additional Luxury\".\nThe use of NTSC coded color in S-Video systems, as well as the use of closed-circuit composite NTSC, both eliminate the phase distortions because there is no reception ghosting in a closed-circuit system to smear the color burst. For VHS videotape on the horizontal axis and frame rate of the three color systems when used with this scheme, the use of S-Video gives the higher resolution picture quality on monitors and TVs without a high-quality motion-compensated comb filtering section. (The NTSC resolution on the vertical axis is lower than the European standards, 525\u00a0lines against 625.) However, it uses too much bandwidth for over-the-air transmission. The Atari 800 and Commodore 64 home computers generate S-video, but only when used with specially designed monitors as no TV at the time supported the separate chroma and luma on standard RCA jacks. In 1987, a standardized four-pin mini-DIN socket was introduced for S-video input with the introduction of S-VHS players, which were the first device produced to use the four-pin plugs. However, S-VHS never became very popular. Video game consoles in the 1990s began offering S-video output as well.\nVertical interval reference.\nThe standard NTSC video image contains some lines (lines 1\u201321 of each field) that are not visible (this is known as the vertical blanking interval, or VBI); all are beyond the edge of the viewable image, but only lines 1\u20139 are used for the vertical-sync and equalizing pulses. The remaining lines were deliberately blanked in the original NTSC specification to provide time for the electron beam in CRT screens to return to the top of the display.\nVIR (or Vertical interval reference), widely adopted in the 1980s, attempts to correct some of the color problems with NTSC video by adding studio-inserted reference data for luminance and chrominance levels on line 19. Suitably equipped television sets could then employ these data in order to adjust the display to a closer match of the original studio image. The actual VIR signal contains three sections, the first having 70 percent luminance and the same chrominance as the color burst signal, and the other two having 50 percent and 7.5 percent luminance respectively.\nA less-used successor to VIR, GCR, also added ghost (multipath interference) removal capabilities.\nThe remaining vertical blanking interval lines are typically used for datacasting or ancillary data such as video editing timestamps (vertical interval timecodes or SMPTE timecodes on lines 12\u201314), test data on lines 17\u201318, a network source code on line 20 and closed captioning, XDS, and V-chip data on line 21. Early teletext applications also used vertical blanking interval lines 14\u201318 and 20, but teletext over NTSC was never widely adopted by viewers.\nSome stations transmitted TV Guide On Screen (TVGOS) data, an electronic program guide, over VBI lines, typically 11\u201318, 20, and 22. The primary station in a market, often a local PBS station, broadcast four lines while backup stations transmitted one. TVGOS was discontinued in 2013 and 2016, ending OTA program guide services for compatible devices. Line 22 is only used by DirecTV in older set-top boxes.\nTiVo data was also transmitted on some commercials and program advertisements so that customers could autorecord the program being advertised, and was also used in weekly half-hour paid programs on Ion Television and the Discovery Channel which highlighted TiVo promotions and advertisers.\nCountries and territories that are using or once used NTSC.\nBelow are countries and territories that currently use or once used the NTSC system. Many of these have switched or are currently switching from NTSC to digital television standards such as ATSC (United States, Canada, Mexico, Suriname, Jamaica, South Korea, Saint Lucia, Bahamas, Barbados, Grenada, Antigua and Barbuda, Haiti), ISDB (Japan, Philippines, part of South America and Saint Kitts and Nevis), DVB-T (Taiwan, Panama, Colombia, Myanmar, Trinidad and Tobago) or DTMB (Cuba).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCountries and territories that have ceased using NTSC.\nThe following countries and regions no longer use NTSC for terrestrial broadcasts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
