{"id": "23299", "revid": "277086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23299", "title": "Provisional Irish Republican Army", "text": "Paramilitary force active from 1969 to 2005\nThe Provisional Irish Republican Army (Provisional IRA), officially known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA; ) and informally known as the Provos, was an Irish republican paramilitary force that sought to end British rule in Northern Ireland, facilitate Irish reunification and bring about an independent republic encompassing all of Ireland. It was the most active republican paramilitary group during the Troubles. It argued that the all-island Irish Republic continued to exist, and it saw itself as that state's army, the sole legitimate successor to the original IRA from the Irish War of Independence. It was designated a terrorist organisation in the United Kingdom and an unlawful organisation in the Republic of Ireland, both of whose authority it rejected.\nThe Provisional IRA emerged in December 1969, due to a split within the previous incarnation of the IRA and the broader Irish republican movement. It was initially the minority faction in the split compared to the Official IRA but became the dominant faction by 1972. The Troubles had begun shortly before when a largely Catholic, nonviolent civil rights campaign was met with violence from both Ulster loyalists and the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), culminating in the August 1969 riots and deployment of British soldiers. The IRA initially focused on defence of Catholic areas, but it began an offensive campaign in 1970 that was aided by external sources, including Irish diaspora communities within the Anglosphere, and the Palestine Liberation Organization and Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. It used guerrilla tactics against the British Army and RUC in both rural and urban areas, and carried out a bombing campaign in Northern Ireland and England against military, political and economic targets, and British military targets in mainland Europe. They also targeted civilian contractors to the British security forces. The IRA's armed campaign, primarily in Northern Ireland but also in England and mainland Europe, killed over 1,700 people, including roughly 1,000 members of the British security forces and 500\u2013644 civilians.\nThe Provisional IRA declared a final ceasefire in July 1997, after which its political wing Sinn F\u00e9in was admitted into multi-party peace talks on the future of Northern Ireland. These resulted in the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, and in 2005 the IRA formally ended its armed campaign and decommissioned its weapons under the supervision of the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning. Several splinter groups have been formed as a result of splits within the IRA, including the Continuity IRA, which is still active in the dissident Irish republican campaign, and the Real IRA.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe original IRA was formed in 1913 as the Irish Volunteers, at a time when all of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom. The Volunteers took part in the Easter Rising against British rule in 1916, and the War of Independence that followed the Declaration of Independence by the revolutionary parliament D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann in 1919, during which they came to be known as the IRA. Ireland was partitioned into Southern Ireland and Northern Ireland by the Government of Ireland Act 1920, and following the implementation of the Anglo-Irish Treaty in 1922 Southern Ireland, renamed the Irish Free State, became a self-governing dominion while Northern Ireland chose to remain under home rule as part of the United Kingdom. The Treaty caused a split in the IRA, the pro-Treaty IRA were absorbed into the National Army, which defeated the anti-Treaty IRA in the Civil War. Subsequently, while denying the legitimacy of the Free State, the surviving elements of the anti-Treaty IRA focused on overthrowing the Northern Ireland state and the achievement of a united Ireland, carrying out a bombing campaign in England in 1939 and 1940, a campaign in Northern Ireland in the 1940s, and the Border campaign of 1956\u20131962. Following the failure of the Border campaign, internal debate took place regarding the future of the IRA. Chief-of-staff Cathal Goulding wanted the IRA to adopt a socialist agenda and become involved in politics, while traditional republicans such as Se\u00e1n Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in wanted to increase recruitment and rebuild the IRA.\nFollowing partition, Northern Ireland became a de facto one-party state governed by the Ulster Unionist Party in the Parliament of Northern Ireland, in which Catholics were viewed as second-class citizens. Protestants were given preference in jobs and housing, and local government constituencies were gerrymandered in places such as Derry. Policing was carried out by the armed Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and the B-Specials, both of which were almost exclusively Protestant. In the mid-1960s tension between the Catholic and Protestant communities was increasing. In 1966 Ireland celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Easter Rising, prompting fears of a renewed IRA campaign. Feeling under threat, Protestants formed the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), a paramilitary group which killed three people in May 1966, two of them Catholic men. In January 1967 the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA) was formed by a diverse group of people, including IRA members and liberal unionists. Civil rights marches by NICRA and a similar organisation, People's Democracy, protesting against discrimination were met by counter-protests and violent clashes with loyalists, including the Ulster Protestant Volunteers, a paramilitary group led by Ian Paisley.\nMarches marking the Ulster Protestant celebration The Twelfth in July 1969 led to riots and violent clashes in Belfast, Derry and elsewhere. The following month a three-day riot began in the Catholic Bogside area of Derry, following a march by the Protestant Apprentice Boys of Derry. The Battle of the Bogside caused Catholics in Belfast to riot in solidarity with the Bogsiders and to try to prevent RUC reinforcements being sent to Derry, sparking retaliation by Protestant mobs. The subsequent arson attacks, damage to property and intimidation forced 1,505 Catholic families and 315 Protestant families to leave their homes in Belfast in the Northern Ireland riots of August 1969 The riots resulted in 275 buildings being destroyed or requiring major repairs, 83.5% of them occupied by Catholics. A number of people were killed on both sides, some by the police, and the British Army were deployed to Northern Ireland. The IRA had been poorly armed and failed to properly defend Catholic areas from Protestant attacks, which had been considered one of its roles since the 1920s. Veteran republicans were critical of Goulding and the IRA's Dublin leadership which, for political reasons, had refused to prepare for aggressive action in advance of the violence. On 24 August a group including Joe Cahill, Seamus Twomey, D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill, Billy McKee, and Jimmy Steele came together in Belfast and decided to remove the pro-Goulding Belfast leadership of Billy McMillen and Jim Sullivan and return to traditional militant republicanism. On 22 September Twomey, McKee, and Steele were among sixteen armed IRA men who confronted the Belfast leadership over the failure to adequately defend Catholic areas. A compromise was agreed where McMillen stayed in command, but he was not to have any communication with the IRA's Dublin based leadership.\n1969 split.\nThe IRA split into \"Provisional\" and \"Official\" factions in December 1969, after an IRA convention was held in Boyle, County Roscommon, Republic of Ireland. The two main issues at the convention were a resolution to enter into a \"National Liberation Front\" with radical left-wing groups, and a resolution to end abstentionism, which would allow participation in the British, Irish, and Northern Ireland parliaments. Traditional republicans refused to vote on the \"National Liberation Front\", and it was passed by twenty-nine votes to seven. The traditionalists argued strongly against the ending of abstentionism, and the official minutes report the resolution passed by twenty-seven votes to twelve.\nFollowing the convention the traditionalists canvassed support throughout Ireland, with IRA director of intelligence Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in meeting the disaffected members of the IRA in Belfast. Shortly after, the traditionalists held a convention which elected a \"Provisional\" Army Council, composed of Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in, Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh, Paddy Mulcahy, Sean Tracey, Leo Martin, \u00d3 Conaill, and Cahill. The term provisional was chosen to mirror the 1916 Provisional Government of the Irish Republic, and also to designate it as temporary pending ratification by a further IRA convention. Nine out of thirteen IRA units in Belfast sided with the \"Provisional\" Army Council in December 1969, roughly 120 activists and 500 supporters. The Provisional IRA issued their first public statement on 28 December 1969, stating:\nWe declare our allegiance to the 32 county Irish republic, proclaimed at Easter 1916, established by the first D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann in 1919, overthrown by force of arms in 1922 and suppressed to this day by the existing British-imposed six-county and twenty-six-county partition states... We call on the Irish people at home and in exile for increased support towards defending our people in the North and the eventual achievement of the full political, social, economic and cultural freedom of Ireland.\nThe Irish republican political party Sinn F\u00e9in split along the same lines on 11 January 1970 in Dublin, when a third of the delegates walked out of the party's highest deliberative body, the ard fheis, in protest at the party leadership's attempt to force through the ending of abstentionism, despite its failure to achieve a two-thirds majority vote of delegates required to change the policy. The delegates that walked out reconvened at another venue where Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in, \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and Mulcahy from the \"Provisional\" Army Council were elected to the Caretaker Executive of \"Provisional\" Sinn F\u00e9in. Despite the declared support of that faction of Sinn F\u00e9in, the early Provisional IRA avoided political activity, instead relying on physical force republicanism. \u00a3100,000 was donated by the Fianna F\u00e1il-led Irish government in 1969 to the Central Citizens Defence Committee in Catholic areas, some of which ended up in the hands of the IRA. This resulted in the 1970 Arms Crisis where criminal charges were pursued against two former government ministers and others including John Kelly, an IRA volunteer from Belfast. The Provisional IRA maintained the principles of the pre-1969 IRA, considering both British rule in Northern Ireland and the government of the Republic of Ireland to be illegitimate, and the Army Council to be the provisional government of the all-island Irish Republic. This belief was based on a series of perceived political inheritances which constructed a legal continuity from the Second D\u00e1il of 1921\u20131922. The IRA recruited many young nationalists from Northern Ireland who had not been involved in the IRA before, but had been radicalised by the violence that broke out in 1969. These people became known as \"sixty niners\", having joined after 1969. The IRA adopted the phoenix as the symbol of the Irish republican rebirth in 1969, one of its slogans was \"out of the ashes rose the Provisionals\", representing the IRA's resurrection from the ashes of burnt-out Catholic areas of Belfast.\nInitial phase.\nIn January 1970, the Army Council decided to adopt a three-stage strategy; defence of nationalist areas, followed by a combination of defence and retaliation, and finally launching a guerrilla campaign against the British Army. The Official IRA was opposed to such a campaign because they felt it would lead to sectarian conflict, which would defeat their strategy of uniting the workers from both sides of the sectarian divide. The Provisional IRA's strategy was to use force to cause the collapse of the Northern Ireland government and to inflict such heavy casualties on the British Army that the British government would be forced by public opinion to withdraw from Ireland. Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in decided they would \"escalate, escalate and escalate\", in what the British Army would later describe as a \"classic insurgency\". In October 1970 the IRA began a bombing campaign against economic targets; by the end of the year there had been 153 explosions. The following year it was responsible for the vast majority of the 1,000 explosions that occurred in Northern Ireland. The strategic aim behind the bombings was to target businesses and commercial premises to deter investment and force the British government to pay compensation, increasing the financial cost of keeping Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom. The IRA also believed that the bombing campaign would tie down British soldiers in static positions guarding potential targets, preventing their deployment in counter-insurgency operations. Loyalist paramilitaries, including the UVF, carried out campaigns aimed at thwarting the IRA's aspirations and maintaining the political union with Britain. Loyalist paramilitaries tended to target Catholics with no connection to the republican movement, seeking to undermine support for the IRA.\nAs a result of escalating violence, internment without trial was introduced by the Northern Ireland government on 9 August 1971, with 342 suspects arrested in the first twenty-four hours. Despite loyalist violence also increasing, all of those arrested were republicans, including political activists not associated with the IRA and student civil rights leaders. The one-sided nature of internment united all Catholics in opposition to the government, and riots broke out in protest across Northern Ireland. Twenty-two people were killed in the next three days, including six civilians killed by the British Army as part of the Ballymurphy massacre on 9 August, and in Belfast 7,000 Catholics and 2,000 Protestants were forced from their homes by the rioting. The introduction of internment dramatically increased the level of violence. In the seven months prior to internment 34 people had been killed, 140 people were killed between the introduction of internment and the end of the year, including thirty soldiers and eleven RUC officers. Internment boosted IRA recruitment, and in Dublin the Taoiseach, Jack Lynch, abandoned a planned idea to introduce internment in the Republic of Ireland. IRA recruitment further increased after Bloody Sunday in Derry on 30 January 1972, when the British Army killed fourteen unarmed civilians during an anti-internment march. Due to the deteriorating security situation in Northern Ireland the British government suspended the Northern Ireland parliament and imposed direct rule in March 1972. The suspension of the Northern Ireland parliament was a key objective of the IRA, in order to directly involve the British government in Northern Ireland, as the IRA wanted the conflict to be seen as one between Ireland and Britain. In May 1972 the Official IRA called a ceasefire, leaving the Provisional IRA as the sole active republican paramilitary organisation. New recruits saw the Official IRA as existing for the purpose of defence in contrast to the Provisional IRA as existing for the purpose of attack, increased recruitment and defections from the Official IRA to the Provisional IRA led to the latter becoming the dominant organisation.\nOn 22 June the IRA announced that a ceasefire would begin at midnight on 26 June, in anticipation of talks with the British government. Two days later \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and \u00d3 Conaill held a press conference in Dublin to announce the \u00c9ire Nua (New Ireland) policy, which advocated an all-Ireland federal republic, with devolved governments and parliaments for each of the four historic provinces of Ireland. This was designed to deal with the fears of unionists over a united Ireland, an Ulster parliament with a narrow Protestant majority would provide them with protection for their interests. The British government held secret talks with the republican leadership on 7 July, with Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in, \u00d3 Conaill, Ivor Bell, Twomey, Gerry Adams, and Martin McGuinness flying to England to meet a British delegation led by William Whitelaw. Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in made demands including British withdrawal, removal of the British Army from sensitive areas, and a release of republican prisoners and an amnesty for fugitives. The British refused and the talks broke up, and the IRA's ceasefire ended on 9 July. In late 1972 and early 1973 the IRA's leadership was being depleted by arrests on both sides of the Irish border, with Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in, \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and McGuinness all imprisoned for IRA membership. Due to the crisis the IRA bombed London in March 1973, as the Army Council believed bombs in England would have a greater impact on British public opinion. This was followed by an intense period of IRA activity in England that left forty-five people dead by the end of 1974, including twenty-one civilians killed in the Birmingham pub bombings.\nFollowing an IRA ceasefire over the Christmas period in 1974 and a further one in January 1975, on 8 February the IRA issued a statement suspending \"offensive military action\" from six o'clock the following day. A series of meetings took place between the IRA's leadership and British government representatives throughout the year, with the IRA being led to believe this was the start of a process of British withdrawal. Occasional IRA violence occurred during the ceasefire, with bombs in Belfast, Derry, and South Armagh. The IRA was also involved in tit for tat sectarian killings of Protestant civilians, in retaliation for sectarian killings by loyalist paramilitaries. By July the Army Council was concerned at the progress of the talks, concluding there was no prospect of a lasting peace without a public declaration by the British government of their intent to withdraw from Ireland. In August there was a gradual return to the armed campaign, and the truce effectively ended on 22 September when the IRA set off 22 bombs across Northern Ireland. The old guard leadership of \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh, \u00d3 Conaill, and McKee were criticised by a younger generation of activists following the ceasefire, and their influence in the IRA slowly declined. The younger generation viewed the ceasefire as being disastrous for the IRA, causing the organisation irreparable damage and taking it close to being defeated. The Army Council was accused of falling into a trap that allowed the British breathing space and time to build up intelligence on the IRA, and McKee was criticised for allowing the IRA to become involved in sectarian killings, as well a feud with the Official IRA in October and November 1975 that left eleven people dead.\nThe \"Long War\".\nFollowing the end of the ceasefire, the British government introduced a new three-part strategy to deal with the Troubles; the parts became known as Ulsterisation, normalisation, and criminalisation. Ulsterisation involved increasing the role of the locally recruited RUC and Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR), a part-time element of the British Army, in order to try to contain the conflict inside Northern Ireland and reduce the number of British soldiers recruited from outside of Northern Ireland being killed. Normalisation involved the ending of internment without trial and Special Category Status, the latter had been introduced in 1972 following a hunger strike led by McKee. Criminalisation was designed to alter public perception of the Troubles, from an insurgency requiring a military solution to a criminal problem requiring a law enforcement solution. As result of the withdrawal of Special Category Status, in September 1976 IRA prisoner Kieran Nugent began the blanket protest in the Maze Prison, when hundreds of prisoners refused to wear prison uniforms.\nIn 1977 the IRA evolved a new strategy which they called the \"Long War\", which would remain their strategy for the rest of the Troubles. This strategy accepted that their campaign would last many years before being successful, and included increased emphasis on political activity through Sinn F\u00e9in. A republican document of the early 1980s states \"Both Sinn F\u00e9in and the IRA play different but converging roles in the war of national liberation. The Irish Republican Army wages an armed campaign... Sinn F\u00e9in maintains the propaganda war and is the public and political voice of the movement\". The 1977 edition of the \"Green Book\", an induction and training manual used by the IRA, describes the strategy of the \"Long War\" in these terms:\nThe \"Long War\" saw the IRA's tactics move away from the large bombing campaigns of the early 1970s, in favour of more attacks on members of the security forces. The IRA's new multi-faceted strategy saw them begin to use armed propaganda, using the publicity gained from attacks such as the assassination of Lord Mountbatten and the Warrenpoint ambush to focus attention on the nationalist community's rejection of British rule. The IRA aimed to keep Northern Ireland unstable, which would frustrate the British objective of installing a power sharing government as a solution to the Troubles.\nThe prison protest against criminalisation culminated in the 1981 Irish hunger strike, when seven IRA and three Irish National Liberation Army members starved themselves to death in pursuit of political status. The hunger strike leader Bobby Sands and Anti H-Block activist Owen Carron were successively elected to the British House of Commons, and two other protesting prisoners were elected to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The electoral successes led to the IRA's armed campaign being pursued in parallel with increased electoral participation by Sinn F\u00e9in. This strategy was known as the \"Armalite and ballot box strategy\", named after Danny Morrison's speech at the 1981 Sinn F\u00e9in ard fheis:\nWho here really believes that we can win the war through the ballot box? But will anyone here object if with a ballot paper in this hand and an Armalite in this hand we take power in Ireland?\nAttacks on high-profile political and military targets remained a priority for the IRA. The Chelsea Barracks bombing in London in October 1981 killed two civilians and injured twenty-three soldiers; a week later the IRA struck again in London with an assassination attempt on Lieutenant General Steuart Pringle, the Commandant General Royal Marines. Attacks on military targets in England continued with the Hyde Park and Regent's Park bombings in July 1982, which killed eleven soldiers and injured over fifty people including civilians. In October 1984 they carried out the Brighton hotel bombing, an assassination attempt on British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, whom they blamed for the deaths of the ten hunger strikers. The bombing killed five members of the Conservative Party attending a party conference including MP Anthony Berry, with Thatcher narrowly escaping death. A planned escalation of the England bombing campaign in 1985 was prevented when six IRA volunteers, including Martina Anderson and the Brighton bomber Patrick Magee, were arrested in Glasgow. Plans for a major escalation of the campaign in the late 1980s were cancelled after a ship carrying 150 tonnes of weapons donated by Libya was seized off the coast of France. The plans, modelled on the Tet Offensive during the Vietnam War, relied on the element of surprise which was lost when the ship's captain informed French authorities of four earlier shipments of weapons, which allowed the British Army to deploy appropriate countermeasures. In 1987 the IRA began attacking British military targets in mainland Europe, beginning with the Rheindahlen bombing, which was followed by approximately twenty other gun and bomb attacks aimed at British Armed Forces personnel and bases between 1988 and 1990.\nPeace process.\nBy the late 1980s, the Troubles were at a military and political stalemate, with the IRA able to prevent the British government imposing a settlement but unable to force their objective of Irish reunification. Sinn F\u00e9in president Adams was in contact with Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) leader John Hume and a delegation representing the Irish government, in order to find political alternatives to the IRA's campaign. As a result of the republican leadership appearing interested in peace, British policy shifted when Peter Brooke, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, began to engage with them hoping for a political settlement. Backchannel diplomacy between the IRA and British government began in October 1990, with Sinn F\u00e9in being given an advance copy of a planned speech by Brooke. The speech was given in London the following month, with Brooke stating that the British government would not give in to violence but offering significant political change if violence stopped, ending his statement by saying:\nThe British government has no selfish, strategic or economic interest in Northern Ireland: Our role is to help, enable and encourage ... Partition is an acknowledgement of reality, not an assertion of national self-interest.\nThe IRA responded to Brooke's speech by declaring a three-day ceasefire over Christmas, the first in fifteen years. Afterwards the IRA intensified the bombing campaign in England, planting 36 bombs in 1991 and 57 in 1992, up from 15 in 1990. The Baltic Exchange bombing in April 1992 killed three people and caused an estimated \u00a3800\u00a0million worth of damage, \u00a3200\u00a0million more than the total damage caused by the Troubles in Northern Ireland up to that point. In December 1992 Patrick Mayhew, who had succeeded Brooke as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, gave a speech directed at the IRA in Coleraine, stating that while Irish reunification could be achieved by negotiation, the British government would not give in to violence. The secret talks between the British government and the IRA via intermediaries continued, with the British government arguing the IRA would be more likely to achieve its objective through politics than continued violence. The talks progressed slowly due to continued IRA violence, including the Warrington bombing in March 1993 which killed two children and the Bishopsgate bombing a month later which killed one person and caused an estimated \u00a31\u00a0billion worth of damage. In December 1993 a press conference was held at London's Downing Street by British prime minister John Major and the Irish Taoiseach Albert Reynolds. They delivered the Downing Street Declaration which conceded the right of Irish people to self-determination, but with separate referendums in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. In January 1994 The Army Council voted to reject the declaration, while Sinn F\u00e9in asked the British government to clarify certain aspects of the declaration. The British government replied saying the declaration spoke for itself, and refused to meet with Sinn F\u00e9in unless the IRA called a ceasefire.\nOn 31 August 1994, the IRA announced a \"complete cessation of military operations\" on the understanding that Sinn F\u00e9in would be included in political talks for a settlement. A new strategy known as \"TUAS\" was revealed to the IRA's rank-and-file following the ceasefire, described as either \"Tactical Use of Armed Struggle\" to the Irish republican movement or \"Totally Unarmed Strategy\" to the broader Irish nationalist movement. The strategy involved a coalition including Sinn F\u00e9in, the SDLP and the Irish government acting in concert to apply leverage to the British government, with the IRA's armed campaign starting and stopping as necessary, and an option to call off the ceasefire if negotiations failed. The British government refused to admit Sinn F\u00e9in to multi-party talks before the IRA decommissioned its weapons, and a standoff began as the IRA refused to disarm before a final peace settlement had been agreed. The IRA regarded themselves as being undefeated and decommissioning as an act of surrender, and stated decommissioning had never been mentioned prior to the ceasefire being declared. In March 1995 Mayhew set out three conditions for Sinn F\u00e9in being admitted to multi-party talks. Firstly the IRA had to be willing to agree to \"disarm progressively\", secondly a scheme for decommissioning had to be agreed, and finally some weapons had to be decommissioned prior to the talks beginning as a confidence building measure. The IRA responded with public statements in September calling decommissioning an \"unreasonable demand\" and a \"stalling tactic\" by the British government.\nOn 9 February 1996 a statement from the Army Council was delivered to the Irish national broadcaster Raidi\u00f3 Teilif\u00eds \u00c9ireann announcing the end of the ceasefire, and just over 90 minutes later the Docklands bombing killed two people and caused an estimated \u00a3100\u2013150\u00a0million damage to some of London's more expensive commercial property. Three weeks later the British and Irish governments issued a joint statement announcing multi-party talks would begin on 10 June, with Sinn F\u00e9in excluded unless the IRA called a new ceasefire. The IRA's campaign continued with the Manchester bombing on 15 June, which injured over 200 people and caused an estimated \u00a3400\u00a0million of damage to the city centre. Attacks were mostly in England apart from the Osnabr\u00fcck mortar attack on a British Army base in Germany. The IRA's first attack in Northern Ireland since the end of the ceasefire was not until October 1996, when the Thiepval barracks bombing killed a British soldier. In February 1997 an IRA sniper team killed Lance Bombardier Stephen Restorick, the last British soldier to be killed by the IRA.\nFollowing the May 1997 UK general election Major was replaced as prime minister by Tony Blair of the Labour Party. The new Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Mo Mowlam, had announced prior to the election she would be willing to include Sinn F\u00e9in in multi-party talks without prior decommissioning of weapons within two months of an IRA ceasefire. After the IRA declared a new ceasefire in July 1997, Sinn F\u00e9in was admitted into multi-party talks, which produced the Good Friday Agreement in April 1998. One aim of the agreement was that all paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland fully disarm by May 2000. The IRA began decommissioning in a process that was monitored by Canadian General John de Chastelain's Independent International Commission on Decommissioning (IICD), with some weapons being decommissioned on 23 October 2001 and 8 April 2002. The October 2001 decommissioning was the first time an Irish republican paramilitary organisation had voluntarily disposed of its arms. In October 2002 the devolved Northern Ireland Assembly was suspended by the British government and direct rule returned, in order to prevent a unionist walkout. This was partly triggered by Stormontgate\u2014allegations that republican spies were operating within the Parliament Buildings and the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI)\u2014and the IRA temporarily broke off contact with de Chastelain. However, further decommissioning took place on 21 October 2003. In the aftermath of the December 2004 Northern Bank robbery, the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform Michael McDowell stated there could be no place in government in either Northern Ireland or the Republic of Ireland for a party that supported or threatened the use of violence, possessed explosives or firearms, and was involved in criminality. At the beginning of February 2005, the IRA declared that it was withdrawing a decommissioning offer from late 2004. This followed a demand from the Democratic Unionist Party, under Paisley, insisting on photographic evidence of decommissioning.\nEnd of the armed campaign.\nOn 28 July 2005, the IRA, with a statement read to the media by S\u00e9anna Walsh, declared an end to the armed campaign, affirming that it would work to achieve its aims solely through peaceful political means and ordering volunteers to end all paramilitary activity. The IRA also stated it would complete the process of disarmament as quickly as possible. The IRA invited two independent witnesses to view the secret disarmament work, Catholic priest Father Alec Reid and Protestant minister Reverend Harold Good. On 26 September 2005, the IICD announced that \"the totality of the IRA's arsenal\" had been decommissioned. Jane's Information Group estimated that the IRA weaponry decommissioned in September 2005 included:\nHaving compared the weapons decommissioned with the British and Irish security forces' estimates of the IRA's arsenal, and because of the IRA's full involvement in the process of decommissioning the weapons, the IICD concluded that all IRA weaponry had been decommissioned. The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Hain, said he accepted the conclusion of the IICD. Since then, there have been occasional claims in the media that the IRA had not decommissioned all of its weaponry. In response to such claims, the Independent Monitoring Commission (IMC) stated in its 10th report that the IRA had decommissioned all weaponry under its control. The report stated that if any weapons had been kept they would have been kept by individuals and against IRA orders.\nIn February 2015, Garda Commissioner N\u00f3ir\u00edn O'Sullivan stated that the Republic of Ireland's police service, the Garda\u00ed, have no evidence that the IRA's military structure remains operational or that the IRA is engaged in criminal activity. In August 2015, George Hamilton, the PSNI chief constable, stated that the IRA no longer exists as a paramilitary organisation. He added that some of its structure remains, but that the group is committed to following a peaceful political path and is not engaged in criminal activity nor directing violence. He pointed out, however, that some of its members have engaged in criminal activity or violence for their own, individual ends. The statement was made in response to the killings of former Belfast IRA commanders Kevin McGuigan and Gerard Davison. McGuigan was shot dead in what was believed to be a revenge killing by former IRA members over the shooting death three months earlier of Davison. The Chief Constable stated there was no evidence that the killing of McGuigan was sanctioned by the IRA leadership. Also in response, the British government commissioned the Assessment on Paramilitary Groups in Northern Ireland. The assessment, concluded in October 2015, was that \"all the main paramilitary groups operating during the Troubles are still in existence, including the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Red Hand Commando, the Ulster Defence Association, the Provisional IRA, and Irish National Liberation Army.\" But, it added, \"the leaderships of the main paramilitary groups [including the IRA's] are committed to peaceful means to achieve their political objectives.\"\nWeaponry and operations.\nIn the early days of the Troubles the IRA was poorly armed: in Derry in early 1972 the IRA's weaponry consisted of six M1 carbines, two Thompson submachine guns, one or two M1 Garand rifles, and a variety of handguns. As a result of black market arms deals and donations from sympathisers, the IRA obtained a large array of weapons such as surface-to-air missiles; M60 machine guns; ArmaLite AR-18, FN FAL, AKM and M16 rifles; DShK heavy machine guns; LPO-50 flamethrowers; and Barrett M90 sniper rifles. The IRA also used a variety of bombs during its armed campaign, such as car and truck bombs, time bombs, and booby traps, using explosives including ANFO and gelignite donated by IRA supporters in the Republic of Ireland and the plastic explosive Semtex donated by the Libyan government. The IRA's engineering department also manufactured a series of improvised mortars in the Republic of Ireland, which by the 1990s were built to a standard comparable to military models. The IRA's development of mortar tactics was a response to the heavy fortifications on RUC and British Army bases; as IRA mortars generally fired indirectly they were able to bypass some perimeter security measures. The mortars used a variety of different firing mechanisms including delay timers, this combined with the disposable nature of the weapons allowed IRA volunteers to reduce the risk of being arrested at the scene.\nThe IRA was mainly active in Northern Ireland, although it also attacked targets in England and mainland Europe, and limited activity also took place in the Republic of Ireland. The IRA's offensive campaign mainly targeted the British Army (including the UDR) and the RUC, with British soldiers being the IRA's preferred target. Other targets included British government officials, politicians, establishment and judicial figures, and senior British Army and police officers. The bombing campaign principally targeted political, economic and military targets, and was described by counter-terrorism expert Andy Oppenheimer as \"the biggest terrorist bombing campaign in history\". Economic targets included shops, restaurants, hotels, railway stations and other public buildings. The IRA was blamed for the Abercorn Restaurant bombing in March 1972, when a bomb exploded without warning killing two women and injuring many people. Due to negative publicity after the Abercorn bombing, the IRA introduced a system of telephoned coded warnings to try to avoid civilian casualties while still causing the intended damage to properties and the economy. Civilian deaths were counter-productive to the IRA, as they provided the British with propaganda coups and affected recruitment and funding. Despite this IRA bombs continued to kill civilians, generally due to IRA mistakes and incompetence or errors in communication. These included the Donegall Street bombing which killed seven people including four civilians, and Bloody Friday, when nine people, five of them civilians, were killed when twenty-two bombs were planted in a one-mile radius of Belfast city centre. Premature explosions were another cause of civilian deaths, such as the Remembrance Day bombing which killed eleven people including ten civilians, and the Shankill Road bombing which killed ten people including eight civilians.\nCasualties.\nThe IRA was responsible for more deaths than any other organisation during the Troubles. Two detailed studies of deaths in the Troubles, the Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN), and the book \"Lost Lives\", differ slightly on the numbers killed by the IRA and the total number of conflict deaths. According to CAIN, the IRA was responsible for 1,705 deaths, about 48% of the total conflict deaths. Of these, 1,009 (about 59%) were members or former members of the British security forces, while 508 (about 29%) were civilians. According to \"Lost Lives\", the IRA was responsible for 1,781 deaths, about 47% of the total conflict deaths. Of these, 944 (about 53%) were members of the British security forces, while 644 (about 36%) were civilians (including 61 former members of the security forces). The civilian figure also includes civilians employed by British security forces, politicians, members of the judiciary, and alleged criminals and informers. Most of the remainder were loyalist or republican paramilitary members, including over 100 IRA members accidentally killed by their own bombs or shot for being security force agents or informers. Overall, the IRA was responsible for 87\u201390% of the total British security force deaths, and 27\u201330% of the total civilian deaths.\nDuring the IRA's campaign in England it was responsible for at least 488 incidents causing 2,134 injuries and 115 deaths, including 56 civilians and 42 British soldiers. Between 275 and 300 IRA members were killed during the Troubles, with the IRA's biggest loss of life in a single incident being the Loughgall ambush in 1987, when eight volunteers attempting to bomb a police station were killed by the British Army's Special Air Service.\nStructure.\nAll levels of the organisation were entitled to send delegates to General Army Conventions. The convention was the IRA's supreme decision-making authority, and was supposed to meet every two years, or every four years following a change to the IRA's constitution in 1986. Before 1969 conventions met regularly, but owing to the difficulty in organising such a large gathering of an illegal organisation in secret, while the IRA's armed campaign was ongoing they were only held in September 1970, October 1986, and October or November 1996. After the 1997 ceasefire they were held more frequently, and are known to have been held in October 1997, May 1998, December 1998 or early 1999, and June 2002. The convention elected a 12-member Executive, which selected seven members, usually from within the Executive, to form the Army Council. Any vacancies on the Executive would then be filled by substitutes previously elected by the convention. For day-to-day purposes, authority was vested in the Army Council which, as well as directing policy and taking major tactical decisions, appointed a chief-of-staff from one of its number or, less often, from outside its ranks.\nThe chief-of-staff would be assisted by an adjutant general as well as a General Headquarters (GHQ) staff, which consisted of a quartermaster general, and directors of finance, engineering, training, intelligence, publicity, operations, and security. GHQ's largest department, the quartermaster general's, accounted for approximately 20% of the IRA's personnel, and was responsible for acquiring weapons and smuggling them to Ireland where they would be hidden in arms dumps, and distributed them to IRA units as needed. The next most important department was engineering, which manufactured improvised explosive devices and improvised mortars. Below GHQ, the IRA was divided into a Northern Command and a Southern Command. Northern Command operated in Northern Ireland as well as the border counties of Donegal, Leitrim, Cavan, Monaghan, and Louth, while Southern Command operated in the remainder of Ireland. In 1977, parallel to the introduction of cell structures at the local level, command of the \"war-zone\" was given to the Northern Command, which facilitated coordinated attacks across Northern Ireland and rapid alterations in tactics. Southern Command consisted of the Dublin Brigade and a number of smaller units in rural areas. Its main responsibilities were support activities for Northern Command, such as importation and storage of arms, providing safe houses, raising funds through robberies, and organising training camps. Another department attached to GHQ but separate from all other IRA structures was the England department, responsible for the bombing campaign in England.\nThe IRA referred to its ordinary members as volunteers (or \"\u00f3glaigh\" in Irish), to reflect the IRA being an irregular army which people were not forced to join and could leave at any time. Until the late 1970s, IRA volunteers were organised in units based on conventional military structures. Volunteers living in one area formed a company as part of a battalion, which could be part of a brigade, such as the Belfast Brigade, Derry Brigade, South Armagh Brigade, and East Tyrone Brigade. In late 1973 the Belfast Brigade restructured, introducing clandestine cells named active service units, consisting of between four and ten members. Similar changes were made elsewhere in the IRA by 1977, moving away from the larger conventional military organisational principle owing to its security vulnerability. The old structures were used for support activities such as policing nationalist areas, intelligence-gathering, and hiding weapons, while the bulk of attacks were carried out by active service units, using weapons controlled by the brigade's quartermaster. The exception to this reorganisation was the South Armagh Brigade, which retained its traditional hierarchy and battalion structure. Only a handful of volunteers from the South Armagh Brigade were convicted of serious offences, and it had fewer arrests than any other area, meaning that the security forces struggled to recruit informers.\nPolitical ideology.\nThe IRA's goal was an all-Ireland democratic socialist republic. Richard English, a professor at Queen's University Belfast, writes that while the IRA's adherence to socialist goals has varied according to time and place, radical ideas, specifically socialist ones, were a key part of IRA thinking. Former IRA volunteer Tommy McKearney states that while the IRA's goal was a socialist republic, there was no coherent analysis or understanding of socialism itself, other than an idea that the details would be worked out following an IRA victory. This was in contrast to the Official IRA and the Irish National Liberation Army, both of which adopted clearly defined Marxist positions. Similarly, the Northern Ireland left-wing politician Eamonn McCann has remarked that the Provisional IRA was considered a non-socialist IRA compared to the Official IRA.\nDuring the 1980s, the IRA's commitment to socialism became more solidified as IRA prisoners began to engage with works of political and Marxist theory by authors such as Frantz Fanon, Che Guevara, Antonio Gramsci, Ho-Chi Minh, and General Giap. Members felt that an Irish version of the Tet Offensive could possibly be the key to victory against the British, pending on the arrival of weapons secured from Libya. However, this never came to pass, and the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989 brought a dogmatic commitment to socialism back into question, as possible socialist allies in Eastern Europe wilted away. In the years that followed, IRA prisoners began to look towards South African politics and the example being set by the African National Congress. Many of the imprisoned IRA members saw parallels between their own struggle and that of Nelson Mandela and were encouraged by Mandela's use of compromise following his ascent to power in South Africa to consider compromise themselves.\nThe Provisionals considered their campaign to be a continuation of events such as the Irish revolutionary period of 1916\u20131923, with IRA leader Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh describing their campaign as \"the current phase of the age-old Irish republican struggle\".\nCategorisation.\nThe IRA is a proscribed organisation in the United Kingdom under the Terrorism Act 2000, and an unlawful organisation in the Republic of Ireland under the Offences Against the State Acts, where IRA volunteers are tried in the non-jury Special Criminal Court. A similar system was introduced in Northern Ireland by the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1973, with a Diplock court consisting of a single judge and no jury. The IRA rejected the authority of the courts in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, and its standing orders did not allow volunteers on trial in a criminal court to enter a plea or recognise the authority of the court, doing so could lead to expulsion from the IRA. These orders were relaxed in 1976 due to sentences in the Republic of Ireland for IRA membership being increased from two years to seven years imprisonment. IRA prisoners in the UK and the Republic of Ireland were granted conditional early release as part of the Good Friday Agreement. IRA members were often refused travel visas to enter the United States, due to previous criminal convictions or because the Immigration and Nationality Act bars the entry of people who are members of an organisation which advocates the overthrow of a government by force.\nAmerican TV news broadcasts used the terms \"activists\", \"guerrillas\", and \"terrorists\" to describe IRA members, while British TV news broadcasts commonly used the term \"terrorists\", particularly the BBC as part of its editorial guidelines published in 1989. Republicans reject the label of terrorism, instead describing the IRA's activity as war, military activity, armed struggle or armed resistance. The IRA prefer the terms freedom fighter, soldier, activist, or volunteer for its members. The IRA has also been described as a \"private army\". The IRA saw the Irish War of Independence as a guerrilla war which accomplished some of its aims, with some remaining \"unfinished business\".\nAn internal British Army document written by General Sir Mike Jackson and two other senior officers was released in 2007 under the Freedom of Information Act. It examined the British Army's 37 years of deployment in Northern Ireland, and described the IRA as \"a professional, dedicated, highly skilled and resilient force\", while loyalist paramilitaries and other republican groups were described as \"little more than a collection of gangsters\".\nStrength and support.\nNumerical strength.\nIt is unclear how many people joined the IRA during the Troubles, as it did not keep detailed records of personnel. Journalists Eamonn Mallie and Patrick Bishop state roughly 8,000 people passed through the ranks of the IRA in the first 20 years of its existence, many of them leaving after arrest, retirement or disillusionment. McGuinness, who held a variety of leadership positions, estimated a total membership of 10,000 over the course of the Troubles. The British Army estimates the IRA had 500 volunteers in July 1971, 130 in Derry and 340 in Belfast, journalist Ed Moloney states by the end of the year the IRA in Belfast had over 1,200 volunteers. After the late 1970s restructure, the British Army estimated the IRA had 500 full-time volunteers. A 1978 British Army report by Brigadier James Glover stated that the restructured IRA did not require the same number of volunteers as the early 1970s, and that a small number of volunteers could \"maintain a disproportionate level of violence\". Journalist Brendan O'Brien states by the late 1980s the IRA had roughly 300 active volunteers and 450 more in support roles, while historian Richard English states in 1988 the IRA was believed to have no more than thirty experienced gunmen and bombers, with a further twenty volunteers with less experience and 500 more in support roles. Moloney estimates in October 1996 the IRA had between 600 and 700 active volunteers.\nSupport from other countries and organisations.\nLibyan leader Colonel Muammar Gaddafi was a supplier of arms to the IRA, donating two shipments of arms in the early 1970s, and another five in the mid-1980s. The final shipment in 1987 was intercepted by French authorities, but the prior four shipments included 1,200 AKM assault rifles, 26 DShK heavy machine guns, 40 general-purpose machine guns, 33 RPG-7 rocket launchers, 10 SAM-7 surface-to-air missiles, 10 LPO-50 flamethrowers, and over two tonnes of plastic explosive Semtex. He also gave $12 million in cash to the IRA.\nIrish Americans (both Irish immigrants and natives of Irish descent) also donated weapons and money. The financial backbone of IRA support in the United States was the Irish Northern Aid Committee (NORAID), founded by Irish immigrant and IRA veteran Michael Flannery. NORAID officially raised money for the families of IRA prisoners but was accused by opponents of being a front for the IRA and being involved in IRA gunrunning. The key IRA transatlantic gunrunning network was run by Irish immigrant and IRA veteran George Harrison, who estimated to have smuggled 2,000\u20132,500 weapons and approximately 1 million rounds of ammunition to Ireland. However, the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested Harrison for IRA arms smuggling in June 1981, thereby blocking the IRA's arms supply from America. This forced the IRA to focus on importing weaponry from its already-established networks in Europe and the Middle East. In addition, Irish American support for the Republican cause began to weaken in the mid-1970s and gradually diminished in the 1980s due to bad publicity surrounding IRA atrocities and NORAID. By 1998, only $3.6 million were raised in America for the Irish Republican cause, in which many historians and scholars agreed such an amount was too small to make an actual difference in the conflict. \nIrish Canadians, Irish Australians, and Irish New Zealanders were also active in supporting the Republican cause. More than A$20,000 were sent per year to the Provisionals from supporters in Australia by the 1990s. Canadian supporters did not just fundraise and import weapons, but also smuggled IRA and Sinn F\u00e9in members into the United States, which, unlike Canada, enacted a visa ban on such members on the basis of advocating violence since the early 1970s. Gear\u00f3id \u00d3 Faole\u00e1n wrote that \"[i]n 1972, inclement weather forced a light aeroplane to reroute to Shannon Airport from Farranfore in County Kerry, where IRA volunteers had been awaiting its arrival. The plane, piloted by a Canadian [IRA supporter], had flown from Libya with at least one cargo of arms that included RPG-7 rocket launchers\" where IRA smuggled these weapons into safe houses for its armed campaign. In 1974, seven Canadian residents (six who were originally from Belfast) were arrested by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for smuggling weapons to the IRA after \"raids in St. Catharines, Tavistock and Toronto and at the U.S. border at Windsor\". Philip Kent, one of those arrested, was discovered in his car for having \"fifteen FN rifles and a .50 calibre machine gun\".\nFormer MI5 agent Willie Carlin said that one of the main reasons why the IRA Army Council did not attack Scotland during the conflict was because doing so would reduce support from Scots and have a negative impact on its fundraising and other activities there. Carlin explained that \"[t]here were politicians in Scotland, a lot of whom were very sympathetic to the nationalist cause, and even the Sinn Fein cause\". He also noted that while much of the money was donated by supporters in Glasgow, funds also came from all over the country, from \"farmers up there who had family and relatives in Ireland\".\nThe IRA had links with the Basque separatist group ETA. Maria McGuire states the IRA received fifty revolvers from ETA in exchange for explosives training. In 1973 the IRA was accused by the Spanish police of providing explosives for the assassination of Spanish prime minister Luis Carrero Blanco in Madrid, and the following year an ETA spokesman told German magazine \"Der Spiegel\" they had \"very good relations\" with the IRA. In 1977 a representative of the Basque political party Euskal Iraultzarako Alderdia attended Sinn F\u00e9in's 1977 ard fheis, and \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh had a close relationship with Basque separatists, regularly visiting the Basque region between 1977 and 1983. The IRA received support from the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in the 1970s, with volunteers attending training camps in the Middle East. In 1977 a shipment of arms from the PLO was seized in Antwerp, Belgium. The shipment included twenty-nine AK-47 assault rifles, twenty-nine French submachine guns, seven RPG-7 rocket launchers and sixty rocket-propelled grenades, two Bren light machine guns, mortars, grenades and ammunition. PLO leader Yasser Arafat distanced himself from the IRA following the assassination of Lord Mountbatten in 1979.\nIn May 1996, the Federal Security Service, Russia's internal security service, accused Estonia of arms smuggling, and claimed that the IRA had bought weapons from arms dealers linked to Estonia's volunteer defence force, Kaitseliit. In 2001, three Irishmen, known as the Colombia Three, were arrested and accused of training Colombian guerrillas, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform stated the IRA was to be paid up to $35\u00a0million to train FARC in bomb-making techniques, including shaped charges, propane bombs, landmines and the construction of mortars. In 2005 a commander in the National Army of Colombia stated IRA techniques were being used all over Colombia by FARC, and British military experts confirmed bombs used by FARC had previously been used by the IRA. The Colombia Three were acquitted at trial in April 2004, before this was reversed at an appeal court in December 2004 although the men had fled the country and returned to Ireland before the appeal court verdict.\nFinancing.\nWhile overseas financial support was generally appreciated, the vast majority of the IRA revenue came from activities in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. Since the Troubles began, the IRA was involved in criminal activities such as robberies, counterfeiting, protection rackets, kidnapping for ransom, fuel laundering and cigarette smuggling in order to fund its armed campaign. The IRA also raised funds by running legitimate businesses such as taxi firms, nightclubs, offices, and nursing homes. British law enforcement estimated that, by the 1990s, the IRA needed \u00a310.5\u00a0million a year to operate. IRA supporters argue that as it was a clandestine organisation it was forced to use extra legal methods of fundraising, which were justified in order to achieve a political goal. However, this activity allowed the British government to portray the IRA as no more than a criminal gang. Armed robberies of banks, trains and small businesses across Ireland were a significant source of funding for the IRA, with over 1,000 raids on post offices in Northern Ireland. The PSNI, the IMC, and the British and Irish governments all accused the IRA of involvement in the biggest bank raid in British history\u2014the 2004 Northern Bank robbery\u2014when \u00a326.5\u00a0million was stolen, which the IRA denied. In April 1987, RUC chief constable John Hermon told government ministers at the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference that \"[i]t costs the IRA \u00a32-\u00a33 million per year to maintain its activity. That amount is no problem to them and they have no shortage of money to purchase weapons.\"\nThe Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee in its 26 June 2002 report stated that \"the importance of overseas donations has been exaggerated and donations from the USA have formed only a small portion of IRA income.\" It identified extortion, fuel laundering, rum-running, tobacco smuggling, armed robbery, and counterfeiting in Ireland and Britain as the primary sources of funding for both Republican and Loyalist militants throughout and after the Troubles, while \"the sums involved [from overseas] [were and] are comparatively small\". The committee estimated that the Provisional IRA made \u00a35\u20138 million a year while spending \u00a31.5m annually to carry out its campaign. One IRA interviewee stated that starting in the 1970s for example:\nBelfast ran itself for years on its [social] clubs. You know the clubs? They formed the clubs, earlier on they formed it and ... the car parks, you know, not building them but taking over areas and running them as car parks. There was no one to say how much you took in and how much you took out and so, you know, if there was twenty-thousand coming in every week you could say there's twelve-thousand coming in and then there's eight-thousand going one way, and you paid your people and say there's so much going every week. And that financed the movement.\nGenerally, the IRA was against drug dealing and prostitution, because it would be unpopular within Catholic communities and for moral reasons. The chief of the RUC Drugs Squad, Kevin Sheehy, said the IRA tried to prevent volunteers being directly involved with drugs, and noted one occasion when an IRA member caught with a small amount of cannabis was \"disowned and humiliated\" in his local area. The IRA targeted drug dealers with punishment shootings and ordered them to leave Ireland, and some were killed using the covername Direct Action Against Drugs. However, there are claims the IRA \"licensed\" certain dealers to operate and forced them to pay protection money. Following the murder of Robert McCartney in 2005, the IRA expelled three IRA volunteers. Adams said at Sinn F\u00e9in's 2005 ard fheis \"There is no place in republicanism for anyone involved in criminality\", while adding \"we refuse to criminalise those who break the law in pursuit of legitimate political objectives\". This was echoed shortly after by an IRA statement issued at Easter, saying that criminality within the ranks would not be tolerated. In 2008, the IMC stated that the IRA was no longer involved in criminality, but that some members have engaged in criminality for their own ends, without the sanction or support of the IRA.\nPopular support.\nSupport for the IRA within nationalist communities and within the Republic of Ireland has fluctuated over the course of the conflict. In September 1979 the Economic and Social Research Institute conducted a wide-ranging survey of attitudes to the IRA in the Republic. Its findings showed that 20.7% broadly supported IRA activities, while 60.5% opposed them. Meanwhile, when respondents were asked whether they sympathised or rejected their motives, 44.8% of respondents expressed some level of sympathy with their motives while 33.5% broadly rejected them.\nA study in 1999 showed amongst Catholics in Northern Ireland, 42% of respondents expressed sympathy with republican violence while 52% said they had no sympathy. The same study found 39.7% of respondents in the Republic of Ireland sympathised with republican violence.\nAccording to a 2022 poll, 69% of Irish nationalists polled believe there was no option but \"violent resistance to British rule during the Troubles\".\nOther activities.\nSectarian attacks.\nThe IRA publicly condemned sectarianism and sectarian attacks, however some IRA members did carry out sectarian attacks. Of those killed by the IRA, Malcolm Sutton classifies 130 (about 7%) of them as sectarian killings of Protestants, 88 of them committed between 1974 and 1976. Unlike loyalists, the IRA denied responsibility for sectarian attacks and the members involved used cover names, such as \"Republican Action Force\", which was used to claim responsibility for the 1976 Kingsmill massacre where ten Protestant civilians were killed in a gun attack. They stated that their attacks on Protestants were retaliation for attacks on Catholics. Many in the IRA opposed these sectarian attacks, but others deemed them effective in preventing similar attacks on Catholics. Robert White, a professor at the Indiana University, states the IRA was generally not a sectarian organisation, and Rachel Kowalski from the Department of War Studies, King's College London states that the IRA acted in a way that was mostly blind to religious diversity.\nProtestants in the rural border areas of counties Fermanagh and Tyrone, where the number of members of the security forces killed was high, viewed the IRA's campaign as ethnic cleansing. Henry Patterson, a professor at the University of Ulster, concludes that while the IRA's campaign was unavoidably sectarian, it did not amount to ethnic cleansing. Although the IRA did not specifically target these people because of their religious affiliation, more Protestants joined the security forces so many people from that community believed the attacks were sectarian. McKearney argues that due to the British government's Ulsterisation policy increasing the role of the locally recruited RUC and UDR, the IRA had no choice but to target them because of their local knowledge, but acknowledges that Protestants viewed this as a sectarian attack on their community.\nVigilantism.\nDuring the Troubles, the IRA took on the role of policing in some nationalist areas of Northern Ireland. Many nationalists did not trust the official police force\u2014the RUC\u2014and saw it as biased against their community. The RUC found it difficult to operate in certain nationalist neighbourhoods and only entered in armoured convoys due to the risk of attack, preventing community policing that could have occurred if officers patrolled on foot. In these neighbourhoods, many residents expected the IRA to act as a policing force, and such policing had propaganda value for the IRA. The IRA also sought to minimise contact between residents and the RUC, because residents might pass on information or be forced to become a police informer. The IRA set up arbitration panels that would adjudicate and investigate complaints from locals about criminal or 'anti-social' activities. First time offenders may have been given a warning, or for more serious offences a curfew may have been imposed. Those responsible for more serious and repeat offences could have been given a punishment beating, or banished from the community. Kneecapping was also used by the IRA as a form of punishment. No punishment attacks have been officially attributed to the IRA since February 2006.\nThe vigilantism of the IRA and other paramilitary organisations has been condemned as \"summary justice\". In January 1971, the IRA and British Army held secret talks aimed at stopping persistent rioting in Ballymurphy. It was agreed that the IRA would be responsible for policing there, but the agreement was short-lived. During the 1975 ceasefire incident centres were set up across Northern Ireland, staffed by Sinn F\u00e9in members who dealt with incidents that might endanger the truce. Residents went there to report crime as well as to make complaints about the security forces. The incident centres were seen by locals as \"IRA police stations\" and gave some legitimacy to the IRA as a policing force. Following the end of the ceasefire the incident centres remained open as Sinn F\u00e9in offices where crime continued to be reported, to be dealt with by the IRA.\nInformers.\nThroughout the Troubles, some members of the IRA passed information to the security forces. In the 1980s, many IRA members were arrested after being implicated by former IRA members known as \"supergrasses\" such as Raymond Gilmour. There have been some high-profile allegations of senior IRA figures having been British informers. In May 2003, an American website named Freddie Scappaticci as being a British spy code-named Stakeknife. Scappaticci was said to be a high-level IRA informer working for the British Army's Force Research Unit, while he was head of the IRA's Internal Security Unit, which interrogated and killed suspected informers. Scappaticci denied being Stakeknife, and involvement in IRA activity. In December 2005, Sinn F\u00e9in member and former IRA volunteer Denis Donaldson appeared at a press conference in Dublin and confessed to being a British spy since the early 1980s. Donaldson, who ran Sinn F\u00e9in's operations in New York during the Northern Ireland peace process, was expelled by the party. On 4 April 2006, Donaldson was shot dead by the Real IRA splinter group at his retreat near Glenties in County Donegal. Other prominent informers include Eamon Collins, Sean O'Callaghan, and Roy McShane, who worked as a driver for the leadership of Sinn F\u00e9in including Adams.\nThe IRA regarded informers as traitors, and a threat to the organisation and lives of its members. Suspected informers were dealt with by the IRA's Internal Security Unit, which carried out an investigation and interrogated the suspects. Following this a court martial would take place, consisting of three members of equal or higher rank than the accused, plus a member of GHQ or the Army Council acting as an observer. Any death sentence would be ratified by the Army Council, who would be informed of the verdict by the observer. The original IRA, as well as all the major paramilitary organisations active during the Troubles, also killed alleged informers. The IRA usually killed informers with a single shot to the head, and left many of their bodies in public to deter other informers. There was also a group of sixteen people known as the Disappeared who were secretly buried between 1972 and 1985, which included alleged informers, agents for the security forces, and people that stole IRA weapons and used them in armed robberies. In March 1999 the IRA apologised for the \"prolonged anguish\" caused to the families of the Disappeared, and stated it had identified the burial places of nine people, including the most high-profile victim, Jean McConville, a Catholic civilian and widowed mother-of-ten. This led to the recovery of three bodies later in 1999, although Jean McConville's body was not recovered until August 2003. As of 2019, the bodies of Columba McVeigh, Joe Lynskey, and undercover British Army intelligence officer Robert Nairac have yet to be recovered.\nSplinter groups.\nFormer IRA volunteers are involved in various dissident republican splinter groups, which are active in the low-level dissident Irish republican campaign. The oldest dissident group is the Continuity IRA, which formed in 1986 following a split in the republican movement, over the decision to allow members, if elected, to take seats in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. This group was inactive for several years while acquiring weapons and finance, their first attack was in 1994 during the Provisional IRA's first ceasefire. The Real IRA was formed in November 1997 when senior Provisional IRA members, including quartermaster-general Michael McKevitt, resigned over acceptance of the Mitchell Principles. The Real IRA is best known for the 1998 Omagh bombing which killed 29 civilians, and the 2009 Massereene Barracks shooting which killed two British soldiers. In 2005/6 some Provisional IRA members defected and formed \u00d3glaigh na h\u00c9ireann, which became active in 2009. This group also included former members of the Irish National Liberation Army and a faction that splintered from the Real IRA. In 2011 a group calling itself \"the IRA\" claimed responsibility for the murder of Ronan Kerr, a Catholic member of the PSNI. The group was believed to have formed in 2008, and included former senior Provisional IRA members unhappy at Sinn F\u00e9in's direction and the peace process. Also in 2008, Republican Action Against Drugs (RAAD) was formed in Derry. This vigilante group's membership included former Provisional IRA members and members of other republican groups. RAAD, \"the IRA\", and some smaller groups merged with the Real IRA in 2012 to form the New IRA.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23300", "revid": "46808612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23300", "title": "Paula Abdul", "text": "American singer and entertainer (born 1962)\nPaula Julie Abdul (born June 19, 1962) is an American singer, dancer, choreographer, actress, and television personality. She began her career as a cheerleader for the Los Angeles Lakers at the age of 18 and later became the head choreographer for the Laker Girls, where she was discovered by the Jacksons. After choreographing music videos for Janet Jackson, Abdul became a choreographer at the height of the music video era and soon thereafter she was signed to Virgin Records. \nAbdul's debut studio album, \"Forever Your Girl\" (1988), became one of the most successful debut albums at that time, selling seven million copies in the United States and setting a record for the most U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 number-one singles from a debut album: \"Straight Up\", \"Forever Your Girl\", \"Cold Hearted\", and \"Opposites Attract\". Her second album, \"Spellbound\" (1991), scored the number-one singles \"Rush Rush\" and \"The Promise of a New Day\". With six number-one singles on Hot 100, Abdul tied Diana Ross for the third-most chart-toppers among female solo artists at the time. As of 2025, Abdul places seventh along with Diana Ross and Lady Gaga for the most number-one singles by female artists in the U.S. to date.\nAbdul was one of the original judges on the television series \"American Idol\" from 2002 to 2009, and has since appeared as a judge on \"The X Factor\", \"Live to Dance\", \"So You Think You Can Dance\", and \"The Masked Dancer\". She received choreography credits in numerous films, including \"Can't Buy Me Love\" (1987), \"The Running Man\" (1987), \"Coming to America\" (1988), \"Action Jackson\" (1988), \"The Doors\" (1991), \"Jerry Maguire\" (1996), and \"American Beauty\" (1999). She received 17 MTV Video Music Award nominations, winning five, as well as receiving the Grammy Award for Best Music Video for \"Opposites Attract\" in 1991. She received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Choreography twice for her work on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\", and her own performance at the American Music Awards in 1990. Abdul was honored with her own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and is the first entertainer to be honored with the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards' Hall of Fame Award.\nEarly life.\nAbdul was born in San Fernando, California. She is Jewish: her father, Harry Abdul, is of Syrian Jewish heritage and was born in Aleppo, Syria, raised in Brazil and emigrated to the United States. Her mother, Lorraine (Rykiss), was a concert pianist of Jewish heritage, from Minnedosa, Manitoba, Canada. Abdul has an older sister named Wendy. As an avid dancer, Abdul was inspired towards a show business career by Gene Kelly in the film \"Singin' in the Rain\".\nAbdul began taking dance lessons at an early age in ballet, jazz, and tap. She attended Van Nuys High School, where she was a cheerleader and an honor student. At 15, she received a scholarship to a dance camp near Palm Springs, and in 1978, appeared in a low-budget independent musical film, \"Junior High School\". In 1980, she graduated from Van Nuys High School. Abdul studied broadcasting at the California State University, Northridge. During her freshman year, she was selected from a pool of 700 candidates for the cheerleading squad of the Los Angeles Lakers NBA basketball team\u2014the famed Laker Girls. Within a year, she became head choreographer. She remained with the Laker Girls until 1986.\nCareer.\n1982\u20131986: Career beginnings.\nAbdul was discovered by the Jacksons, after a few of the band members had watched her while attending a Los Angeles Lakers game. She was signed to do the choreography for the video to their single \"Torture\". Abdul recalled feeling intimidated by having to tell the Jacksons how to dance, stating that she was \"not quite sure how [she] got through that.\" The success of the choreography in the video led to Abdul's career as choreographer of music videos, notably Janet Jackson's \"What Have You Done for Me Lately\", \"Nasty\", \"When I Think of You\" and \"Control\" videos. It was also due to the success of the video that Abdul was chosen to be the choreographer for the Jacksons' \"Victory\" tour. Abdul also choreographed sequences for the giant keyboard scene involving Tom Hanks's character in \"Big\" (1988).\n1987\u20131999: \"Forever Your Girl\", \"Spellbound\" and \"Head over Heels\".\nIn 1987, Abdul used her savings to make a singing demo. Soon thereafter, she was signed to the newly formed Virgin Records America by Jeff Ayeroff, who had worked in marketing at A&amp;M Records with Janet Jackson. Although she was a skilled dancer and choreographer, Abdul was a relatively untrained singer, and worked with various coaches and record producers to develop her vocal ability. She has a mezzo-soprano vocal range. Ayeroff recalled signing Abdul to a recording contract years later, stating: \"She said, 'I can sing, you know. I want to do an album.' Paula's in our industry. Here's someone with a personality and she's gorgeous, and she can dance. If she can sing, she could be a star. So she went into the studio and cut a demo record and she could sing.\"\nAbdul's debut studio album, \"Forever Your Girl\" (1988), would become the most successful debut album in history at that time, reaching number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart after 64 weeks (where it would spend 10 weeks at number one), and set a record for the most singles from a debut album to reach number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart in the United States, with four: \"Straight Up\", \"Forever Your Girl\", \"Cold Hearted\", and \"Opposites Attract\". The album was later certified 7\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. A remix album, \"\", was also released and reached number seven in the United States, becoming one of the most successful remix albums to date. At the 32nd Grammy Awards, Abdul won her first Grammy for Best Music Video for \"Opposites Attract\". She was also nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for \"Straight Up\", but lost to Bonnie Raitt's \"Nick of Time\". In 1991, singer Yvette Marine filed a lawsuit against Abdul and the Virgin label, alleging that it was her vocals that were used on several tracks from \"Forever Your Girl\", most notably \"Opposites Attract\". A jury sided with Abdul and the label two years later in 1993, rejecting Marine's claim to credit and copyright compensation.\nAbdul saw continued success with her second studio album \"Spellbound\" (1991), which saw two additional number-one singles: \"Rush Rush\" and \"The Promise of a New Day\". A third single \"Blowing Kisses in the Wind\" reached number six for three consecutive weeks. \"Spellbound\" retained the dance-pop sound from \"Forever Your Girl\" and introduced elements of R&amp;B, and sold 7 million copies worldwide. The music video for \"Rush Rush\" featured a \"Rebel Without a Cause\" motif, starring Keanu Reeves in the James Dean role. The album's other singles, \"Vibeology\" and \"Will You Marry Me?\", saw moderate success on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, reaching the top 20. In 1991, Abdul starred in a popular Diet Coke commercial in which she danced with a digital image of her idol, a young Gene Kelly. Abdul was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in December 1991. Abdul promoted \"Spellbound\" through the Under My Spell Tour, which was named by an MTV contest for fans. The tour was nearly cancelled due to an accident during rehearsals, but began on schedule in October 1991 and concluded in August 1992.\nAfter her initial period of professional success, Abdul's career entered a brief hiatus while she sought treatment for personal and physical issues. Her third studio album, \"Head over Heels\" (1995), retained both pop and R&amp;B elements and saw moderate commercial success, peaking at number 18 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart in the United States and later becoming her lowest-selling release. The lead single from \"Head over Heels\", \"My Love Is for Real\", featured a fusion of R&amp;B and traditional Middle Eastern instruments, and was performed with Yemeni-Israeli singer Ofra Haza. Its accompanying \"Lawrence of Arabia\"-inspired music video was played in theaters across the world as a prologue to the film \"Clueless\". The single performed well on the \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Music/Club Play chart, where it reached number one, and peaked at number 28 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Crazy Cool\" and \"Ain't Never Gonna Give You Up\" served as the album's second and third singles. To date, \"Head over Heels\" has sold over 500,000 copies in the United States. In 1995, Abdul released a dance workout video entitled \"Paula Abdul's Get Up and Dance!\" (re-released on DVD in 2003), a fast-paced, hip-hop style workout. In 1997, Abdul co-wrote a song called \"Spinning Around\" with record producer and composer Kara DioGuardi, which was intended to be her comeback single from a new album, but the plan never materialized and the song was later given to Kylie Minogue. That year, Abdul appeared in the ABC television film \"Touched By Evil\", playing a businesswoman who discovers that her boyfriend is a serial rapist. In 1998, she released a second workout video called \"Cardio Dance\" (re-released on DVD in 2000). Thereafter, Abdul served as the choreographer for several film and theater productions, including the 1998 musical \"Reefer Madness\" and the cheerleading scenes in \"American Beauty\" (1999).\n2000\u20132009: \"American Idol\", \"Hey Paula\" and return to music.\nIn 2000, Virgin Records, with whom Abdul was already no longer affiliated, released the first of two compilation albums by Abdul, \"\". Abdul co-produced the 2001 pilot for \"Skirts\", an MTV television series about a high school cheerleading squad; Abdul was also set to appear as the head coach. The pilot never aired. In 2002, she began appearing as one of three judges on the Fox reality competition series \"American Idol\", where she won praise as a sympathetic and compassionate judge and mentor. She seemed especially kind compared to fellow judge Simon Cowell, who was often blunt in his appraisals of the contestants' performances. When she realized that Cowell's over-the-top judging style was heartbreaking for many young contestants, Abdul was horrified and she considered leaving the series. Although their differences often resulted in heated on-air exchanges and confrontations, Cowell says he played a major role in convincing Abdul not to leave the series. While serving as a judge on \"American Idol\", Abdul accepted a second assignment as reporter for \"Entertainment Tonight\". In December 2005, Abdul launched a cheerleading/fitness/dance DVD series called \"Cardio Cheer,\" which is marketed to children and teenage girls involved with cheerleading and dance. Abdul also choreographed The King's touchdown celebration, as seen in a string of Burger King television commercials that aired during the 2005\u201306 NFL season. In 2006, Abdul appeared on the third series of \"The X Factor\" UK as a guest judge during the auditions, sitting alongside judges Cowell, Sharon Osbourne and Louis Walsh.\nA second compilation album, \"\", was released in 2007 by the Virgin label, who also made all of Abdul's releases under their label available for digital download on iTunes. That year, Bravo began airing a reality television series centered around Abdul, \"Hey Paula,\" which followed her through her day-to-day life. Abdul's behavior as depicted on the series was described as \"erratic\" by comedian Rosie O'Donnell and was criticized by audiences and critics, and \"Hey Paula\" was cancelled after a single season.\nIn 2007, Paula Abdul Jewelry launched its nationwide consumer debut on QVC, with the tagline \"fashion jewelry designed with heart and soul.\" Abdul's first QVC appearance resulted in 15 sellouts of her first jewelry collection involving more than 34,000 pieces. In 2008, Abdul returned to music charts for the first time in nearly thirteen years with the single \"Dance Like There's No Tomorrow\", the first track on the album \"Randy Jackson's Music Club Vol. 1\". The song debuted on \"On Air with Ryan Seacrest\", and Abdul performed it during the pre-game show for Super Bowl XLII. \"Dance Like There's No Tomorrow\" was a modest comeback hit for Abdul, peaking at number 62 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number 2 on the \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Music/Club Play chart. The moderate success led to reports of Abdul beginning work on a new album, but this never materialized. Abdul also made a brief guest appearance on an episode of the British television series \"Hotel Babylon\", which aired in the United Kingdom in February 2008.\nIn January 2009, Abdul hosted \"RAH!,\" a cheerleading competition on MTV. \"RAH!\" featured five collegiate squads competing in a series of challenges with Abdul crowning one the winner. In May 2009, Abdul debuted her latest original song to date, \"I'm Just Here for the Music\" (originally an unreleased song from Kylie Minogue's ninth album \"Body Language\") on the Ryan Seacrest Radio KIIS-FM show and performed the single on the \"American Idol\". \"I'm Just Here for the Music\" reached number 87 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, becoming Abdul's fifteenth song to appear on the chart.\nIn an interview with the \"Los Angeles Times\" in July 2009, Abdul's manager David Sonenberg told the newspaper that, \"Very sadly, it does not appear that she's going to be back on \"Idol\".\" This came about as a result of stalled negotiations between Abdul and the series. In August, after numerous contract negotiations, Abdul confirmed that she would not return to \"Idol\" for its ninth season. \"The Times\" cited reports Abdul had been earning as much as $5 million per season and that she was reportedly seeking as much as $20 million to return. Abdul was replaced by Ellen DeGeneres. Abdul claimed her departure from \"Idol\" was not about money, but that she had to stand on principle.\n2010\u20132015: \"Live to Dance\", \"The X Factor\" and \"So You Think You Can Dance\".\nIn January 2010, Abdul presented a Lifetime Achievement Award to choreographer Julie McDonald at the 11th Anniversary show of . In November, Abdul launched and co-founded AuditionBooth.com, a website that allows aspiring talents to connect with casting directors, producers, and managers.\nIn January 2011, Abdul began appearing on the short-lived CBS reality competition series \"Live to Dance\", where she was also an executive producer. Abdul said that unlike \"American Idol\", \"Live to Dance\" is less about \"competition\" and more about \"celebration\". After its first season of seven episodes, it was cancelled by CBS. In May 2011, it was announced that Abdul would rejoin Cowell on the first season of the American edition of \"The X Factor\". In January 2012, Abdul announced that she would not return as a judge for the series' second season. Abdul was replaced by Britney Spears. In October 2012, Abdul served as a guest judge during week four of the \"All-Stars version\" of \"Dancing with the Stars\". In April 2013, Abdul appeared on the Top 5 results show of season 12 of \"American Idol\" to compliment contestant Candice Glover on her performance of \"Straight Up\".\nOn July 9, 2013, Abdul was a guest judge on \"So You Think You Can Dance\" (season ten). In October 2013, Abdul was named as a judge on the revamped \"So You Think You Can Dance Australia\", which aired on Australia's Network Ten from February 9 through May 1, 2014. Abdul was present as a permanent member of the judge's panel for all episodes of this season. She later became a permanent judge of the American version starting with its twelfth season. In January 2017, Abdul announced that she would not be returning as a judge for its fourteenth season because of her tour schedule.\nIn April 2014, Abdul was a guest judge on \"RuPaul's Drag Race\" (episode \"Queens of Talk\"), which reunited her with previous \"Idol\" contestant Adore Delano. In June 2014, Abdul made a cameo appearance on the Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\" and shared scenes with established character Karl Kennedy (Alan Fletcher). In 2015, Abdul made a guest appearance on the comedy sitcom \"Real Husbands of Hollywood\" on its season 4 premiere. She was shown in a comedic scene with Arsenio Hall where she was trying to kick Hall out of her pool house. On November 16, 2015, Abdul along with Charles \"Chucky\" Klapow, Renee Richie, and Nakul Dev Mahajan won the World Choreography Award for Outstanding Choreography Digital Format for the video 'Check Yourself'. On November 22, 2015, Abdul and Donnie Wahlberg presented Favorite Female Artist \u2013 Pop/Rock at the 43rd American Music Awards; the award Abdul won at the 1990 AMAs, presented to her by Wahlberg.\n2016\u2013present: Return to performing, Las Vegas residency.\nOn August 6, 2016, Abdul performed a full headline set for the first time in 26 years at the Mixtape Festival in Hershey, Pennsylvania. In November 2016, New Kids on the Block announced that Abdul would be touring with them and Boyz II Men on their Total Package Tour in 2017; her first tour in 25 years. The tour began on May 12 in Columbus, Ohio, and concluded on July 16, 2017, in Hollywood, Florida, for a total of 47 shows. In an interview with \"Elle\" magazine, Abdul stated there were \"many reasons\" she decided to return to the stage after over two decades, saying: \"I took a long break and had sustained some injuries in the past. Then I returned to television with \"American Idol\" and that took up a good decade of my life. Then I went out to do some more television, as well. I always wanted to get back on stage, because I missed it. I wanted to get back in close contact with the people who have supported me all throughout my career and be able to see them again. Plus, I was getting asked all the time if I would ever do it again! I finally said, You know what, I want to and I'm going to make it a priority. I'm really passionate about it and it's fun, and I want to connect with my fans around the country.\"\nIn July 2018, Abdul announced that she would embark on a solo headlining tour across North America that fall, entitled Straight Up Paula!, as part of the celebration of the 30th anniversary of her debut studio album \"Forever Your Girl\". The tour began in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on October 18 and concluded in Los Angeles, California, on June 7, 2019, for a total of 25 shows.\nAbdul performed a medley of her greatest hits at the 2019 \"Billboard\" Music Awards, closing out the show. On May 1, 2019, Abdul announced her first Las Vegas residency, . The residency's first leg began on August 13, the first of 20 dates, ending in January 2020. On June 7, 2019, Abdul opened LA Pride.\nAbdul also performed at the fourteenth series finale of \"America's Got Talent\" with Light Balance Kids, Brian King Joseph, and Tyler Butler-Figueroa to surprise Cowell. In October 2020, it was announced that Abdul would serve as a panelist for Fox's reality competition, \"The Masked Dancer\". In April 2021, ABC announced that Abdul would return to \"American Idol\" as a guest-judge while Luke Bryan was out sick after being diagnosed with COVID-19. She returned as a guest judge on \"Dancing with the Stars\" for Music Video Night in its 32nd season. In 2023, Abdul joined the producing team of the Broadway musical \"How to Dance in Ohio\". She also appeared as a contestant on \"Celebrity Wheel of Fortune\". In 2024, Abdul co-headlines The Magic Summer Tour. Her Straight Up! to Canada Tour that was scheduled to commence in September 2024 has since been cancelled.\nOn 2 March 2025, Abdul was a panel judge in the first round of the tenth series of Let's Dance, Slovak adaptation of Strictly Come Dancing, presented by TV Mark\u00edza. The show was broadcast from Incheba in Bratislava, Slovakia.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nAbdul married actor Emilio Estevez in 1992, and filed for divorce in 1994. In 1995, Abdul stated that the reason for their divorce was that she wanted children and Estevez, who had two children from a previous relationship, did not. Abdul married clothing designer Brad Beckerman in 1996, at the New England Carousel Museum in Bristol, Connecticut. They filed for divorce in 1998, after 17 months of marriage, citing irreconcilable differences.\nBeliefs.\nAbdul is observant in her Jewish faith, and is proud of her heritage. She once stated, \"My father is a Syrian Jew whose family immigrated to Brazil. My mother is Canadian with Jewish roots. My dream is to go to Israel for a real holiday.\" In November 2006, when Israeli Tourism Minister Isaac Herzog invited her to Israel, Abdul responded with a hug, adding, \"I will come; you have helped me make a dream come true.\" In 2013, at the age of 51, Abdul had her bat mitzvah in Safed, Israel, at the International Center for Tzfat Kabbalah, a museum and spiritual retreat for the study of Kabbalah \u2013 Jewish mysticism. In 2003, Abdul was reported as a practitioner of Transcendental Meditation.\nAbdul is a dog lover who raised awareness about National Guide Dog Month in May 2009, and she teamed up with Dick Van Patten to help people with blindness to have more independence through the help of guide dogs. She does not wear real fur.\nHealth.\nAbdul has claimed that she was seriously injured in a plane crash in Iowa in 1992 during her Under My Spell Tour, necessitating fifteen cervical spinal surgeries. The accuracy of her claim has been questioned by some publications, such as \"Jezebel\", in part because the National Transportation Safety Board, which is tasked with investigating all aviation accidents in the United States, has no record of an accident matching Abdul's description. In response to skepticism, she said in 2020, \"There are seven other people that were on the plane, who were in that plane accident with me. So, I really don't care what people have to say. I don't.\" No one else who may have been aboard the flight has publicly corroborated Abdul's account, though she claims she had them sign non-disclosure agreements.\nIn 1994, Abdul sought treatment for bulimia nervosa, which she revealed years later had first developed during her teens and only intensified after she became a pop star. She said: \"I learned at a very early age I didn't fit in physically. I learned through years of rejections from auditions. I would ask myself, 'Why can't I be tall and skinny like the other dancers?' I felt nervous and out of control, and all I could think about was food. Food numbed the fear and anxiety. I'd eat and then run to the bathroom.\"\nIn 2005, Abdul said she had been diagnosed in November 2004 with a neurological disorder causing chronic pain, reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), following a \"cheerleading accident\" at age 17. She discussed the diagnosis in response to allegations of drug use.\nIn April 2006, Abdul filed a report at a Hollywood police station stating she had been a victim of battery at a private party at about 1 am on April 2, according to LAPD spokesman Lt. Paul Vernon. \"According to Abdul, the man at the party argued with her, grabbed her by the arm and threw her against a wall,\" Vernon said. \"She said she had sustained a concussion and spinal injuries.\"\nAllegations of drug use.\nSubstance abuse allegations arose as the result of what some described as \"erratic behavior\" by Abdul during episodes of \"American Idol\". After reading these allegations on message boards, Abdul told \"People\" in April 2005 about her RSD diagnosis; she added that she was pain-free following treatment with anti-inflammatory medication. Allegations arose again in January 2007 when videos circulated on the Internet of Abdul appearing to sway in her chair and slur her speech during a set of interviews. Abdul's publicist attributed this to fatigue and technical difficulties during the recording of the interviews. It was revealed on the Bravo show \"Hey Paula\", which had followed Abdul with a video camera prior to the interviews, that Abdul had not been sleeping, perhaps suffering from some mild form of insomnia. In February 2007, Abdul told \"Us Weekly\" that she had never been drunk or used illegal drugs, and called the allegations \"lies\".\nIn May 2009, \"Ladies' Home Journal\" posted an article on its website that said that Abdul told them she stayed at the La Costa Resort and Spa in Carlsbad, California, for three days the previous year to recover from physical dependence on prescription pain medications. The medications, prescribed due to injuries and her RSD diagnosis, included a pain patch, nerve medication, and a muscle relaxant. According to the article, Abdul said the medications made her \"get weird\" at times and that she suffered from physical withdrawal symptoms during her recovery. Later that same week, in an interview with Detroit radio station WKQI, Abdul rejected the article's accuracy. She told the radio station she never checked into a rehab clinic and never had a drug abuse problem.\n2004 car crash.\nIn December 2004, Abdul was driving her Mercedes-Benz on a Los Angeles-area freeway when she changed lanes and hit another vehicle, but did not stop or render assistance. The driver and passenger took a photograph with a cell phone camera and wrote down the license plate number of the car, which was traced to Abdul. In March 2005, Abdul was fined US$900 and given 24 months of informal probation after pleading \"nolo contendere\" (no contest) to misdemeanor hit-and-run driving. She was ordered to pay US$775 for damage to the other car.\n2005 accusations by Corey Clark.\nIn May 2005, ABC's \"Primetime Live\" reported claims by season 2 \"American Idol\" contestant Corey Clark that he and Abdul had had an affair during that season, and that she had coached him on how to succeed in the competition. Some considered Clark's timing suspicious as he was marketing a CD and trying to get a book deal, but Clark said that his career was being prejudiced because of his relationship with Abdul, and that is why he came forward with the information to clear his name.\nFor the most part, Abdul refused to comment on Clark's allegations. Simon Cowell came to Abdul's defense, stating, \"It was just somebody using her to get a lot of publicity for an appalling record, full stop.\" Abdul appeared in a \"Saturday Night Live\" skit, making light of the situation. In August 2005, the Fox network confirmed that Abdul would be returning to the show, as the investigation had found \"insufficient evidence that the communications between Mr. Clark and Ms. Abdul in any way aided his performance\".\n2008 stalking incident.\nOn November 11, 2008, a 30-year-old woman named Paula Goodspeed was found dead in her car outside of Abdul's Los Angeles home in California. The death was ruled a suicide by drug overdose, and she was found surrounded by prescription pills, along with photos and CDs of Abdul. Goodspeed was an obsessive fan of Abdul, having legally changed her name to Paula, drawn many pictures of her, sent her flowers and auditioned for Abdul on season 5 of \"American Idol\" in 2005 at a stop in Austin, Texas, before being dismissed from the show. Goodspeed had been accused in the press of being a celebrity stalker but her relatives disputed the claim.\n2023 sexual assault lawsuit against Nigel Lythgoe.\nOn December 29, 2023, Abdul filed a lawsuit accusing producer Nigel Lythgoe of sexual assault when they worked together on \"American Idol\" in the 2000s. Lythgoe denied the allegations. It was reported in December 2024 that the case had been settled. Abdul commented on the settlement, \"I am grateful that this chapter has successfully come to a close and is now something I can now put behind me,\" while expressing optimism that her experience could inspire women facing similar obstacles.\nTours and residencies.\nHeadlining\nCo-headlining\nResidency\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23301", "revid": "32", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23301", "title": "Project Gutenberg", "text": "Online digital book library\nProject Gutenberg (PG) is a volunteer effort to digitize and archive cultural works, as well as to \"encourage the creation and distribution of eBooks.\" It was founded in 1971 by American writer Michael S. Hart and is the oldest digital library. Most of the items in its collection are the full texts of books or individual stories in the public domain. All files can be accessed for free under an open format layout, available on almost any computer. As of 2024[ [update]], Project Gutenberg had reached over 75,999 items in its collection of free eBooks.\nThe releases are available in plain text as well as other formats, such as HTML, EPUB, and MOBI. Most releases are in the English language, but many non-English works are also available. There are multiple affiliated projects that provide additional content, including region- and language-specific works. Project Gutenberg is closely affiliated with Distributed Proofreaders, an Internet-based community for proofreading scanned texts.\nProject Gutenberg is named after the inventor Johannes Gutenberg, whose works in developing printing technology led to an increase in the mass availability of books and other text.\nHistory.\nMichael S. Hart began Project Gutenberg in 1971 with the digitization of the United States Declaration of Independence. Hart, a student at the University of Illinois, obtained access to a Xerox Sigma V mainframe computer in the university's Materials Research Lab. Through friendly operators, he received an account with a virtually unlimited amount of computer time; its value at that time has since been variously estimated at $100,000 or $100,000,000. Hart explained he wanted to \"give back\" this gift by doing something one could consider to be of great value. His initial goal was to make the 10,000 most consulted books available to the public at little or no charge by the end of the 20th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On July 4, 1971, after being inspired by a free printed copy of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, he decided to type the text into a computer, and to transmit it to other users on the computer network.\u2014\u200a\nThis computer was one of the 15 nodes on ARPANET, the computer network that would become the Internet. Hart believed one day the general public would be able to access computers and decided to make works of literature available in electronic form for free. He used a copy of the United States Declaration of Independence in his backpack, and this became the first Project Gutenberg e-text. He named the project for Johannes Gutenberg, the fifteenth century German printer who propelled the movable type printing press revolution.\nBy the mid-1990s, Hart was running Project Gutenberg from Illinois Benedictine College. More volunteers had joined the effort. He manually entered all of the text until 1989 when image scanners and optical character recognition software improved and became more available, making book scanning more feasible. Hart later came to an arrangement with Carnegie Mellon University, which agreed to administer Project Gutenberg's finances. As the volume of e-texts increased, volunteers began to take over the project's day-to-day operations that Hart had run.\nItalian volunteer Pietro Di Miceli developed and administered the first Project Gutenberg website and started the development of the Project online Catalog. In his ten years in this role (1994\u20132004), the Project web pages won a number of awards, often being featured in \"best of the Web\" listings, contributing to the project's popularity.\nStarting in 2004, an improved online catalog made Project Gutenberg content easier to browse, access and hyperlink. Project Gutenberg is now hosted by ibiblio at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.\nHart died on 6 September 2011 at his home in Urbana, Illinois, at the age of 64.\nScope of collection.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], Project Gutenberg claimed over 75,999 items in its collection, with an average of over 30 new e-books being added each week. These are primarily works of literature from the Western cultural tradition. In addition to literature such as novels, poetry, short stories and drama, Project Gutenberg also has cookbooks, reference works and issues of periodicals. The Project Gutenberg collection also has a few non-text items such as audio files, movies, and music-notation files. Most releases are in English, but there are also significant numbers in many other languages.\nWhenever possible, Gutenberg releases are available in plain text, mainly using US-ASCII character encoding but frequently extended to ISO-8859-1 (needed to represent accented characters in French and Scharfes s in German, for example). Besides being copyright-free, the requirement for a Latin (character set) text version of the release had been a criterion of Michael Hart's since the founding of Project Gutenberg, as he believed it was the format most likely to be readable in the extended future. Out of necessity, this criterion has had to be extended further for the sizable collection of texts in East Asian languages such as Chinese and Japanese now in the collection, where UTF-8 is used instead.\nOther formats may be released as well when submitted by volunteers. The most common non-ASCII format is HTML, which allows markup and illustrations to be included. Some project members and users have requested more advanced formats, believing them to be easier to read. But some formats that are not easily editable, such as PDF, are generally not considered to fit with the goals of Project Gutenberg.\nPreviously Project Gutenberg supported two other source formats: customized versions of the Text Encoding Initiative standard (beginning in 2005) and reStructuredText (beginning in 2011).\nBeginning in 2009, the Project Gutenberg catalog began offering auto-generated alternate file formats, including HTML (when not already provided), EPUB and plucker.\nIdeals.\nMichael Hart said in 2004, \"The mission of Project Gutenberg is simple: 'To encourage the creation and distribution of ebooks'\". His goal was \"to provide as many e-books in as many formats as possible for the entire world to read in as many languages as possible\". Likewise, a project slogan is to \"break down the bars of ignorance and illiteracy\", because its volunteers aim to continue spreading public literacy and appreciation for the literary heritage just as public libraries began to do in the late 19th century.\nProject Gutenberg is intentionally decentralized; there is no selection policy dictating what texts to add. Instead, individual volunteers work on what they are interested in or have available. The Project Gutenberg collection is intended to preserve items for the long term, so they cannot be lost by any one localized accident. In an effort to ensure this, the entire collection is backed-up regularly and mirrored on servers in many different locations.\nCopyright.\nProject Gutenberg is careful to verify the status of its eBooks according to United States copyright law. Material is added to the Project Gutenberg archive only after it has received a copyright clearance, and records of these clearances are saved for future reference. Project Gutenberg does not claim new copyright on titles it publishes. Instead, it encourages their free reproduction and distribution.\nMost books in the Project Gutenberg collection are distributed as public domain under United States copyright law. There are also a few copyrighted texts, such as those of science fiction author Cory Doctorow, that Project Gutenberg distributes with permission. These are subject to further restrictions as specified by the copyright holder, although they generally tend to be licensed under Creative Commons.\n\"Project Gutenberg\" is a trademark of the organization, and the mark cannot be used in commercial or modified redistributions of public domain texts from the project. There is no legal impediment to the reselling of works in the public domain if all references to Project Gutenberg are removed, but Gutenberg contributors have questioned the appropriateness of directly and commercially reusing content that has been formatted by volunteers. There have been instances of books being stripped of attribution to the project and sold for profit in the Kindle Store and other booksellers, one being the 1906 book \"Fox Trapping\".\nFrom 2018 to 2021, the Project Gutenberg website was not accessible within Germany, as a result of a court order from S. Fischer Verlag regarding the works of Heinrich Mann, Thomas Mann and Alfred D\u00f6blin. Although they were in the public domain in the United States, the German court (Frankfurt am Main Regional Court) recognized the infringement of copyrights still active in Germany, and asserted that the Project Gutenberg website was under German jurisdiction because it hosts content in the German language and is accessible in Germany. This judgment was confirmed by the Frankfurt Court of Appeal on 30 April 2019 (11 U 27/18). The Frankfurt Court of Appeal has not given permission for a further appeal to the Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof), however, an application for permission to appeal has been filed with the Federal Court of Justice. As of 4 October 2020 that application was still pending (Federal Court of Justice I ZR 97/19). According to Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, \"In October 2021, the parties reached a settlement agreement. Under the terms of the agreement, Project Gutenberg eBooks by the three authors will be blocked from Germany until their German copyright expires. Under the terms of the settlement, the all-Germany block is no longer in place. Other terms of the settlement are confidential.\"\nThe Project Gutenberg website has been blocked in Italy since May 2020, as part of a larger effort to block websites that publish newspapers and journals that are protected by copyright in Italy.\nCriticism.\nThe text files use the format of plain text encoded in UTF-8 and are typically wrapped at 65\u201370 characters, with paragraphs separated by a double line break. In 2000, this presentation was criticized as \"bland and difficult to read on screen\". Project Gutenberg attempts to address this by making many texts available in HTML, ePub, and PDF versions as well. HTML versions of older texts are autogenerated versions. Another not-for-profit project, Standard Ebooks, aims to address these issues with its collection of public domain titles that are formatted and styled. It corrects issues related to design and typography.\nIn December 1994, Project Gutenberg was criticized by the Text Encoding Initiative for failing to include documentation or discussion of the decisions unavoidable in preparing a text, or in some cases, not documenting which of several (conflicting) versions of a text has been the one digitized.\nThe selection of works (and editions) available has been determined by popularity, ease of scanning, being out of copyright, and other factors; this would be difficult to avoid in any crowd-sourced project.\nIn March 2004, an initiative was begun by Michael Hart and John S. Guagliardo to provide low-cost distribution of intellectual properties. The initiative evolved into a \"self-publishing portal\" now located at self.gutenberg.org. (The initial name for this project was \"Project Gutenberg 2\" (PG II), which created controversy among PG volunteers.)\nProject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.\nIn 2000, a 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, Inc. (EIN: 64-6221541) was chartered in Mississippi, United States, to handle the project's legal needs. Donations to it are tax-deductible.&lt;ref name=\"gutenberg.org/donate\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGregory B. Newby, while assistant professor at UNC School of Information and Library Science, and a long-time Project Gutenberg volunteer, in 2001, became the foundation's first CEO.\nSister projects.\nAll sister projects are independent organizations that share the same ideals and have been given permission to use the \"Project Gutenberg\" trademark. They often have a particular national or linguistic focus.\nCD and DVD project.\nIn August 2003, Project Gutenberg created a CD containing approximately 600 of the \"best\" e-books from the collection. The CD was available for download as an ISO image. When users were unable to download the CD, they could request to have a copy sent to them, free of charge.\nIn December 2003, a DVD was created containing nearly 10,000 items. At the time, this represented almost the entire collection. In early 2004, the DVD also became available by mail.\nIn July 2007, a new edition of the DVD was released containing over 17,000 books, and in April 2010, a dual-layer DVD was released, containing nearly 30,000 items.\nThe majority of the DVDs, and all of the CDs mailed by the project, were recorded on recordable media by volunteers. However, the new dual layer DVDs were manufactured, as it proved more economical than having volunteers burn them. As of \u00a02010[ [update]], the project has mailed approximately 40,000 discs. As of 2017, the delivery of free CDs had been discontinued, though the ISO image was still available for download.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23303", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23303", "title": "Personal area network", "text": "Short distance computer network\nA personal area network (PAN) is a computer network for interconnecting electronic devices within an individual person's workspace. A PAN provides data transmission among devices such as computers, smartphones, tablets and personal digital assistants. PANs can be used for communication among the personal devices themselves, or for connecting to a higher level network and the Internet where one master device takes up the role as gateway. \nA PAN may be carried over wired interfaces such as USB, but is predominantly carried wirelessly, also called a wireless personal area network (WPAN). A PAN is wirelessly carried over a low-powered, short-distance wireless network technology such as IrDA, Wireless USB, Bluetooth, NearLink or Zigbee. The reach of a WPAN varies from a few centimeters to a few meters. WPANs specifically tailored for low-power operation of the sensors are sometimes also called low-power personal area network (LPPAN) to better distinguish them from low-power wide-area network (LPWAN).\nWired.\nWired personal area networks provide short connections between peripherals. Example technologies include USB, IEEE 1394 and Thunderbolt.\nWireless.\nA wireless personal area network (WPAN) is a personal area network in which the connections are wireless. IEEE 802.15 has produced standards for several types of PANs operating in the ISM band including Bluetooth. The Infrared Data Association (IrDA) has produced standards for WPANs that operate using infrared communications.\nBluetooth.\nBluetooth uses short-range radio waves. Uses in a WPAN include, for example, Bluetooth devices such as keyboards, pointing devices, audio headsets, and printers that may connect to smartwatches, cell phones, or computers. A Bluetooth WPAN is also called a \"piconet\", and is composed of up to 8 active devices in a master-slave relationship (a very large number of additional devices can be connected in \"parked\" mode). The first Bluetooth device in the piconet is the master, and all other devices are slaves that communicate with the master. A piconet typically has a range of , although ranges of up to can be reached under ideal circumstances. Long-range Bluetooth routers with augmented antenna arrays connect Bluetooth devices up to .\nWith Bluetooth mesh networking the range and number of devices is extended by using mesh networking techniques to relay information from one device to another. Such a network doesn't have a master device and may or may not be treated as a WPAN.\nIrDA.\nIrDA uses infrared light, which has a frequency below the human eye's sensitivity. Infrared is used in other wireless communications applications, for instance, in remote controls. Typical WPAN devices that use IrDA include printers, keyboards, and other serial communication interfaces.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "23304", "revid": "24874401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23304", "title": "Personal digital assistant", "text": "Multi-purpose mobile device\nA personal digital assistant (PDA) was a multi-purpose mobile device which functioned as a personal information manager. Following a boom in the 1990s and 2000s, PDAs were mostly displaced in the early 2010s by the widespread adoption of smartphones. In particular, smartphones based on iOS and Android took their place, causing a rapid decline in PDA usage.\nA PDA had a flat-screen display; many later PDAs also had color displays, and instead of navigation buttons, resistive touchscreens; or even capacitive touchscreens. Most models also had audio capabilities, allowing usage as a portable media player, and also enabling some of them to be used as telephones. By the early 2000s, nearly all PDA models had the ability to access the Internet via Wi-Fi; these models generally included a web browser. \nThe concept of the PDA was eventually combined with that of the cell phone, the camera, and the GPS navigation system to produce the smartphone. To a lesser extent, the tablet computer also replaced PDAs, offering larger screens and newer operating systems.\nHistory.\nThe first PDA, the Organiser, was released in 1984 by Psion, followed by Psion's Series 3, in 1991. The latter began to resemble the more familiar PDA style, including a full keyboard. The term \"PDA\" was first used on 7 January 1992 by Apple Inc. CEO John Sculley at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nevada, referring to the Apple Newton.\nIn 1994, IBM introduced the first PDA with analog cellular phone functionality, the IBM Simon, which can also be considered the first smartphone. Then in 1996, Nokia introduced a PDA with digital cellphone functionality, the 9000 Communicator.\nAnother early entrant in this market was Palm, with a line of PDA products which began in March 1996. Palm would eventually be the dominant vendor of PDAs until the rising popularity of Pocket PC devices in the early 2000s.\nBy the mid-2000s, most PDAs had morphed into smartphones as classic PDAs without cellular radios were increasingly becoming uncommon. Devices such as the Palm Treo (resembling a bar phone) and the Kyocera 7135 (resembling a traditional flip phone) began merging the concept on a PDA with the concept of a cell phone. Some such devices even had built-in cameras and/or GPS capabilities, making them resemble smartphones more than PDAs.\nTypical features.\nA typical PDA has a touchscreen for navigation, a memory card slot for data storage, and IrDA, Bluetooth and/or Wi-Fi. However, some PDAs may not have a touchscreen, using soft keys, a directional pad, and a numeric keypad or a thumb keyboard for input. To have the functions expected of a PDA, a device's software typically includes an appointment calendar, a to-do list, an address book for contacts, a calculator, and some sort of memo (or \"note\") program. PDAs with wireless data connections also typically include an email client and a Web browser, and may or may not include telephony functionality.\nTouchscreen.\nMany of the original PDAs, such as the Apple Newton and Palm Pilot, featured a touchscreen for user interaction, having only a few buttons\u2014usually reserved for shortcuts to often-used programs. Some touchscreen PDAs, including Windows Mobile devices, had a detachable stylus to facilitate making selections. The user interacted with the device by tapping the screen to select buttons or issue commands, or by dragging a finger (or the stylus) on the screen to make selections or scroll.\nTypical methods of entering text on touchscreen PDAs included:\nDespite research and development projects, end-users experienced mixed results with handwriting recognition systems. Some found it frustrating and inaccurate, while others were satisfied with the quality of the recognition.\nTouchscreen PDAs intended for business use, such as the BlackBerry and Palm Treo, usually also offered full keyboards and scroll wheels or thumbwheels to facilitate data entry and navigation. Multiple touchscreen PDAs supported some form of external keyboard as well. Specialized folding keyboards, which offer a full-sized keyboard but collapse into a compact size for transport, were made available for multiple models. External keyboards may have attached to the PDA directly, using a cable, or using wireless technology such as infrared or Bluetooth to connect to the PDA. Newer PDAs, such as the HTC HD2, Palm Pre, Pre Plus, Pixi, and Pixi Plus, as well as devices running the Android operating system, included more advanced forms of touchscreen that could register multiple touches simultaneously. These \"multi-touch\" displays allowed for more sophisticated interfaces using various gestures entered with one or more fingers.\nMemory cards.\nAlthough many early PDAs did not have memory card slots, later models had either some form of Secure Digital (SD) slot, a CompactFlash slot or a combination of the two. Although designed for memory, Secure Digital Input/Output (SDIO) and CompactFlash cards were made available that provided peripheral accessories like Wi-Fi or digital cameras to devices with software support. Some PDAs also had a USB port, mainly for USB flash drives. Some PDAs used microSD cards, which are electronically compatible with SD cards, but have a much smaller physical size.\nWired connectivity.\nWhile early PDAs connected to a user's personal computer via serial ports and other proprietary connections, later models connect via a USB cable. Older PDAs were unable to connect to each other via USB, as their implementations of USB did not support acting as the \"host\". Some early PDAs were able to connect to the Internet indirectly by means of an external modem connected via the PDA's serial port or \"sync\" connector, or directly by using an expansion card that provided an Ethernet port.\nWireless connectivity.\nMany later PDAs use Bluetooth, a popular wireless protocol for mobile devices. Bluetooth can be used to connect keyboards, headsets, GPS receivers, and other nearby accessories. It is also possible to transfer files between PDAs that have Bluetooth. Multiple PDAs have Wi-Fi wireless network connectivity and can connect to Wi-Fi hotspots. All smartphones, and some other PDAs, can connect to wireless wide area networks, such as those provided by cellular telecommunications companies. Older PDAs, from the 1990s to 2006, typically had an IrDA (infrared) port allowing short-range, line-of-sight wireless communication. Few later models used this technology, as it had been supplanted by Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. IrDA allows communication between two PDAs, or between a PDA and any device with an IrDA port or adapter. Some contemporary printers have IrDA receivers, allowing IrDA-equipped PDAs to print to them, if the PDA's operating system supports it. Universal PDA keyboards designed for these older PDAs use infrared technology, due to cost and a lack of wireless interference.\nSynchronization.\nMost PDAs were able to synchronize their data with applications on a user's computer, allowing the user to update contact, schedule, or other information on their computer, using software such as Microsoft Outlook or ACT!. They could have that same data transferred to the PDA\u2014or transfer updated information from the PDA back to the computer, eliminating the need for the user to update their data in two places. Synchronization also prevented the loss of information stored on the device if it was lost, stolen, or destroyed. When a PDA was repaired or replaced, it could likewise be \"re-synced\" with the computer, restoring the user's data. Some users found that data input was quicker on their computer than on their PDA since text input via a touchscreen or small-scale keyboard was slower than a full-size keyboard. Transferring data to a PDA via the computer was, therefore, a lot quicker than having to manually input all data on the handheld device.\nData synchronization was done through \"synchronization software\" provided with the handheld, or sometimes with the computer's operating system. Examples of synchronization software include:\nThese programs allowed the PDA to be synchronized with a personal information manager, which may be part of the computer's operating system, provided with the PDA, or sold separately by a third party. For example, the RIM BlackBerry came with RIM's \"Desktop Manager\" program, which can synchronize to both Microsoft Outlook and ACT!. Other PDAs came only with their own proprietary software. For example, some early Palm OS PDAs came only with Palm Desktop, while later Palm PDAs\u2014such as the Treo 650\u2014have the ability to sync to Palm Desktop or Microsoft Outlook. Microsoft's ActiveSync and Windows Mobile Device Center only synchronized with Microsoft Outlook or Microsoft Exchange Server. Third-party synchronization software was also available for some PDAs from companies like CommonTime and CompanionLink. Third-party software can be used to synchronize PDAs to other personal information managers that are not supported by the PDA manufacturers (for example, GoldMine and IBM Lotus Notes).\nWireless synchronization.\nSome PDAs could synchronize some or all of their data using their wireless networking capabilities, rather than having to be directly connected to a personal computer via a cable (or dock/cradle). Devices running Palm's webOS or Google's Android operating system would primarily sync with the cloud. For example, if Gmail was used, information in contacts, email, and calendars can be synchronized between the PDA and Google's servers. RIM sold BlackBerry Enterprise Server to corporations so that corporate BlackBerry users could wirelessly synchronize their PDAs with the company's Microsoft Exchange Server, IBM Lotus Domino, or Novell GroupWise servers. Email, calendar entries, contacts, tasks, and memos kept on the company's server were automatically synchronized with the BlackBerry.\nOperating systems of PDAs.\nThe most common operating systems pre-installed on PDAs were:\nOther, rarely used operating systems:\nAutomobile navigation.\nSome PDAs included Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers. Other PDAs were compatible with external GPS-receiver add-ons that used the PDA's processor and screen to display location information. PDAs with GPS functionality could be used for automotive navigation. Integrated PDAs were fitted as standard on new cars throughout the 2000s. Some PDA-based GPS could also display traffic conditions, perform dynamic routing, and show known locations of roadside mobile radar guns. TomTom, Garmin, and iGO offered GPS navigation software for PDAs.\nRuggedized.\nSome businesses and government organizations relied upon rugged PDAs, sometimes known as enterprise digital assistants (EDAs) or mobile computers, for mobile data applications. These PDAs had features that made them more robust and able to handle inclement weather, jolts, and moisture. EDAs would often have extra features for data capture, such as barcode readers, radio-frequency identification (RFID) readers, magnetic stripe card readers, or smart card readers. These features were designed to facilitate the use of these devices to scan product or item codes.\nTypical applications included:\nEducational uses.\nPDAs and handheld devices were allowed in multiple classrooms for digital note-taking. Students could spell-check, modify, and amend their class notes on a PDA. Some educators distributed course material through the Internet or infrared file-sharing functions of the PDA. Textbook publishers released e-books, which could be uploaded directly to a PDA, reducing the number of textbooks students were required to carry. Brighton and Sussex Medical School in the UK was the first medical school to provide wide scale use of PDAs to its undergraduate students. The learning opportunities provided by having PDAs complete with a suite of key medical texts were studied with results showing that learning occurred in context with timely access to key facts and through consolidation of knowledge via repetition. The PDA was an important addition to the learning ecology rather than a replacement. Software companies also developed PDA programs to meet the instructional needs of educational institutions, such as dictionaries, thesauri, word processing software, encyclopedias, webinars and digital lesson planners.\nRecreational uses.\nPDAs were used by music enthusiasts to play a variety of music file formats. Many PDAs include the functionality of an MP3 player. Road rally enthusiasts can use PDAs to calculate distance, speed, and time. This information may be used for navigation, or the PDA's GPS functions can be used for navigation. Underwater divers can use PDAs to plan breathing gas mixtures and decompression schedules using software such as \"V-Planner\". On-device games were also available in a wide variety of types and styles. Most did not require internet access, since many PDAs did not reliably have access to networks.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23305", "revid": "12844987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23305", "title": "POSIX", "text": "Family of IEEE standards for compatibility between operating systems\nThe Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX; ) is a family of standards specified by the IEEE Computer Society for maintaining compatibility between operating systems. POSIX defines application programming interfaces (APIs), along with command line shells and utility interfaces, for software compatibility (portability) with variants of Unix and other operating systems. POSIX is also a trademark of the IEEE. POSIX is intended to be used by both application and system developers. As of POSIX 2024, the standard is aligned with the C17 language standard.\nName.\nOriginally, the name \"POSIX\" referred to IEEE Std 1003.1-1988, released in 1988. The family of POSIX standards is formally designated as IEEE 1003 and the ISO/IEC standard number is ISO/IEC 9945.\nThe standards emerged from a project that began in 1984 building on work from related activity in the \"/usr/group\" association. Richard Stallman suggested the name \"POSIX\" to the IEEE instead of the former \"IEEE-IX\". The committee found it more easily pronounceable and memorable, and thus adopted it.\nOverview.\nUnix was selected as the basis for a standard system interface partly because it was \"manufacturer-neutral\". However, several major versions of Unix existed\u2014so there was a need to develop a common-denominator system. The POSIX specifications for Unix-like operating systems originally consisted of a single document for the core programming interface, but eventually grew to 19 separate documents (POSIX.1, POSIX.2, etc.). The standardized user command line and scripting interface were based on the UNIX System V shell. Many user-level programs, services, and utilities (including awk, echo, ed) were also standardized, along with required program-level services (including basic I/O: file, terminal, and network). POSIX also defines a standard threading library API which is supported by most modern operating systems. In 2008, most parts of POSIX were combined into a single standard \"(IEEE Std 1003.1-2008\", also known as \"POSIX.1-2008).\"\nAs of 2014[ [update]], POSIX documentation is divided into two parts:\nThe development of the POSIX standard takes place in the Austin Group (a joint working group among the IEEE, The Open Group, and the ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22/WG 15).\nVersions.\nParts before 1997.\nBefore 1997, POSIX comprised several standards:\nVersions after 1997.\nAfter 1997, the Austin Group developed the POSIX revisions. The specifications are known under the name Single UNIX Specification, before they become a POSIX standard when formally approved by the ISO.\nPOSIX.1-2001 (with two TCs).\n\"POSIX.1-2001\" (or IEEE Std 1003.1-2001) equates to the \"Single UNIX Specification, version 3\" minus \"X/Open Curses\".\nThis standard consisted of:\nIEEE Std 1003.1-2004 involved a minor update of POSIX.1-2001. It incorporated two minor updates or errata referred to as \"Technical Corrigenda\" (TCs). Its contents are available on the web.\nPOSIX.1-2008 (with two TCs).\n\"Base Specifications, Issue 7\" (or \"IEEE Std 1003.1-2008\", 2016 Edition).\nThis standard consists of:\nPOSIX.1-2017.\nIEEE Std 1003.1-2017 (Revision of IEEE Std 1003.1-2008) - IEEE Standard for Information Technology\u2014Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX(R)) Base Specifications, Issue 7 is available from either The Open Group or IEEE. It is technically identical to POSIX.1-2008 with Technical Corrigenda 1 and 2 applied. Its contents are available on the web.\nPOSIX.1-2024.\nIEEE Std 1003.1-2024 - IEEE Standard for Information Technology\u2014Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX(R)) Base Specifications, Issue 8 was published on 14 June 2024. Its contents are available on the web.\nControversies.\n512- vs 1024-byte blocks.\nPOSIX mandates 512-byte default block sizes for the df and du utilities, reflecting the typical size of blocks on disks. When Richard Stallman and the GNU team were implementing POSIX for the GNU operating system, they objected to this on the grounds that most people think in terms of 1024 byte (or 1 KiB) blocks. The environment variable POSIX_ME_HARDER was introduced to allow the user to force the standards-compliant behaviour. The variable name was later changed to POSIXLY_CORRECT. As of 2025, this variable is also used for a number of other behaviour quirks.\nPOSIX-oriented operating systems.\nDepending upon the degree of compliance with the standards, operating systems can be classified as fully or partly POSIX compatible.\nPOSIX-certified.\nCurrent versions of the following operating systems have been certified to conform to one or more of the various POSIX standards. This means that they passed the automated conformance tests and their certification has not expired and the operating system has not been discontinued.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormerly POSIX-certified.\nSome versions of the following operating systems had been certified to conform to one or more of the various POSIX standards. This means that they passed the automated conformance tests. The certification has expired and some of the operating systems have been discontinued.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMostly POSIX-compliant.\nThe following are not certified as POSIX compliant yet comply in large part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPOSIX for OS/2.\nMostly POSIX compliant environments for OS/2:\nPOSIX for DOS.\nPartially POSIX compliant environments for DOS include:\nCompliant via compatibility layer.\nThe following are not officially certified as POSIX compatible, but they conform in large part to the standards by implementing POSIX support via some sort of compatibility feature (usually translation libraries, or a layer atop the kernel). Without these features, they are usually non-compliant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23306", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23306", "title": "Personal Telco", "text": "Oregon wireless community network\nThe Personal Telco Project (or PTP) is a wireless community network project in Portland, Oregon. It was founded by Adam Shand in November 2000 after he read a Slashdot article about the Consume The Net project in London.\nPTP has wireless hotspots offering free Internet access at locations around Portland including Pioneer Courthouse Square, three public parks, and several restaurants and coffee shops using Wi-Fi.\nIn 2005 PTP was involved in a grant-funded project to bring free wireless Internet to an entire neighborhood in North Portland, along N. Mississippi Avenue.\nPTP is a non-profit organization in the state of Oregon, and received its 501(c)(3) status (a federal tax exemption granted to charitable organizations) in early 2003.\nPTP made US news in August 2002 when their hotspot at Pioneer Courthouse Square was blocked by a for-fee hotspot at a nearby Starbucks coffee shop. The problem was resolved amicably when the for-fee hotspot moved their connection to another channel.\nOn March 4, 2003, a study was published stating Portland had more wireless hotspots per capita than any other U.S. city. This was due in part to PTP's advocacy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23307", "revid": "1314101054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23307", "title": "Prince Paul (producer)", "text": "American record producer and DJ\nPaul Edward Huston (born April 2, 1967), better known by his stage name Prince Paul, is an American record producer, disc jockey and recording artist from Amityville, New York. Paul began his career as a DJ for Stetsasonic. He has worked on albums by Boogie Down Productions, Gravediggaz, MC Lyte, Big Daddy Kane and 3rd Bass, among others. Major recognition for Prince Paul came when he produced De La Soul's debut album \"3 Feet High and Rising\" (1989), in which he pioneered new approaches to hip hop production, mixing and sampling, notably by including comedy sketches.\nHis first solo album, \"\", came out in 1997, followed by a second album, \"A Prince Among Thieves\", in 1999.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nPaul Edward Huston was born on April 2, 1967 in Amityville, New York. Paul was interested in music from a young age and started collecting vinyl when he was five. According to his mother, he was mature for his age and tended to hang out with older friends.\nWhen he was in fifth grade he started DJing, using a makeshift setup of one Lafayette turntable hooked up to another turntable set and using the balance knob as a fader. In 1981, at age 14, Paul performed a DJ set at The Ace Center Amityville that helped him gain recognition. He did a routine with Trouble Funk's \"Pump Me Up\" which he later described as his \"claim to fame.\" After The Ace Center performance, Paul started doing parties and tapes with Biz Markie while he was in 8th grade. At the same time, Paul's middle school music teacher was Everett Collins, a drummer for The Isley Brothers. Collins later introduced Paul to De La Soul member Maseo.\n1980s and 1990s.\nPrince Paul began performing with groups during his teenage years, first joining a group called Soul Brothers with his longtime friend Don Newkirk. Paul was one of the original members of Stetsasonic. He joined the group in 1984 after impressing Daddy-O with his routine in the \"Brevoit Day Celebration\" DJ battle in Brooklyn. Daddy-O was struck by Paul's energy, saying that he performed his routine with Liquid Liquid's song \"Cavern\", \"like he was mad at the turntables\". Paul credits Grandmaster Flash's song \"Flash To The Beat\" as the reason he purchased his drum machine.\nPrince Paul produced \"The Gas Face\" and \"Brooklyn-Queens\" on 3rd Bass' 1989 debut \"The Cactus Album.\" The original version of \"The Gas Face\" was recorded on 4-track cassette tape and started out as mistake. Paul wanted to change the beat after he realized the pattern was not what he had intended, but MC Serch and Pete Nice convinced him to keep it. The song was recorded on the 4th of July.\nPaul also worked on De La Soul's first three albums, \"3 Feet High and Rising\" (1989), \"De La Soul Is Dead\" (1991), and \"Buhloone Mindstate\" (1993). \"De La Soul is Dead\" received a five mic album review from \"The Source\". According to Paul, \"3 Feet High and Rising\" (1989) had a budget of about $20,000 and took a month and a half to make. In Brian Coleman's 2007 book \"Check the Technique\", Paul reflected on his work with De La Soul by saying, \"If there was ever a sign of the existence of God, De La Soul would be that proof to me. I've never had such a perfect fit in any other production situation.\"\nIn 1990, Russell Simmons gave Prince Paul an imprint under his Def Jam label, however the only album, \"It Takes a Nation of Suckers to Let Us In\" by Resident Alien, was never officially released. It is available as an unofficial release, which is different to a bootleg.\nAlong with Frukwan of Stetsasonic, Too Poetic of Brothers Grimm, and the RZA of Wu-Tang Clan, Prince Paul formed the group Gravediggaz. They recorded a demo together in 1991 and released their first album \"Niggamortis/6 Feet Deep\" in 1994 on Gee Street Records. Before signing a deal with Gee Street, Eazy-E wanted to release the album on Ruthless Records. Paul flew to Los Angeles to have a meeting with Eazy-E and Jerry Heller but was unimpressed with the contract and declined. After the group signed to Gee Street, Paul estimated that it took them about six months to complete the album.\nPrince Paul also contributed to several other projects during this time period. He produced three songs for Boogie Down Productions' 1992 album \"Sex and Violence\", though later expressed frustration that the group released the album before he had finalized and polished those tracks. In 1995, Paul and Teo Macero collaborated to produce the solo debut from guitarist Vernon Reid, and in 1996 he appeared on the compilation album \"America Is Dying Slowly\". Additionally, Paul joined forces with Amityville rapper Superstar to launch a supergroup called Horror City. Paul produced a Horror City album, but proved unable to successfully market the album to any record labels. Ultimately, Paul decided to offer \"Horror City\" as a free download in 2010.\nIn 1996, during the early recording sessions for \"Stakes Is High\", De La Soul and Prince Paul decided to part ways. Although Paul was not involved in the making of the album, he has praised it in several interviews, once saying, \"I was going through a serious transition period in my life when that album dropped. I was trying to figure out the next thing I was going to do; I was going through a custody case for my son, and I was running out of money. There were a lot of things going on at the time and in a sense, that album pulled me through everything.\"\nAfter splitting from De La Soul, Paul released two solo albums in the following years: \"\" (1996) and \"A Prince Among Thieves\" (1999). These albums featured a wide range of rappers, including Big Daddy Kane, Xzibit, Kool Keith, and Everlast. When Paul was recording \"Psychoanalysis\" he thought his career was over and had a hard time finding people who wanted to be involved with the project. Many of the vocals were provided by friends of his from outside the music industry. Years later he recalled thinking, \"Some people might get butt-hurt about it, but so what? It's probably the last record I'll make anyway,\" during the recording of \"Beautiful Night (Manic Psychopath)\". The song is very dark and deals with date rape, racism, and violence.\nAccording to Paul, he originally proposed the idea for \"A Prince Among Thieves\" to Russell Simmons in the early 1990s but Simmons was not interested. While describing his goals for the album in an interview he said, \"I wanted to make a movie on wax. I wanted to make an adults' kid album.\" To prepare for the album he watched many B movies and tried to use scenes from various films as inspiration. On \"A Prince Among Thieves\", Paul also repurposed some of the beats he had initially composed for \"Horror City\". In addition to the extensive list of rappers on the album, Paul reached out to Vanilla Ice to perform on \"Handle Your Time\" with Sadat X and Xzibit. He also reached out to The Notorious B.I.G. about playing a role on the album and was supposed to meet up with him the night he was murdered.\nPrince Paul formed the duo Handsome Boy Modeling School with Dan the Automator. Their 1999 debut album, \"So... How's Your Girl?\", featured Sean Lennon, Del the Funky Homosapien, Alec Empire, and Don Novello.\n21st century.\nPaul contributed to multiple projects in the year 2000. His work from that year includes the song \"The Fantabulous Rap Extravaganza\" on Deltron 3030's self-titled album, as well as \"It's Very Stimulating\", the debut EP by MC Paul Barman.\nPrince Paul's 2003 album \"Politics of the Business\" again featured many guests such as Chuck D, Ice-T, The Beatnuts, and Wordsworth. The latter also collaborated on a track Paul composed for \"The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie\" soundtrack. Paul followed this project with a second Handsome Boy Modeling School album, \"White People\", in 2004. His next solo album was \"Itstrumental\" (2005). It encompasses a range of genres, relying heavily on past samples, especially from \"A Prince Among Thieves\", and combining them with lighthearted skits about his depression. As of 2023, \"Itstrumental\" is Paul's most recent studio album.\nPaul continued to collaborate throughout the 2000s. In 2005, he produced the album \"The Art of Picking Up Women\" by the Dix, which combines some of hip-hop's misogyny and boasting with 1960s-style R&amp;B. He also collaborated with Parliament, Don Newkirk, and Talking Heads keyboardist Bernie Worrell to release an album titled \"Turn My Teeth Up!\" (2007) under the moniker Baby Elephant. Another project Paul produced during this period was \"Montezuma's Revenge\", a 2009 album by Souls of Mischief. On this album, Paul extensively used vintage equipment such as the Emu SP-12, Ensoniq ASR-10, Akai MPC-60 and an Akai MPC-2000.\nAt the 48th Annual Grammy Awards in 2006, Prince Paul was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album for his work on Chris Rock's \"Never Scared\".\nIn 2012, Paul spoke openly in an interview about the possibility of doing another De La Soul album after Maseo had made some public comments about a reunion. In the interview, Paul states that he asked the members of De La Soul to work on a new album on and off since 1999. Though he wanted to do a reunion at one time, it seemed in the interview he had moved past the idea, partially because of the far more restrictive sampling laws that exist today. He said, \"It's nice to think about it, but I kind of like where we left it. There would be so many expectations. For me to do another De La record, I don't think I could really live up to it. Especially in a day and age where I can't openly sample like that.\"\nPaul continued to provide occasional contributions to various products in the 2010s and 2020s. In 2016, he collaborated with Brazilian hip hop fusion group Broozkill! on an album titled \"Throwback to the Future\". In 2017 Prince Paul helped to score \"Mogul\", a Gimlet Media podcast about hip-hop scene-maker Chris Lighty. In 2020, Prince Paul co-produced the Gorillaz song \"Pac-Man\" for the band's Song Machine web series.\nIn 2017, Prince Paul joined the Creators Advisory Board of Tracklib. In an interview with Tracklib, Prince Paul stated that \"I know Tracklib will help (producers) because it will give everybody an opportunity to sample without having to look over their shoulder.\"\nEquipment.\nPaul has talked about his fondness for vintage equipment in several interviews. One of his favorite pieces of vintage equipment is the Akai S900, which he credits for having a unique sound, saying, \"Even though it's big and bulky, nothing sounds like that. It's pretty flexible, it's easy to work, and it's easy to truncate your sample and get things tight...When you look at all this new technology, everything sounds very sterile. Everything is clean and super quiet. It kind of lacks something. When I plug that in, it's like, 'Wow, this is hip hop.'\"\nRecord collection.\nHe is known for sampling from a wide range of genres. Rapper Biz Markie once said of Paul's production style, \"Prince Paul's contribution to hip-hop is that you could use records that weren't by James Brown or just break-beats.\"\nStyle and influences.\nUnlike the vast majority of hip-hop producers during the 1980s and early 1990s, Paul explored many genres outside of funk and soul to extract samples. \nChris Rock listed the \"Buhloone Mindstate\" album at number ten on his \"Top 25 Albums\" list. He credited the album as helping to shape him as a comedian. In 1999, Rock appeared on Paul's \"A Prince Among Thieves.\" Later in 2005, Rock's debut album was produced by Paul.\nPaul credits The Bomb Squad and Public Enemy as being a significant influence on early De La Soul production, saying, \"Early Public Enemy production used layers upon layers and layers, and their arrangements were always super duper incredible to me. We were kind of like students to what they did.\" In addition to The Bomb Squad, he also lists George Clinton, Dr. Dre, Rick Rubin, and Bernie Worrell as his major influences.\nWhile Paul continues to utilize samples, he has expanded his production to include live instrumentation, including guitar, bass guitar, and several analog keyboards. To combine elements of sampling and live instrumentation, Paul now re-plays some of his samples with instruments. In a 2010 interview he described the process by saying, \"I\u2019ve gotten to the point now where I\u2019ll re-play samples with instruments. I learned how to interpolate, change the sound, and dust it out so that when I\u2019m re-playing certain samples, it sounds like a direct sample from a record.\"\nPaul has credited the process of working with Dan the Automator on the Handsome Boy Modeling School project as helping him learn a great deal about production.\nAwards and nominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n!Ref.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23309", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23309", "title": "Paul Vixie", "text": "American internet pioneer\nPaul Vixie is an American computer scientist whose technical contributions include Domain Name System (DNS) protocol design and procedure, mechanisms to achieve operational robustness of DNS implementations, and significant contributions to open source software principles and methodology. He also created and launched the first successful commercial anti-spam service. He authored the standard UNIX system programs \"SENDS\", \"proxynet\", \"rtty\" and Vixie cron. At one point he ran his own consulting business, Vixie Enterprises. In 2002, Vixie held the record for \"most CERT advisories due to a single author\".\nEarly life.\nPaul A Vixie was born on 23 May 1963 and grew up in San Francisco, and his mother's maiden name is Killian.\n\"There were no computers at my school. I used to cut school and go to City College of San Francisco, where they had a Honeywell system\" \u2014 Paul Vixie\nIn 1980, when George Washington High School in San Francisco told him he'd have to repeat 11th grade, he quit school and got a job as a programmer at a consulting firm.\nCareer.\nVixie worked on BIND as a software engineer at Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) from 1988 to 1993. After he left DEC in 1994, he founded Internet Software Consortium (ISC) in 1996 together with Rick Adams and Carl Malamud to support BIND and other software for the Internet. The activities of ISC were assumed by a new company, Internet Systems Consortium in 2004. Although ISC operates the F root name server, Vixie at one point joined the Open Root Server Network (ORSN) project and operated their L root server.\nIn 1995 he cofounded the Palo Alto Internet Exchange (PAIX) and, after Metromedia Fiber Network (MFN) bought it in 1999, served as the chief technology officer to MFN / AboveNet and later as the president of PAIX.\nIn 1998 he cofounded Mail Abuse Prevention System (MAPS), a California non-profit company with the goal of stopping email abuse.\nVixie is the author of several Request for Comments (RFC)s, including a Best Current Practice document on \"Classless IN-ADDR.ARPA Delegation\" (BCP 20), and some Unix software. He stated in 2002 that he \"now hold[s] the record for 'most CERT advisories due to a single author.'\"\nIn 2008, Vixie served as a judge for the Mozilla Foundation's \"Download Day\", an attempt to set a Guinness World Record for most downloads in a single day for a new piece of software.\nVixie served on the board of trustees of the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) from 2005 to 2013, and served as chairman in 2009 and 2010. Vixie also serves on the Security and Stability Advisory Committee of ICANN.\nHe received a Ph.D. in computer science from Keio University in 2011.\nIn 2013, after nearly 20 years at ISC, he founded a new company, Farsight Security, Inc. spinning off the Security Business Unit from ISC.\nIn 2014, Vixie was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame as an Innovator.\nIn 2021, Vixie's company FarSight Security was acquired by DomainTools. Since 2022, he has been working at AWS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23310", "revid": "30571117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23310", "title": "Pleistocene", "text": "First epoch of the Quaternary Period\nThe Pleistocene ( ; referred to colloquially as the \"Ice Age\") is the geological epoch that lasted from c.\u20092.58\u00a0million to 11,700 years ago, spanning the Earth's most recent period of repeated glaciations. Before a change was finally confirmed in 2009 by the International Union of Geological Sciences, the cutoff of the Pleistocene and the preceding Pliocene was regarded as being 1.806\u00a0million years Before Present (BP). Publications from earlier years may use either definition of the period. The end of the Pleistocene corresponds with the end of the last glacial period and also with the end of the Paleolithic age used in archaeology. The name comes from Ancient Greek \u03c0\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"ple\u00eestos\"), meaning \"most\", and \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2 (\"kain\u00f3s\"), meaning \"new, recent\".\nThe aridification and cooling trends of the preceding Neogene were continued in the Pleistocene. The climate was strongly variable depending on the glacial cycle, oscillating between cold glacial periods and warmer interglacials, with the sea levels being up to lower than present at peak glaciation, allowing the periodic connection of Asia and North America via the Beringia land bridge, and the covering of most of northern North America by the large Laurentide Ice Sheet.\nAt the end of the preceding Pliocene, the previously isolated North and South American continents were joined by the Isthmus of Panama, causing a faunal interchange between the two regions and changing ocean circulation patterns, with the onset of glaciation in the Northern Hemisphere occurring around 2.7\u00a0million years ago. During the Early Pleistocene (2.58\u20130.8 Ma), archaic humans of the genus \"Homo\" originated in Africa and spread throughout Afro-Eurasia. The end of the Early Pleistocene is marked by the Mid-Pleistocene Transition, with the cyclicity of glacial cycles changing from 41,000-year cycles to asymmetric 100,000-year cycles, making the climate variation more extreme. The Late Pleistocene witnessed the spread of modern humans outside Africa as well as the extinction of all other human species. Humans also spread to the Australian continent and the Americas for the first time.\nThe Late Pleistocene from around 50,000 years ago onwards was marked by the extinction of most large terrestrial animals outside of Africa, an extinction event otherwise unprecedented in the geological record due to its extreme size bias. Most authors suggest that climate change, the expansion of modern humans, or the combination of both were the likely causes of the extinctions.\nEtymology.\nCharles Lyell introduced the term \"Pleistocene\" in 1839 to describe strata in Sicily that had at least 70% of their molluscan fauna still living today. This distinguished it from the older Pliocene Epoch, which Lyell had originally thought to be the youngest fossil rock layer. He constructed the name \"Pleistocene\" ('most new' or 'newest') from the Greek \"\u03c0\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2\" (\"ple\u012bstos\") 'most' and \"\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2\" (\"kain\u00f3s\" (Latinized as \"c\u00e6nus\") 'new'). This contrasts with the immediately preceding Pliocene (\"newer\", from \"\u03c0\u03bb\u03b5\u03af\u03c9\u03bd\" (\"ple\u00ed\u014dn\", \"more\") and \"kain\u00f3s\") and the immediately subsequent Holocene (\"wholly new\" or \"entirely new\", from \"\u1f45\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2\" (\"h\u00f3los\", \"whole\") and \"kain\u00f3s\") epoch, which extends to the present time.\nDating.\nThe Pleistocene has been dated from 2.580 million (\u00b10.005) to 11,700 years BP with the end date expressed in radiocarbon years as 10,000 carbon-14 years BP. It covers most of the latest period of repeated glaciation, up to and including the Younger Dryas cold spell. The end of the Younger Dryas has been dated to about 9700 BCE (11,700 years before present). The end of the Younger Dryas is the official start of the current Holocene Epoch. Although it is considered an epoch, the Holocene was not significantly different in terms of temperature change than previous Pleistocene interglacial intervals, although the rapid onset of the Anthropocene is unprecedented. In the ICS timescale, the Pleistocene is divided into four stages or ages, the Gelasian, Calabrian, Chibanian (previously the unofficial \"Middle Pleistocene\"), and Upper Pleistocene (unofficially the \"Tarantian\"). In addition to these international subdivisions, various regional subdivisions are often used.\nIn 2009 the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) confirmed a change in time period for the Pleistocene, changing the start date from 1.806 to 2.588 million years BP, and accepted the base of the Gelasian as the base of the Pleistocene, namely the base of the Monte San Nicola GSSP. The start date has now been rounded down to 2.580 million years BP. The IUGS has yet to approve a type section, Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP), for the upper Pleistocene/Holocene boundary (\"i.e.\" the upper boundary). The proposed section is the \"North Greenland Ice Core Project\" ice core 75\u00b0 06' N 42\u00b0 18' W. The lower boundary of the Pleistocene Series is formally defined magnetostratigraphically as the base of the Matuyama (C2r) chronozone, isotopic stage 103. Above this point there are notable extinctions of the calcareous nannofossils: \"Discoaster pentaradiatus\" and \"Discoaster surculus\". The Pleistocene covers the recent period of repeated glaciations. \nThe name Plio-Pleistocene has, in the past, been used to mean the last ice age. Formerly, the boundary between the two epochs was drawn at the time when the foraminiferal species \"Hyalinea baltica\" first appeared in the marine section at La Castella, Calabria, Italy. However, the revised definition of the Quaternary, by pushing back the start date of the Pleistocene to 2.58 Ma, results in the inclusion of all the recent repeated glaciations within the Pleistocene.\nWhile radiocarbon dating is well-suited for dates in the Holocene, its half life is too short for practical use in Pleistocene dating. Instead geologists use marine isotope stages derived from oxygen isotopes to date materials deposited in the Pleistocene.\nDeposits.\nPleistocene non-marine sediments are found primarily in fluvial deposits, lakebeds, slope and loess deposits as well as in the large amounts of material moved about by glaciers. Less common are cave deposits, travertines and volcanic deposits (lavas, ashes). Pleistocene marine deposits are found primarily in shallow marine basins mostly (but with important exceptions) in areas within a few tens of kilometres of the modern shoreline. In a few geologically active areas such as the Southern California coast, Pleistocene marine deposits may be found at elevations of several hundred metres.\nPaleogeography and climate.\nThe modern continents were essentially at their present positions during the Pleistocene, the plates upon which they sit probably having moved no more than relative to each other since the beginning of the period. In glacial periods, the sea level would drop by up to lower than today during peak glaciation, exposing large areas of the present continental shelf as dry land.\nAccording to Mark Lynas (through collected data), the Pleistocene's overall climate could be characterised as a continuous El Ni\u00f1o with trade winds in the south Pacific weakening or heading east, warm air rising near Peru, warm water spreading from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific, and other El Ni\u00f1o markers.\nGlacial features.\nPleistocene climate was marked by repeated glacial cycles in which continental glaciers pushed to the 40th parallel in some places. It is estimated that, at maximum glacial extent, 30% of the Earth's surface was covered by ice. In addition, a zone of permafrost stretched southward from the edge of the glacial sheet, a few hundred kilometres in North America, and several hundred in Eurasia. The mean annual temperature at the edge of the ice was ; at the edge of the permafrost, .\nEach glacial advance tied up huge volumes of water in continental ice sheets thick, resulting in temporary sea-level drops of or more over the entire surface of the Earth. During interglacial times, such as at present, drowned coastlines were common, mitigated by isostatic or other emergent motion of some regions.\nThe effects of glaciation were global. Antarctica was ice-bound throughout the Pleistocene as well as the preceding Pliocene. The Andes were covered in the south by the Patagonian ice cap. There were glaciers in New Zealand and Tasmania. The current decaying glaciers of Mount Kenya, Mount Kilimanjaro, and the Ruwenzori Range in east and central Africa were larger. Glaciers existed in the mountains of Ethiopia and to the west in the Atlas Mountains.\nIn the northern hemisphere, many glaciers fused into one. The Cordilleran Ice Sheet covered the North American northwest; the east was covered by the Laurentide. The Fenno-Scandian ice sheet rested on northern Europe, including much of Great Britain; the Alpine ice sheet on the Alps. Scattered domes stretched across Siberia and the Arctic shelf. The northern seas were ice-covered.\nSouth of the ice sheets large lakes accumulated because outlets were blocked and the cooler air slowed evaporation. When the Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated, north-central North America was completely covered by Lake Agassiz. Over a hundred basins, now dry or nearly so, were overflowing in the North American west. Lake Bonneville, for example, stood where Great Salt Lake now does. In Eurasia, large lakes developed as a result of the runoff from the glaciers. Rivers were larger, had a more copious flow, and were braided. African lakes were fuller, apparently from decreased evaporation. Deserts, on the other hand, were drier and more extensive. Rainfall was lower because of the decreases in oceanic and other evaporation.\nIt has been estimated that during the Pleistocene, the East Antarctic Ice Sheet thinned by at least 500 meters, and that thinning since the Last Glacial Maximum is less than 50 meters and probably started after c. 14 ka.\nMajor events.\nDuring the 2.5\u00a0million years of the Pleistocene, numerous cold phases called glacials (Quaternary ice age), or significant advances of continental ice sheets, in Europe and North America, occurred at intervals of approximately 40,000 to 100,000 years. The long glacial periods were separated by more temperate and shorter interglacials which lasted about 10,000\u201315,000 years. The last cold episode of the last glacial period ended about 10,000 years ago. Over 11 major glacial events have been identified, as well as many minor glacial events. A major glacial event is a general glacial excursion, termed a \"glacial\". Glacials are separated by \"interglacials\". During a glacial, the glacier experiences minor advances and retreats. The minor excursion is a \"stadial\"; times between stadials are \"interstadials\".\nThese events are defined differently in different regions of the glacial range, which have their own glacial history depending on latitude, terrain and climate. There is a general correspondence between glacials in different regions. Investigators often interchange the names if the glacial geology of a region is in the process of being defined. However, it is generally incorrect to apply the name of a glacial in one region to another.\nFor most of the 20th century, only a few regions had been studied and the names were relatively few. Today the geologists of different nations are taking more of an interest in Pleistocene glaciology. As a consequence, the number of names is expanding rapidly and will continue to expand. Many of the advances and stadials remain unnamed. Also, the terrestrial evidence for some of them has been erased or obscured by larger ones, but evidence remains from the study of cyclical climate changes.\nThe glacials in the following tables show \"historical\" usages, are a simplification of a much more complex cycle of variation in climate and terrain, and are generally no longer used. The headings \"Glacial 1\" to \"Glacial 4\" are designations indicating the four most recent glacials, with \"Glacial 4\" being the most recent. These names have been abandoned in favour of numeric data because many of the correlations were found to be either inexact or incorrect and more than four major glacials have been recognised since the historical terminology was established.\nCorresponding to the terms glacial and interglacial, the terms pluvial and interpluvial are in use (Latin: \"pluvia\", rain). A pluvial is a warmer period of increased rainfall; an interpluvial is of decreased rainfall. Formerly a pluvial was thought to correspond to a glacial in regions not iced, and in some cases it does. Rainfall is cyclical also. Pluvials and interpluvials are widespread.\nThere is no systematic correspondence between pluvials to glacials, however. Moreover, regional pluvials do not correspond to each other globally. For example, some have used the term \"Riss pluvial\" in Egyptian contexts. Any coincidence is an accident of regional factors. Only a few of the names for pluvials in restricted regions have been stratigraphically defined.\nPalaeocycles.\nThe sum of transient factors acting at the Earth's surface is cyclical: climate, ocean currents and other movements, wind currents, temperature, etc. The waveform response comes from the underlying cyclical motions of the planet, which eventually drag all the transients into harmony with them. The repeated glaciations of the Pleistocene were caused by the same factors.\nThe Mid-Pleistocene Transition, approximately one million years ago, saw a change from low-amplitude glacial cycles with a dominant periodicity of 41,000 years to asymmetric high-amplitude cycles dominated by a periodicity of 100,000 years.\nHowever, a 2020 study concluded that ice age terminations might have been influenced by obliquity since the Mid-Pleistocene Transition, which caused stronger summers in the Northern Hemisphere.\nMilankovitch cycles.\nGlaciation in the Pleistocene was a series of glacials and interglacials, stadials and interstadials, mirroring periodic climate changes. The main factor at work in climate cycling is now believed to be Milankovitch cycles. These are periodic variations in regional and planetary solar radiation reaching the Earth caused by several repeating changes in the Earth's motion. The effects of Milankovitch cycles were enhanced by various positive feedbacks related to increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and Earth's albedo.\nMilankovitch cycles cannot be the sole factor responsible for the variations in climate since they explain neither the long-term cooling trend over the Plio-Pleistocene nor the millennial variations in the Greenland Ice Cores known as Dansgaard-Oeschger events and Heinrich events. Milankovitch pacing seems to best explain glaciation events with periodicity of 100,000, 40,000, and 20,000 years. Such a pattern seems to fit the information on climate change found in oxygen isotope cores.\nOxygen isotope ratio cycles.\nIn oxygen isotope ratio analysis, variations in the ratio of 18O to 16O (two isotopes of oxygen) by mass (measured by a mass spectrometer) present in the calcite of oceanic core samples is used as a diagnostic of ancient ocean temperature change and therefore of climate change. Cold oceans are richer in 18O, which is included in the tests of the microorganisms (foraminifera) contributing the calcite.\nA more recent version of the sampling process makes use of modern glacial ice cores. Although less rich in 18O than seawater, the snow that fell on the glacier year by year nevertheless contained 18O and 16O in a ratio that depended on the mean annual temperature.\nTemperature and climate change are cyclical when plotted on a graph of temperature versus time. Temperature coordinates are given in the form of a deviation from today's annual mean temperature, taken as zero. This sort of graph is based on another isotope ratio versus time. Ratios are converted to a percentage difference from the ratio found in standard mean ocean water (SMOW).\nThe graph in either form appears as a waveform with overtones. One half of a period is a Marine isotopic stage (MIS). It indicates a glacial (below zero) or an interglacial (above zero). Overtones are stadials or interstadials.\nAccording to this evidence, Earth experienced 102 MIS stages beginning at about 2.588 Ma BP in the Early Pleistocene Gelasian. Early Pleistocene stages were shallow and frequent. The latest were the most intense and most widely spaced.\nBy convention, stages are numbered from the Holocene, which is MIS1. Glacials receive an even number and interglacials receive an odd number. The first major glacial was MIS2-4 at about 85\u201311 ka BP. The largest glacials were 2, 6, 12, and 16. The warmest interglacials were 1, 5, 9 and 11. For matching of MIS numbers to named stages, see under the articles for those names.\nFauna.\nBoth marine and continental faunas were essentially modern but with many more large land mammals such as Mammoths, Mastodons, \"Diprotodons\", \"Smilodons\", tigers, lions, Aurochs, short-faced bears, giant sloths, species within \"Gigantopithecus\" and others. Isolated landmasses such as Australia, Madagascar, New Zealand and islands in the Pacific saw the evolution of large birds and even reptiles such as the Elephant bird, moa, Haast's eagle, \"Quinkana\", \"Megalania\" and \"Meiolania\".\nThe severe climatic changes during the Ice Age had major impacts on the fauna and flora. With each advance of the ice, large areas of the continents became depopulated, and plants and animals retreating southwards in front of the advancing glacier faced tremendous stress. The most severe stress resulted from drastic climatic changes, reduced living space, and curtailed food supply. A major extinction event of large mammals (megafauna), which included mammoths, mastodons, saber-toothed cats, \"glyptodons\", the woolly rhinoceros, various giraffids, such as the Sivatherium; ground sloths, Irish elk, cave lions, cave bears, Gomphotheres, American lions, dire wolves, and short-faced bears, began late in the Pleistocene and continued into the Holocene. Neanderthals also became extinct during this period. At the end of the last ice age, cold-blooded animals, smaller mammals like wood mice, migratory birds, and swifter animals like whitetail deer had replaced the megafauna and migrated north. Late Pleistocene bighorn sheep were more slender and had longer legs than their descendants today. Scientists believe that the change in predator fauna after the late Pleistocene extinctions resulted in a change of body shape as the species adapted for increased power rather than speed.\nThe extinctions hardly affected Africa but were especially severe in North America where native horses and camels were wiped out.\nIn July 2018, a team of Russian scientists in collaboration with Princeton University announced that they had brought two female nematodes frozen in permafrost, from around 42,000 years ago, back to life. The two nematodes, at the time, were the oldest confirmed living animals on the planet.\nHumans.\nThe evolution of anatomically modern humans took place during the Pleistocene. At the beginning of the Pleistocene \"Paranthropus\" species were still present, as well as early human ancestors, but during the lower Palaeolithic they disappeared, and the only hominin species found in fossilic records is \"Homo erectus\" for much of the Pleistocene. Acheulean lithics appear along with \"Homo erectus\", some 1.8\u00a0million years ago, replacing the more primitive Oldowan industry used by \"Australopithecus garhi\" and by the earliest species of \"Homo\". The Middle Paleolithic saw more varied speciation within \"Homo\", including the appearance of \"Homo sapiens\" about 300,000 years ago. Artifacts associated with modern human behavior are unambiguously attested starting 40,000\u201350,000 years ago.\nAccording to mitochondrial timing techniques, modern humans migrated from Africa after the Riss glaciation in the Middle Palaeolithic during the Eemian Stage, spreading all over the ice-free world during the late Pleistocene. A 2005 study posits that humans in this migration interbred with archaic human forms already outside of Africa by the late Pleistocene, incorporating archaic human genetic material into the modern human gene pool.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23311", "revid": "148026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23311", "title": "Pasteurization", "text": "Process of preserving foods with heat\nIn food processing, pasteurization (also pasteurisation) is a process of food preservation in which packaged foods (e.g., milk and fruit juices) are treated with mild heat, usually to less than , to eliminate pathogens and extend shelf life. Pasteurization either destroys or deactivates microorganisms and enzymes that contribute to food spoilage or the risk of disease, including vegetative bacteria, but most bacterial spores survive the process.\nPasteurization is named after the French microbiologist Louis Pasteur, whose research in the 1860s demonstrated that thermal processing would deactivate unwanted microorganisms in wine. Spoilage enzymes are also inactivated during pasteurization. Today, pasteurization is used widely in the dairy industry and other food processing industries for food preservation and food safety.\nBy the year 1999, most liquid products were heat treated in a continuous system where heat was applied using a heat exchanger or the direct or indirect use of hot water and steam. Due to the mild heat, there are minor changes to the nutritional quality and sensory characteristics of the treated foods. Pascalization or high-pressure processing (HPP) and pulsed electric field (PEF) are non-thermal processes that are also used to pasteurize foods.\nHistory.\nHeating wine for preservation has been known in China since AD 1117 and was documented in Japan in the diary \"Tamonin-nikki\" written by a series of monks between 1478 and 1618.\nIn 1768, research performed by the Italian priest and scientist Lazzaro Spallanzani proved that a product could be made \"sterile\" after thermal processing. Spallanzani boiled meat broth for one hour, sealed the container immediately after boiling, and noticed that the broth did not spoil and was free from microorganisms. In 1795, a Parisian chef and confectioner named Nicolas Appert began experimenting with ways to preserve foodstuffs, succeeding with soups, vegetables, juices, dairy products, jellies, jams, and syrups. He placed the food in glass jars, sealed them with cork and sealing wax, and placed them in boiling water. In that same year, the French military offered a cash prize of 12,000 francs for a new method to preserve food. After some 14 or 15 years of experimenting, Appert submitted his invention and won the prize in January 1810. Later that year, Appert published \"L'Art de conserver les substances animales et v\u00e9g\u00e9tales\" (\"The Art of Preserving Animal and Vegetable Substances\"). This was the first cookbook on modern food preservation methods.\n\"La Maison Appert\" 'The House of Appert', in the town of Massy, near Paris, became the first food-bottling factory in the world, preserving a variety of foods in sealed bottles. Appert filled thick, large-mouthed glass bottles with produce of every description, ranging from beef and fowl to eggs, milk, and prepared dishes. He left air space at the top of the bottle, and the cork would then be sealed firmly in the jar by using a vise. The bottle was then wrapped in canvas to protect it while it was dunked into boiling water and then boiled for as much time as Appert deemed appropriate for cooking the contents thoroughly. Appert patented his method, sometimes called \"appertisation\" in his honor.\nAppert's method was so simple and workable that it quickly became widespread. In 1810, the British inventor and merchant Peter Durand, also of French origin, patented his method, but this time in a tin can, so creating the modern-day process of canning foods. In 1812, the Englishmen Bryan Donkin and John Hall purchased both patents and began producing preserves. A decade later, Appert's canning method had come to America. Tin can production was not common until the beginning of the 20th century, partly because a hammer and chisel were needed to open cans until the invention of a can opener by Robert Yeates in 1855.\nA less aggressive method was developed by French chemist Louis Pasteur during an 1864 summer holiday in Arbois. To remedy the frequent acidity of the local aged wines, he found out experimentally that it is sufficient to heat a young wine to only about for a short time to kill the microbes, and that the wine could subsequently be aged without sacrificing the final quality. In honor of Pasteur, this process is known as pasteurization. Pasteurization was originally used as a way of preventing wine and beer from souring, and it would be many years before milk was pasteurized. In the United States in the 1870s, before milk was regulated, it was common for milk to contain substances intended to mask spoilage.\nMilk.\nMilk is an excellent medium for microbial growth, and when it is stored at ambient temperature, bacteria and other pathogens soon proliferate. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says improperly handled raw milk is responsible for nearly three times more hospitalizations than any other food-borne disease source, making it one of the world's most dangerous food products. Diseases prevented by pasteurization include tuberculosis, brucellosis, diphtheria, scarlet fever, and Q-fever; it also kills the harmful bacteria \"Salmonella\", \"Listeria\", \"Yersinia\", \"Campylobacter\", \"Staphylococcus aureus\", and \"\", among others.\nBefore industrialization, dairy cows were kept in urban areas to limit the time between milk production and consumption, hence the risk of disease transmission via raw milk was reduced. As urban densities increased and supply chains lengthened to the distance from country to city, raw milk (often days old) became recognized as a source of disease. For example, between 1912 and 1937, some 65,000 people died of tuberculosis contracted from consuming milk in England and Wales alone. Because tuberculosis has a long incubation period in humans, it was difficult to link unpasteurized milk consumption with the disease. In 1892, chemist Ernst Lederle experimentally inoculated milk from tuberculosis-diseased cows into guinea pigs, which caused them to develop the disease. In 1910, Lederle, then in the role of Commissioner of Health, introduced mandatory pasteurization of milk in New York City.\nDeveloped countries adopted milk pasteurization to prevent such disease and loss of life, and as a result, milk is now considered a safer food. A traditional form of pasteurization by scalding and straining of cream to increase the keeping qualities of butter was practiced in Great Britain in the 18th century and was introduced to Boston in the British Colonies by 1773, although it was not widely practiced in the United States for the next 20 years. Pasteurization of milk was suggested by Franz von Soxhlet in 1886. In the early 20th century, Milton Joseph Rosenau established standards \u2013 i.e. low-temperature, slow heating at for 20 minutes \u2013 for the pasteurization of milk while at the United States Marine Hospital Service, notably in his publication of \"The Milk Question\" (1912). States in the U.S. soon began enacting mandatory dairy pasteurization laws, with the first in 1947, and in 1973 the U.S. federal government required pasteurization of milk used in any interstate commerce.\nThe shelf life of refrigerated pasteurized milk is greater than that of raw milk. For example, high-temperature, short-time (HTST) pasteurized milk typically has a refrigerated shelf life of two to three weeks, whereas ultra-pasteurized milk can last much longer, sometimes two to three months. When ultra-heat treatment (UHT) is combined with sterile handling and container technology (such as aseptic packaging), it can even be stored non-refrigerated for up to 9 months.\nAccording to the Centers for Disease Control, between 1998 and 2011, 79% of dairy-related disease outbreaks in the United States were due to raw milk or cheese products. They report 148 outbreaks and 2,384 illnesses (with 284 requiring hospitalization), as well as two deaths due to raw milk or cheese products during the same period.\nMedical equipment.\nMedical equipment, notably respiratory and anesthesia equipment, is often disinfected using hot water, as an alternative to chemical disinfection. The temperature is raised to for 30 minutes. More thorough sterilization can be performed at higher temperatures and pressures in an autoclave.\nPasteurization process.\nPasteurization is a mild heat treatment of liquid foods (both packaged and unpackaged) where products are typically heated to below . The heat treatment and cooling process are designed to inhibit a phase change in the product. The acidity of the food determines the parameters (time and temperature) of the heat treatment as well as the duration of shelf life. Parameters also take into account nutritional and sensory qualities that are sensitive to heat.\nIn acidic foods (with pH of 4.6 or less), such as fruit juice and beer, the heat treatments are designed to inactivate enzymes (pectin methylesterase and polygalacturonase in fruit juices) and destroy spoilage microbes (yeast and lactobacillus). Due to the low pH of acidic foods, pathogens cannot grow. The shelf-life is thereby extended by several weeks. In less acidic foods (with pH greater than 4.6), such as milk and liquid eggs, heat treatments are designed to destroy pathogens and spoilage organisms (yeast and molds). Not all spoilage organisms are destroyed under pasteurization parameters, so subsequent refrigeration is necessary.\nHigh-temperature short-time (HTST) pasteurization, such as that used for milk ( for 15 seconds) ensures the safety of milk and provides a refrigerated shelf life of approximately two weeks. In ultra-high-temperature (UHT) pasteurization, milk is pasteurized at for 1\u20132 seconds. Along with special packaging this extends shelf life to three months without refrigeration.\nEquipment.\nFood can be pasteurized either before or after being packaged into containers. Pasteurization of food in containers generally uses either steam or hot water. When food is packaged in glass, hot water is used to avoid cracking the glass from thermal shock. When plastic or metal packaging is used, the risk of thermal shock is low, so steam or hot water is used.\nMost liquid foods are pasteurized by using a continuous process that passes the food through a heating zone, a hold tube to keep it at the pasteurization temperature for the desired time, and a cooling zone, after which the product is filled into the package. Plate heat exchangers are often used for low-viscosity products such as animal milk, nut milk, and juices. A plate heat exchanger is composed of many thin vertical stainless steel plates that separate the liquid from the heating or cooling medium. \nShell and tube heat exchangers are often used for the pasteurization of foods that are non-Newtonian fluids, such as dairy products, tomato ketchup, and baby foods. A tube heat exchanger is made up of concentric stainless steel tubes. Food passes through the inner tube or tubes, while the heating/cooling medium is circulated through the outer tube.\nScraped-surface heat exchangers are a type of shell and tube that contain an inner rotating shaft having spring-loaded blades that serve to scrape away any highly viscous material that accumulates on the wall of the tube.\nThe benefits of using a heat exchanger to pasteurize foods before packaging, versus pasteurizing foods in containers are:\nAfter being heated in a heat exchanger, the product flows through a hold tube for a set period to achieve the required treatment. If pasteurization temperature or time is not achieved, a flow diversion valve is used to divert the under-processed product back to the raw product tank. If the product is adequately processed, it is cooled in a heat exchanger, then filled.\nVerification.\nDirect microbiological techniques are the ultimate measurement of pathogen contamination, but these are costly and time-consuming, which means that products have a reduced shelf-life by the time pasteurization is verified.\nAs a result of the unsuitability of microbiological techniques, milk pasteurization efficacy is typically monitored by checking for the presence of alkaline phosphatase, which is denatured by pasteurization. Destruction of alkaline phosphatase ensures the destruction of common milk pathogens. Therefore, the presence of alkaline phosphatase is an ideal indicator of pasteurization efficacy. For liquid eggs, the effectiveness of the heat treatment is measured by the residual activity of \u03b1-amylase.\nEfficacy against pathogenic bacteria.\nDuring the early 20th century, there was no robust knowledge of what time and temperature combinations would inactivate pathogenic bacteria in milk, so several different pasteurization standards were in use. By 1943, both HTST pasteurization conditions of for 15 seconds, as well as batch pasteurization conditions of for 30 minutes, were confirmed by studies of the complete thermal death (as best as could be measured at that time) for a range of pathogenic bacteria in milk. Complete inactivation of \"Coxiella burnetii\" (which was thought at the time to cause Q fever by oral ingestion of infected milk) as well as of \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" (which causes tuberculosis) were later demonstrated. For all practical purposes, these conditions were adequate for destroying almost all yeasts, molds, and common spoilage bacteria and also for ensuring adequate destruction of common pathogenic, heat-resistant organisms. However, the microbiological techniques used until the 1960s did not allow for the actual reduction of bacteria to be enumerated. Demonstration of the extent of inactivation of pathogenic bacteria by milk pasteurization came from a study of surviving bacteria in milk that was heat-treated after being deliberately spiked with high levels of the most heat-resistant strains of the most significant milk-borne pathogens.\nThe mean log10 reductions and temperatures of inactivation of the major milk-borne pathogens during a 15-second treatment are:\nThe Codex Alimentarius \"Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk\" notes that milk pasteurization is designed to achieve at least a 5\u00a0log10 reduction of \"Coxiella burnetii\". The Code also notes that: \"The minimum pasteurization conditions are those having bactericidal effects equivalent to heating every particle of the milk to for 15 seconds (continuous flow pasteurization) or for 30 minutes (batch pasteurization)\u201d and that \"To ensure that each particle is sufficiently heated, the milk flow in heat exchangers should be turbulent, \"i.e\". the Reynolds number should be sufficiently high\". The point about turbulent flow is important because simplistic laboratory studies of heat inactivation that use test tubes, without flow, will have less bacterial inactivation than larger-scale experiments that seek to replicate conditions of commercial pasteurization.\nAs a precaution, modern HTST pasteurization processes must be designed with flow-rate restriction as well as divert valves which ensure that the milk is heated evenly and that no part of the milk is subject to a shorter time or a lower temperature. It is common for the temperatures to exceed by .\nDouble pasteurization.\nPasteurization is not sterilization and does not kill spores. \"Double\" pasteurization, which involves a secondary heating process, can extend shelf life by killing spores that have germinated.\nThe acceptance of double pasteurization varies by jurisdiction. In places where it is allowed, milk is initially pasteurized when it is collected from the farm so it does not spoil before processing. Many countries prohibit the labelling of such milk as \"pasteurized\" but allow it to be marked \"thermized\", which refers to a lower-temperature process.\nEffects on nutritional and sensory characteristics of foods.\nBecause of its mild heat treatment, pasteurization increases the shelf-life by a few days or weeks. This mild heat also means there are only minor changes to heat-labile vitamins in the foods.\nMilk.\nAccording to a systematic review and meta-analysis, it was found that pasteurization appeared to reduce concentrations of vitamins B12 and E, but it also increased concentrations of vitamin A. In the same review, there was only limited research regarding how much pasteurization affects A, B12, and E levels. Milk is not considered an important source of vitamins B12 or E in the North American diet, so the effects of pasteurization on the adult daily intake of these vitamins is negligible. Milk is considered an important source of vitamin A, and because pasteurization appears to increase vitamin A concentrations in milk, the effect of milk heat treatment on this vitamin is a not a major public health concern. Results of meta-analyses reveal that pasteurization of milk leads to a significant decrease in vitamin C and folate, but milk is also not an important source of these vitamins. A significant decrease in vitamin B2 concentrations was found after pasteurization. Vitamin B2 is typically found in bovine milk at concentrations of 1.83\u00a0mg/liter. Because the recommended daily intake for adults is 1.1\u00a0mg/day, milk consumption greatly contributes to the recommended daily intake of this vitamin. Except for B2, pasteurization does not appear to be a concern in diminishing the nutritive value of milk because milk is often not a primary source of these studied vitamins in the North American diet.\nSensory effects.\nPasteurization also has a small but measurable effect on the sensory attributes of the foods that are processed. In fruit juices, pasteurization may result in loss of volatile aroma compounds. Fruit juice products undergo a deaeration process before pasteurization that may be responsible for this loss. Deaeration also minimizes the loss of nutrients like vitamin C and carotene. To prevent the decrease in quality resulting from the loss in volatile compounds, volatile recovery, though costly, can be utilized to produce higher-quality juice products.\nRegarding color, the pasteurization process does not have much effect on pigments such as chlorophylls, anthocyanins, and carotenoids in plants and animal tissues. In fruit juices, polyphenol oxidase (PPO) is the main enzyme responsible for causing browning and color changes. This enzyme is deactivated in the deaeration step before pasteurization with the removal of oxygen.\nIn milk, the color difference between pasteurized and raw milk is related to the homogenization step that takes place before pasteurization. Before pasteurization milk is homogenized to emulsify its fat and water-soluble components, which results in the pasteurized milk having a whiter appearance compared to raw milk. For vegetable products, color degradation is dependent on the temperature conditions and the duration of heating.\nPasteurization may result in some textural loss as a result of enzymatic and non-enzymatic transformations in the structure of pectin if the processing temperatures are too high as a result. With mild heat treatment pasteurization, tissue softening in the vegetables that causes textural loss is not of concern as long as the temperature does not get above .\nNovel pasteurization methods.\nMore broadly, pasteurizing is any method that reduces microbes by an amount (log reduction) equivalent to Pasteur's process. Novel processes, thermal and non-thermal, have been developed to pasteurize foods as a way of reducing the effects on nutritional and sensory characteristics of foods and preventing the degradation of heat-labile nutrients. Pascalization or high pressure processing (HPP), pulsed electric field (PEF), ionising radiation, high pressure pasteurization, UV decontamination, pulsed high intensity light, high intensity laser, pulsed white light, high power ultrasound, oscillating magnetic fields, high voltage arc discharge, and streamer plasma are examples of these non-thermal pasteurization methods that are currently commercially utilized.\nMicrowave volumetric heating (MVH) is the newest available pasteurization technology. It uses microwaves to heat liquids, suspensions, or semi-solids in a continuous flow. Because MVH delivers energy evenly and deeply into the whole body of a flowing product, it allows for gentler and shorter heating, so that almost all heat-sensitive substances in the milk are preserved.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23312", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23312", "title": "Penicillin", "text": "Group of antibiotics derived from Penicillium fungi\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPenicillins (P, PCN or PEN) are a group of \u03b2-lactam antibiotics originally obtained from \"Penicillium\" moulds, principally \"P. chrysogenum\" and \"P. rubens\". Most penicillins in clinical use are synthesised by \"P. chrysogenum\" using deep tank fermentation and then purified. A number of natural penicillins have been discovered, but only two purified compounds are in clinical use: penicillin G (intramuscular or intravenous use) and penicillin V (given by mouth). Penicillins were among the first medications to be effective against many bacterial infections caused by staphylococci and streptococci. They are still widely used today for various bacterial infections, though many types of bacteria have developed resistance following extensive use.\nIn the United States, 10% of the population claims penicillin allergies, but because the frequency of positive skin test results decreases by 10% with each year of avoidance, 90% of these patients can eventually tolerate penicillin. Additionally, those with penicillin allergies can usually tolerate cephalosporins (another group of \u03b2-lactam) because the immunoglobulin E (IgE) cross-reactivity is only 3%.\nPenicillin was discovered in 1928 by the Scottish physician Alexander Fleming as a crude extract of \"P. rubens\". Fleming's student Cecil George Paine was the first to successfully use penicillin to treat eye infection (neonatal conjunctivitis) in 1930. The purified compound (penicillin F) was isolated in 1940 by a research team led by Howard Florey and Ernst Boris Chain at the University of Oxford. Fleming first used the purified penicillin to treat streptococcal meningitis in 1942. The 1945 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was shared by Chain, Fleming and Florey.\nSeveral semisynthetic penicillins are effective against a broader spectrum of bacteria: these include the antistaphylococcal penicillins, aminopenicillins, and antipseudomonal penicillins.\nNomenclature.\nThe term \"penicillin\" is defined as the natural product of \"Penicillium\" mould with antimicrobial activity. It was coined by Alexander Fleming on 7 March 1929 when he discovered the antibacterial property of \"Penicillium rubens\". Fleming explained in his 1929 paper in the \"British Journal of Experimental Pathology\" that \"to avoid the repetition of the rather cumbersome phrase 'Mould broth filtrate', the name 'penicillin' will be used.\" The name thus refers to the scientific name of the mould, as described by Fleming in his Nobel lecture in 1945:\nI have been frequently asked why I invented the name \"Penicillin\". I simply followed perfectly orthodox lines and coined a word which explained that the substance penicillin was derived from a plant of the genus Penicillium just as many years ago the word \"Digitalin\" was invented for a substance derived from the plant \"Digitalis\".\nIn modern usage \"penicillin\" is used more broadly to refer to any \u03b2-lactam antimicrobial that contains a thiazolidine ring fused to the \u03b2-lactam core and may or may not be a natural product. Like most natural products, penicillin is present in \"Penicillium\" moulds as a mixture of active constituents (gentamicin is another example of a natural product that is an ill-defined mixture of active components). The principal active components of \"Penicillium\" are listed in the following table:\nOther minor active components of \"Penicillium\" include penicillin O, penicillin U1, and penicillin U6. Other named constituents of natural \"Penicillium\", such as penicillin A, were subsequently found not to have antibiotic activity and are not chemically related to antibiotic penicillins.\nThe precise constitution of the penicillin extracted depends on the species of \"Penicillium\" mould used and on the nutrient media used to culture the mould. Fleming's original strain of \"Penicillium rubens\" produces principally penicillin F, named after Fleming. But penicillin F is unstable, difficult to isolate, and produced by the mould in small quantities.\nThe principal commercial strain of \"Penicillium chrysogenum\" (the Peoria strain) produces penicillin G as the principal component when corn steep liquor is used as the culture medium. When phenoxyethanol or phenoxyacetic acid are added to the culture medium, the mould produces penicillin V as the main penicillin instead.\n6-Aminopenicillanic acid (6-APA) is a compound derived from penicillin G. 6-APA contains the beta-lactam core of penicillin G, but with the side chains stripped off; 6-APA is a useful precursor for manufacturing other penicillins. There are many semi-synthetic penicillins derived from 6-APA and these are in three groups: antistaphylococcal penicillins, broad-spectrum penicillins, and antipseudomonal penicillins. The semi-synthetic penicillins are all referred to as penicillins because they are all derived ultimately from penicillin G.\nPenicillin units.\nThe use of units to prescribe penicillin is largely obsolete outside of the US. Since the original penicillin was an ill-defined mixture of active compounds (an amorphous yellow powder), the potency of penicillin varied from batch to batch. It was therefore impractical to prescribe 1 g of penicillin because the activity of 1 g of penicillin from one batch would be different from the activity from another batch. To address this problem, after manufacture, each batch of penicillin was standardised against a known unit of penicillin: each glass vial was then filled with the number of units required. In the 1940s, a vial of 5,000 Oxford units was standard, but the depending on the batch, could contain anything from 15\u00a0mg to 20\u00a0mg of penicillin. Later, a vial of 1,000,000 international units became standard, and this could contain 2.5 g to 3 g of natural penicillin (a mixture of penicillin I, II, III, and IV and natural impurities). With the advent of pure penicillin G preparations (a white crystalline powder), there is little reason to prescribe penicillin in units, although units are still used for benzathine benzylpenicillin in the United States.\nThe \"unit\" of penicillin has had three previous definitions, and each definition was chosen as being roughly equivalent to the previous one.\nThere is an older unit for penicillin V that is not equivalent to the current penicillin V unit. The reason is that the US FDA incorrectly assumed that the potency of penicillin V is the same mole-for-mole as penicillin G. In fact, penicillin V is less potent than penicillin G, and the current penicillin V unit reflects that fact.\nA similar standard was also established for penicillin K.\nTypes.\nPenicillins consist of a distinct 4-membered beta-lactam ring, in addition to a thiazolide ring and an R side chain. The main distinguishing feature between variants within this family is the \"R substituent\". \nThis side chain is connected to the 6-aminopenicillanic acid residue and results in \"variations\" in the antimicrobial spectrum, stability and susceptibility to beta-lactamases of each type.\nNatural penicillins.\nPenicillin G (benzylpenicillin) was first produced from a penicillium fungus that occurs in nature. The strain of fungus used today for the manufacture of penicillin G was created by genetic engineering to improve the yield in the manufacturing process. None of the other natural penicillins (F, K, N, X, O, U1 or U6) are currently in clinical use.\nSemi-synthetic penicillin.\nPenicillin V (phenoxymethylpenicillin) is produced by adding the precursor phenoxyacetic acid to the medium in which a genetically modified strain of the penicillium fungus is being cultured.\nAntibiotics created from 6-APA.\nThere are three major groups of other semi-synthetic antibiotics related to the penicillins. They are synthesised by adding various side-chains to the precursor 6-APA, which is isolated from penicillin G. These are the antistaphylococcal antibiotics, broad-spectrum antibiotics and antipseudomonal antibiotics.\nAntistaphylococcal antibiotics.\nAntistaphylococcal antibiotics are so-called because they are resistant to being broken down by staphylococcal penicillinase. They are also, therefore, referred to as being penicillinase-resistant.\nBroad-spectrum antibiotics.\nThis group of antibiotics is called \"broad-spectrum\" because they are active against a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria such as \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Salmonella typhi\", for which penicillin is not suitable. However, resistance in these organisms is now common.\nThere are many ampicillin precursors in existence. These are inactive compounds that are broken down in the gut to release ampicillin. None of these pro-drugs of ampicillin is in current use:\nEpicillin is an aminopenicillin that has never seen widespread clinical use.\nAntipseudomonal antibiotics.\nThe Gram-negative species, \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa,\" is naturally resistant to many antibiotic classes. There were many efforts in the 1960s and 1970s to develop antibiotics that are active against \"Pseudomonas\" species. There are two chemical classes within the group: carboxypenicillins and ureidopenicillins. All are given by injection: none can be given by mouth.\nMedical usage.\nThe term \"penicillin\", when used by itself, may refer to either of two chemical compounds, penicillin G or penicillin V.\nPenicillin G.\nPenicillin G is destroyed by stomach acid, so it cannot be taken by mouth, but doses as high as 2.4 g can be given (much higher than penicillin V). It is given by intravenous or intramuscular injection. It can be formulated as an insoluble salt, and there are two such formulations in current use: procaine penicillin and benzathine benzylpenicillin. When a high concentration in the blood must be maintained, penicillin G must be administered at relatively frequent intervals, because it is eliminated quite rapidly from the bloodstream by the kidney.\nPenicillin G is licensed for use to treat septicaemia, empyema, pneumonia, pericarditis, endocarditis and meningitis caused by susceptible strains of staphylococci and streptococci. It is also licensed for the treatment of anthrax, actinomycosis, cervicofacial disease, thoracic and abdominal disease, clostridial infections, botulism, gas gangrene (with accompanying debridement and/or surgery as indicated), tetanus (as an adjunctive therapy to human tetanus immune globulin), diphtheria (as an adjunctive therapy to antitoxin and for the prevention of the carrier state), erysipelothrix endocarditis, fusospirochetosis (severe infections of the oropharynx, lower respiratory tract and genital area), \"Listeria\" infections, meningitis, endocarditis, \"Pasteurella\" infections including bacteraemia and meningitis, Haverhill fever; rat-bite fever and disseminated gonococcal infections, meningococcal meningitis and/or septicaemia caused by penicillin-susceptible organisms and syphilis.\nPenicillin V.\nPenicillin V can be taken by mouth because it is relatively resistant to stomach acid. Doses higher than 500\u00a0mg are not fully effective because of poor absorption. It is used for the same bacterial infections as those of penicillin G and is the most widely used form of penicillin. However, it is not used for diseases, such as endocarditis, where high blood levels of penicillin are required.\nBacterial susceptibility.\nBecause penicillin resistance is now so common, other antibiotics are now the preferred choice for treatments. For example, penicillin used to be the first-line treatment for infections with \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" and \"Neisseria meningitidis\", but it is no longer recommended for treatment of these infections. Penicillin resistance is now very common in \"Staphylococcus aureus\", which means penicillin should not be used to treat infections caused by \"S. aureus\" infection unless the infecting strain is known to be susceptible.\nSide effects.\nCommon (\u2265 1% of people) adverse drug reactions associated with use of the penicillins include diarrhoea, hypersensitivity, nausea, rash, neurotoxicity, urticaria, and superinfection (including candidiasis). Infrequent adverse effects (0.1\u20131% of people) include fever, vomiting, erythema, dermatitis, angioedema, seizures (especially in people with epilepsy), and pseudomembranous colitis. Penicillin can also induce serum sickness or a serum sickness-like reaction in some individuals. Serum sickness is a type III hypersensitivity reaction that occurs one to three weeks after exposure to drugs including penicillin. It is not a true drug allergy, because allergies are type I hypersensitivity reactions, but repeated exposure to the offending agent can result in an anaphylactic reaction. Allergy will occur in 1\u201310% of people, presenting as a skin rash after exposure. IgE-mediated anaphylaxis will occur in approximately 0.01% of patients.\nPain and inflammation at the injection site are also common for parenterally administered benzathine benzylpenicillin, benzylpenicillin, and, to a lesser extent, procaine benzylpenicillin. The condition is known as livedoid dermatitis or Nicolau syndrome.\nStructure.\nThe term \"penam\" is used to describe the common core skeleton of a member of the penicillins. This core has the molecular formula R-C9H11N2O4S, where R is the variable side chain that differentiates the penicillins from one another. The penam core has a molar mass of 243 g/mol, with larger penicillins having molar mass near 450\u2014for example, cloxacillin has a molar mass of 436 g/mol. 6-APA (C8H12N2O3S) forms the basic structure of penicillins. It is made up of an enclosed dipeptide formed by the condensation of -cysteine and -valine. This results in the formations of \u03b2-lactam and thiazolidinic rings.\nThe key structural feature of the penicillins is the four-membered \u03b2-lactam ring; this structural moiety is essential for penicillin's antibacterial activity. The \u03b2-lactam ring is itself fused to a five-membered thiazolidine ring. The fusion of these two rings causes the \u03b2-lactam ring to be more reactive than monocyclic \u03b2-lactams because the two fused rings distort the \u03b2-lactam amide bond and therefore remove the resonance stabilisation normally found in these chemical bonds. An acyl side side chain attached to the \u03b2-lactam ring.\nA variety of \u03b2-lactam antibiotics have been produced following chemical modification from the 6-APA structure during synthesis, specifically by making chemical substitutions in the acyl side chain. For example, the first chemically altered penicillin, methicillin, had substitutions by methoxy groups at positions 2' and 6' of the 6-APA benzene ring from penicillin G. This difference makes methicillin resistant to the activity of \u03b2-lactamase, an enzyme by which many bacteria are naturally unsusceptible to penicillins.\nPharmacology.\nEntry into bacteria.\nPenicillin can easily enter bacterial cells in the case of Gram-positive species. This is because Gram-positive bacteria do not have an outer cell membrane and are simply enclosed in a thick cell wall. Penicillin molecules are small enough to pass through the spaces of glycoproteins in the cell wall. For this reason Gram-positive bacteria are very susceptible to penicillin (as first evidenced by the discovery of penicillin in 1928).\nPenicillin, or any other molecule, enters Gram-negative bacteria in a different manner. The bacteria have thinner cell walls but the external surface is coated with an additional cell membrane, called the outer membrane. The outer membrane is a lipid layer (lipopolysaccharide chain) that blocks passage of water-soluble (hydrophilic) molecules like penicillin. It thus acts as the first line of defence against any toxic substance, which is the reason for relative resistance to antibiotics compared to Gram-positive species. But penicillin can still enter Gram-negative species by diffusing through aqueous channels called porins (outer membrane proteins), which are dispersed among the fatty molecules and can transport nutrients and antibiotics into the bacteria. Porins are large enough to allow diffusion of most penicillins, but the rate of diffusion through them is determined by the specific size of the drug molecules. For instance, penicillin G is large and enters through porins slowly; while smaller ampicillin and amoxicillin diffuse much faster. In contrast, large vancomycin can not pass through porins and is thus ineffective for Gram-negative bacteria. The size and number of porins are different in different bacteria. As a result of the two factors\u2014size of penicillin and porin\u2014Gram-negative bacteria can be unsusceptible or have varying degree of susceptibility to specific penicillin.\nMechanism of action.\nPenicillin kills bacteria by inhibiting the completion of the synthesis of peptidoglycans, the structural component of the bacterial cell wall. It specifically inhibits the activity of enzymes that are needed for the cross-linking of peptidoglycans during the final step in cell wall biosynthesis. It does this by binding to penicillin binding proteins with the \u03b2-lactam ring, a structure found on penicillin molecules. This causes the cell wall to weaken due to fewer cross-links and means water uncontrollably flows into the cell because it cannot maintain the correct osmotic gradient. This results in cell lysis and death.\nBacteria constantly remodel their peptidoglycan cell walls, simultaneously building and breaking down portions of the cell wall as they grow and divide. During the last stages of peptidoglycan biosynthesis, uridine diphosphate-\"N\"-acetylmuramic acid pentapeptide (UDP-MurNAc) is formed in which the fourth and fifth amino acids are both -alanyl--alanine. The transfer of -alanine is done (catalysed) by the enzyme -transpeptidase (penicillin-binding proteins are such type). The structural integrity of bacterial cell wall depends on the cross linking of UDP-MurNAc and \"N\"-acetyl glucosamine. Penicillin and other \u03b2-lactam antibiotics act as an analogue of -alanine--alanine (the dipeptide) in UDP-MurNAc owing to conformational similarities. The -transpeptidase then binds the four-membered \u03b2-lactam ring of penicillin instead of UDP-MurNAc. As a consequence, -transpeptidase is inactivated, the formation of cross-links between UDP-MurNAc and \"N\"-acetyl glucosamine is blocked so that an imbalance between cell wall production and degradation develops, causing the cell to rapidly die.\nThe enzymes that hydrolyse the peptidoglycan cross-links continue to function, even while those that form such cross-links do not. This weakens the cell wall of the bacterium, and osmotic pressure becomes increasingly uncompensated\u2014eventually causing cell death (cytolysis). In addition, the build-up of peptidoglycan precursors triggers the activation of bacterial cell wall hydrolases and autolysins, which further digest the cell wall's peptidoglycans. The small size of the penicillins increases their potency, by allowing them to penetrate the entire depth of the cell wall. This is in contrast to the glycopeptide antibiotics vancomycin and teicoplanin, which are both much larger than the penicillins.\nGram-positive bacteria are called protoplasts when they lose their cell walls. Gram-negative bacteria do not lose their cell walls completely and are called spheroplasts after treatment with penicillin.\nPenicillin shows a synergistic effect with aminoglycosides, since the inhibition of peptidoglycan synthesis allows aminoglycosides to penetrate the bacterial cell wall more easily, allowing their disruption of bacterial protein synthesis within the cell. This results in a lowered MBC for susceptible organisms.\nPenicillins, like other \"\u03b2\"-lactam antibiotics, block not only the division of bacteria, including cyanobacteria, but also the division of cyanelles, the photosynthetic organelles of the glaucophytes, and the division of chloroplasts of bryophytes. In contrast, they have no effect on the plastids of the highly developed vascular plants. This supports the endosymbiotic theory of the evolution of plastid division in land plants.\nSome bacteria produce enzymes that break down the \u03b2-lactam ring, called \u03b2-lactamases, which make the bacteria resistant to penicillin. Therefore, some penicillins are modified or given with other drugs for use against antibiotic-resistant bacteria or in immunocompromised patients. The use of clavulanic acid or tazobactam, \u03b2-lactamase inhibitors, alongside penicillin gives penicillin activity against \u03b2-lactamase-producing bacteria. \u03b2-Lactamase inhibitors irreversibly bind to \u03b2-lactamase preventing it from breaking down the beta-lactam rings on the antibiotic molecule. Alternatively, flucloxacillin is a modified penicillin that has activity against \u03b2-lactamase-producing bacteria due to an acyl side chain that protects the beta-lactam ring from \u03b2-lactamase.\nPharmacokinetics.\nPenicillin has low protein binding in plasma. The bioavailability of penicillin depends on the type: penicillin G has low bioavailability, below 30%, whereas penicillin V has higher bioavailability, between 60 and 70%.\nPenicillin has a short half-life and is excreted via the kidneys. This means it must be dosed at least four times a day to maintain adequate levels of penicillin in the blood. Early manuals on the use of penicillin, therefore, recommended injections of penicillin as frequently as every three hours, and dosing penicillin has been described as being similar to trying to fill a bath with the plug out. This is no longer required since much larger doses of penicillin are cheaply and easily available; however, some authorities recommend the use of continuous penicillin infusions for this reason.\nResistance.\nWhen Alexander Fleming discovered the crude penicillin in 1928, one important observation he made was that many bacteria were not affected by penicillin. This phenomenon was realised by Ernst Chain and Edward Abraham while trying to identify the exact of penicillin. In 1940 they discovered that unsusceptible bacteria like \"Escherichia coli\" produced specific enzymes that can break down penicillin molecules, thus making them resistant to the antibiotic. They named the enzyme penicillinase. Penicillinase is now classified as member of enzymes called \u03b2-lactamases. These \u03b2-lactamases are naturally present in many other bacteria, and many bacteria produce them upon constant exposure to antibiotics. In most bacteria, resistance can be through three different mechanisms\u00a0\u2013 reduced permeability in bacteria, reduced binding affinity of the penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) or destruction of the antibiotic through the expression of \u03b2-lactamase. Using any of these, bacteria commonly develop resistance to different antibiotics, a phenomenon called multi-drug resistance.\nThe actual process of resistance mechanism can be very complex. In case of reduced permeability in bacteria, the mechanisms are different between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. In Gram-positive bacteria, blockage of penicillin is due to changes in the cell wall. For example, resistance to vancomycin in \"S. aureus\" is due to additional peptidoglycan synthesis that makes the cell wall much thicker preventing effective penicillin entry. Resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is due to mutational variations in the structure and number of porins. In bacteria like \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", there is reduced number of porins; whereas in bacteria like \"Enterobacter\" species, \"Escherichia\" \"coli\" and \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", there are modified porins such as non-specific porins (such as OmpC and OmpF groups) that cannot transport penicillin.\nResistance due to PBP alterations is highly varied. A common case is found in \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" where there is mutation in the gene for PBP, and the mutant PBPs have decreased binding affinity for penicillins. There are six mutant PBPs in \"S. pneumoniae\", of which PBP1a, PBP2b, PBP2x and sometimes PBP2a are responsible for reduced binding affinity. \"S. aureus\" can activate a hidden gene that produces a different PBP, PBD2, which has low binding affinity for penicillins. There is a different strain of \"S. aureus\" named methicillin-resistant \"S. aureus\" (MRSA) which is resistant not only to penicillin and other \u03b2-lactams, but also to most antibiotics. The bacterial strain developed after introduction of methicillin in 1959. In MRSA, mutations in the genes (\"mec\" system) for PBP produce a variant protein called PBP2a (also termed PBP2'), while making four normal PBPs. PBP2a has poor binding affinity for penicillin and also lacks glycosyltransferase activity required for complete peptidoglycan synthesis (which is carried out by the four normal PBPs). In \"Helicobacter cinaedi\", there are multiple mutations in different genes that make PBP variants.\nEnzymatic destruction by \u03b2-lactamases is the most important mechanism of penicillin resistance, and is described as \"the greatest threat to the usage [of penicillins]\". It was the first discovered mechanism of penicillin resistance. During the experiments when purification and biological activity tests of penicillin were performed in 1940, it was found that \"E. coli\" was unsusceptible. The reason was discovered as production of an enzyme penicillinase (hence, the first \u03b2-lactamase known) in \"E. coli\" that easily degraded penicillin. There are over 2,000 types of \u03b2-lactamases each of which has unique amino acid sequence, and thus, enzymatic activity. All of them are able to hydrolyse \u03b2-lactam rings but their exact target sites are different. They are secreted on the bacterial surface in large quantities in Gram-positive bacteria but less so in Gram-negative species. Therefore, in a mixed bacterial infection, the Gram-positive bacteria can protect the otherwise penicillin-susceptible Gram-negative cells.\nThere are unusual mechanisms in \"P. aeruginosa\", in which there can be biofilm-mediated resistance and formation of multidrug-tolerant persister cells.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nStarting in the late-19th century there had been reports of the antibacterial properties of \"Penicillium\" mould, but scientists were unable to discern what process was causing the effect. The Scottish physician Alexander Fleming at St. Mary's Hospital in London (now part of Imperial College) was the first to show that \"Penicillium rubens\" had antibacterial properties. On 3 September 1928 he observed by chance that fungal contamination of a bacterial culture (\"Staphylococcus aureus\") appeared to kill the bacteria. He confirmed this observation with a new experiment on 28 September 1928. He published his experiment in 1929, and called the antibacterial substance (the fungal extract) penicillin.\nC. J. La Touche identified the fungus as \"Penicillium rubrum\" (later reclassified by Charles Thom as \"P. notatum\" and \"P. chrysogenum\", but later corrected as \"P. rubens\"). Fleming expressed initial optimism that penicillin would be a useful antiseptic, because of its high potency and minimal toxicity in comparison to other antiseptics of the day, and noted its laboratory value in the isolation of \"Bacillus influenzae\" (now called \"Haemophilus influenzae\").\nFleming did not convince anyone that his discovery was important. This was largely because penicillin was so difficult to isolate that its development as a drug seemed impossible. It is speculated that had Fleming been more successful at making other scientists interested in his work, penicillin would possibly have been developed years earlier.\nThe importance of his work has been recognised by the placement of an International Historic Chemical Landmark at the Alexander Fleming Laboratory Museum in London on 19 November 1999.\nDevelopment and medical application.\nIn 1930 Cecil George Paine, a pathologist at the Royal Infirmary in Sheffield, successfully treated ophthalmia neonatorum, a gonococcal infection in infants, with penicillin (fungal extract) on 25 November 1930.\nIn 1940 the Australian scientist Howard Florey (later Baron Florey) and a team of researchers (Ernst Chain, Edward Abraham, Arthur Duncan Gardner, Norman Heatley, Margaret Jennings, Jean Orr-Ewing and Arthur Gordon Sanders) at the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology of the University of Oxford made progress in making concentrated penicillin from fungal culture broth that showed both \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\" bactericidal action. In 1941 they treated a policeman, Albert Alexander, with a severe face infection; his condition improved, but then supplies of penicillin ran out and he died. Subsequently, several other patients were treated successfully. In December 1942, survivors of the Cocoanut Grove fire in Boston, United States, were the first burn patients to be successfully treated with penicillin.\nThe first successful use of pure penicillin was in 1942 when Fleming cured Harry Lambert of an infection of the nervous system (streptococcal meningitis) which would otherwise have been fatal. By that time the Oxford team could produce only a small amount. Florey willingly gave the only available sample to Fleming. Lambert showed improvement from the very next day of the treatment, and was completely cured within a week. Fleming published his clinical trial in \"The Lancet\" in 1943. Following the medical breakthrough, the British War Cabinet set up the Penicillin Committee on 5 April 1943 that led to projects for mass production.\nMass production.\nAs the medical application was established, the Oxford team found that it was impossible to produce usable amounts in their laboratory. Failing to persuade His Majesty's Government, Florey and Heatley travelled to the US in June 1941 with their mould samples in order to interest the US federal government for large-scale production. They approached the Northern Regional Research Laboratory (NRRL, now the National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research) of the US Department of Agriculture at Peoria, Illinois, where facilities for large-scale fermentations were established. Mass culture of the mould and search for better moulds immediately followed.\nOn 14 March 1942 the first patient was treated for streptococcal sepsis with US-made penicillin produced by Merck &amp; Co. Half of the total supply produced at the time was used on that one patient, Anne Miller. By June 1942, just enough US penicillin was available to treat ten patients. In July 1943 the War Production Board drew up a plan for the mass distribution of penicillin stocks to Allied troops fighting in Europe. The results of fermentation research on corn steep liquor at the NRRL allowed the United States to produce 2.3\u00a0million doses in time for the invasion of Normandy in the spring of 1944. After a worldwide search in 1943, a mouldy cantaloupe in a Peoria, Illinois market was found to contain the best strain of mould for production using the corn steep liquor process. Six times as much penicillin could be produced compared to using Fleming's mould. Jasper H. Kane, a scientist at Pfizer, suggested using a deep-tank fermentation method for producing large quantities of pharmaceutical-grade penicillin. Large-scale production resulted from the development of a deep-tank fermentation plant by the chemical engineer Margaret Hutchinson Rousseau. As a direct result of the war and the War Production Board, by June 1945 over 646\u00a0billion units per year were being produced.\nG. Raymond Rettew made a significant contribution to the American war effort by his techniques to produce commercial quantities of penicillin, wherein he combined his knowledge of mushroom spawn with the function of the Sharples Cream Separator. By 1943 Rettew's lab was producing most of the world's penicillin. During the Second World War penicillin made a major difference in the number of deaths and amputations caused by infected wounds amongst Allied forces, saving an estimated 12\u201315% of lives. Availability was severely limited, however, by the difficulty of manufacturing large quantities of penicillin and by the rapid renal clearance of the drug, necessitating frequent dosing. Methods for mass production of penicillin were patented by Andrew Jackson Moyer in 1945. Florey had not patented penicillin, having been advised by Sir Henry Dale that doing so would be unethical.\nPenicillin is actively excreted, and about 80% of a penicillin dose is cleared from the body within three to four hours of administration. Indeed, during the early penicillin era, the drug was so scarce and so highly valued that it became common to collect the urine from patients being treated, so that the penicillin in the urine could be isolated and reused. This was not a satisfactory solution, so researchers looked for a way to slow penicillin excretion. They hoped to find a molecule that could compete with penicillin for the organic acid transporter responsible for excretion, such that the transporter would preferentially excrete the competing molecule and the penicillin would be retained. The uricosuric agent probenecid proved to be suitable. When probenecid and penicillin are administered together, probenecid competitively inhibits the excretion of penicillin, increasing penicillin's concentration and prolonging its activity. Eventually, the advent of mass-production techniques and semi-synthetic penicillins resolved the supply issues, so this use of probenecid declined. Probenecid is still useful, however, for certain infections requiring particularly high concentrations of penicillins.\nAfter the Second World War Australia was the first country to make the drug available for civilian use. In the United States penicillin was made available to the general public on 15 March 1945.\nFleming, Florey and Chain shared the 1945 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the development of penicillin.\nStructure determination and total synthesis.\nThe chemical structure of penicillin was first proposed by Edward Abraham in 1942 and was later confirmed in 1945 using X-ray crystallography by Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin, who was also working at Oxford. She later in 1964 received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this and other structure determinations.\nThe chemist John C. Sheehan at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) completed the first chemical synthesis of penicillin in 1957. Sheehan had started his studies into penicillin synthesis in 1948, and during these investigations developed new methods for the synthesis of peptides, as well as new protecting groups\u2014groups that mask the reactivity of certain functional groups. Although the initial synthesis developed by Sheehan was not appropriate for mass production of penicillins, one of the intermediate compounds in Sheehan's synthesis was 6-aminopenicillanic acid (6-APA), the nucleus of penicillin.\n6-APA was discovered by researchers at the Beecham Research Laboratories (later the Beecham Group) in Surrey in 1957 (published in 1959). Attaching different groups to the 6-APA 'nucleus' of penicillin allowed the creation of new forms of penicillins which are more versatile and better in activity.\nDevelopments from penicillin.\nThe narrow range of treatable diseases or \"spectrum of activity\" of the penicillins, along with the poor activity of the orally active phenoxymethylpenicillin, led to the search for derivatives of penicillin that could treat a wider range of infections. The isolation of 6-APA, the nucleus of penicillin, allowed for the preparation of semisynthetic penicillins, with various improvements over benzylpenicillin (bioavailability, spectrum, stability, tolerance).\nThe first major development was ampicillin in 1961. It offered a broader spectrum of activity than either of the original penicillins. Further development yielded \u03b2-lactamase-resistant penicillins, including flucloxacillin, dicloxacillin and methicillin. These were significant for their activity against \u03b2-lactamase-producing bacterial species, but were ineffective against the methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA) strains that subsequently emerged.\nAnother development of the line of true penicillins was the antipseudomonal penicillins, such as carbenicillin, ticarcillin, and piperacillin, useful for their activity against Gram-negative bacteria. However, the usefulness of the \u03b2-lactam ring was such that related antibiotics, including the mecillinams, the carbapenems, and, most importantly, the cephalosporins, still retain it at the center of their structures.\nProduction.\nPenicillin is produced by the fermentation of various types of sugar by the fungus \"Penicillium rubens\". The fermentation process produces penicillin as a secondary metabolite when the growth of the fungus is inhibited by stress. The biosynthetic pathway outlined below experiences feedback inhibition involving the by-product l-lysine inhibiting the enzyme homocitrate synthase.\n \u03b1-ketoglutarate + AcCoA \u2192 homocitrate \u2192 -\u03b1-aminoadipic acid \u2192 -lysine + \u03b2-lactam\nThe \"Penicillium\" cells are grown using a technique called fed-batch culture, in which the cells are constantly subjected to stress, which is required for induction of penicillin production. While the usage of glucose as a carbon source represses penicillin biosynthesis enzymes, lactose does not exert any effect and alkaline pH levels override this regulation. Excess phosphate, available oxygen, and usage of ammonium as a nitrogen source repress penicillin production, while methionine can act as a sole nitrogen/sulfur source with stimulating effects.\nThe biotechnological method of directed evolution has been applied to produce by mutation a large number of \"Penicillium\" strains. These techniques include error-prone PCR, DNA shuffling, ITCHY and strand-overlap PCR.\nBiosynthesis.\nThe biosynthetic gene cluster for penicillin was first cloned and sequenced in 1990. Overall, there are three main and important steps to the biosynthesis of penicillin G (benzylpenicillin).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23313", "revid": "43331825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23313", "title": "Piri Reis", "text": "Ottoman admiral and cartographer (c. 1470\u20131553)\nPiri Reis (; born Muhiddin Piri; c. 1470\u20131553) was an Ottoman Turkish cartographer, admiral, navigator, and corsair. He is best known for his 1513 world map and his nautical atlas, the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" (\"Book of the Sea\"). His maps combined classical sources, his own seafaring knowledge, and information from new European discoveries. The 1513 world map drew international attention when rediscovered centuries later during renovations to the Topkap\u0131 Palace in Istanbul because it includes details from a now-lost map by Christopher Columbus.\nHe began his maritime career sailing with his uncle, the corsair Kemal Reis, with whom he entered Ottoman naval service. He later commanded his own ship in the Ottoman\u2013Venetian wars and, following his uncle\u2019s death, began the cartographic work for which he became best known. Returning to the fleet by 1516, he took part in the conquest of Egypt. He presented his world maps and atlases as gifts to the Ottoman Sultan, and commanded a small group of ships in naval operations in the Eastern Mediterranean. Later, as grand admiral of the Ottoman fleet in the Indian Ocean, Piri Reis led successful campaigns in the Red Sea, but was executed following his retreat from the siege of Hormuz Island at the mouth of the Persian Gulf.\nDuring his lifetime, Piri Reis' cartography received little appreciation, but many copies of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" were produced after his death. The 1929 rediscovery of his first world map increased interest in his work and made his career a point of national pride for Turkey. Although the map has been the subject of fringe theories based on the disproven hypothesis that the map depicted an ice-free Antarctica, studies have shown no significant similarities between the map and Antarctica's subglacial coast. Nevertheless, this speculation has increased interest in Piri Reis' cartography.\nBiography.\nEarly life and piracy.\nWhat historians know about Piri Reis' early life comes almost entirely from his own writing in a few surviving cartographic works. Across decades of naval service and piracy\u2014which began at a young age\u2014he created notes and charts that would later inform his cartography. He was likely born between 1465 and 1470 in Gelibolu, Turkey, also known as Gallipoli, a major naval base for the Ottoman Empire. Ibn Kemal, an Ottoman historian active during the period, wrote: \"The children of Gelibolu grow up in the water like alligators. Their cradles are the boats. They are rocked to sleep with the lullaby of the sea and of the ships day and night.\" Born Muhiddin Piri, he later earned the rank \"Reis\", equivalent to a captain in the Ottoman Navy. He wrote that his father's name was Hac\u0131 Mehmed. His uncle Kemal Reis was a notable corsair, a type of pirate acting with state approval, often along religious lines, in the Mediterranean Sea.\nPiri Reis began sailing aboard his uncle's ship as a child around 1481. His first recorded naval combat experience came fighting alongside his uncle in the Western Mediterranean. From the 8th to the 15th centuries, Catholic monarchs in the Iberian Peninsula had been expanding south and conquering Muslim-ruled al-Andalus (Andalusia) in campaigns known as the \"Reconquista\" (Reconquest)\".\" When their forces reached the Emirate of Granada, its Muslim rulers asked for assistance from the Ottoman Empire, one of the largest Muslim powers in the Mediterranean, spanning Anatolia and much of the Balkans in Eastern Europe. With Sultan Bayezid II's approval, Kemal Reis sailed to the Western Mediterranean with his nephew. As a teenager, Piri Reis helped his uncle bombard the Catholic forces laying siege to M\u00e1laga in 1487. Despite the corsairs' assistance, M\u00e1laga fell by the end of 1487 and Granada by 1492. After Spain expelled its Jewish population in 1492, Sultan Bayezid II instructed Kemal Reis to aid religious refugees. Piri Reis transported Muslims and Jews from Catholic Spain to North Africa.\nBarbary corsairs led by Kemal Reis continued to threaten European maritime traffic after the fall of Granada. Piri Reis wrote that they \"sailed on the Mediterranean and fought the enemies of our religion mercilessly.\" During winters, he and his uncle took shelter in harbors on the Barbary Coast in North Africa, including B\u00e9ja\u00efa in modern-day Algeria. For six summers from 1488 to 1493, they conducted raids along the coasts of Spain, Southern France, Corsica, Sardinia, and Sicily.\nNaval career and cartography.\nSultan Bayezid\u00a0II recruited Barbary and Aegean corsairs into the Ottoman Navy, including Piri Reis, who sailed first under his uncle and later under Hayreddin Barbarossa. Although Kemal Reis was imprisoned for piracy in 1495, rather than being sentenced he was given an official position in the navy. As Piri Reis later documented in the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\", he and his uncle advocated taking the Venetian coastal fortresses of the Peloponnese and the small but strategically valuable island of Rhodes. \nPiri Reis fought in the Ottoman\u2013Venetian wars as a captain under his uncle's command. Like other Ottoman captains, he operated a galley, a shallow oar-driven warship well suited to the Mediterranean coasts. During the 1499 Battle of Zonchio\u2014the First Battle of Lepanto\u2014Piri Reis sailed in a fleet of about 270 ships that broke through the Venetian fleet to enter the Gulf of Corinth, forcing the governor to surrender. Kemal Reis led the Ottomans to victory in the 1500 Battle of Modon\u2014the Second Battle of Lepanto\u2014and the following year in battles to retake Modon and capture Navarino in modern-day Greece. After these victories, the Ottoman Navy began to consolidate control over the Eastern Mediterranean.\nPiri and Kemal returned to the Western Mediterranean, raiding the coasts of Spain and nearby islands in 1501. In a naval battle near Valencia, Spain, they captured a Spaniard who said he had sailed with Columbus, and likely possessed an early map of the Americas that Piri Reis would later use as a source for his maps. In 1502, he and his uncle returned to Constantinople and soon resumed hostilities with Venice.\nAfter his uncle died in a shipwreck c. 1511, Piri Reis returned to Gelibolu to work on his navigational studies. There, he completed the world map for which he is best known today. Dated to March\u00a01513 AD (Muharram 919\u00a0AH), the manuscript depicts the recently explored shores of the Americas and Africa. Although Piri Reis had not sailed the Atlantic, he compiled over 20 maps of Arab, Spanish, Portuguese, Indian, and older Greek origins into a comprehensive representation of the known world of his era. By 1513, Piri Reis was sailing for the Ottomans under Hayreddin Barbarossa along the North African coast.\nDuring the 1516\u20131517 Ottoman conquest of Egypt, Piri Reis commanded the Ottoman ships blockading Alexandria. After the Ottoman victory, Piri Reis presented the 1513 world map to Sultan Selim\u00a0I (r. 1512\u20131520). How Selim used the map is unknown, as it vanished from history until its rediscovery centuries later. \nVenetian documents report that Piri Reis left the Ottoman Navy in 1518 to engage in piracy again. By 1522, he rejoined the navy and took part in Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent's Siege of Rhodes, for which he had advocated; indeed, his first version of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\"\u2014a nautical atlas dedicated and gifted to Suleiman\u2014included advice on conquering the island. Located just off the coast of Anatolia, Rhodes had a secure harbor that could threaten maritime communication between the empire's capital and Mediterranean ports. Controlled by the Knights of St.\u00a0John, the island provided shelter to Christian pirates. \nDuring the siege, the Knights' 10-ship fleet remained in the harbor rather than confront the larger Ottoman force. The Ottoman Navy conducted an amphibious operation, transporting many troops to the small island. The Knights were defeated in December 1522, temporarily taking refuge at Viterbo, Italy, and relocating more permanently to Malta several years later. The second version of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\", completed after the conquest, discusses the siege only in practical terms of acquiring drinking water from Karaba\u011f in Bodrum.\nSuleiman's reign was the beginning of a shift towards power concentrating in a group of viziers, advisers, governors, and royal family members. His childhood friend Pargal\u0131 Ibrahim Pasha rose to become the Ottoman grand vizier, or chief minister. When putting down Hain Ahmed Pasha's 1524 rebellion in Egypt, Ibrahim rode aboard the navy's flagship, commanded by Piri Reis. The longer second version of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" resulted from a conversation with the grand vizier, during which Piri Reis said they discussed cartography after Ibrahim asked him about the maps and charts used aboard the ship. Ibrahim commissioned Piri Reis to create an expanded version of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye,\" which he finished and presented to the sultan by 1526. In later centuries, many copies were made of both versions of the book. Piri Reis completed a second world map in 1528 or 1529. According to Turkish science historian Sevim Tekeli, the changes from the first world map demonstrate that he was actively following European voyages of discovery.\nVenice viewed Piri Reis as an adversary and obstacle to their aims in the Eastern Mediterranean during the 1530s. In 1532, he led a group of five galleys and three \"fustas\"\u2014smaller and lighter variants of the galley\u2014against Dalmatian pirates in the Adriatic, the branch of the Mediterranean Sea leading to Venice. One year later, he led an attack on the Venetian-held castle at Coron with 10 galleys and five \"fustas\". He captured a Venetian galley in 1536 and chased down Venetian ships in the Eastern Mediterranean in the late 1530s. When he received a promotion in Egypt in 1546, during a period of peace between Venice and the Ottomans, he attacked the Venetian ship \"Liona\" along his route, killing several sailors and capturing others.\nGrand admiral of the Indian Ocean fleet.\nAfter the death of Sinan Reis, the or grand admiral of the Ottoman Fleet in the Indian Ocean, Piri Reis took his position as admiral of the Indian Ocean fleet, as well as admiral of the fleet in Egypt. Although experienced in Mediterranean naval warfare, he arrived as a relative outsider to the conflicts unfolding around the Indian Ocean. The Portuguese and Ottoman empires were both expanding into the Indian Ocean at this time. Portuguese ships had arrived in the Indian Ocean in the early 1500s, raiding the Red Sea as far as Suez, Egypt, and attempting to gain control of the port city of Aden in Yemen. \nThe Portuguese Navy employed sailing ships capable of navigating in open seas, whereas the Ottoman Navy relied mainly on galleys, which were more effective along coasts. This limited Ottoman naval warfare to the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the narrow straits around Arabia. The Ottoman Empire focused on using its navy to continue land-based expansion into new areas for tax revenue and agriculture, in contrast to the Portuguese, who were attempting to control new oceanic trade routes between Europe and Asia. The Ottoman Empire was additionally split in its Indian Ocean endeavors between the central government managed by Grand Vizier R\u00fcstem Pasha\u2014who was seeking to turn the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf into \"Ottoman Lakes,\" as the Black Sea had become\u2014and regional leaders, who were attempting to preserve their autonomy.\nUsing his fleet based out of Suez, Piri Reis led campaigns in the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. Just prior to his promotion, the empire lost Aden, its only port on the Indian Ocean since the city's conquest just a decade earlier. The city, built into the crater of an extinct volcano on one arm of a crescent-shaped bay, was known as the \"Eye of Yemen\" because of its position at the entrance to the Red Sea along sea routes to Indian and East African ports. \u00dcveys Pasha, the governor of Yemen Eyalet, led a disastrous campaign to expand Ottoman territory inland into the highlands of Yemen that resulted in his assassination, a rebellion in Yemen's interior, and Aden's departure from the Ottoman Empire. Urban leaders in Aden gave their city to a local Arab chief, Ali al-Tawlaki, who immediately sent an ambassador to the Portuguese outpost on Hormuz Island to seek protection and alliance. The most senior remaining Ottoman leader in Yemen was Ozdemir Pasha, who wrote the Ottoman governor of Egypt to seek his assistance. \nPiri Reis left Suez to aid Ozdemir Pasha with a fleet of 60 ships on 29 October 1547. The fleet dropped off reinforcements on the shore of Yemen outside the range of Aden's cannons, then continued to Aden's crescent-shaped bay to besiege the city by sea. The two Portuguese ships that had arrived under the command of Dom Paio de Noronha were not enough to stop the Ottoman Navy or the large Ottoman land army that quickly overran the city. On 26\u00a0February 1548, the forces under Piri Reis recaptured the citadel of Aden. When another small group of Portuguese ships arrived in January 1549 and found the Ottoman Navy in the bay, they attempted to flee, but Piri Reis had his fleet pursue them, capture the Portuguese sailors, and set fire to their ships. By February of that year, when Ottoman control was fully restored, Piri Reis was reaching his 80s.\nFollowing the success at Aden, Sultan Suleiman instructed Piri Reis to take the Portuguese-controlled Hormuz Island at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. Taking Bahrain Island was a secondary objective. In April 1552, Piri Reis left Suez with 25 galleys, five ships, and 850 soldiers. The Sultan's official plan had been for Piri Reis to bring his fleet past the Portuguese unnoticed, and to merge the Suez fleet with the recently formed Ottoman fleet in the Persian Gulf. However, the fleet was spotted by a light Portuguese galley captained by Sim\u00e3o da Costa who was able to sail in advance to Hormuz, and Piri Reis decided to attack Portuguese strongholds directly. In August, the Ottoman Fleet took Muscat after a one-month siege. When the Portuguese garrison surrendered, the Ottomans took them prisoner and forced them to work the oars on galleys in the fleet. \nThe Ottomans pillaged the area, destroyed fortifications, regrouped, and continued to Hormuz as a consolidated fleet. The expedition cleared the Arabian Peninsula coast of Portuguese occupation, and the Portuguese forces prepared for the coming attack on Hormuz by evacuating most of the island. Wealthy Hormuz residents took refuge on the nearby island of Qeshm, and the Portuguese soldiers and the Hormuz royal family retreated to the fortress.\nOttoman soldiers entered the city of Hormuz in September 1552, but could not take the fortress. They besieged and bombarded it for several weeks, and Piri Reis grew concerned about the possibility of the Portuguese fleet attacking them during the siege. The Ottoman forces ran low on gunpowder during the siege, but Kubad Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Basra, did not send supplies. The next month, the Ottomans sacked the city, looted Qeshm, and retreated into the Gulf with over a million pieces of gold. The fleet arrived at Basra by 1553. A letter from the Portuguese governor inside the fortress, dated 31\u00a0October 1552, said that the walls had been near collapsing but that the Ottomans had run low on \"munitions, gunpowder, and other war materials,\" much of which they had lost when a galleon\u2014a type of larger sailing ship\u2014sank on the way to Hormuz. The Portuguese governor of India, Afonso de Noronha, organized a fleet of 40 ships led by his nephew Ant\u00e3o de Noronha that reached Hormuz in November 1552.\nAs a result, Piri Reis retreated. After the Ottoman expedition's failure, Kubad Pasha denied Piri Reis rowers for his galleys. Historian Svat Soucek suggested that hostility between the two men \"may have been at the root\" of Piri Reis' decision to return to Egypt quickly as well as the \"accusatory report the Pasha probably sent to Constantinople.\" Leaving most of the fleet behind, Piri Reis returned with only two ships in 1553. The gold he brought back to Egypt played a role in his death sentence. Ottoman histories criticize Piri Reis for looting Qeshm, some even alleging that he had accepted bribery; and although those allegations were unlikely, as a delegation from Hormuz traveled to Constantinople to demand compensation, they may have been believed at the time of his execution. Venetian diplomats in Constantinople sent a letter dated 15\u00a0November 1553 stating that Piri Reis had been \"charged with having raised the siege of the fortress of Hormuz because of bribery\" and replaced by Seydi Ali Reis. It was for sacking the city instead of maintaining the siege that the sultan had him beheaded in Cairo, the exact date of which is unknown.\nSoon after his death, Piri Reis' fleet in Basra was destroyed by the Portuguese. Seydi Ali Reis attempted to return the fleet to Suez but the Portuguese intercepted them and the Ottoman ships were captured, destroyed, or swept out to sea.\nWorks.\nPiri Reis' cartography was unusual for 16th-century Turkish and broader Islamic cartography for its deep engagement with recent European discoveries. Three of his works survive to the present day: fragments of his 1513 world map and his 1528 world map held in the Topkap\u0131 Palace Museum in Istanbul, and copies of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" in libraries and museums around the world, although his original manuscripts are lost.\nAcross his works, Piri Reis engaged with the European Age of Discovery. His first world map incorporated many non-Muslim sources, unusual for Islamic cartography of the period, and famously cites a now-lost map by Christopher Columbus. The second edition of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" incorporated information from new Portuguese and Spanish voyages, including Vasco da Gama's discovery of a sea route to India, and the 1528 world map cited new Portuguese voyages to Labrador and Newfoundland. \nAll of Piri Reis' surviving maps are portolan charts, late medieval nautical maps with compass roses from which lines of bearing radiate. Widely produced and used by European navigators, they were designed for navigation by dead reckoning, a method by which a ship's location is estimated from its direction, speed, and elapsed time. Portolan charts employ a windrose network matching the directions of a compass rather than a longitude and latitude grid. Piri Reis' maps employed standard portolan symbols to indicate hazards, such as dots for shallow water and sand banks, and crosses for rocks and reefs.\nHis works also reveal his attitude toward European discoveries. In the 1513 world map and the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" preface, he rhetorically undermines the significance of European discoveries by reframing them as the rediscovery of ancient knowledge. For instance, he invokes Alexander the Great when explaining Columbus' discoveries. According to the Quran and Turkish literary tradition, \"Dhu al-Qarnayn\"\u2014believed to be a Quranic reference to Alexander the Great\u2014traveled to every corner of the world, thereby defining its limits. Marginal inscriptions on the world map mention \"charts drawn in the days of Alexander\" and a book that \"fell into the hands\" of Columbus, describing lands \"at the end of the Western Sea.\" In the 1526 version of the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\", Piri Reis explicitly credits European discoveries to lost works created during Alexander's legendary voyages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My friend, the Franks both read and write everything there is to know about the science of the sea. But do not suppose that they invented such knowledge on their own; and if you wish, I will explain why. During his time, the famous ruler Alexander traveled over all the seas, and whatever he saw and whatever he heard he had recorded, item by item, by a competent person.\n1513 world map.\nThe Piri Reis map of 1513 is a world map compiled from a range of contemporary and classical sources. Roughly one-third of the map survives, housed in the Topkap\u0131 Palace in Istanbul. The finished manuscript was dated to the Islamic year 919\u00a0AH, equivalent to 1513\u00a0AD. After the empire's conquest of Egypt, Piri Reis presented the map to Sultan Selim I, and then it vanished from history until rediscovered centuries later. \nWhen rediscovered in 1929, the remaining fragment attracted international attention for including a partial copy of an otherwise lost map by Christopher Columbus. The map's longest inscription tells the story of Columbus' discovery of the Americas and states that Piri Reis and his uncle captured a Spaniard who had sailed with Columbus. The inscription credits part of the map's depiction of the Americas to a prisoner who said he had received a map from Columbus. Scholarly analysis of the placenames, knowledge of the Americas, and cartographic misconceptions indicates that Piri Reis likely did use a map composed during one of Columbus' early voyages to the Americas. For example, on the mainland in the northwest, a stretch of coast is labelled \"Ornofay\", a term recorded by Columbus but not found on other maps.\nThe map contains extensive notes primarily in Ottoman Turkish. The colophon in Arabic is written in a different handwriting, likely that of Piri Reis himself. The depiction of South America is detailed and accurate for its time. The northwestern coast combines features of Central America and Cuba into a single body of land. Scholars attribute this peculiar arrangement of the Caribbean to a now-lost map from Columbus that merged Cuba into the Asian mainland and Hispaniola with Marco Polo's description of Japan. \nThis reflects Columbus's erroneous claim that he had found a new route to Asia. During the 1494 exploration of Cuba, Columbus was so adamant that he had found Asia, that he had a notary board each of his ships anchored off the coast. Columbus compelled his men to swear that Cuba was a part of Asia and agree to never contradict this interpretation \"under a penalty of 10,000 maravedis and the cutting out of the tongue.\" Historian Joaquim Gaspar has suggested that both Columbus's notary stunt and his creation of a map with Hispaniola rotated to match Japan were an attempt to motivate his own men with the unattainable promise of wealth upon reaching India. Gaspar points out the difficulty in navigating the Caribbean by compass using a map with a second north and Cuba unfolded into a North\u2013South coast. Researcher Gregory McIntosh suggests the possibility of an unofficial map for navigation, and an official map presented as evidence of his continued claims of having discovered a route to Asia.\nThe southernmost conclusively identified feature on the map is a stretch of Brazilian coastline including Cabo Frio (\"Kav Friyo\" on the map), possibly the earliest depiction of Rio de Janeiro and likely the area around Canan\u00e9ia, labeled \"Katino\" on the map. Beyond this point, the coast curves sharply east. Cartographic historian Svat Soucek has suggested this is the coast of South America, bent to fit the natural curve of the skin the map was drawn on. However, there is no textual or historical evidence that the map represents land south of present-day Canan\u00e9ia. Most scholars interpret this southern coast as a version of \"Terra Australis\", a southern landmass once hypothesized to balance the known land in the Northern Hemisphere. A disproven 20th-century hypothesis identified the southern landmass with an ice-free Antarctic coast. Antarctica was last free of ice over 10 million years ago. However, the inscription on the southern coast records that the Portuguese explored the area and according to the Portuguese sources, the land was hot and home to large snakes.\nThe map is visually distinct from European portolan charts, influenced by the tradition of Islamic miniature painting. Piri Reis adapted the elements of iconography from the traditional maps\u2014which illustrated well-known routes, cities, and peoples\u2014to the portolan portrayals of newly discovered coasts. Historian Karen Pinto has described the positive portrayal of legendary creatures from the edge of the known world in the Americas as breaking away from the medieval Islamic idea of an impassable \"Encircling Ocean\" surrounding the Old World. Scholarly debate continues over some of the map's sources and the identification of certain geographic features.\n\"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\".\nThe \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" (), or \"Book of the Sea\", is a navigational atlas. Piri Reis compiled navigational charts and notes into the most detailed portolan atlas of the 16th century. The \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" combines information from a range of sources. It also draws from Piri Reis' own experience, especially for the coast of North Africa; the section on Tunisia relies heavily on his personal observations. For example, the description of the Galite Islands just off the Tunisian coast notes the dangers posed by southern winds; the availability of wild goats; and the quality of the fresh water, which Piri Reis compares in flavor to rose water.\nThe main part of both versions is a nautical guide to the Mediterranean Sea. Separate chapters cover different locations with corresponding charts. Piri Reis said that he composed an atlas because any single map would have had limited space for written details, whereas some \"knowledge cannot be known from maps; it must be explained.\" There are 130 chapters in the first version and 210 in the second. The chapters start at the Dardanelles, the narrow strait separating Asia from Europe, and move counter-clockwise around the Mediterranean. Each map has a compass rose indicating North for that page. Scale is indicated only in the textual descriptions, not with scale bars. Written when Ottoman sailors relied on oar-driven galleys, the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" reflects their needs and capabilities, such as information on coastal waters, safe harbors, hazards, and sources of fresh water.\nThere are two versions of the book, both dedicated to Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. The first version was composed between 1511 and 1521. The second, expanded version was commissioned by the grand vizier and presented to the sultan in 1526. It begins with a longer introduction written in verse, offering information on storms, winds, navigation with a compass and by the stars, reading nautical charts, and the oceans. It provides the first detailed Ottoman description of the Indian Ocean, and gives special attention to Hormuz Island at the strait leading into the Persian Gulf.\nThe book achieved fame only after Piri Reis' death. The known surviving manuscripts are all copies created beginning in the latter half of the 16th century. At least some portion of the book has been translated into English, modern Turkish, Greek, French, German, and Italian.\n1528 world map.\nPiri Reis compiled a second world map in 1528, of which only the northwest corner of the map survives. The parchment fragment is approximately square. As with his 1513 map, the 1528 map has calligraphic inscriptions in Ottoman-Turkish written in the Arabic alphabet. The colophon is in Arabic, likely handwritten by Piri Reis himself. According to the colophon, he compiled the map in 1528 in Gelibolu, although he may not have actually completed it until 1529.\nThe 1528 map was a portolan chart like his earlier works. It has one line of latitude, the Tropic of Cancer, positioned slightly south of the correct position for Cuba and the Yucatan. Each section of the scale indicates .\nThe map is more accurate than Piri Reis' first world map and reflects new discoveries in the Americas. Based on its depiction of newly explored regions like Greenland, Newfoundland, and Florida, the map likely relies on Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian maps from the 1520s. Hispaniola and Cuba are much more accurate compared to the 1513 world map. Cuba, labeled \"Isla di Vana,\" is now correctly positioned as an island in the Caribbean. Unlike the 1513 map, unexplored regions are left blank. Only the explored southern coasts of Florida are on the map; the rest of its geography is left ambiguous as potentially an island or peninsula. The Spanish Empire's master map, the \"Padr\u00f3n Real\", included this same ambiguity until 1520 and influenced Italian cartography, such as the Freducci map.\nLegacy.\nPiri Reis' cartography received limited appreciation during his lifetime. Historian Svat Soucek said that the works of Piri Reis \"show that although the Ottoman Empire had the potential to participate in the discoveries, its ruling elite spurned the attempt to blaze a trail in this direction.\" \nOttoman historian Cengiz Orhonlu, examining 16th-century Turkish authors who wrote about Piri Reis' execution, found that they criticized his performance during the Siege of Hormuz but did not discuss his maps or writing. He was not regarded especially highly as a seafarer by Turkish contemporaries. His reputation was overshadowed by that of his uncle Kemal Reis, and the reputations of both were surpassed by later Ottoman sailors like the Barbarossas. In the 21st century, Piri Reis is remembered as a cartographer more than a corsair or an admiral.\nThe 1513 world map disappeared from the historical record until its rediscovery centuries later, and there is no evidence that either version of his atlas circulated outside the royal palace prior to 1550. Copies produced after Piri Reis' death were often created for their aesthetic value rather than practical navigation. No Turkish school of cartography or navigation was established to build on his work. Murat Reis the Elder's expedition to the Canary Islands and the 1586 Sack of Lanzarote were some of the few times when Piri Reis' Atlantic cartography was likely used by the Ottoman Navy. The empire's navy\u2014even during the Canary Islands expedition\u2014remained largely composed of oar-driven galleys after the point when other naval powers were moving to sailing ships suited to the open oceans. Although Ottoman scholar K\u00e2tip \u00c7elebi built on the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\" in his 17th-century work, \"M\u00fcntehab-\u0131 Bahriyye\", by the 18th century were major works of cartography from Western Europe being translated into Turkish.\nWhen Piri Reis' world map was unearthed in 1929, it received international media attention for containing the surviving piece of an otherwise lost map of Christopher Columbus. Turkey's first president, Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, took an interest in the map and initiated projects to publish facsimiles and conduct research. Discovered during Atat\u00fcrk's reforms to modernize Turkey, the map was a point of national pride. Its rediscovery also sparked interest in the \"Kitab-\u0131 Bahriye\". A facsimile of the book's second version was published by the Turkish Historical Society in 1935, and a four-volume facsimile with photographic quality was published in 1988. Several ships and submarines have been named after Piri Reis, including the RV\u00a0K.\u00a0\"Piri\u00a0Reis\" and TCG\u00a0\"Pirireis\"; and the Piri Reis University for maritime studies was founded in 2008. In the Turkish TV series \"\", Piri Reis is portrayed by actor Emir Benderlio\u011flu.\nPiri Reis' 1513 world map is the subject of pseudoscientific claims and sometimes invoked in broader pop culture as an unsolved mystery. For example, civil engineer Arlington Mallery, Professor Charles Hapgood, and Hapgood's students developed the hypothesis that the 1513 world map contained cartographic information, notably from an ice-free Antarctic coast, that exceeded 16th century map-making abilities. In Hapgood's 1966 book \"Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings\", he claims that islands along the map's southern Atlantic shore depict what are now ice-covered mountains in Antarctica's Queen Maud Land region. \nHapgood's book was met with skepticism due to its lack of evidence and its reliance on cataclysmic pole shift, the disproven geological hypothesis that the Earth's entire crust could shift around the planet. Also, according to geologist Paul Heinrich, the book did not account for post-glacial rebound, the process by which land rises after glacial ice melts and flows away. Additionally, the 1949 survey initially cited by Mallery could not measure even one percent of the area drawn in the Piri Reis map. Subsequent studies have shown no significant similarities to Antarctica's coast. Although the 1513 world map has been described by some authors as anomalous in its accuracy, it is no more precise than other 16th-century manuscript maps. \nHapgood's claims, however, have been uncritically repeated by Erich von D\u00e4niken in support of ancient astronauts and by Graham Hancock in support of an advanced lost civilization. The map and polar shift were key plot elements in Allan W. Eckert's science fiction novel \"The HAB Theory.\" Historian Karen Pinto has commented that popular speculation has contributed to Piri Reis' becoming \"more famous than the Sultan who\" executed him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23315", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23315", "title": "Medical doctor", "text": "Professional who practices medicine\nA medical doctor, also known as a physician (American and Canadian English) or medical practitioner (British English), is a health professional who practices medicine, which is concerned with promoting, maintaining or restoring health through the study, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of disease, injury, and other physical and mental impairments. Doctors may focus their practice on certain disease categories, types of patients, and methods of treatment\u2014known as specialities\u2014or they may assume responsibility for the provision of continuing and comprehensive medical care to individuals, families, and communities\u2014known as general practice. Medical practice properly requires both a detailed knowledge of the academic disciplines, such as anatomy and physiology, underlying diseases, and their treatment, which is the science of medicine, and a decent competence in its applied practice, which is the art or craft of the profession.\nBoth the role of doctors and the meaning of the word itself vary around the world. Degrees and other qualifications vary widely, but there are some common elements, such as medical ethics requiring that doctors show consideration, compassion, and benevolence for their patients.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"doctor\" commonly refers to medical practitioners across the world, but may also be applied to holders of non-medical doctoral degrees. While the term \"physician\" is used in North America to refer to medical practitioners in a general sense, in the United Kingdom and countries influenced by British English this word refers to specialists in internal medicine specifically.\nBritish and Commonwealth.\nThe British meaning of the term \"physician\" is the original one, and is used in opposition to \"surgeon\", which refers to a specialist in surgery. This meaning of physician conveys a sense of expertise in treatment with drugs, rather than with the manual procedures used by a surgeon. The English word \"physician\" is at least nine hundred years old: physicians and surgeons were once members of separate professions, and traditionally were rivals. The \"Shorter Oxford English Dictionary\", third edition, gives a Middle English quotation making this contrast, from as early as 1400: \"O Lord, whi is it so greet difference betwixe a cirugian and a physician.\" Henry\u00a0VIII granted a charter to the London Royal College of Physicians in 1518. It was not until 1540 that he granted the Company of Barber-Surgeons (ancestor of the Royal College of Surgeons) its separate charter. In the same year, the English monarch established the Regius Professorship of Physic at the University of Cambridge. Newer universities would probably describe such an academic as a professor of internal medicine. Hence, in the 16th century, \"physic\" meant roughly what internal medicine does now.\nThis original use is common in much of the world including the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries (such as Australia, Bangladesh, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka, and Zimbabwe), as well as in places as diverse as Brazil, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Ireland, and Taiwan. In such places, the more general terms \"doctor\" or \"medical practitioner\" are used to describe any person whose practises medicine. In Britain, the use of the term \"doctor\" for medical practitioners is a courtesy and does not indicate possession of a doctorate; British doctors must have a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery to practise. Community-oriented providers of primary care are called \"general practitioners\", commonly abbreviated to GP.\nNorth American.\nIn the United States and Canada, the term \"physician\" describes all medical practitioners holding a professional medical degree. The American Medical Association (AMA), established in 1847, as well as the American Osteopathic Association, founded in 1897, both currently use the term \"physician\" to describe members. The AMA advocates for the definition of a \"physician\" as \"an individual possessing degree of either a Doctor of Medicine or Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine.\" However, the American College of Physicians, established in 1915, use the term \"physician\" in its original sense. Specialists in internal medicine may be described as an \"internist\". Another term, \"hospitalist\", was introduced in 1996, to describe US specialists in internal medicine who work largely or exclusively in hospitals. Such \"hospitalists\" now make up about 19% of all US \"general internists\", who are often called \"general physicians\" in Commonwealth countries. In North America, community-oriented providers of primary care are called \"family doctors\" or \"primary care physicians\".\nThe vast majority of physicians trained in the United States have a Doctor of Medicine degree, and use the initials M.D. A smaller number attend osteopathic medical schools and have a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree and use the initials D.O. The World Directory of Medical Schools lists both MD and DO granting schools as \"medical schools\" located in the United States. After completion of medical school, physicians complete a residency in the specialty in which they will practice. Subspecialties require the completion of a fellowship after residency. Both MD and DO physicians participate in the National Resident Matching Program (NRMP) and attend ACGME-accredited residencies and fellowships across all medical specialties to obtain licensure. All boards of certification now require that physicians demonstrate, by examination, continuing mastery of the core knowledge and skills for a chosen specialty. Recertification varies by particular specialty between every seven and every ten years.\nPhysician and surgeon.\nAround the world, the combined term \"physician and surgeon\" is used to describe either a general practitioner or any medical practitioner irrespective of specialty. This usage still shows the original meaning of physician and preserves the old difference between a physician, as a practitioner of \"physic\", and a surgeon. The term may be used by state medical boards in the United States, and by equivalent bodies in Canadian provinces, to describe any medical practitioner.\nShortage.\nMany countries in the developing world have the problem of too few doctors. In 2015, the Association of American Medical Colleges warned that the US will face a doctor shortage of as many as 90,000 by 2025. Long medical working hours, shift work and sleep deprivation contribute to medical errors.\nSocial role and world view.\nBiomedicine.\nWithin Western culture and over recent centuries, medicine has become increasingly based on scientific reductionism and materialism. This style of medicine is now dominant throughout the industrialized world, and is often termed \"biomedicine\" by medical anthropologists. Biomedicine \"formulates the human body and disease in a culturally distinctive pattern\", and is a world view learnt by medical students. Within this tradition, the medical model is a term for the complete \"set of procedures in which all doctors are trained\", including mental attitudes. A particularly clear expression of this world view, currently dominant among conventional doctors, is evidence-based medicine. Within conventional medicine, most doctors still pay heed to their ancient traditions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The critical sense and sceptical attitude of the Hippocratic school ... the emancipation of medicine from the shackles of priestcraft and of caste; \"secondly\", the conception of medicine as an art based on accurate observation, and as a science, an integral part of the science of man and of nature; \"thirdly\", the high moral ideals, expressed in that most \"memorable of human documents\" (Gomperz), the Hippocratic oath; and \"fourthly\", the conception and realization of medicine as the profession of a cultivated gentleman.\n\u2014 Sir William Osler, \"Chauvinism in Medicine\" (1902)\nIn this Western tradition, doctors are considered to be members of a learned profession, and enjoy high social status, often combined with expectations of a high and stable income and job security. However, medical practitioners often work long and inflexible hours, with shifts at unsociable times. Their high status is partly from their extensive training requirements, and also because of their occupation's special ethical and legal duties. The term traditionally used by doctors to describe a person seeking their help is the word \"patient\" (although one who visits a doctor for a routine check-up may also be so described). This word patient is an ancient reminder of medical duty, as it originally meant 'one who suffers'. The English noun comes from the Latin word \"patiens\", the present participle of the deponent verb, patior, meaning 'I am suffering', and akin to the Greek verb ( \"paschein\", to suffer) and its cognate noun \u03c0\u03ac\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 (\"pathos\", suffering).\nAlternative medicine.\nWhile contemporary biomedicine has distanced itself from its ancient roots in religion and magic, many forms of traditional medicine and alternative medicine continue to espouse vitalism in various guises: \"As long as life had its own secret properties, it was possible to have sciences and medicines based on those properties\". The US National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) classifies complementary and alternative medicine therapies into five categories or domains, including: alternative medical systems, or complete systems of therapy and practice; mind-body interventions, or techniques designed to facilitate the mind's effect on bodily functions and symptoms; biologically based systems including herbalism; and manipulative and body-based methods such as chiropractic and massage therapy.\nIn considering these alternate traditions that differ from biomedicine (see above), medical anthropologists emphasize that all ways of thinking about health and disease have a significant cultural content, including conventional western medicine.\nAyurveda, Unani medicine, and homeopathy are popular types of alternative medicine.\nDoctors' own health.\nSome commentators have argued that doctors have duties to serve as role models for the general public in matters of health, for example by not smoking cigarettes. Indeed, in most western nations relatively few doctors smoke, and their professional knowledge does appear to have a beneficial effect on their health and lifestyle. According to a study of male doctors in the United States, life expectancy is slightly higher for doctors (73 years for white and 69 years for black) than lawyers or many other highly educated professionals. Causes of death which are less likely to occur in doctors than the general population include respiratory disease (including pneumonia, pneumoconioses, COPD, but excluding emphysema and other chronic airway obstruction), alcohol-related deaths, rectosigmoid and anal cancers, and bacterial diseases.\nDoctors do experience exposure to occupational hazards, and there is a well-known aphorism that \"doctors make the worst patients\". Causes of death that are shown to be higher in doctors include suicide among doctors and self-inflicted injury, drug-related causes, traffic accidents, and cerebrovascular and ischaemic heart disease. Doctors are also prone to occupational burnout. This manifests as a long-term stress reaction characterized by poorer quality of care towards patients, emotional exhaustion, a feeling of decreased personal achievement, and others. A study by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality reported that time pressure was the greatest cause of burnout; a survey from the American Medical Association reported that more than half of all respondents chose \"too many bureaucratic tasks\" as the leading cause of burnout.\nEducation and training.\nMedical education and career pathways for doctors vary considerably across the world.\nIn all developed countries, entry-level medical education programs are tertiary-level courses, undertaken at a medical school attached to a university. Depending on jurisdiction and university, entry may follow directly from secondary school or require pre-requisite undergraduate education. The former commonly takes five or six years to complete. Programs that require previous undergraduate education (typically a three- or four-year degree, often in science) are usually four or five years in length. Hence, gaining a basic medical degree may typically take from five to eight years, depending on jurisdiction and university.\nFollowing the completion of entry-level training, newly graduated medical practitioners are often required to undertake a period of supervised practice before full registration is granted, typically one or two years. This may be referred to as an \"internship\", as the \"foundation\" years in the UK, or as \"conditional registration\". Some jurisdictions, including the United States, require residencies for practice.\nMedical practitioners hold a medical degree specific to the university from which they graduated. This degree qualifies the medical practitioner to become licensed or registered under the laws of that particular country, and sometimes of several countries, subject to requirements for an internship or conditional registration.\nRegulation.\nIn most jurisdictions, doctors need government permission to practice. Such permission is intended to promote public safety, and often to protect government spending, as medical care is commonly subsidized by national governments.\nIn some jurisdictions such as in Singapore, it is common for medical practitioners to inflate their qualifications with the title \"Dr\" in correspondence or namecards, even if their qualifications are limited to a basic (e.g., bachelor level) degree. In other countries such as Germany, only medical practitioners holding an academic doctorate may call themselves \"doctor\" \u2013 on the other hand, the European Research Council has decided that the German medical doctorate does not meet the international standards of a PhD research degree.\nLicensing.\nAmong the English-speaking countries, this process is known either as licensure as in the United States, or as registration in the United Kingdom, other Commonwealth countries, and Ireland. Synonyms in use elsewhere include \"colegiaci\u00f3n\" in Spain, \"ishi menkyo\" in Japan, \"autorisasjon\" in Norway, \"Approbation\" in Germany, and \u03ac\u03b4\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1 \u03b5\u03c1\u03b3\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 in Greece. In France, Italy and Portugal, doctors must be members of a national order of medical practitioners. \nIn some countries, including the United Kingdom and Ireland, the medical profession largely regulates itself, with the government affirming the regulating body's authority. The best-known example of this is probably the General Medical Council of Britain. In all countries, the regulating authorities will revoke permission to practice in cases of malpractice or serious misconduct.\nIn the large English-speaking federations (United States, Canada, Australia), the licensing or registration of medical practitioners is done at a state or provincial level, or nationally as in New Zealand. Australian states usually have a \"Medical Board\", which has now been replaced by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) in most states, while Canadian provinces usually have a \"College of Physicians and Surgeons\". All American states have an agency that is usually called the \"Medical Board\", although there are alternate names such as \"Board of Medicine\", \"Board of Medical Examiners\", \"Board of Medical Licensure\", \"Board of Healing Arts\" or some other variation. After graduating from a first-professional school, physicians who wish to practice in the US usually take standardized exams, such as the USMLE for a Doctor in Medicine.\nPerformance and professionalism supervision.\nThe issue of medical errors, drug abuse, and other issues in a doctors' professional behavior received significant attention across the world, in particular following a critical 2000 report which \"arguably launched\" the patient-safety movement. In the US, as of 2006 there were few organizations that systematically monitored performance. In the US, only the Department of Veterans Affairs randomly drug tests doctors, in contrast to drug testing practices for other professions that have a major impact on public welfare. Licensing boards at the US state-level depend upon continuing education to maintain competence. Through the use of the National Practitioner Data Bank, Federation of State Medical Boards' disciplinary report, and American Medical Association Physician Profile Service, the 67 State Medical Boards continually self-report any adverse/disciplinary actions taken against a licensed doctor so that the other Medical Boards in which the doctor holds or is applying for a medical license will be properly notified so that corrective, reciprocal action can be taken against the offending doctor. In Europe, as of 2009 the health systems are governed according to various national laws, and can also vary according to regional differences similar to the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23316", "revid": "47069993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23316", "title": "Pound (mass)", "text": "Unit of mass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe pound or pound-mass is a unit of mass used in both the British imperial and United States customary systems of measurement. Various definitions have been used; the most common today is the international avoirdupois pound, which is legally defined as exactly , and which is divided into 16 avoirdupois ounces. The international standard symbol for the avoirdupois pound is lb; an alternative symbol (when there might otherwise be a risk of confusion with the pound-force) is lbm (for most pound definitions), # (chiefly in the U.S.), and \u2114 or \u2033\u0336 (specifically for the apothecaries' pound).\nThe unit is descended from the Roman (hence the symbol \"lb\", descended from the scribal abbreviation, \"\u2114\"). The English word \"pound\" comes from the Roman ('the weight measured in '), and is cognate with, among others, German , Dutch , and Swedish . These units are now designated as historical and are no longer in common usage, being replaced by the metric system.\nUsage of the unqualified term \"pound\" reflects the historical conflation of mass and weight. This accounts for the modern distinguishing terms \"pound-mass\" and \"pound-force\".\nEtymology.\nThe word 'pound' and its cognates ultimately derive from a borrowing into Proto-Germanic of the Latin expression ('the weight measured in '), in which the word is the ablative singular of the Latin noun ('weight').\nCurrent use.\nThe United States and the Commonwealth of Nations agreed upon common definitions for the pound and the yard. Since 1 July 1959, the international avoirdupois pound (symbol lb) has been defined as exactly .\nIn the United Kingdom, the use of the international pound was implemented in the Weights and Measures Act 1963.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The yard or the metre shall be the unit of measurement of length and the pound or the kilogram shall be the unit of measurement of mass by reference to which any measurement involving a measurement of length or mass shall be made in the United Kingdom; and\u2014 \nAn avoirdupois pound is equal to 16 avoirdupois ounces and to exactly 7,000 grains. The conversion factor between the kilogram and the international pound was therefore chosen to be divisible by 7 with a terminating decimal representation, and an (international) grain is thus equal to exactly .\nIn the United Kingdom, the process of metrication and European units of measurement directives were expected to eliminate the use of the pound and ounce, but in 2007 the European Commission abandoned the requirement for metric-only labelling on packaged goods there, and allowed for dual metric\u2013imperial marking to continue indefinitely.\nIn the United States, the Metric Conversion Act of 1975 declared the metric system to be the \"preferred system of weights and measures\" but did not suspend use of United States customary units, and the United States is the only industrialised country where commercial activities do not predominantly use the metric system, despite many efforts to do so, and the pound remains widely used as one of the key customary units.\nHistorical use.\nHistorically, in different parts of the world, at different points in time, and for different applications, the pound (or its translation) has referred to broadly similar but not identical standards of mass or force.\n tright\" style=\"width:282px;\"&gt;\nVarious historic pounds from a German textbook dated 1848\nRoman.\nThe (Latin for 'scale'/'balance') is an ancient Roman unit of mass that is now equivalent to . It was divided into 12 (singular: ), or ounces. The is the origin of the abbreviation for pound, \"lb\".\nIn Britain.\nA number of different definitions of the pound have historically been used in Britain. Among these are the avoirdupois pound, which is the common pound used for weights, and the obsolete tower, merchants' and London pounds. The troy pound and ounce remain in use only for the weight of precious metals, especially in their trade. The weights of traded precious metals, such as gold and silver, are normally quoted just in ounces (e.g. \"500 ounces\") and, when the type of ounce is not explicitly stated, the troy system is assumed.\nThe pound sterling money system, which was introduced during the reign of King Offa of Mercia (757\u201396), was based originally on a Saxon pound of silver. After the Norman conquest the Saxon pound was known as the tower pound or moneyer's pound. In 1528, during the reign of Henry VIII, the coinage standard was changed by parliament from the tower pound to the troy pound.\nAvoirdupois pound.\nThe avoirdupois pound, also known as the wool pound, first came into general use c. 1300. It was initially equal to 6,992 troy grains. The pound avoirdupois was divided into 16 ounces. During the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, the avoirdupois pound was redefined as 7,000 troy grains. Since then, the grain has often been an integral part of the avoirdupois system. By 1758, two Elizabethan Exchequer standard weights for the avoirdupois pound existed, and when measured in troy grains they were found to be of 7,002 grains and 6,999 grains.\nImperial standard pound.\nIn the United Kingdom, weights and measures have been defined by a long series of Acts of Parliament, the intention of which has been to regulate the sale of commodities. Materials traded in the marketplace are quantified according to accepted units and standards in order to avoid fraud. The standards themselves are legally defined so as to facilitate the resolution of disputes brought to the courts; only legally defined measures will be recognised by the courts. Quantifying devices used by traders (weights, weighing machines, containers of volumes, measures of length) are subject to official inspection, and penalties apply if they are fraudulent.\nThe Weights and Measures Act 1878 (41 &amp; 42 Vict. c. 49) marked a major overhaul of the British system of weights and measures, and the definition of the pound given there remained in force until the 1960s. The pound was defined thus (Section 4): \"The ... platinum weight ... deposited in the Standards department of the Board of Trade ... shall continue to be the imperial standard of ... weight ... and the said platinum weight shall continue to be the imperial standard for determining the imperial standard pound for the United Kingdom\". Section 13 states that the weight of this standard shall be called the imperial standard pound, and that all other weights mentioned in the act and permissible for commerce shall be ascertained from it alone. The first schedule of the act gave more details of the standard pound: it is a platinum cylinder nearly high, and diameter, and the edges are carefully rounded off. It has a groove about from the top, to allow the cylinder to be lifted using an ivory fork. It was constructed following the destruction of the Houses of Parliament by fire in 1834, and is stamped \"P.S. 1844, 1\u00a0lb\" (P.S. stands for \"Parliamentary Standard\").\nRedefinition in terms of the kilogram.\nThe British Weights and Measures Act 1878 (41 &amp; 42 Vict. c. 49) said that contracts worded in terms of metric units would be deemed by the courts to be made according to the Imperial units defined in the Act, and a table of metric equivalents was supplied so that the Imperial equivalents could be legally calculated. This defined, in UK law, metric units in terms of Imperial ones. The equivalence for the pound was given as 1\u00a0lb = or 0.45359\u00a0kg, which made the kilogram equivalent to about .\nIn 1883, it was determined jointly by the standards department of the British Board of Trade and the Bureau International that was a better approximation, and this figure, rounded to was given legal status by an Order in Council in May 1898.\nIn 1959, based on further measurements and international coordination, the International Yard and Pound Agreement defined an \"international pound\" as being equivalent to exactly . This meant that the existing legal definition of the UK pound differed from the international standard pound by . To remedy this, the pound was again redefined in the United Kingdom by the Weights and Measures Act 1963 to match the international pound, stating: \"the pound shall be 0.453 592 37 kilogramme exactly\", a definition which remains valid to the present day.\nThe 2019 revision of the SI means that the pound is now defined precisely in terms of fundamental constants, ending the era of its definition in terms of physical prototypes.\nTroy pound.\nA troy pound (abbreviated lb t) is equal to 12 troy ounces and to 5,760 grains, that is exactly grams. Troy weights were used in England by jewellers. Apothecaries also used the troy pound and ounce, but added the drachms and scruples unit in the apothecaries' system of weights.\nTroy weight may take its name from the French market town of Troyes in France where English merchants traded at least as early as the early 9th century. The troy pound is no longer in general use or a legal unit for trade (it was abolished in the United Kingdom on 6 January 1879 by the Weights and Measures Act 1878), but the troy ounce, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204412 of a troy pound, is still used for measurements of gems such as opals, and precious metals such as silver, platinum and particularly gold.\nTower pound.\nA tower pound is equal to 12 tower ounces and to 5,400 troy grains, which equals around 350 grams. The tower pound is the historical weight standard that was used for England's coinage. Before the Norman conquest in 1066, the tower pound was known as the Saxon pound. During the reign of King Offa (757\u2013796) of Mercia, a Saxon pound of silver was used to set the original weight of a pound sterling. From one Saxon pound of silver (that is a tower pound) the king had 240 silver pennies minted. In the pound sterling monetary system, twelve pennies equaled a shilling and twenty shillings equaled a pound sterling.\nThe tower pound was referenced to a standard prototype found in the Tower of London. The tower system ran concurrently with the avoirdupois and troy systems until the reign of Henry VIII, when a royal proclamation dated 1526 required that the troy pound be used for mint purposes instead of the tower pound. No standards of the tower pound are known to have survived.\nThe tower pound was also called the moneyers' pound (referring to the Saxon moneyers before the Norman conquest); the easterling pound, which may refer to traders of eastern Germany, or to traders on the shore of the eastern Baltic sea, or dealers of Asiatic goods who settled at the London Steelyard wharf; and the Rochelle pound by French writers, because it was also in use at La Rochelle. An almost identical weight was employed by the Germans for weighing gold and silver.\nThe mercantile pound (1304) of 6750 troy grains, or 9600 Tower grains, derives from this pound, as 25 shilling-weights or 15 Tower ounces, for general commercial use. Multiple pounds based on the same ounce were quite common. In much of Europe, the apothecaries' and commercial pounds were different numbers of the same ounce.\nMerchants' pound.\nThe merchants' pound (\"mercantile pound\", , or \"commercial pound\") was considered to be composed of 25 rather than 20 Tower shillings of 12 pence. It was equal to 9,600 wheat grains (15 tower ounces or 6,750 grains) and was used in England until the 14th century for goods other than money and medicine (\"electuaries\").\nLondon pound.\nThe London pound is that of the Hansa, as used in their various trading places. The London pound is based on 16 ounces, each ounce divided as the tower ounce. It never became a legal standard in England; the use of this pound waxed and waned with the influence of the Hansa itself.\nA London pound was equal to 7,200 troy grains (16 troy ounces) or, equivalently, 10,240 tower grains (16 tower ounces).\nIn the United States.\nIn the United States, the avoirdupois pound as a unit of mass has been officially defined in terms of the kilogram since the Mendenhall Order of 1893. That order defined the pound to be pounds to a kilogram. The following year, this relationship was refined as pounds to a kilogram, following a determination of the British pound.\nIn 1959, the United States National Bureau of Standards redefined the pound (avoirdupois) to be exactly equal to 0.453\u00a0592\u00a037\u00a0kilograms, as had been declared by the International Yard and Pound Agreement of that year. According to a 1959 NIST publication, the United States 1894 pound differed from the international pound by approximately one part in 10 million. The difference is so insignificant that it can be ignored for almost all practical purposes.\nByzantine litra.\nThe Byzantines used a series of measurements known as pounds (, ). The most common was the (, \"pound of account\"), established by Constantine the Great in 309/310. It formed the basis of the Byzantine monetary system, with one of gold equivalent to 72 . A hundred were known as a (, \"hundredweight\"). Its weight seems to have decreased gradually from the original to . Due to its association with gold, it was also known as the (, \"gold pound\") or (, \"maritime pound\"), but it could also be used as a measure of land, equalling a fortieth of the .\nThe was specifically used for weighing olive oil or wood, and corresponded to 4/5 of the or . Some outlying regions, especially in later times, adopted various local measures, based on Italian, Arab or Turkish measures. The most important of these was the (, \"silver pound\") of , found in Trebizond and Cyprus, and probably of Arab origin.\nFrench livre.\nSince the Middle Ages, various pounds () have been used in France. Since the 19th century, a has referred to the \"metric pound\", 500\u00a0g.\nThe is equivalent to about and was used between the late 9th century and the mid-14th century.\nThe or is equivalent to about and was used between the 1350s and the late 18th century. It was introduced by the government of John II.\nThe was set equal to the kilogram by the decree of between 1800 and 1812. This was a form of official metric pound.\nThe (customary unit) was defined as by the decree of 28 March 1812. It was abolished as a unit of mass effective 1 January 1840 by a decree of 4 July 1837, but is still used informally.\nGerman and Austrian Pfund.\nOriginally derived from the Roman libra, the definition varied throughout the Holy Roman Empire in the Middle Ages and onward. For example, the measures and weights of the Habsburg monarchy were reformed in 1761 by Empress Maria Theresa of Austria. The unusually heavy Habsburg (civil) pound of 16 ounces was later defined in terms of . Bavarian reforms in 1809 and 1811 adopted essentially the same standard as the Austrian pound. In Prussia, a reform in 1816 defined a uniform civil pound in terms of the Prussian foot and distilled water, resulting in a Prussian pound of .\nBetween 1803 and 1815, all German regions west of the River Rhine were under French control, organised in the departements: Roer, Sarre, Rhin-et-Moselle, and Mont-Tonnerre. As a result of the Congress of Vienna, these regions again became part of various German states. However, many of these regions retained the metric system and adopted a metric pound of precisely . In 1854, the pound of 500 g also became the official mass standard of the German Customs Union and was renamed the , but local pounds continued to co-exist with the pound for some time in some German states. Nowadays, the term is sometimes still in use and universally refers to a pound of 500 g.\nRussian.\nThe Russian pound (, ) is an obsolete Russian unit of measurement of mass. It is equal to . In 1899, the was the basic unit of weight, and all other units of weight were formed from it; in particular, a was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204496 of a , and a was 40 .\nThe was a Scandinavian measurement that varied in weight between regions. From the 17th century onward, it was equal to in Sweden but was abandoned in 1889 when Sweden switched to the metric system.\nIn Norway, the same name was used for a weight of . In Denmark, it equaled .\nIn the 19th century, Denmark followed Germany's lead and redefined the pound as .\nPortuguese and.\nThe Portuguese unit that corresponds to the pounds of different nations is the , equivalent to 16 ounces of , a variant of the Cologne standard. This was introduced in 1499 by Manuel I, king of Portugal. Based on an evaluation of bronze nesting weight piles distributed by Manuel I to different towns, the of Manuel I has been estimated to be of . In the early 19th century, the was evaluated at .\nIn the 15th century, the was of 14 ounces of or . The Portuguese was the same as 2 . There were also of 12.5 and 13 ounces and of 15 and 16 ounces. The or standard was also used.\nJersey pound.\nA Jersey pound is an obsolete unit of mass used on the island of Jersey from the 14th century to the 19th century. It was equivalent to about 7,561 grains (). It may have been derived from the French livre poids de marc.\nTrone pound.\nThe trone pound is one of a number of obsolete Scottish units of measurement. It was equivalent to between 21 and 28 avoirdupois ounces (about ).\nMetric pound.\nIn many countries, upon the introduction of a metric system, the pound (or its translation) became an historic and obsolete term, although some have kept it as an informal term without a specific value. In German, the term is , in French , in Dutch , in Spanish and Portuguese , in Italian , and in Danish and Swedish .\nThough not from the same linguistic origin, the Chinese (, also known as the \"catty\") in mainland China has a modern definition of exactly , divided into 10 (). Traditionally around , the has been in use for more than two thousand years varying in exact value from one period to another, serving the same purpose as \"pound\" for the common-use measure of weight. In Hong Kong, for the purposes of commerce and trade between Britain and Imperial China in the preceding centuries, three Chinese catties were equivalent to four British imperial pounds, defining one catty as in weight precisely.\nHundreds of older pounds were replaced in this way. Examples of the older pounds are one of around in Spain, Portugal, and Latin America; one of in Norway; and several different ones in what is now Germany.\nFrom the introduction of the kilogram scales and measuring devices are denominated only in grams and kilograms. A pound of product must be determined by weighing the product in grams as the use of the \"pound\" is not sanctioned for trade within the European Union.\nUse in weaponry.\nSmoothbore cannon and carronades are currently designated by the weight in imperial pounds of round solid iron shot of diameter to fit the barrel. A cannon that fires a six-pound ball, for example, is called a \"six-pounder\". Standard sizes are 6, 12, 18, 24, 32, and 42 pounds; 60-pounders and 68-pounders also exist, along with other nonstandard weapons using the same scheme. Before the introduction of the metric system, countries that produced their own artillery generally used their national pound for these designations. See carronade.\nA similar definition, using lead balls, exists for determining the gauge of shotguns and shotgun shells.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23317", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23317", "title": "Proton", "text": "Subatomic particle with positive charge\nA proton is a stable subatomic particle, symbol , H+, or 1H+ with a positive electric charge of +1\u00a0\"e\" (elementary charge). Its mass is slightly less than the mass of a neutron and approximately times the mass of an electron (the proton-to-electron mass ratio). Protons and neutrons, each with a mass of approximately one dalton, are jointly referred to as \"nucleons\" (particles present in atomic nuclei).\nOne or more protons are present in the nucleus of every atom. They provide the attractive electrostatic central force which binds the atomic electrons. The number of protons in the nucleus is the defining property of an element, and is referred to as the atomic number (represented by the symbol \"Z\"). Since each element is identified by the number of protons in its nucleus, each element has its own atomic number, which determines the number of atomic electrons and consequently the chemical characteristics of the element.\nThe word \"proton\" is Greek for \"first\", and the name was given to the hydrogen nucleus by Ernest Rutherford in 1920. In previous years, Rutherford had discovered that the hydrogen nucleus (known to be the lightest nucleus) could be extracted from the nuclei of nitrogen by atomic collisions. Protons were therefore a candidate to be a fundamental or elementary particle, and hence a building block of nitrogen and all other heavier atomic nuclei.\nAlthough protons were originally considered to be elementary particles, in the modern Standard Model of particle physics, protons are known to be composite particles, containing three valence quarks, and together with neutrons are now classified as hadrons. Protons are composed of two up quarks of charge +\"e\" each, and one down quark of charge \u2212\"e\". The rest masses of quarks contribute only about 1% of a proton's mass. The remainder of a proton's mass is due to quantum chromodynamics binding energy, which includes the kinetic energy of the quarks and the energy of the gluon fields that bind the quarks together. The proton charge radius is around but two different kinds of measurements give slightly different values.\nAt sufficiently low temperatures and kinetic energies, free protons will bind electrons in any matter they traverse.\nFree protons are routinely used for accelerators for proton therapy or various particle physics experiments, with the most powerful example being the Large Hadron Collider.\nDescription.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nHow do the quarks and gluons carry the spin of protons?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nProtons are spin- fermions and are composed of three valence quarks, making them baryons (a sub-type of hadrons). The two up quarks and one down quark of a proton are held together by the strong force, mediated by gluons. A modern perspective has a proton composed of the valence quarks (up, up, down), the gluons, and transitory pairs of sea quarks. Protons have a positive charge distribution, which decays approximately exponentially, with a root mean square charge radius of about 0.8\u00a0fm.\nProtons and neutrons are both nucleons, which may be bound together by the nuclear force to form atomic nuclei. The nucleus of the most common isotope of the hydrogen atom (with the chemical symbol \"H\") is a lone proton. The nuclei of the heavy hydrogen isotopes deuterium and tritium contain one proton bound to one and two neutrons, respectively. All other types of atomic nuclei are composed of two or more protons and various numbers of neutrons.\nHistory.\nThe concept of a hydrogen-like particle as a constituent of other atoms was developed over a long period. As early as 1815, William Prout used early values of atomic weight to devise what later researchers called Prout's hypothesis: all atoms are composed of integer combinations of hydrogen atoms (which he called \"protyles\"). When more accurate values of the atomic weights were measured, the integer relationship failed. Nevertheless the concept continued to intrigue scientists and would eventually emerge again a century later.\nIn 1886, Eugen Goldstein discovered canal rays (also known as anode rays) exiting from perforations in the discharge tube. Wilhelm Wien in 1898 showed that these rays had a charge opposite to the negative electrons discovered by J. J. Thomson, but with a much higher mass to charge ratio. Later that year Thomson was able to determine a value for the magnitude of the electric charge, \"e\", and show that the canal rays included material with charge-to-mass ratio (\"q\"/\"m\") consistent with the hydrogen ion. \nFollowing the discovery of the atomic nucleus by Ernest Rutherford in 1913, Antonius van den Broek proposed that the place of each element in the periodic table (its atomic number) is equal to its nuclear charge. This was confirmed experimentally by Henry Moseley in 1913 when he showed that the energy of X-ray spectra lines of many elements followed a pattern based on atomic number.\nIn 1919, after a long series of sporadic experiments interrupted by WWI, Rutherford discovered what he called artificial disintegration of nitrogen atoms. Using alpha particles from radium to strike air, Rutherford detected scintillation on a zinc sulfide screen at a distance, up to 28\u00a0cm, well beyond the distance of alpha-particle range of travel but instead corresponding to the range of travel of hydrogen atoms. By 1920 he concluded that these hydrogen nuclei were a constituent part of the nitrogen nucleus. This result has been described as the discovery of protons.\nWhen Rutherford described his results at the British Association for the Advancement of Science August 1920 he was asked by Oliver Lodge for a new name for the positive hydrogen nucleus to avoid confusion with the neutral hydrogen atom. Rutherford initially suggested both \"proton\" (the neuter singular of the Greek word for \"first\", ) and \"prouton\" (after Prout). Rutherford later reported that the meeting had accepted his suggestion that the hydrogen nucleus be named the \"proton\", following Prout's word \"protyle\". The first use of the word \"proton\" in the scientific literature appeared in 1920.\nRutherford initially assumed that the alpha particle merely knocked a proton out of nitrogen, turning it into carbon. Patrick Blackett's cloud chamber images in 1925 demonstrated that the alpha particle was absorbed. If the alpha particle were not absorbed, then 3 charged particles, a negatively charged carbon, a proton, and an alpha particle, would be expected. The 3 charged particles would create three tracks in the cloud chamber, but only 2 tracks in the cloud chamber were observed. Blackett proposed that the alpha particle is absorbed by the nitrogen atom. Heavy oxygen (17O), not carbon, was the product. This was the first reported nuclear reaction, .\nOccurrence.\nOne or more bound protons are present in the nucleus of every atom. \nFree protons are found naturally in a number of situations in which energies or temperatures are high enough to separate them from electrons, for which they have some affinity. Free protons occur occasionally on Earth: thunderstorms can produce protons with energies of up to several tens of megaelectronvolt. Free protons exist in plasmas in which temperatures are too high to allow them to combine with electrons. Free protons of high energy and velocity make up 90% of cosmic rays, which propagate through the interstellar medium. Free protons are emitted directly from atomic nuclei in some rare types of radioactive decay. Protons also result (along with electrons and antineutrinos) from the radioactive decay of free neutrons, which are unstable.\nStability.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nAre protons fundamentally stable? Or do they decay with a finite lifetime as predicted by some extensions to the standard model?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nThe spontaneous decay of free protons has never been observed, and protons are therefore considered stable particles according to the Standard Model. However, some grand unified theories (GUTs) of particle physics predict that proton decay should take place with lifetimes between 1031 and 1036 years. The experimental lower bound for the mean lifetime is .\nThe mean lifetime measures decay to any product. Lifetimes for decay to specific products is also measured. For example, experiments at the Super-Kamiokande detector in Japan gave lower limits for proton mean lifetime of for decay to an antimuon and a neutral pion, and for decay to a positron and a neutral pion.\nProtons are known to transform into neutrons through the process of electron capture (also called inverse beta decay). For free protons, this process does not occur spontaneously but only when energy is supplied. The equation is:\nThe process is reversible; neutrons can convert back to protons through beta decay, a common form of radioactive decay. In fact, a free neutron decays this way, with a mean lifetime of about 15 minutes. A proton can also transform into a neutron through beta plus decay (\u03b2+ decay).\nAccording to quantum field theory, the mean proper lifetime of protons formula_1 becomes finite when they are accelerating with proper acceleration formula_2, and formula_1 decreases with increasing formula_2. Acceleration gives rise to a non-vanishing probability for the transition \u2192 + +. This was a matter of concern in the later 1990s because formula_1 is a scalar that can be measured by the inertial and coaccelerated observers. In the inertial frame, the accelerating proton should decay according to the formula above. However, according to the coaccelerated observer the proton is at rest and hence should not decay. This puzzle is solved by realizing that in the coaccelerated frame there is a thermal bath due to Fulling\u2013Davies\u2013Unruh effect, an intrinsic effect of quantum field theory. In this thermal bath, experienced by the proton, there are electrons and antineutrinos with which the proton may interact according to the processes: \nAdding the contributions of each of these processes, one should obtain formula_1.\nQuarks and the mass of a proton.\nIn quantum chromodynamics, the modern theory of the nuclear force, most of the mass of protons and neutrons is explained by special relativity. The mass of a proton is about 80\u2013100 times greater than the sum of the rest masses of its three valence quarks, while the gluons have zero rest mass. The extra energy of the quarks and gluons in a proton, as compared to the rest energy of the quarks alone in the QCD vacuum, accounts for almost 99% of the proton's mass. The rest mass of a proton is, thus, the invariant mass of the system of moving quarks and gluons that make up the particle, and, in such systems, even the energy of massless particles confined to a system is still measured as part of the rest mass of the system.\nTwo terms are used in referring to the mass of the quarks that make up protons: \"current quark mass\" refers to the mass of a quark by itself, while \"constituent quark mass\" refers to the current quark mass plus the mass of the gluon particle field surrounding the quark. These masses typically have very different values. The kinetic energy of the quarks that is a consequence of confinement is a contribution (see \"Mass in special relativity\"). Using lattice QCD calculations, the contributions to the mass of the proton are the quark condensate (~9%, comprising the up and down quarks and a sea of virtual strange quarks), the quark kinetic energy (~32%), the gluon kinetic energy (~37%), and the anomalous gluonic contribution (~23%, comprising contributions from condensates of all quark flavors).\nThe constituent quark model wavefunction for the proton is\nformula_7\nThe internal dynamics of protons are complicated, because they are determined by the quarks' exchanging gluons, and interacting with various vacuum condensates. Lattice QCD provides a way of calculating the mass of a proton directly from the theory to any accuracy, in principle. The most recent calculations claim that the mass is determined to better than 4% accuracy, even to 1% accuracy (see Figure S5 in D\u00fcrr \"et al.\"). These claims are still controversial, because the calculations cannot yet be done with quarks as light as they are in the real world. This means that the predictions are found by a process of extrapolation, which can introduce systematic errors. It is hard to tell whether these errors are controlled properly, because the quantities that are compared to experiment are the masses of the hadrons, which are known in advance.\nThese recent calculations are performed by massive supercomputers, and, as noted by Boffi and Pasquini: \"a detailed description of the nucleon structure is still missing because ... long-distance behavior requires a nonperturbative and/or numerical treatment\u00a0...\"\nMore conceptual approaches to the structure of protons are: the topological soliton approach originally due to Tony Skyrme and the more accurate AdS/QCD approach that extends it to include a string theory of gluons, various QCD-inspired models like the bag model and the constituent quark model, which were popular in the 1980s, and the SVZ sum rules, which allow for rough approximate mass calculations. These methods do not have the same accuracy as the more brute-force lattice QCD methods, at least not yet.\nCharge radius.\nThe CODATA recommended value of a proton's charge radius is . The radius of the proton measured by electron\u2013proton scattering differs from the value measured via the Lamb shift in muonic hydrogen (an exotic atom made of a proton and a negatively charged muon). As a muon is 200 times heavier than an electron, resulting in a smaller atomic orbital, it is much more sensitive to the proton's charge radius and thus allows a more precise measurement. Subsequent improved scattering and electron-spectroscopy measurements agree with the new small radius. Work continues to refine and check this new value.\nA third kind of high precision measurement agrees most closely with the value given by the muonic hydrogen spectroscopy but unexplained differences remain. The exact nature of what these measurement mean has also been questioned.\nPressure inside the proton.\nSince the proton is composed of quarks confined by gluons, an equivalent pressure that acts on the quarks can be defined. The size of that pressure and other details about it are controversial.\nIn 2018 this pressure was reported to be on the order 1035\u00a0Pa, which is greater than the pressure inside a neutron star. It was said to be maximum at the centre, positive (repulsive) to a radial distance of about 0.6\u00a0fm, negative (attractive) at greater distances, and very weak beyond about 2\u00a0fm. These numbers were derived by a combination of a theoretical model and experimental \nCompton scattering of high-energy electrons. However, these results have been challenged as also being consistent with zero pressure and as effectively providing the pressure profile shape by selection of the model.\nCharge radius in solvated proton, hydronium.\nThe radius of the hydrated proton appears in the Born equation for calculating the hydration enthalpy of hydronium.\nInteraction of free protons with ordinary matter.\nAlthough protons have affinity for oppositely charged electrons, this is a relatively low-energy interaction and so free protons must lose sufficient velocity (and kinetic energy) in order to become closely associated and bound to electrons. High energy protons, in traversing ordinary matter, lose energy by collisions with atomic nuclei, and by ionization of atoms (removing electrons) until they are slowed sufficiently to be captured by the electron cloud in a normal atom.\nHowever, in such an association with an electron, the character of the bound proton is not changed, and it remains a proton. The attraction of low-energy free protons to any electrons present in normal matter (such as the electrons in normal atoms) causes free protons to stop and to form a new chemical bond with an atom. Such a bond happens at any sufficiently \"cold\" temperature (that is, comparable to temperatures at the surface of the Sun) and with any type of atom. Thus, in interaction with any type of normal (non-plasma) matter, low-velocity free protons do not remain free but are attracted to electrons in any atom or molecule with which they come into contact, causing the proton and molecule to combine. Such molecules are then said to be \"protonated\", and chemically they are simply compounds of hydrogen, often positively charged. Often, as a result, they become so-called Br\u00f8nsted acids. For example, a proton captured by a water molecule in water becomes hydronium, the aqueous cation .\nProton in chemistry.\nAtomic number.\nIn chemistry, the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is known as the atomic number, which determines the chemical element to which the atom belongs. For example, the atomic number of chlorine is 17; this means that each chlorine atom has 17 protons and that all atoms with 17 protons are chlorine atoms. The chemical properties of each atom are determined by the number of (negatively charged) electrons, which for neutral atoms is equal to the number of (positive) protons so that the total charge is zero. For example, a neutral chlorine atom has 17 protons and 17 electrons, whereas a Cl\u2212 anion has 17 protons and 18 electrons for a total charge of .\nAll atoms of a given element are not necessarily identical, however. The number of neutrons may vary to form different isotopes, and energy levels may differ, resulting in different nuclear isomers. For example, there are two stable isotopes of chlorine: Cl with 35 \u2212 17 = 18 neutrons and Cl with 37 \u2212 17 = 20 neutrons.\nHydrogen ion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe proton is a unique chemical species, being a bare nucleus. As a consequence it has no independent existence in the condensed state and is invariably found bound by a pair of electrons to another atom.\nRoss Stewart, \"The Proton: Application to Organic Chemistry\" (1985, p. 1)\nIn chemistry, the term \"proton\" refers to the hydrogen ion, H+. Since the atomic number of hydrogen is 1, a hydrogen ion has no electrons and corresponds to a bare nucleus, consisting of a proton (and 0 neutrons for the most abundant isotope \"protium\" [&lt;noinclude /&gt;[hydrogen-1|H]&lt;noinclude /&gt;]). The proton is a \"bare charge\" with only about 1/64,000 of the radius of a hydrogen atom, and so is extremely reactive chemically. The free proton, thus, has an extremely short lifetime in chemical systems such as liquids and it reacts immediately with the electron cloud of any available molecule. In aqueous solution, it forms the hydronium ion, H3O+, which in turn is further solvated by water molecules in clusters such as [H5O2]+ and [H9O4]+.\nThe transfer of H+ in an acid\u2013base reaction is usually referred to as \"proton transfer\". The acid is referred to as a proton donor and the base as a proton acceptor. Likewise, biochemical terms such as \"proton pump\" and \"proton channel\" refer to the movement of hydrated H+ ions.\nThe ion produced by removing the electron from a deuterium atom is known as a \"deuteron\", not a proton. Likewise, removing an electron from a tritium atom produces a \"triton\".\nProton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).\nAlso in chemistry, the term \"proton NMR\" refers to the observation of hydrogen-1 nuclei in (mostly organic) molecules by nuclear magnetic resonance. This method uses the quantized spin magnetic moment of the proton, which is due to its angular momentum (or spin), which in turn has a magnitude of one-half the reduced Planck constant. (formula_8). The name refers to examination of protons as they occur in protium (hydrogen-1 atoms) in compounds, and does not imply that free protons exist in the compound being studied.\nHuman exposure.\nThe Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (ALSEP) determined that more than 95% of the particles in the solar wind are electrons and protons, in approximately equal numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because the Solar Wind Spectrometer made continuous measurements, it was possible to measure how the Earth's magnetic field affects arriving solar wind particles. For about two-thirds of each orbit, the Moon is outside of the Earth's magnetic field. At these times, a typical proton density was 10 to 20 per cubic centimeter, with most protons having velocities between 400 and 650 kilometers per second. For about five days of each month, the Moon is inside the Earth's geomagnetic tail, and typically no solar wind particles were detectable. For the remainder of each lunar orbit, the Moon is in a transitional region known as the magnetosheath, where the Earth's magnetic field affects the solar wind, but does not completely exclude it. In this region, the particle flux is reduced, with typical proton velocities of 250 to 450 kilometers per second. During the lunar night, the spectrometer was shielded from the solar wind by the Moon and no solar wind particles were measured.\nProtons also have extrasolar origin from galactic cosmic rays, where they make up about 90% of the total particle flux. These protons often have higher energy than solar wind protons, and their intensity is far more uniform and less variable than protons coming from the Sun, the production of which is heavily affected by solar proton events such as coronal mass ejections.\nResearch has been performed on the dose-rate effects of protons, as typically found in space travel, on human health. To be more specific, there are hopes to identify what specific chromosomes are damaged, and to define the damage, during cancer development from proton exposure. Another study looks into determining \"the effects of exposure to proton irradiation on neurochemical and behavioral endpoints, including dopaminergic functioning, amphetamine-induced conditioned taste aversion learning, and spatial learning and memory as measured by the Morris water maze. Electrical charging of a spacecraft due to interplanetary proton bombardment has also been proposed for study. There are many more studies that pertain to space travel, including galactic cosmic rays and their possible health effects, and solar proton event exposure.\nThe American Biostack and Soviet Biorack space travel experiments have demonstrated the severity of molecular damage induced by heavy ions on microorganisms including Artemia cysts.\nAntiproton.\nCPT-symmetry puts strong constraints on the relative properties of particles and antiparticles and, therefore, is open to stringent tests. For example, the charges of a proton and antiproton must sum to exactly zero. This equality has been tested to one part in . The equality of their masses has also been tested to better than one part in . By holding antiprotons in a Penning trap, the equality of the charge-to-mass ratio of protons and antiprotons has been tested to one part in . The measured magnetic moments of protons and antiprotons have been found to be equal and opposite within 0.8\u00a0ppm.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "23318", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23318", "title": "Phosphorus", "text": "element with atomic number 15 (P)\nPhosphorus is a chemical element; it has symbol P and atomic number 15. All elemental forms of phosphorus are highly reactive and are therefore never found in nature. They can nevertheless be prepared artificially, the two most common allotropes being white phosphorus and red phosphorus. With as its only stable isotope, phosphorus has an occurrence in Earth's crust of about 0.1%, generally as phosphate rock. A member of the pnictogen family, phosphorus readily forms a wide variety of organic and inorganic compounds, with as its main oxidation states +5, +3 and \u22123.\nThe isolation of white phosphorus in 1669 by Hennig Brand marked the scientific community's first discovery of an element since antiquity. The name phosphorus is a reference to the god of the Morning star in Greek mythology, inspired by the faint glow of white phosphorus when exposed to oxygen. This property is also at the origin of the term \"phosphorescence\", meaning glow after illumination, although white phosphorus itself does not exhibit phosphorescence, but chemiluminescence caused by its oxidation. Its high toxicity makes exposure to white phosphorus very dangerous, while its flammability and pyrophoricity can be weaponised in the form of incendiaries. Red phosphorus is less dangerous and is used in matches and fire retardants.\nMost industrial production of phosphorus is focused on the mining and transformation of phosphate rock into phosphoric acid for phosphate-based fertilisers. Phosphorus is an essential and often limiting nutrient for plants, and while natural levels are normally maintained over time by the phosphorus cycle, it is too slow for the regeneration of soil that undergoes intensive cultivation. As a consequence, these fertilisers are vital to modern agriculture. The leading producers of phosphate ore in 2024 were China, Morocco, the United States and Russia, with two-thirds of the estimated exploitable phosphate reserves worldwide in Morocco alone. Other applications of phosphorus compounds include pesticides, food additives, and detergents.\nPhosphorus is essential to all known forms of life, largely through organophosphates, organic compounds containing the phosphate ion as a functional group. These include DNA, RNA, ATP, and phospholipids, complex compounds fundamental to the functioning of all cells. The main component of bones and teeth, bone mineral, is a modified form of hydroxyapatite, itself a phosphorus mineral.\nHistory.\nPhosphorus was the first element to be \"discovered\", in the sense that it was not known since ancient times. The discovery is credited to the Hamburg alchemist Hennig Brand in 1669, who was attempting to create the fabled philosopher's stone. To this end, he experimented with urine, which contains considerable quantities of dissolved phosphates from normal metabolism. By letting the urine rot (a step later discovered to be unnecessary), boiling it down to a paste, then distilling it at a high temperature and leading the resulting vapours through water, he obtained a white, waxy substance that glowed in the dark and burned brilliantly. He named it in . The word phosphorus itself () originates from Greek mythology, where it references the god of the morning star, also known as the planet Venus.\nBrand at first tried to keep the method secret, but later sold the recipe for 200 thalers to Johann Daniel Kraft from Dresden. Kraft toured much of Europe with it, including London, where he met with Robert Boyle. The crucial fact that the substance was made from urine was eventually found out, and Johann Kunckel was able to reproduce it in Sweden in 1678. In 1680, Boyle also managed to make phosphorus and published the method of its manufacture. He was the first to use phosphorus to ignite sulfur-tipped wooden splints, forerunners of modern matches, and also improved the process by using sand in the reaction:\nBoyle's assistant Ambrose Godfrey-Hanckwitz later made a business of the manufacture of phosphorus.\nIn 1777, Antoine Lavoisier recognised phosphorus as an element after Johan Gottlieb Gahn and Carl Wilhelm Scheele showed in 1769 that calcium phosphate is found in bones by obtaining elemental phosphorus from bone ash. Bone ash subsequently became the primary industrial source of phosphorus and remained so until the 1840s. The process consisted of several steps. First, grinding up the bones into their constituent tricalcium phosphate and treating it with sulfuric acid:\nThen, dehydrating the resulting monocalcium phosphate:\nFinally, mixing the obtained calcium metaphosphate with ground coal or charcoal in an iron pot, and distilling phosphorus vapour out of a retort:\nThis way, two-thirds of the phosphorus was turned into white phosphorus while one-third remained in the residue as calcium orthophosphate. The carbon monoxide produced during the reaction process was burnt off in a flare stack.\nIn 1609 Inca Garcilaso de la Vega wrote the book \"Comentarios Reales\" in which he described many of the agricultural practices of the Incas prior to the arrival of the Spaniards and introduced the use of guano as a fertiliser. As Garcilaso described, the Incas near the coast harvested guano. In the early 1800s Alexander von Humboldt introduced guano as a source of agricultural fertiliser to Europe after having discovered it in exploitable quantities on islands off the coast of South America. It has been reported that, at the time of its discovery, the guano on some islands was over 30\u00a0meters deep. The guano had previously been used by the Moche people as a source of fertiliser by mining it and transporting it back to Peru by boat. International commerce in guano did not start until after 1840. By the start of the 20th century guano had been nearly completely depleted and was eventually overtaken with the discovery of methods of production of superphosphate.\nEarly matches used white phosphorus in their composition, and were very dangerous due to both its toxicity and the way the match was ignited. The first striking match with a phosphorus head was invented by Charles Sauria in 1830. These matches (and subsequent modifications) were made with heads of white phosphorus, an oxygen-releasing compound (potassium chlorate, lead dioxide, or sometimes nitrate), and a binder. They were poisonous to the workers in manufacture, exposure to the vapours causing severe necrosis of the bones of the jaw, known as \"phossy jaw\". Additionally, they were sensitive to storage conditions, toxic if ingested, and hazardous when accidentally ignited on a rough surface. The very high risks for match workers was at the source of several notable early cases of industrial action, such as the 1888 London Matchgirls' strike.\nThe discovery of red phosphorus allowed for the development of matches that were both much safer to use and to manufacture, leading to the gradual replacement of white phosphorus in matches. Additionally, around 1900 French chemists Henri S\u00e9v\u00e8ne and Emile David Cahen invented the modern strike-anywhere match, wherein the white phosphorus was replaced by phosphorus sesquisulfide (), a non-toxic and non-pyrophoric compound that ignites under friction. For a time these safer strike-anywhere matches were quite popular but in the long run they were superseded by the modern red phosphorus-based safety match. Following the implementation of these new manufacturing methods, production of white phosphorus matches was banned in several countries between 1872 and 1925, and an international treaty to this effect was signed following the Berne Convention (1906).\nPhosphate rock, which usually contains calcium phosphate, was first used in 1850 to make phosphorus. With the introduction of the submerged-arc furnace for phosphorus production by James Burgess Readman in 1888 (patented 1889), the use of bone-ash became obsolete. After the depletion of world guano sources about the same time, mineral phosphates became the major source of phosphate fertiliser production. Phosphate rock production greatly increased after World War II, and remains the primary global source of phosphorus and phosphorus chemicals today.\nThe electric furnace method allowed production to increase to the point where it became possible that white phosphorus could be weaponised in war. In World War I, it was used in incendiary ammunition, smoke screens and tracer ammunition. A special incendiary bullet was developed to shoot at hydrogen-filled Zeppelins over Britain (hydrogen being highly flammable).\nDuring World War II, Molotov cocktails made of phosphorus dissolved in petrol were distributed in Britain to specially selected civilians as part of the preparations for a potential invasion. The United States also developed the M15 white-phosphorus hand grenade, a precursor to the M34 grenade, while the British introduced the similar No 77 grenade. These multipurpose grenades were mostly used for signaling and smoke screens, although they were also efficient anti-personnel weapons. The difficulty of extinguishing burning phosphorus and the very severe burns it causes had a strong psychological impact on the enemy. Phosphorus incendiary bombs were used on a large scale, notably to destroy Hamburg, the place where the \"miraculous bearer of light\" was first discovered.\nCharacteristics.\nIsotopes.\nThere are 22 known isotopes of phosphorus, ranging from to . Only is stable and, therefore, has 100% abundance. The nuclear spin of 1/2 and high abundance of make phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy a very useful analytical tool in studies of phosphorus-containing samples.\nTwo radioactive isotopes of phosphorus have half-lives suitable for biological scientific experiments, and are used as radioactive tracers in biochemical laboratories. These are:\nThe high-energy beta particles from penetrate skin and corneas and any ingested, inhaled, or absorbed is readily incorporated into bone and nucleic acids. For these reasons, personnel working with is required to wear lab coats, disposable gloves, and safety glasses, and avoid working directly over open containers. Monitoring personal, clothing, and surface contamination is also required. The high energy of the beta particles gives rise to secondary emission of X-rays via Bremsstrahlung (braking radiation) in dense shielding materials such as lead. Therefore, the radiation must be shielded with low density materials such as water, acrylic or other plastic.\nAtomic properties.\nA phosphorus atom has 15 electrons, 5 of which are valence electrons. This results in the electron configuration 1s22s22p63s23p3, often simplified as [Ne]3s23p3, omitting the core electrons which have a configuration equivalent to the noble gas of the preceding period, in this case neon. The molar ionisation energies of these five electrons are 1011.8, 1907, 2914.1, 4963.6 and 6273.9\u00a0kJ\u22c5mol\u22121.\nPhosphorus is a member of the pnictogens (also called group 15) and period 3 elements, and many of its chemical properties can be inferred from its position on the periodic table as a result of periodic trends. Like nitrogen, arsenic and antimony, its main oxidation states are \u22123, +3 and +5, with every one in-between less common but known. Phosphorus shows as expected more electronegativity than silicon and arsenic, less than sulfur and nitrogen, but also notably less than carbon, affecting the nature and properties of P\u2013C bonds. It is the element with the lowest atomic number to exhibit hypervalence, meaning that it can form more bonds per atom that would normally be permitted by the octet rule.\nAllotropes.\nPhosphorus has several allotropes that exhibit very diverse properties. The most useful and therefore common is white phosphorus, followed by red phosphorus. The two other main allotropes, violet and black phosphorus, have either a more fundamental interest or specialised applications. Many other allotropes have been theorised and synthesised, with the search for new materials an active area of research. Commonly mentioned \"yellow phosphorus\" is not an allotrope, but a result of the gradual degradation of white phosphorus into red phosphorus, accelerated by light and heat. This causes white phosphorus that is aged or otherwise impure (e.g. weapons-grade) to appear yellow.\nWhite phosphorus is a soft, waxy molecular solid that is insoluble in water. It is also very toxic, highly flammable and pyrophoric, igniting in air at about . Structurally, it is composed of tetrahedra. The nature of bonding in a given tetrahedron can be described by spherical aromaticity or cluster bonding, that is the electrons are highly delocalized. This has been illustrated by calculations of the magnetically induced currents, which sum up to 29\u00a0nA/T, much more than in the archetypical aromatic molecule benzene (11\u00a0nA/T). The molecule in the gas phase has a P-P bond length of 2.1994(3)\u00a0\u00c5 as determined by gas electron diffraction. White phosphorus exists in two crystalline forms named \u03b1 (alpha) and \u03b2 (beta), differing in terms of the relative orientation of the constituent tetrahedra. The \u03b1-form is most stable at room temperature and has a cubic crystal structure. When cooled down to it transforms into the \u03b2-form, turning into an hexagonal crystal structure. When heated up, the tetrahedral structure is conserved after melting at and boiling at , before facing thermal decomposition at where it turns into gaseous diphosphorus (). This molecule contains a triple bond and is analogous to ; it can also be generated as a transient intermediate in solution by thermolysis of organophosphorus precursor reagents. At still higher temperatures, dissociates into atomic P.\nWhen exposed to air, white phosphorus faintly glows green and blue due to oxidation, a phenomenon best visible in the dark. This reaction with oxygen takes place at the surface of the solid (or liquid) phosphorus, forming the short-lived molecules and that both emit visible light. However, in a pure-oxygen environment phosphorus does not glow at all, with the oxidation happening only in a range of partial pressures. Derived from this phenomenon, the terms \"phosphors\" and \"phosphorescence\" have been loosely used to describe substances that shine in the dark. However, phosphorus itself is not phosphorescent but chemiluminescent, since it glows due to a chemical reaction and not the progressive reemission of previously absorbed light.\nRed phosphorus is polymeric in structure. It can be viewed as a derivative of wherein one P-P bond is broken and one additional bond is formed with the neighbouring tetrahedron, resulting in chains of molecules linked by van der Waals forces. Red phosphorus may be formed by heating white phosphorus to in the absence of air or by exposing it to sunlight. In this form phosphorus is amorphous, but can be crystallised upon further heating into violet phosphorus or fibrous red phosphorus depending on the reaction conditions. Red phosphorus is therefore not an allotrope in the strictest sense of the term, but rather an intermediate between other crystalline allotropes of phosphorus, and consequently most of its properties have a range of values. Freshly prepared, bright red phosphorus is highly reactive and ignites at about . After prolonged heating or storage, the color darkens; the resulting product is more stable and does not spontaneously ignite in air.\nViolet phosphorus or \u03b1-metallic phosphorus can be produced by day-long annealing of red phosphorus above . In 1865, Johann Wilhelm Hittorf discovered that when phosphorus was recrystallised from molten lead, a red/purple form is obtained. Therefore, this form is sometimes known as \"Hittorf's phosphorus\" .\nBlack phosphorus or \u03b2-metallic phosphorus is the least reactive allotrope and the thermodynamically stable form below . In appearance, properties, and structure, it resembles graphite, being black and flaky, a conductor of electricity, and having puckered sheets of linked atoms. It is obtained by heating white phosphorus under high pressures (about ). It can also be produced at ambient conditions using metal salts, e.g. mercury, as catalysts. Single-layer black phosphorus is called phosphorene, and is therefore predictably analogous to graphene.\nNatural occurrence.\nIn 2013, astronomers detected phosphorus in Cassiopeia A, which confirmed that this element is produced in supernovae as a byproduct of supernova nucleosynthesis. The phosphorus-to-iron ratio in material from the supernova remnant could be up to 100 times higher than in the Milky Way in general. In 2020, astronomers analysed ALMA and ROSINA data from the massive star-forming region AFGL 5142, to detect phosphorus-bearing molecules and how they could have been carried in comets to the early Earth.\nPhosphorus has a concentration in the Earth's crust of about one gram per kilogram (for comparison, copper is found at about 0.06 grams per kilogram). It is not found free in nature, but is widely distributed in many minerals, usually as phosphates. Inorganic phosphate rock, which is partially made of apatite, is today the chief commercial source of this element.\nCompounds.\nInorganic phosphates.\nPhosphoric acids.\nThe most prevalent compounds of phosphorus are derivatives of phosphate (), a tetrahedral anion. Phosphate is the conjugate base of phosphoric acid, which is produced on a massive scale for use in fertilisers. Being triprotic, phosphoric acid converts stepwise to three conjugate bases:\n (\"K\"a1\u2009= 7.25\u00d710\u22123)\n (\"K\"a2\u00a0= 6.31\u00d710\u22128)\n (\"K\"a3\u00a0= 3.98\u00d710\u221213)\nFood-grade phosphoric acid (additive E338) is used to acidify foods and beverages such as various colas and jams, providing a tangy or sour taste. The phosphoric acid also serves as a preservative. Soft drinks containing phosphoric acid, including Coca-Cola, are sometimes called phosphate sodas or phosphates. Phosphoric acid in soft drinks has the potential to cause dental erosion, as well as contribute to the formation of kidney stones, especially in those who have had kidney stones previously.\nMetal salts.\nWith metal cations, phosphate forms a variety of salts. These solids are polymeric, featuring P-O-M linkages. When the metal cation has a charge of 2+ or 3+, the salts are generally insoluble, hence they exist as common minerals. Many phosphate salts are derived from hydrogen phosphate ().\nCalcium phosphates in particular are widespread compounds with many applications. Among them, they are used to improve the characteristics of processed meat and cheese, in baking powder, and in toothpaste. Two of the most relevant among them are monocalcium phosphate, and dicalcium phosphate.\nPolyphosphates.\nPhosphate exhibits a tendency to form chains and rings containing P-O-P bonds. Many polyphosphates are known, including ATP. Polyphosphates arise by dehydration of hydrogen phosphates such as and . For example, the industrially important pentasodium triphosphate (also known as sodium tripolyphosphate, STPP) is produced industrially by the megatonne by this condensation reaction:\nSodium triphosphate is used in laundry detergents in some countries, but banned for this use in others. This compound softens the water to enhance the performance of the detergents and to prevent pipe and boiler tube corrosion.\nOxoacids.\nPhosphorus oxoacids are extensive, often commercially important, and sometimes structurally complicated. They all have acidic protons bound to oxygen atoms, some have nonacidic protons that are bonded directly to phosphorus and some contain phosphorus\u2013phosphorus bonds. Although many oxoacids of phosphorus are formed, only nine are commercially important. Among them, hypophosphorous, phosphorous and orthophosphoric acid are particularly important.\nOther inorganic compounds.\nOxides and sulfides.\nPhosphorus pentoxide () is the acid anhydride of phosphoric acid, but several intermediates between the two are known. This waxy white solid reacts vigorously with water. Similarly, phosphorus trioxide (, also called tetraphosphorus hexoxide) is the anhydride of , the minor tautomer of phosphorous acid. The structure of is like that of without the terminal oxide groups. Mixed oxyhalides and oxyhydrides of phosphorus(III) are almost unknown. Meanwhile, phosphorus forms a wide range of sulfides, where the phosphorus can be in P(V), P(III) or other oxidation states. However, only two of them are commercially significant. Phosphorus pentasulfide () has a structure analogous to , and is used in the manufacture of additives and pesticides. The three-fold symmetric Phosphorus sesquisulfide () is used in strike-anywhere matches.\nHalides.\nPhosphorus halides can have as oxidation state +3 in the case of trihalides and +5 for pentahalides and chalcoalides, but also +2 for disphosphorus tetrahalides. All four symmetrical trihalides are well known: gaseous , the yellowish liquids and , and the solid . These materials are moisture sensitive, hydrolysing to give phosphorous acid. The trichloride, a common reagent used for the manufacture of pesticides, is produced by chlorination of white phosphorus. The trifluoride is produced from the trichloride by halide exchange. is toxic because it binds to haemoglobin.\nMost phosphorus pentahalides are common compounds. is a colourless gas and the molecules have a trigonal bipyramidal geometry. With fluoride, it forms , an anion that is isoelectronic with . is a colourless solid which has an ionic formulation of , but adopts a trigonal bipyramidal geometry when molten or in the vapour phase. Both the pentafluoride and the pentachloride are Lewis acids. Meanwhile, is an unstable solid formulated as . is not known.\nThe most important phosphorus oxyhalide is phosphorus oxychloride (), which is approximately tetrahedral. It is prepared from and used in the manufacture of plasticizers. Phosphorus can also form thiohalides such as , and in rare cases selenohalides.\nNitrides.\nThe PN molecule phosphorus mononitride is considered unstable, but is a product of crystalline triphosphorus pentanitride decomposition at . Similarly, is considered unstable, and phosphorus nitride halogens like , , , and oligomerise into cyclic polyphosphazenes. For example, compounds of the formula exist mainly as rings such as the trimer hexachlorophosphazene. The phosphazenes arise by treatment of phosphorus pentachloride with ammonium chloride:\nWhen the chloride groups are replaced by alkoxide (), a family of polymers is produced with potentially useful properties.\nPhosphides and phosphine.\nA wide variety of compounds which contain the containing the phosphide ion exist, both with main-group elements and with metals. They often exhibit complex structures, where phosphorus has the \u22123 oxidation state. Metal phosphides arise by reaction of metals with red phosphorus. The alkali metals (group 1) and alkaline earth metals (group 2) can also form compounds such as . These compounds react with water to form phosphine. Some phosphide minerals are also known, like and , but they are very rare on Earth, most instances occurring in iron-nickel meteorites.\nPhosphine () and its organic derivatives are structural analogues of ammonia (), but the bond angles at phosphorus are closer to 90\u00b0 for phosphine and its organic derivatives. It is an ill-smelling and toxic gas, produced by hydrolysis of calcium phosphide (). Unlike ammonia, phosphine is oxidised by air. Phosphine is also far less basic than ammonia. Other phosphines are known which contain chains of up to nine phosphorus atoms and have the formula . The highly flammable gas diphosphine () is an analogue of hydrazine.\nOrganophosphorus compounds.\nPhosphines, phosphites and organophosphates.\nCompounds with P-C and P-O-C bonds are often classified as organophosphorus compounds. They are widely used commercially. The serves as a source of in routes to organophosphorus(III) compounds. For example, it is the precursor to triphenylphosphine:\nTreatment of phosphorus trihalides with alcohols and phenols gives phosphites, e.g. triphenylphosphite:\nSimilar reactions occur for phosphorus oxychloride, affording triphenylphosphate:\nSome organophosphates are used as flame retardants. Among them, tricresyl phosphate and 2-ethylhexyl diphenyl phosphate are also plasticisers, making these two properties useful in the production of non-flammable plastic products and derivatives.\nWhile many organic compounds of phosphorus are required for life, some are highly toxic. A wide range of organophosphorus compounds are used for their toxicity as pesticides and weaponised as nerve agents. Some notable examples include sarin, VX or Tabun. Fluorophosphate esters (like sarin) are among the most potent neurotoxins known.\nThioesters.\nSymmetric phosphorus(III) trithioesters (e.g. ) can be produced from the reaction of white phosphorus and the corresponding disulfide, or phosphorus(III) halides and thiolates. Unlike the corresponding esters, they do not undergo a variant of the Michaelis-Arbuzov reaction with electrophiles. Instead, they revert to another phosphorus(III) compound through a sulfonium intermediate.\nPhosphorus(I) and phosphorus(II).\nThese compounds generally feature P\u2013P bonds. Examples include catenated derivatives of phosphine and organophosphines. Compounds containing P=P double bonds have also been observed, although they are rare.\nBiological role.\nCells.\nInorganic phosphorus in the form of the phosphate is required for all known forms of life. Phosphorus plays a major role in the structural framework of DNA and RNA. Living cells use phosphate to transport cellular energy with adenosine triphosphate (ATP), necessary for every cellular process that uses energy. ATP is also important for phosphorylation, a key regulatory event in cells. Every living cell is encased in a membrane that separates it from its surroundings. Cellular membranes are composed of a phospholipid matrix and proteins, typically in the form of a bilayer. Phospholipids are derived from glycerol with two of the glycerol hydroxyl (OH) protons replaced by fatty acids as an ester, and the third hydroxyl proton has been replaced with phosphate bonded to another alcohol.\nBone and teeth enamel.\nThe main component of bone is hydroxyapatite as well as amorphous forms of calcium phosphate, possibly including carbonate. Hydroxyapatite is the main component of tooth enamel. Water fluoridation enhances the resistance of teeth to decay by the partial conversion of this mineral to the still harder material fluorapatite:\nAn average adult human contains about of phosphorus, about 85\u201390% in bones and teeth in the form of apatite, and the remainder in soft tissues and extracellular fluids. The phosphorus content increases from about 0.5% by mass in infancy to 0.65\u20131.1% by mass in adults. In comparison, average phosphorus concentration in the blood is about 0.4\u00a0g/L; about 70% of that is organic and 30% inorganic phosphates.\nNutrition.\nThe main food sources for phosphorus are the same as those containing protein, although proteins themselves do not contain phosphorus. For example, milk, meat, and soya typically also have phosphorus. Generally, if a diet includes sufficient protein and calcium, the amount of phosphorus is sufficient.\nAccording to the U.S. Institute of Medicine, the estimated average requirement for phosphorus for people ages 19 and up is 580\u00a0mg/day. The RDA is 700\u00a0mg/day. RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher-than-average requirements. RDA for pregnancy and lactation are also 700\u00a0mg/day. For people ages 1\u201318 years, the RDA increases with age from 460 to 1250\u00a0mg/day. As for safety, the IOM sets tolerable upper intake level for phosphorus at 4000\u00a0mg/day. Collectively, these values are referred to as the Dietary Reference Intake. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR. AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For people ages 15 and older, including pregnancy and lactation, the AI is set at 550\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 4\u201310, the AI is 440\u00a0mg/day, and for ages 11\u201317 it is 640\u00a0mg/day. These AIs are lower than the U.S. RDAs. In both systems, teenagers need more than adults. The EFSA reviewed the same safety question and decided that there was not sufficient information to set a UL.\nPhosphorus deficiency may be caused by malnutrition, by failure to absorb phosphate, and by metabolic syndromes that draw phosphate from the blood (such as in refeeding syndrome after malnutrition) or passing too much of it into the urine. All are characterised by hypophosphatemia, which is a condition of low levels of soluble phosphate levels in the blood serum and inside the cells. Symptoms of hypophosphatemia include neurological dysfunction and disruption of muscle and blood cells due to lack of ATP. Too much phosphate can lead to diarrhoea and calcification (hardening) of organs and soft tissue, and can interfere with the body's ability to use iron, calcium, magnesium, and zinc.\nPhosphorus cycle.\nPhosphorus is an essential plant nutrient (the most often limiting nutrient, after nitrogen), and the bulk of all phosphorus production is in concentrated phosphoric acids for agriculture fertilisers, containing as much as 70% to 75% . That led to large increase in phosphate production in the second half of the 20th century. Artificial phosphate fertilisation is necessary because phosphorus is essential to all living organisms; it is involved in energy transfers, strength of root and stems, photosynthesis, the expansion of plant roots, formation of seeds and flowers, and other important factors effecting overall plant health and genetics. Heavy use of phosphorus fertilisers and their runoff have resulted in eutrophication (overenrichment) of aquatic ecosystems.\nNatural phosphorus-bearing compounds are mostly inaccessible to plants because of the low solubility and mobility in soil. Most phosphorus is very stable in the soil minerals or organic matter of the soil. Even when phosphorus is added in manure or fertiliser it can become fixed in the soil. Therefore, the natural phosphorus cycle is very slow. Some of the fixed phosphorus is released again over time, sustaining wild plant growth, however, more is needed to sustain intensive cultivation of crops. Fertiliser is often in the form of superphosphate of lime, a mixture of calcium dihydrogen phosphate (), and calcium sulfate dihydrate () produced reacting sulfuric acid and water with calcium phosphate.\nProcessing phosphate minerals with sulfuric acid for obtaining fertiliser is so important to the global economy that this is the primary industrial market for sulfuric acid and the greatest industrial use of elemental sulfur.\nProduction.\nMining.\nMeans of commercial phosphorus production besides mining are few because the phosphorus cycle does not include significant gas-phase transport. The predominant source of phosphorus in modern times is phosphate rock (as opposed to the guano that preceded it).\nUS production of phosphate rock peaked in 1980 at 54.4 million metric tons. The United States was the world's largest producer of phosphate rock from at least 1900, up until 2006, when US production was exceeded by that of China. In 2019, the US produced 10 percent of the world's phosphate rock.\nProcessing.\nMost phosphorus-bearing material is for agriculture fertilisers. In this case where the standards of purity are modest, phosphorus is obtained from phosphate rock by what is called the \"wet process.\" The minerals are treated with sulfuric acid to give phosphoric acid. Phosphoric acid is then neutralised to give various phosphate salts, which comprise fertilisers. In the wet process, phosphorus does not undergo redox. About five tons of phosphogypsum waste are generated per ton of phosphoric acid production. Annually, the estimated generation of phosphogypsum worldwide is 100 to 280 Mt.\nFor the use of phosphorus in drugs, detergents, and foodstuff, the standards of purity are high, which led to the development of the thermal process. In this process, phosphate minerals are converted to white phosphorus, which can be purified by distillation. The white phosphorus is then oxidised to phosphoric acid and subsequently neutralised with a base to give phosphate salts. The thermal process is conducted in a submerged-arc furnace which is energy intensive. Presently, about of elemental phosphorus is produced annually. Calcium phosphate (as phosphate rock), mostly mined in Florida and North Africa, can be heated to 1,200\u20131,500\u00a0\u00b0C with sand, which is mostly , and coke to produce . The product, being volatile, is readily isolated:\n\nSide products from the thermal process include ferrophosphorus, a crude form of , resulting from iron impurities in the mineral precursors. The silicate slag is a useful construction material. The fluoride is sometimes recovered for use in water fluoridation. More problematic is a \"mud\" containing significant amounts of white phosphorus. Production of white phosphorus is conducted in large facilities in part because it is energy intensive. The white phosphorus is transported in molten form. Some major accidents have occurred during transportation.\nReserves.\nPhosphorus comprises about 0.1% by mass of the Earth's crust. However, only concentrated forms collectively referred to as phosphate rock or phosphorite are exploitable, and are not evenly distributed across the Earth. Unprocessed phosphate rock has a concentration of 1.7\u20138.7% phosphorus by mass (4\u201320% phosphorus pentoxide). The world's total commercial phosphate reserves and resources are estimated in amounts of phosphate rock, which in practice includes over 300 ores of different origin, composition, and phosphate content. \"Reserves\" refers to the amount assumed recoverable at current market prices and \"resources\" refers to estimated amounts of such a grade or quality that they have reasonable prospects for economic extraction. Mining is currently the only cost-effective method for the production of phosphorus. Hence, a shortage in rock phosphate or significant price increases might negatively affect the world's food security.\nThe countries estimated to have the biggest phosphate rock commercial reserves (in billion metric tons) are Morocco (50), China (3.2), Egypt (2.8), Algeria (2.2), Syria (1.8), Brazil (1.6), Saudi Arabia (1.4), South Africa (1.4), Australia (1.1), United States (1.0), and Finland (1.0). Estimates for future production vary significantly depending on modelling and assumptions on extractable volumes, but it is inescapable that future production of phosphate rock will be heavily influenced by Morocco in the foreseeable future. According to some researchers, Earth's commercial and affordable phosphorus reserves are expected to be depleted in 50\u2013100 years.\nIn 2023, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimated that economically extractable phosphate rock reserves worldwide are 72 billion tons, while world mining production in 2022 was 220 million tons. Assuming zero growth, the reserves would thus last for around 300 years. This broadly confirms a 2010 International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC) report that global reserves would last for several hundred years. Phosphorus reserve figures are intensely debated. Gilbert suggest that there has been little external verification of the estimate. A 2014 review concluded that the IFDC report \"presents an inflated picture of global reserves, in particular those of Morocco, where largely hypothetical and inferred resources have simply been relabeled \"reserves\".\nConservation and recycling.\nReducing agricultural runoff and soil erosion can slow the frequency with which farmers have to reapply phosphorus to their fields. Agricultural methods such as no-till farming, terracing, contour tilling, and the use of windbreaks have been shown to reduce the rate of phosphorus depletion from farmland, though do not completely remove the need for periodic fertiliser application. Strips of grassland or forest between arable land and rivers can also greatly reduce losses of phosphate and other nutrients.\nSewage treatment plants that have a dedicated phosphorus removal step produce phosphate-rich sewage sludge that can then be treated to extract phosphorus from it. This is done by incinerating the sludge and recovering the resulting ash. Another approach lies into the recovery of phosphorus-rich materials such as struvite from waste processing plants, which is done by adding magnesium to the waste. However, the technologies currently in use are not yet cost-effective, given the current price of phosphorus on the world market.\nApplications.\nMatches.\nSafety matches are very difficult to ignite on any surface other than a special striker strip. The strip contains non-toxic red phosphorus and the match head potassium chlorate, an oxygen-releasing compound. When struck, small amounts of abrasion from match head and striker strip are mixed intimately to make a small quantity of Armstrong's mixture, a very touch sensitive composition. The fine powder ignites immediately and provides the initial spark to set off the match head. Safety matches separate the two components of the ignition mixture until the match is struck. This is the key safety advantage as it prevents accidental ignition.\nMilitary.\nThough military uses of white phosphorus are constrained by modern international law, white phosphorus munitions are still used for military applications, such as incendiary bombs, smoke screens, smoke bombs, and tracer ammunition.\nDrug production.\nElemental phosphorus can reduce elemental iodine to hydroiodic acid, which is a reagent effective for reducing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to methamphetamine. For this reason, red and white phosphorus are listed in the United States as List I precursor chemicals by the Drug Enforcement Administration, and their handling is subject to stringent regulatory controls.\nMetallurgical aspects.\nPhosphorus is also an important component in steel production, in the making of phosphor bronze, and in many other related products. Phosphorus is added to metallic copper during its smelting process to react with oxygen present as an impurity in copper and to produce phosphorus-containing copper (CuOFP) alloys with a higher hydrogen embrittlement resistance than normal copper. Phosphate conversion coating is a chemical treatment applied to steel parts to improve their corrosion resistance.\nSemiconductors.\nPhosphorus is a dopant in N-type semiconductors used in high-power electronics and semiconductor detectors. In this context, phosphorus is not present at the start of the process, but rather created directly out of silicon during the manufacture of the devices. This is done by neutron transmutation doping, a method based on the conversion of the into by neutron capture and beta decay as follows:\nformula_1\nIn practice, the silicon is typically placed near or inside a nuclear reactor generating neutrons. As neutrons pass through the silicon, phosphorus atoms are produced by transmutation. This doping method is far less common than diffusion or ion implantation, but it has the advantage of creating an extremely uniform dopant distribution.\nHazards.\nExternal contact.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nElemental phosphorus poses by far the greatest danger in its white form, red phosphorus being relatively nontoxic. In the past, external exposure to white phosphorus was treated by washing the affected area with 2% copper(II) sulfate solution to form harmless compounds that are then washed away. According to 2009 United States Navy guidelines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cupric (copper) sulfate has been used by U.S. personnel in the past and is still being used by some nations. However, copper sulfate is toxic and its use will be discontinued. Copper sulfate may produce kidney and cerebral toxicity as well as intravascular hemolysis.\nInstead, the manual suggests:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] a bicarbonate solution to neutralise phosphoric acid, which will then allow removal of visible white phosphorus. Particles often can be located by their emission of smoke when air strikes them, or by their phosphorescence in the dark. In dark surroundings, fragments are seen as luminescent spots. Promptly debride the burn if the patient's condition will permit removal of bits of WP (white phosphorus) that might be absorbed later and possibly produce systemic poisoning. DO NOT apply oily-based ointments until it is certain that all WP has been removed. Following complete removal of the particles, treat the lesions as thermal burns.\nIngestion.\nBecause of its common use as a rodenticide, there are documented medical reports of white phosphorus ingestion and its effects, especially on children. These cases can present very characteristic symptoms, such as garlic-smelling, smoking and luminescent vomit and stool, the latter sometimes called \"Smoking Stool Syndrome\". It is absorbed by both the gastrointestinal tract and the respiratory mucosa, to whose it causes serious damage. The acute lethal dose has been estimated at 1\u00a0mg/kg, this very small amount leading to many cases proving fatal, either because of rapid cardiovascular arrest or through the following systemic toxicity.\nPassive exposure.\nChronic poisoning can lead to necrosis of the jaw. In the United States, exposure to 0.1\u00a0mg/m3 of white phosphorus over an 8-hour workday is set as the permissible exposure limit by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and as the recommended exposure limit by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. From 5\u00a0mg/m3, it is considered immediately dangerous to life or health."}
{"id": "23319", "revid": "51009161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23319", "title": "Palladium", "text": "element with atomic number 46 (Pd)\nPalladium is a chemical element; it has the symbol Pd and atomic number 46. It is a rare and lustrous silvery-white metal discovered in 1802 by the English chemist William Hyde Wollaston. He named it after the asteroid Pallas (formally 2 Pallas), which was thought to be a planet at the time, which was itself named after the epithet of the Greek goddess Athena, acquired by her when she slew Pallas. Palladium, platinum, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium and osmium form together a group of elements referred to as the platinum group metals. They have similar chemical properties, but palladium has the lowest melting point and is the least dense of them.\nMore than half the supply of palladium and its congener platinum is used in catalytic converters, which convert as much as 90% of the harmful gases in automobile exhaust (hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen dioxide) into nontoxic substances (nitrogen, carbon dioxide and water vapor). Palladium is also used in electronics, dentistry, medicine, hydrogen purification, chemical applications, electrochemical sensors, electrosynthesis, groundwater treatment, and jewellery. Palladium is a key component of fuel cells, in which hydrogen and oxygen react to produce electricity, heat, and water.\nOre deposits of palladium and other platinum group metals are rare. The most extensive deposits have been found in the norite belt of the Bushveld Igneous Complex covering the Transvaal Basin in South Africa; the Stillwater Complex in Montana, United States; the Sudbury Basin and Thunder Bay District of Ontario, Canada; and the Norilsk Complex in Russia. Recycling is also a source, mostly from scrapped catalytic converters. The numerous applications and limited supply sources result in considerable investment interest.\nCharacteristics.\nPalladium belongs to group\u00a010 in the periodic table, but the configuration in the outermost electrons is in accordance with Hund's rule. Electrons that by the Madelung rule would be expected to occupy the 5\"s\" instead fill the 4\"d\"\u00a0orbitals, as it is more energetically favorable to have a completely filled 4d10 shell instead of the 5s2 4d8 configuration.\nThis 5s0 configuration, unique in period\u00a05, makes palladium the heaviest element having only \"one\" incomplete electron shell, with all shells above it empty.\nPalladium has the appearance of a soft silver-white metal that resembles platinum. It is the least dense and has the lowest melting point of the platinum group metals. It is soft and ductile when annealed and is greatly increased in strength and hardness when cold-worked. Palladium dissolves slowly in concentrated nitric acid, in hot, concentrated sulfuric acid, and when finely ground, in hydrochloric acid. It dissolves readily at room temperature in aqua regia.\nPalladium does not react with oxygen at standard temperature (and thus does not tarnish in air). Palladium heated to 800\u00a0\u00b0C will produce a layer of palladium(II) oxide (PdO). It may slowly develop a slight brownish coloration over time, likely due to the formation of a surface layer of its monoxide.\nPalladium films with defects produced by alpha particle bombardment at low temperature exhibit superconductivity having \"T\"c = 3.2 K.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring palladium is composed of six stable isotopes. The most stable radioisotopes are 107Pd with a half-life of 6.5 million years (traces found in nature), 103Pd with a half-life of 16.99 days, and 100Pd with a half-life of 3.63 days. There are 25 other radioisotopes characterized ranging from 91Pd to 129Pd. These have half-lives of less than thirty minutes, except 101Pd (8.47 hours), 109Pd (13.6 hours), and 112Pd (21.0 hours).\nFor isotopes with atomic masses less than that of the most abundant stable isotope, 106Pd, the primary decay mode is electron capture with the primary decay product being rhodium. The primary mode of decay for those isotopes of Pd with atomic mass greater than 106 is beta decay with the primary product of this decay being silver.\nRadiogenic 107Ag is a decay product of 107Pd and was first discovered in 1978 in the Santa Clara meteorite of 1976. The discoverers suggest that the coalescence and differentiation of iron-cored small planets may have occurred 10 million years after a nucleosynthetic event. 107Pd versus Ag correlations observed in Solar System bodies must reflect the presence of short-lived nuclides in the early Solar System.\n107Pd is also produced as a fission product in spontaneous or induced fission of 235U. As it is not very mobile in the environment and has a relatively low decay energy, 107Pd is usually considered to be among the more benign of the long-lived fission products.\nCompounds.\nPalladium compounds exist primarily in the 0 and +2 oxidation state. Other less common states are also recognized. Generally the compounds of palladium are more similar to those of platinum than those of any other element.\nPalladium(II).\nPalladium(II) chloride is the principal starting material for other palladium compounds. It arises by the reaction of palladium with chlorine. It is used to prepare heterogeneous palladium catalysts such as palladium on barium sulfate, palladium on carbon, and palladium chloride on carbon. Solutions of in nitric acid react with acetic acid to give palladium(II) acetate, also a versatile reagent. reacts with ligands (L) to give square planar complexes of the type . One example of such complexes is the benzonitrile derivative .\n (L = PhCN, PPh3, NH3, etc.)\nThe complex bis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(II) dichloride is a useful catalyst.\nPalladium(0).\nPalladium forms a range of zerovalent complexes with the formula , and . For example, reduction of a mixture of and gives tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0):\nAnother major palladium(0) complex, tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) (), is prepared by reducing sodium tetrachloropalladate in the presence of dibenzylideneacetone.\nPalladium(0), as well as palladium(II), are catalysts in coupling reactions, as has been recognized by the 2010 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Richard F. Heck, Ei-ichi Negishi, and Akira Suzuki. Such reactions are widely practiced for the synthesis of fine chemicals. Prominent coupling reactions include the Heck, Suzuki, Sonogashira coupling, Stille reactions, and the Kumada coupling. Palladium(II) acetate, tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0) (), and tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) () serve either as catalysts or precatalysts.\nOther oxidation states.\nAlthough Pd(IV) compounds are comparatively rare, one example is sodium hexachloropalladate(IV), . Pd(II) and Pd(IV) can transform into each other under certain electrochemical conditions. A few compounds of palladium(III) are also known. Palladium(VI) was claimed to have been synthesized in 2002, but subsequently disproven.\nMixed valence palladium complexes exist, e.g. forms an infinite Pd chain structure, with alternatively interconnected and Pd(acac)2 units.\nWhen alloyed with a more electropositive element, palladium can acquire a negative charge. Such compounds are known as palladides, such as gallium palladide. Palladides with the stoichiometry exist where R is scandium, yttrium, or any of the lanthanides.\nOccurrence.\nAs overall mine production of palladium reached 210,000 kilograms in 2022, Russia was the top producer with 88,000 kilograms, followed by South Africa, Canada, the U.S., and Zimbabwe. Russia's company Norilsk Nickel ranks first among the largest palladium producers globally, accounting for 39% of the world's production. \nPalladium can be found as a free metal alloyed with gold and other platinum-group metals in placer deposits of the Ural Mountains, Australia, Ethiopia, North and South America. For the production of palladium, these deposits play only a minor role. The most important commercial sources are nickel-copper deposits found in the Sudbury Basin, Ontario, and the Norilsk\u2013Talnakh deposits in Siberia. The other large deposit is the Merensky Reef platinum group metals deposit within the Bushveld Igneous Complex South Africa. The Stillwater igneous complex of Montana and the Roby zone ore body of the Lac des \u00celes igneous complex of Ontario are the two other sources of palladium in Canada and the United States. Palladium is found in the rare minerals cooperite and polarite. Many more Pd minerals are known, but all of them are very rare.\nPalladium is also produced in nuclear fission reactors and can be extracted from spent nuclear fuel (see synthesis of precious metals), though this source for palladium is not used. None of the existing nuclear reprocessing facilities are equipped to extract palladium from the high-level radioactive waste. A complication for the recovery of palladium in spent fuel is the presence of 107Pd, a slightly radioactive long-lived fission product. Depending on end use, the radioactivity contributed by the 107Pd might make the recovered palladium unusable without a costly step of isotope separation.\nApplications.\nThe largest use of palladium today is in catalytic converters. Palladium is also used in jewellery, dentistry, watch making, blood sugar test strips, aircraft spark plugs, surgical instruments, and electrical contacts. Palladium is also used to make some professional transverse (concert or classical) flutes. As a commodity, palladium bullion has ISO currency codes of XPD and 964. Palladium is one of only four metals to have such codes, the others being gold, silver and platinum. Because it adsorbs hydrogen, palladium was a key component of the controversial cold fusion experiments of the late 1980s.\nCatalysis.\nWhen it is finely divided, as with palladium on carbon, palladium forms a versatile catalyst; it speeds heterogeneous catalytic processes like hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, and petroleum cracking. Palladium is also essential to the Lindlar catalyst, also called Lindlar's Palladium. A large number of carbon\u2013carbon bonding reactions in organic chemistry are facilitated by palladium compound catalysts. For example:\nWhen dispersed on conductive materials, palladium is an excellent electrocatalyst for oxidation of primary alcohols in alkaline media. Palladium is also a versatile metal for homogeneous catalysis, used in combination with a broad variety of ligands for highly selective chemical transformations.\nIn 2010 the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded \"for palladium-catalyzed cross couplings in organic synthesis\" to Richard F. Heck, Ei-ichi Negishi and Akira Suzuki. A 2008 study showed that palladium is an effective catalyst for carbon\u2013fluorine bonds.\nPalladium catalysis is primarily employed in organic chemistry and industrial applications, although its use is growing as a tool for synthetic biology; in 2017, effective \"in vivo\" catalytic activity of palladium nanoparticles was demonstrated in mammals to treat disease.\nPalladium is also used as a catalyst in the production of biofuels.\nElectronics.\nThe primary application of palladium in electronics is in multi-layer ceramic capacitors in which palladium (and palladium-silver alloy) is used for electrodes. Palladium (sometimes alloyed with nickel) is or can be used for component and connector plating in consumer electronics and in soldering materials. The electronic sector consumed of palladium in 2006, according to a Johnson Matthey report. Palladium is used in the production of printed circuit boards.\nTechnology.\nHydrogen easily diffuses through heated palladium, and membrane reactors with Pd membranes are used in the production of high purity hydrogen. Palladium is used in palladium-hydrogen electrodes in electrochemical studies. Palladium(II) chloride readily catalyzes carbon monoxide gas to carbon dioxide and is useful in carbon monoxide detectors.\nPalladium has been used to produce metallic glass by fast cooling alloys, avoiding their crystallisation, thus reducing brittleness and leading to stronger materials.\nHydrogen storage.\nPalladium readily adsorbs hydrogen at room temperatures, forming palladium hydride PdHx with x less than 1. While this property is common to many transition metals, palladium has a uniquely high absorption capacity and does not lose its ductility until x approaches 1. This property has been investigated in designing an efficient and safe hydrogen fuel storage medium, though palladium itself is currently prohibitively expensive for this purpose. The content of hydrogen in palladium can be linked to magnetic susceptibility, which decreases with the increase of hydrogen and becomes zero for PdH0.62. At any higher ratio, the solid solution becomes diamagnetic.\nPalladium is used for purification of hydrogen on a laboratory but not industrial scale.\nMedicine.\nPalladium is used in small amounts (about 0.5%) in some alloys of dental amalgam to decrease corrosion and increase the metallic lustre of the final restoration. Palladium is also used in the production of pacemakers.\nJewellery.\nPalladium has been used as a precious metal in jewellery since 1939 as an alternative to platinum in the alloys called \"white gold\", where the naturally white color of palladium does not require rhodium plating. Palladium, being much less dense than platinum, is similar to gold in that it can be beaten into leaf as thin as 100\u00a0nm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044250,000\u00a0in). Unlike platinum, palladium may discolor at temperatures above due to oxidation, making it more brittle and thus less suitable for use in jewellery; to prevent this, palladium intended for jewellery is heated under controlled conditions.\nPrior to 2004, the principal use of palladium in jewellery was the manufacture of white gold. Palladium is one of the three most popular alloying metals in white gold (nickel and silver can also be used). Palladium-gold is more expensive than nickel-gold, but seldom causes allergic reactions (though certain cross-allergies with nickel may occur).\nWhen platinum became a strategic resource during World War II, many jewellery bands were made out of palladium. Palladium was little used in jewellery because of the technical difficulty of casting. With the casting problem resolved the use of palladium in jewellery increased, originally because platinum increased in price whilst the price of palladium decreased. In early 2004, when gold and platinum prices rose steeply, China began fabricating volumes of palladium jewellery, consuming 37 tonnes in 2005. Subsequent changes in the relative price of platinum lowered demand for palladium to 17.4 tonnes in 2009. Demand for palladium as a catalyst has increased the price of palladium to about 50% higher than that of platinum in January 2019.\nIn January 2010, hallmarks for palladium were introduced by assay offices in the United Kingdom, and hallmarking became mandatory for all jewellery advertising pure or alloyed palladium. Articles can be marked as 500, 950, or 999 parts of palladium per thousand of the alloy.\nPhotography.\nIn the platinotype printing process, photographers make fine-art black-and-white prints using platinum or palladium salts. Often used with platinum, palladium provides an alternative to silver. But palladium is more inert than the silver used in silver bromide prints, so such photographs are better archived than conventional prints and convey details more clearly.\nEffects on health.\nToxicity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPalladium is a metal with low toxicity as conventionally measured (e.g. LD50). Recent research on the mechanism of palladium toxicity suggests high toxicity if measured on a longer timeframe and at the cellular level in the liver and kidney. Mitochondria appear to have a key role in palladium toxicity via mitochondrial membrane potential collapse and depletion of the cellular glutathione (GSH) level. Until that recent work, it had been thought that palladium was poorly absorbed by the human body when ingested. Plants such as the water hyacinth are killed by low levels of palladium salts, but most other plants tolerate it, although tests show that, at levels above 0.0003%, growth is affected. High doses of palladium could be poisonous; tests on rodents suggest it may be carcinogenic, though until the recent research cited above, no clear evidence indicated that the element harms humans.\nPrecautions.\nLike other platinum-group metals, bulk Pd is quite inert. Although contact dermatitis has been reported, data on the effects are limited. It has been shown that people with an allergic reaction to palladium also react to nickel, making it advisable to avoid the use of dental alloys containing palladium on those so allergic.\nSome palladium is emitted with the exhaust gases of cars with catalytic converters. Between 4 and 108\u00a0ng/km of palladium particulate is released by such cars, while the total uptake from food is estimated to be less than 2\u00a0\u03bcg per person a day. The second possible source of palladium is dental restoration, from which the uptake of palladium is estimated to be less than 15\u00a0\u03bcg per person per day. People working with palladium or its compounds might have a considerably greater uptake. For soluble compounds such as palladium chloride, 99% is eliminated from the body within three days.\nThe median lethal dose (LD50) of soluble palladium compounds in mice is 200\u00a0mg/kg for oral and 5\u00a0mg/kg for intravenous administration.\nHistory.\nWilliam Hyde Wollaston noted the discovery of a new noble metal in July 1802 in his lab book and named it palladium in August of the same year. He named the element after the asteroid 2 Pallas, which had been discovered two months earlier (and which was previously considered a planet). Wollaston purified a quantity of the material and offered it, without naming the discoverer, in a small shop in Soho in April 1803. After harsh criticism from Richard Chenevix, who claimed that palladium was an alloy of platinum and mercury, Wollaston anonymously offered a reward of \u00a320 for 20 grains of synthetic palladium \"alloy\". Chenevix received the Copley Medal in 1803 after he published his experiments on palladium. Wollaston published the discovery of rhodium in 1804 and mentions some of his work on palladium. He disclosed that he was the discoverer of palladium in a publication in 1805.\nWollaston found palladium in crude platinum ore from South America by dissolving the ore in aqua regia, neutralizing the solution with sodium hydroxide, and precipitating platinum as ammonium chloroplatinate with ammonium chloride. He added mercuric cyanide to form the compound palladium(II) cyanide, which was heated to extract palladium metal.\nPalladium chloride was at one time prescribed as a tuberculosis treatment at the rate of 0.065\u00a0g per day (approximately one milligram per kilogram of body weight). This treatment had many negative side-effects, and was later replaced by more effective drugs.\nMost palladium is used for catalytic converters in the automobile industry. Catalytic converters are targets for thieves because they contain palladium and other rare metals. In the run up to year 2000, the Russian supply of palladium to the global market was repeatedly delayed and disrupted; for political reasons, the export quota was not granted on time. The ensuing market panic drove the price to an all-time high of in January 2001. Around that time, the Ford Motor Company, fearing that automobile production would be disrupted by a palladium shortage, stockpiled the metal. When prices fell in early 2001, Ford lost nearly US$1\u00a0billion.\nWorld demand for palladium increased from 100 tons in 1990 to nearly 300\u00a0tons in 2000. The global production of palladium from mines was 222\u00a0tonnes in 2006 according to the United States Geological Survey. Many were concerned about a steady supply of palladium in the wake of Russia's annexation of Crimea, partly as sanctions could hamper Russian palladium exports; any restrictions on Russian palladium exports could have exacerbated what was already expected to be a large palladium deficit in 2014. Those concerns pushed palladium prices to their highest level since 2001. In September 2014 they soared above the $900 per ounce mark. In 2016 however palladium cost around $614 per ounce as Russia managed to maintain stable supplies. In January 2019 palladium futures climbed past $1,344 per ounce for the first time on record, mainly due to the strong demand from the automotive industry. Palladium reached on 6 January 2020, passing $2,000 per troy ounce the first time. The price rose above $3,000 per troy ounce in May 2021 and March 2022.\nPalladium as investment.\nGlobal palladium sales were in 2017, of which 86% was used in the manufacturing of automotive catalytic converters, followed by industrial, jewellery, and investment usages. More than 75% of global platinum and 40% of palladium are mined in South Africa. Russia's mining company, Norilsk Nickel, produces another 44% of palladium, with US and Canada-based mines producing most of the rest.\nThe price for palladium reached an all-time high of $2,981.40 per troy ounce on May 3, 2021, driven mainly on speculation of the catalytic converter demand from the automobile industry. Over the following few years the price fell by over two-thirds. Palladium is traded in the spot market with the code \"XPD\". When settled in USD, the code is \"XPDUSD\". A later surplus of the metal was caused by the Russian government selling stockpiles from the Soviet era, at a rate of about a year. The amount and status of this stockpile are a state secret.\nExchange-traded products.\nWisdomTree Physical Palladium () is backed by allocated palladium bullion and was the world's first palladium ETF. It is listed on the London Stock Exchange as PHPD, Xetra Trading System, Euronext and Milan. ETFS Physical Palladium Shares (NYSE:\u00a0[ PALL]) is an ETF traded on the New York Stock Exchange.\nBullion coins and bars.\nA traditional way of investing in palladium is buying bullion coins and bars made of palladium. Available palladium coins include the Canadian Palladium Maple Leaf, the Chinese Panda, and the American Palladium Eagle. The liquidity of direct palladium bullion investment is poorer than that of gold, platinum, and silver because there is a lower circulation of palladium coins than the big three precious metals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23321", "revid": "50899256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23321", "title": "Promethium", "text": "element with atomic number 61 (Pm) \nPromethium is a chemical element; it has symbol Pm and atomic number 61. All of its isotopes are radioactive; it is extremely rare, with only about 500\u2013600 grams naturally occurring in the Earth's crust at any given time. Promethium is one of the only two radioactive elements that are both preceded and succeeded in the periodic table by elements with stable forms, the other being technetium. Chemically, promethium is a lanthanide. Promethium shows only one stable oxidation state of +3.\nIn 1902 Bohuslav Brauner suggested that there was a then-unknown element with properties intermediate between those of the known elements neodymium (60) and samarium (62); this was confirmed in 1914 by Henry Moseley, who, having measured the atomic numbers of all the elements then known, found that the element with atomic number 61 was missing. In 1926, two groups (one Italian and one American) claimed to have isolated a sample of element 61; both \"discoveries\" were soon proven to be false. In 1938, during a nuclear experiment conducted at Ohio State University, a few radioactive nuclides were produced that certainly were not radioisotopes of neodymium or samarium, but there was a lack of chemical proof that element 61 was produced, and the discovery was not much recognized. Promethium was first produced and characterized at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 1945 by the separation and analysis of the fission products of uranium fuel irradiated in a graphite reactor. The discoverers proposed the name \"prometheum\" (the spelling was subsequently changed), derived from Prometheus, the Titan in Greek mythology who stole fire from Mount Olympus and brought it down to humans, to symbolize \"both the daring and the possible misuse of mankind's intellect\". A sample of the metal was made only in 1963.\nThe two sources of natural promethium are rare alpha decays of natural europium-151 (producing promethium-147) and spontaneous fission of uranium (various isotopes). Promethium-145 is the most stable promethium isotope, but the only isotope with practical applications is promethium-147, chemical compounds of which are used in luminous paint, atomic batteries and thickness-measurement devices. Because natural promethium is exceedingly scarce, it is typically synthesized by bombarding uranium-235 (enriched uranium) with thermal neutrons to produce promethium-147 as a fission product.\nProperties.\nPhysical properties.\nA promethium atom has 61 electrons, arranged in the configuration [Xe]\u00a04f5\u00a06s2. The seven 4f and 6s electrons are valence electrons. In forming compounds, the atom loses its two outermost electrons and one 4f-electron, which belongs to an open subshell. The element's atomic radius is the second largest among all the lanthanides but is only slightly greater than those of the neighboring elements. It is the most notable exception to the general trend of the contraction of lanthanide atoms with the increase of their atomic numbers (lanthanide contraction). Many properties of promethium rely on its position among lanthanides and are intermediate between those of neodymium and samarium. For example, the melting point, the first three ionization energies, and the hydration energy are greater than those of neodymium and lower than those of samarium; similarly, the estimate for the boiling point, ionic (Pm3+) radius, and standard heat of formation of monatomic gas are greater than those of samarium and less than those of neodymium.\nPromethium has a double hexagonal close packed (dhcp) structure and a hardness of 63\u00a0kg/mm2. This low-temperature alpha form converts into a beta, body-centered cubic (bcc) phase upon heating to 890\u00a0\u00b0C.\nChemical properties and compounds.\nPromethium belongs to the cerium group of lanthanides and is chemically very similar to the neighboring elements. Because of its instability, chemical studies of promethium are incomplete. Even though a few compounds have been synthesized, they are not fully studied; in general, they tend to be pink or red in color. In May 2024, a promethium coordination complex with neutral PyDGA ligands was characterized in aqueous solution. Treatment of acidic solutions containing ions with ammonia results in a gelatinous light-brown sediment of hydroxide, , which is insoluble in water. When dissolved in hydrochloric acid, a water-soluble yellow salt, , is produced; similarly, when dissolved in nitric acid, a nitrate results, . The latter is also well-soluble; when dried, it forms pink crystals, similar to . The electron configuration for is [Xe] 4f4, and the color of the ion is pink. The ground state term symbol is 5I4. The sulfate is slightly soluble, like the other cerium group sulfates. Cell parameters have been calculated for its octahydrate; they lead to conclusion that the density of is 2.86\u00a0g/cm3. The oxalate, , has the lowest solubility of all lanthanide oxalates.\nUnlike the nitrate, the oxide is similar to the corresponding samarium salt and not the neodymium salt. As-synthesized, e.g. by heating the oxalate, it is a white or lavender-colored powder with disordered structure. This powder crystallizes in a cubic lattice upon heating to 600\u00a0\u00b0C. Further annealing at 800\u00a0\u00b0C and then at 1750\u00a0\u00b0C irreversibly transforms it to monoclinic and hexagonal phases, respectively, and the last two phases can be interconverted by adjusting the annealing time and temperature.\nPromethium forms only one stable oxidation state, +3, in the form of ions; this is in line with other lanthanides. Promethium can also form the +2 oxidation state. Thermodynamic properties of Pm2+ suggests that the dihalides are stable, similar to NdCl2 and SmCl2.\nIsotopes.\nPromethium is the only lanthanide and one of only two elements among the first 82 with no stable or long-lived (primordial) isotopes. This is a result of a rarely occurring effect of the liquid drop model and stabilities of neighbor element isotopes; it is also the least stable element of the first 84. The primary decay products are neodymium and samarium isotopes (promethium-146 decays to both, the lighter isotopes generally to neodymium via positron decay and electron capture, and the heavier isotopes to samarium via beta decay). Promethium nuclear isomers may decay to other promethium isotopes and one isotope (145Pm) has a very rare alpha decay mode to stable praseodymium-141.\nThe most stable isotope of the element is promethium-145, which has a specific activity of and a half-life of 17.7\u00a0years via electron capture. Because it has 84 neutrons (two more than 82, which is a magic number corresponding to a stable neutron configuration), it may emit an alpha particle (which has 2 neutrons) to form praseodymium-141 with 82 neutrons. Thus it is the only promethium isotope with an experimentally observed alpha decay. Its partial half-life for alpha decay is about 6.3\u00d7109\u00a0years, and the relative probability for a 145Pm nucleus to decay in this way is 2.8\u00d710-7\u00a0%. Several other promethium isotopes such as 144Pm, 146Pm, and 147Pm also have a positive energy release for alpha decay; their alpha decays are predicted to occur but have not been observed. In total, 41 isotopes of promethium are known, ranging from 126Pm to 166Pm.\nThe element also has 18 nuclear isomers, with mass numbers of 133 to 142, 144, 148, 149, 152, and 154 (some mass numbers have more than one isomer). The most stable of them is promethium-148m, with a half-life of 41.3\u00a0days; this is longer than the half-lives of its ground state, and all promethium isotopes except for 143-147.\nOccurrence.\nIn 1934, Willard Libby reported that he had found weak beta activity in pure neodymium, which was attributed to a half-life over 1012\u00a0years. Almost 20 years later, it was claimed that the element occurs in natural neodymium in equilibrium in quantities below 10\u221220 grams of promethium per one gram of neodymium. However, these observations were disproved by newer investigations, because for all seven naturally occurring neodymium isotopes, any single beta decays (which can produce promethium isotopes) are forbidden by energy conservation. In particular, careful measurements of atomic masses show that the mass difference between 150Nd and 150Pm is negative (\u221287\u00a0keV), which absolutely prevents the single beta decay of 150Nd to 150Pm.\nIn 1965, Olavi Er\u00e4mets\u00e4 separated out traces of 147Pm from a rare earth concentrate purified from apatite, resulting in an upper limit of 10\u221221 for the abundance of promethium in nature; this may have been produced by the natural nuclear fission of uranium, or by neutron capture of 146Nd.\nBoth isotopes of natural europium have larger mass excesses than sums of those of their potential alpha daughters plus that of an alpha particle; therefore, they (stable in practice) may alpha decay to promethium. Research at Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso showed that europium-151 decays to promethium-147 with the half-life of 5\u00d71018\u00a0years; later measurements gave the half-life as (4.62\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.95(stat.)\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.68(syst.))\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01018 years. It has been shown that europium is \"responsible\" for about 12\u00a0grams of promethium in the Earth's crust. Alpha decays for europium-153 have not been found yet, and its theoretically calculated half-life is so high (due to low energy of decay) that this process will probably not be observed in the near future.\nPromethium can also be formed in nature as a product of spontaneous fission of uranium-238. Only trace amounts can be found in naturally occurring ores: a sample of pitchblende has been found to contain promethium at a concentration of four parts per quintillion (4\u00d710-18) by mass. Uranium is thus \"responsible\" for 560\u00a0g of promethium in Earth's crust.\nPromethium has also been identified in the spectrum of the star HR 465 in Andromeda; it also has been found in HD 101065 (Przybylski's star) and HD 965. Because of the short half-life of promethium isotopes, they should be formed near the surface of those stars.\nHistory.\nSearches for element 61.\nIn 1902, Czech chemist Bohuslav Brauner found out that the differences in properties between neodymium and samarium were the largest between any two consecutive lanthanides in the sequence then known; as a conclusion, he suggested there was an element with intermediate properties between them. This prediction was supported in 1914 by Henry Moseley who, having discovered that atomic number was an experimentally measurable property of elements, found that a few atomic numbers had no known corresponding elements: the gaps were 43, 61, 72, 75, 85, and 87. With the knowledge of a gap in the periodic table several groups started to search for the predicted element among other rare earths in the natural environment.\nThe first claim of a discovery was published by Luigi Rolla and Lorenzo Fernandes of Florence, Italy. After separating a mixture of a few rare earth elements nitrate concentrate from the Brazilian mineral monazite by fractionated crystallization, they yielded a solution containing mostly samarium. This solution gave x-ray spectra attributed to samarium and element 61. In honor of their city, they named element 61 \"florentium\". The results were published in 1926, but the scientists claimed that the experiments were done in 1924. Also in 1926, a group of scientists from the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, Smith Hopkins and Len Yntema published the discovery of element 61. They named it \"illinium\", after the university. Both of these reported discoveries were shown to be erroneous because the spectrum line that \"corresponded\" to element 61 was identical to that of didymium; the lines thought to belong to element 61 turned out to belong to a few impurities (barium, chromium, and platinum).\nIn 1934, Josef Mattauch finally formulated the isobar rule. One of the indirect consequences of this rule was that element 61 was unable to form stable isotopes. From 1938, a nuclear experiment was conducted by H. B. Law et al. at the Ohio State University. Nuclides were produced in 1941 which were not radioisotopes of neodymium or samarium, and the name \"cyclonium\" was proposed, but there was a lack of chemical proof that element 61 was produced and the discovery was not largely recognized.\nDiscovery and synthesis of promethium metal.\nPromethium was first produced and characterized at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (Clinton Laboratories at that time) in 1945 by Jacob A. Marinsky, Lawrence E. Glendenin and Charles D. Coryell by separation and analysis of the fission products of uranium fuel irradiated in the graphite reactor; however, being too busy with military-related research during World War II, they did not announce their discovery until 1947. The original proposed name was \"clintonium\", after the laboratory where the work was conducted; however, the name \"prometheum\" was suggested by Grace Mary Coryell, the wife of one of the discoverers. It is derived from Prometheus, the Titan in Greek mythology who stole fire from Mount Olympus and brought it down to humans and symbolizes \"both the daring and the possible misuse of the mankind intellect\". The spelling was then changed to \"promethium\", as this was in accordance with most other metals.\nIn 1963, promethium(III) fluoride was used to make promethium metal. Provisionally purified from impurities of samarium, neodymium, and americium, it was put into a tantalum crucible which was located in another tantalum crucible; the outer crucible contained lithium metal (10 times excess compared to promethium). After creating a vacuum, the chemicals were mixed to produce promethium metal:\nPmF3 + 3\u00a0Li \u2192 Pm + 3\u00a0LiF\nThe promethium sample produced was used to measure a few of the metal's properties, such as its melting point.\nIn 1963, ion-exchange methods were used at ORNL to prepare about ten grams of promethium from nuclear reactor fuel processing wastes.\nPromethium can be either recovered from the byproducts of uranium fission or produced by bombarding 146Nd with neutrons, turning it into 147Nd, which decays into 147Pm through beta decay with a half-life of 11 days.\nProduction.\nThe production methods for different isotopes vary, and only those for promethium-147 are given because it is the only isotope with industrial applications. Promethium-147 is produced in large quantities (compared to other isotopes) by bombarding uranium-235 with thermal neutrons. The output is relatively high, at 2.6% of the total product. Another way to produce promethium-147 is via neodymium-147, which decays to promethium-147 with a short half-life. Neodymium-147 can be obtained either by bombarding enriched neodymium-146 with thermal neutrons or by bombarding a uranium carbide target with energetic protons in a particle accelerator. Another method is to bombard uranium-238 with fast neutrons to cause fast fission, which, among multiple reaction products, creates promethium-147.\nAs early as the 1960s, Oak Ridge National Laboratory could produce 650\u00a0grams of promethium per year and was the world's only large-volume synthesis facility. Gram-scale production of promethium was discontinued in the U.S. in the early 1980s, but will possibly be resumed after 2010 at the High Flux Isotope Reactor. In 2010, Russia was the only country producing promethium-147 on a relatively large scale.\nApplications.\nOnly promethium-147 has uses outside laboratories. It is obtained as the oxide or chloride, in milligram quantities. This isotope has a relatively long half-life and its radiation has a relatively small penetration depth in matter.\nSome signal lights use a luminous paint containing a phosphor that absorbs the beta radiation emitted by promethium-147 and emits light. This isotope does not cause aging of the phosphor, as alpha emitters do, and therefore the light emission is stable for a few years. Originally, radium-226 was used for the purpose, but it was later replaced by promethium-147 and tritium (hydrogen-3). Promethium may be favored over tritium for nuclear safety.\nIn atomic batteries, the beta particles emitted by promethium-147 are converted into electric current by sandwiching a small promethium source between two semiconductor plates. These batteries have a useful lifetime of about five years. The first promethium-based battery was assembled in 1964 and generated \"a few milliwatts of power from a volume of about 2 cubic inches, including shielding\".\nPromethium is also used to measure the thickness of materials by measuring the amount of radiation from a promethium source that passes through the sample. It has possible future uses in portable X-ray sources, and as auxiliary heat or power sources for space probes and satellites (although the alpha emitter plutonium-238 has become standard for most space-exploration-related uses).\nPromethium-147 is also used, albeit in very small quantities (less than 330nCi), in some Philips CFL (Compact Fluorescent Lamp) glow switches in the PLC 22W/28W 15mm CFL range.\nPrecautions.\nPromethium has no biological role. Promethium-147 can emit gamma rays, which are dangerous for all lifeforms, during its beta decay. Interactions with tiny quantities of promethium-147 are not hazardous if certain precautions are observed. In general, gloves, footwear covers, safety glasses, and an outer layer of easily removed protective clothing should be used.\nIt is not known what human organs are affected by interaction with promethium; a possible candidate is the bone tissues. Sealed promethium-147 is not dangerous. However, if the packaging is damaged, then promethium becomes dangerous to the environment and humans. If radioactive contamination is found, the contaminated area should be washed with water and soap, but, even though promethium mainly affects the skin, the skin should not be abraded. If a promethium leak is found, the area should be identified as hazardous and evacuated, and emergency services must be contacted. No dangers from promethium aside from the radioactivity are known.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23322", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23322", "title": "Protactinium", "text": "element with atomic number 91 (Pa)\nProtactinium is a chemical element; it has symbol Pa and atomic number 91. It is a dense, radioactive, silvery-gray actinide metal which readily reacts with oxygen, water vapor, and inorganic acids. It forms various chemical compounds, in which protactinium is usually present in the oxidation state +5, but it can also assume +4 and even +3 or +2 states. Concentrations of protactinium in the Earth's crust are typically a few parts per trillion, but may reach up to a few parts per million in some uraninite ore deposits. Because of its scarcity, high radioactivity, and high toxicity, there are currently no uses for protactinium outside scientific research, and for this purpose, protactinium is mostly extracted from spent nuclear fuel.\nThe element was first identified in 1913 by Kazimierz Fajans and Oswald Helmuth G\u00f6hring and named \"brevium\" because of the short half-life of the specific isotope studied, 234mPa. A more stable isotope of protactinium, 231Pa, was discovered in 1917/18 by Lise Meitner in collaboration with Otto Hahn, and they named the element protactinium. In 1949, the IUPAC chose the name \"protactinium\" and confirmed Hahn and Meitner as its discoverers. The new name meant \"(nuclear) precursor of actinium,\" suggesting that actinium is a product of radioactive decay of protactinium. John Arnold Cranston (working with Frederick Soddy and Ada Hitchins) is also credited with discovering the most stable isotope in 1915, but he delayed his announcement due to being called for service in the First World War.\nThe longest-lived and most abundant (nearly 100%) naturally occurring isotope of protactinium, 231Pa, has a half-life of 32,760 years and occurs in the decay chain of uranium-235. Much smaller trace amounts of the short-lived 234Pa and its nuclear isomer 234mPa occur in the decay chain of uranium-238. 233Pa occurs as a result of the decay of thorium-233 as part of the chain of events necessary to produce uranium-233 by neutron irradiation of 232Th. It is an undesired intermediate product in thorium-based nuclear reactors, and is therefore removed from the active zone of the reactor during the breeding process. Ocean science uses the element to understand the ancient ocean's geography: analysis of the relative concentrations of various uranium, thorium, and protactinium isotopes in water and minerals is used in radiometric dating of sediments up to 175,000 years old, and in modeling of various geological processes.\nHistory.\nIn 1871, Dmitri Mendeleev predicted the existence of an element between thorium and uranium. The actinide series was unknown at the time, so Mendeleev positioned uranium below tungsten in group VI, and thorium below zirconium in group IV, leaving the space below tantalum in group V empty. Until the general acceptance of the actinide concept in the late 1940s, periodic tables were published with this structure. For a long time, chemists searched for eka-tantalum as an element with similar chemical properties to tantalum, making a discovery of protactinium nearly impossible. Tantalum's heavier analogue was later found to be the transuranic element dubnium \u2013 although dubnium is more chemically similar to protactinium, not tantalum.\nIn 1900, William Crookes isolated protactinium as an intensely radioactive material from uranium; however, he could not characterize it as a new chemical element and thus named it uranium X (UX). Crookes dissolved uranium nitrate in ether, and the residual aqueous phase contained most of the Th and Pa. His method was used into the 1950s to isolate Th and Pa from uranium compounds. Protactinium was first identified in 1913, when Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth G\u00f6hring encountered the isotope 234mPa during their studies of the decay chains of uranium-238: U \u2192 Th \u2192 Pa \u2192 U. They named the new element \"brevium\" (from the Latin word \"brevis\", meaning brief or short) because of the short half-life of 1.16 minutes for Pa (uranium\u00a0X2). In 1917\u201318, two groups of scientists, Lise Meitner in collaboration with Otto Hahn of Germany and Frederick Soddy and John Cranston of Great Britain, independently discovered another isotope, 231Pa, having a much longer half-life of 32,760 years. Meitner changed the name \"brevium\" to \"protactinium\" as the new element was part of the decay chain of uranium-235 as the parent of actinium (from the \"pr\u00f4tos\", meaning \"first, before\"). The IUPAC confirmed this naming in 1949. The discovery of protactinium completed one of the last gaps in early versions of the periodic table, and brought fame to the involved scientists.\nAristid von Grosse produced 2\u00a0milligrams of Pa2O5 in 1927, and in 1934 first isolated elemental protactinium from 0.1\u00a0milligrams of Pa2O5. He used two different procedures: in the first, protactinium oxide was irradiated by 35\u00a0keV electrons in vacuum. In the other, called the van Arkel\u2013de Boer process, the oxide was chemically converted to a halide (chloride, bromide or iodide) and then reduced in a vacuum with an electrically heated metallic filament:\n 2 PaI5 \u2192 2 Pa + 5 I2\nIn 1961, the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) produced 127\u00a0grams of 99.9% pure protactinium-231 by processing 60\u00a0tonnes of waste material in a 12-stage process, at a cost of about US$500,000. For many years, this was the world's only significant supply of protactinium, which was provided to various laboratories for scientific studies. The Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the US provided protactinium at a cost of about US$280/gram.\nIsotopes.\nThirty radioisotopes of protactinium have been discovered, ranging from 210Pa to 239Pa. The most stable are 231Pa with a half-life of 32,650 years, 233Pa with a half-life of 26.975 days, and 230Pa with a half-life of 17.4 days. All other isotopes have half-lives shorter than 1.6 days, and the majority of these have half-lives less than 1.8 seconds. Protactinium also has six nuclear isomers, with the most stable being 234mPa (half-life 1.159 minutes).\nThe primary decay mode for the most stable isotope 231Pa and lighter isotopes (210Pa to 227Pa) is alpha decay, producing isotopes of actinium. The primary decay mode for 228Pa to 230Pa is electron capture or beta plus decay, producing isotopes of thorium, while the primary decay mode for the heavier isotopes (232Pa to 239Pa) is beta decay, producing isotopes of uranium.\nNuclear fission.\nThe longest-lived and most abundant isotope, 231Pa, can fission from fast neutrons exceeding ~1\u00a0MeV. 233Pa, the other isotope of protactinium produced in nuclear reactors, also has a fission threshold of 1\u00a0MeV.\nOccurrence.\nProtactinium is one of the rarest and most expensive naturally occurring elements. It is found in the form of two isotopes, 231Pa and 234Pa, with the isotope 234Pa occurring in two different energy states. Nearly all natural protactinium is 231Pa. It is an alpha emitter and is formed by the decay of uranium-235, whereas the beta-radiating 234Pa is produced as a result of . Nearly all uranium-238 (99.8%) decays first to the shorter-lived 234mPa isomer.\nProtactinium occurs in uraninite (pitchblende) at concentrations of about 0.3\u20133 parts 231Pa per million parts (ppm) of ore. Whereas the usual content is closer to 0.3\u00a0ppm (e.g. in J\u00e1chymov, Czech Republic), some ores from the Democratic Republic of the Congo have about 3\u00a0ppm. Protactinium is homogeneously dispersed in most natural materials and in water, but at much lower concentrations on the order of one part per trillion, corresponding to a radioactivity of 0.1 picocuries (pCi)/g. There is about 500 times more protactinium in sandy soil particles than in water, even when compared to water present in the same sample of soil. Much higher ratios of 2,000 and above are measured in loam soils and clays, such as bentonite.\nIn nuclear reactors.\nTwo major protactinium isotopes, 231Pa and 233Pa, are produced from thorium in nuclear reactors; both are undesirable and are usually removed, thereby adding complexity to the reactor design and operation. In particular, 232Th, via (\"n\", 2\"n\") reactions, produces 231Th, which quickly decays to 231Pa (half-life 25.5 hours). The last isotope, while not a transuranic waste, has a long half-life of 32,760 years, and is a major contributor to the long-term radiotoxicity of spent nuclear fuel.\nProtactinium-233 is formed upon neutron capture by 232Th. It either further decays to 233U, or captures another neutron and converts into the non-fissile 234U. 233Pa has a relatively long half-life of 27 days and high cross section for neutron capture (the so-called \"neutron poison\"). Thus, instead of rapidly decaying to the useful 233U, a significant fraction of 233Pa converts to non-fissile isotopes and consumes neutrons, degrading reactor efficiency. To limit the loss of neutrons, 233Pa is extracted from the active zone of thorium molten salt reactors during their operation, so that it can only decay into 233U. Extraction of 233Pa is achieved using columns of molten bismuth with lithium dissolved in it. In short, lithium selectively reduces protactinium salts to protactinium metal, which is then extracted from the molten-salt cycle, while the molten bismuth is merely a carrier, selected due to its low melting point of 271\u00a0\u00b0C, low vapor pressure, good solubility for lithium and actinides, and immiscibility with molten halides.\nPreparation.\nBefore the advent of nuclear reactors, protactinium was separated for scientific experiments from uranium ores. Since reactors have become more common, it is mostly produced as an intermediate product of neutron capture on thorium, used for the production of the fissile 233U:\n&lt;chem&gt;^{232}_{90}Th + ^{1}_{0}n -&gt; ^{233}_{90}Th -&gt;[\\beta^-][22.3\\ \\ce{min}] ^{233}_{91}Pa -&gt;[\\beta^-][26.975\\ \\ce{d}] ^{233}_{92}U.&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe isotope 231Pa can be prepared by irradiating 230Th with slow neutrons, converting it to the beta-decaying 231Th; or, by irradiating 232Th with fast neutrons, generating (as one product) 231Th and 2 neutrons.\nProtactinium metal has been prepared by reduction of its fluoride with calcium, lithium, or barium at a temperature of 1300\u20131400\u00a0\u00b0C.\nProperties.\nProtactinium is an actinide positioned in the periodic table to the left of uranium and to the right of thorium, and many of its physical properties are intermediate between its neighboring actinides. Protactinium is denser and more rigid than thorium, but is lighter than uranium; its melting point is lower than that of thorium, but higher than that of uranium. The thermal expansion, electrical, and thermal conductivities of these three elements are comparable and are typical of post-transition metals. The estimated shear modulus of protactinium is similar to that of titanium. Protactinium is a metal with silvery-gray luster that is preserved for some time in air. Protactinium easily reacts with oxygen, water vapor, and acids, but not with alkalis.\nAt room temperature, protactinium crystallizes in the body-centered tetragonal structure, which can be regarded as distorted body-centered cubic lattice; this structure does not change upon compression up to 53 GPa. The structure changes to face-centered cubic (\"fcc\") upon cooling from high temperature, at about 1200\u00a0\u00b0C. The thermal expansion coefficient of the tetragonal phase between room temperature and 700\u00a0\u00b0C is 9.9\u00d710-6/\u00b0C.\nProtactinium is paramagnetic and no magnetic transitions are known for it at any temperature. It becomes superconductive at temperatures below 1.4\u00a0K. Protactinium tetrachloride is paramagnetic at room temperature, but becomes ferromagnetic when cooled to 182\u00a0K.\nProtactinium exists in two major oxidation states: +4 and +5, both in solids and solutions; and the +3 and +2 states, which have been observed in some solids. As the electron configuration of the neutral atom is [Rn]5f26d17s2, the +5 oxidation state corresponds to the low-energy (and thus favored) 5f0 configuration. Both +4 and +5 states easily form hydroxides in water, with the predominant ions being Pa(OH)3+, , , and Pa(OH)4, all of which are colorless. Other known protactinium ions include PaOF2+, PaOF2+, PaF6-, PaF72-, PaF83-, PaOSO4+, PaO(SO4)2-, PaO(SO4)33-, PaOCl52-, and PaCl6-.\nChemical compounds.\nHere, \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are lattice constants in picometers, No is the space group number, and \"Z\" is the number of formula units per unit cell; \"fcc\" stands for the face-centered cubic symmetry. Density was not measured directly but calculated from the lattice parameters.\nOxides and oxygen-containing salts.\nProtactinium oxides are known for the metal oxidation states +2, +4, and +5. The most stable is the white pentoxide Pa2O5, which can be produced by igniting protactinium(V) hydroxide in air at a temperature of 500\u00a0\u00b0C. Its crystal structure is cubic, and the chemical composition is often non-stoichiometric, described as PaO2.25. Another phase of this oxide with orthorhombic symmetry has also been reported. The black dioxide PaO2 is obtained from the pentoxide by reducing it at 1550\u00a0\u00b0C with hydrogen. It is not readily soluble in either dilute or concentrated nitric, hydrochloric, or sulfuric acid, but easily dissolves in hydrofluoric acid. The dioxide can be converted back to pentoxide by heating in oxygen-containing atmosphere to 1100\u00a0\u00b0C. The monoxide PaO has only been observed as a thin coating on protactinium metal, but not in an isolated bulk form.\nProtactinium forms mixed binary oxides with various metals. With alkali metals \"A\", the crystals have a chemical formula APaO3 and perovskite structure; A3PaO4 and distorted rock-salt structure; or A7PaO6, where oxygen atoms form a hexagonal close-packed lattice. In all of these materials, the protactinium ions are octahedrally coordinated. The pentoxide Pa2O5 combines with rare-earth metal oxides R2O3 to form various nonstoichiometric mixed-oxides, also of perovskite structure.\nProtactinium oxides are basic; they easily convert to hydroxides and can form various salts, such as sulfates, phosphates, nitrates, etc. The nitrate is usually white but can be brown due to radiolytic decomposition. Heating the nitrate in air at 400\u00a0\u00b0C converts it to the white protactinium pentoxide. The polytrioxophosphate Pa(PO3)4 can be produced by reacting the difluoride sulfate PaF2SO4 with phosphoric acid (H3PO4) under an inert atmosphere. Heating the product to about 900\u00a0\u00b0C eliminates the reaction by-products, which include hydrofluoric acid, sulfur trioxide, and phosphoric anhydride. Heating it to higher temperatures in an inert atmosphere decomposes Pa(PO3)4 into the diphosphate PaP2O7, which is analogous to diphosphates of other actinides. In the diphosphate, the PO3 groups form pyramids of C2v symmetry. Heating PaP2O7 in air to 1400\u00a0\u00b0C decomposes it into the pentoxides of phosphorus and protactinium.\nHalides.\nProtactinium(V) fluoride is a white compound that forms tetragonal crystals, isomorphic to \u03b2-UF5. Protactinium(V) chloride forms yellow crystals where protactinium ions are arranged in pentagonal bipyramids and coordinated by 7 other ions. The coordination changes to octahedral in the brown protactinium(V) bromide, but is unknown for protactinium(V) iodide. The protactinium coordination in all its tetrahalides is 8, but the arrangement is square antiprismatic in protactinium(IV) fluoride and dodecahedral in the chloride and bromide. Brown-colored protactinium(III) iodide has been reported, where protactinium ions are 8-coordinated in a bicapped trigonal prismatic arrangement.\nProtactinium(V) chloride has a polymeric structure of monoclinic symmetry. There, within one polymeric chain, all chlorine atoms lie in one graphite-like plane and form planar pentagons around the protactinium ions. The 7-coordination of protactinium originates from the five chlorine atoms and two bonds to protactinium atoms belonging to the nearby chains. It easily hydrolyzes in water. It melts at 300\u00a0\u00b0C and sublimates at even lower temperatures.\nProtactinium(V) fluoride can be prepared by reacting protactinium oxide with either bromine pentafluoride or bromine trifluoride at about 600\u00a0\u00b0C, and protactinium(IV) fluoride is obtained from the oxide and a mixture of hydrogen and hydrogen fluoride at 600\u00a0\u00b0C; a large excess of hydrogen is required to remove atmospheric oxygen leaks into the reaction.\nProtactinium(V) chloride is prepared by reacting protactinium oxide with carbon tetrachloride at temperatures of 200\u2013300\u00a0\u00b0C. The by-products (such as PaOCl3) are removed by fractional sublimation. Reduction of protactinium(V) chloride with hydrogen at about 800\u00a0\u00b0C yields protactinium(IV) chloride \u2013 a yellow-green solid that sublimes in vacuum at 400\u00a0\u00b0C. It can also be obtained directly from protactinium dioxide by treating it with carbon tetrachloride at 400\u00a0\u00b0C.\nProtactinium bromides are produced by the action of aluminium bromide, hydrogen bromide, carbon tetrabromide, or a mixture of hydrogen bromide and thionyl bromide on protactinium oxide. They can alternatively be produced by reacting protactinium pentachloride with hydrogen bromide or thionyl bromide. Protactinium(V) bromide has two similar monoclinic forms: one is obtained by sublimation at 400\u2013410\u00a0\u00b0C, and another by sublimation at a slightly lower temperature of 390\u2013400\u00a0\u00b0C.\nProtactinium iodides can be produced by reacting protactinium metal with elemental iodine at 600\u00a0\u00b0C, and by reacting Pa2O5 with AlI3 at elevated temperatures. Protactinium(III) iodide can be obtained by heating protactinium(V) iodide in vacuum. As with oxides, protactinium forms mixed halides with alkali metals. The most remarkable among these is Na3PaF8, where the protactinium ion is symmetrically surrounded by 8 F\u2212 ions, forming a nearly perfect cube.\nMore complex protactinium fluorides are also known, such as Pa2F9 and ternary fluorides of the types MPaF6 (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs or NH4), M2PaF7 (M = K, Rb, Cs or NH4), and M3PaF8 (M = Li, Na, Rb, Cs), all of which are white crystalline solids. The MPaF6 formula can be represented as a combination of MF and PaF5. These compounds can be obtained by evaporating a hydrofluoric acid solution containing both complexes. For the small alkali cations like Na, the crystal structure is tetragonal, whereas it becomes orthorhombic for larger cations K+, Rb+, Cs+ or NH4+. A similar variation was observed for the M2PaF7 fluorides: namely, the crystal symmetry was dependent on the cation and differed for Cs2PaF7 and M2PaF7 (M = K, Rb or NH4).\nOther inorganic compounds.\nOxyhalides and oxysulfides of protactinium are known. PaOBr3 has a monoclinic structure composed of double-chain units where protactinium has coordination 7 and is arranged into pentagonal bipyramids. The chains are interconnected through oxygen and bromine atoms, and each oxygen atom is related to three protactinium atoms. PaOS is a light-yellow, non-volatile solid with a cubic crystal lattice isostructural to that of other actinide oxysulfides. It is obtained by reacting protactinium(V) chloride with a mixture of hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide at 900\u00a0\u00b0C.\nIn hydrides and nitrides, protactinium has a low oxidation state of about +3. The hydride is obtained by direct action of hydrogen on the metal at 250\u00a0\u00b0C, and the nitride is a product of ammonia and protactinium tetrachloride or pentachloride. This bright yellow solid is thermally stable to 800\u00a0\u00b0C in vacuum. Protactinium carbide (PaC) is formed by the reduction of protactinium tetrafluoride with barium in a carbon crucible at a temperature of about 1400\u00a0\u00b0C. Protactinium forms borohydrides, which include Pa(BH4)4. It has an unusual polymeric structure with helical chains, where the protactinium atom has coordination number of 14 and is surrounded by six BH4\u2212 ions.\nOrganometallic compounds.\nProtactinium(IV) forms a tetrahedral complex tetrakis(cyclopentadienyl)protactinium(IV) (or Pa(C5H5)4) with four cyclopentadienyl rings, which can be synthesized by reacting protactinium(IV) chloride with Be(C5H5)2. One ring can be substituted with a halide atom. Another organometallic complex is the golden-yellow bis(\u03c0-cyclooctatetraene) protactinium, or protactinocene (Pa(C8H8)2), which is analogous in structure to uranocene. There, the metal atom is sandwiched between two cyclooctatetraene ligands. Similar to uranocene, it can be prepared by reacting protactinium tetrachloride with dipotassium cyclooctatetraenide (K2C8H8) in tetrahydrofuran.\nApplications.\nAlthough protactinium is situated in the periodic table between uranium and thorium, both of which have numerous applications, there are currently no uses for protactinium outside scientific research owing to its scarcity, high radioactivity, and high toxicity.\n231Pa arises naturally from the decay of natural 235U, and artificially in nuclear reactors by the reaction 232Th\u00a0+\u00a0n\u00a0\u2192\u00a0231Th\u00a0+\u00a02n and the subsequent beta decay of 231Th. It was once thought to be able to support a nuclear chain reaction, which could in principle be used to build nuclear weapons; the physicist Walter Seifritz once estimated the associated critical mass as . However, the possibility of criticality of 231Pa has since been ruled out.\nWith the advent of highly sensitive mass spectrometers, an application of 231Pa as a tracer in geology and paleoceanography has become possible. In this application, the ratio of 231Pa to 230Th is used for radiometric dating of sediments which are up to 175,000 years old, and in modeling of the formation of minerals. In particular, its evaluation in oceanic sediments helped to reconstruct the movements of North Atlantic water bodies during the last melting of Ice Age glaciers. Some of the protactinium-related dating variations rely on analysis of the relative concentrations of several long-living members of the uranium decay chain \u2013 uranium, protactinium, and thorium, for example. These elements have 6, 5, and 4 valence electrons, thus favoring +6, +5, and +4 oxidation states respectively, and display different physical and chemical properties. Thorium and protactinium, but not uranium compounds, are poorly soluble in aqueous solutions and precipitate into sediments; the precipitation rate is faster for thorium than for protactinium. The concentration analysis for both protactinium-231 (half-life 32,760 years) and 230Th (half-life 75,380 years) improves measurement accuracy compared to when only one isotope is measured; this double-isotope method is also weakly sensitive to inhomogeneities in the spatial distribution of the isotopes and to variations in their precipitation rate.\nPrecautions.\nProtactinium is both toxic and highly radioactive; thus, it is handled exclusively in a sealed glove box. Its major isotope 231Pa has a specific activity of per gram and primarily emits alpha particles, which can be stopped by a thin layer of any material. However, it slowly decays into 227Ac, and then follows the more rapid actinium series, making its total activity (alpha, beta, and gamma) greater than one would calculate from that figure.\nAs protactinium is present in small amounts in most natural products and materials, it is ingested with food or water and inhaled with air. Only about 0.05% of ingested protactinium is absorbed into the blood and the remainder is excreted. From the blood, about 40% of the protactinium deposits in the bones, about 15% goes to the liver, 2% to the kidneys, and the rest leaves the body. The biological half-life of protactinium is about 50 years in the bones, whereas its biological half-life in other organs has a fast and slow component. For example, 70% of the protactinium in the liver has a biological half-life of 10 days, and the remaining 30% for 60 days. The corresponding values for kidneys are 20% (10 days) and 80% (60 days). In each affected organ, protactinium promotes cancer via its radioactivity. The maximum amount of Pa allowed in the human body is , which corresponds to 0.5 micrograms of 231Pa. The maximum allowed concentrations of 231Pa in the air in Germany is .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23324", "revid": "10274643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23324", "title": "Platinum", "text": "element with atomic number 78 (Pt)\nPlatinum is a chemical element; it has symbol Pt and atomic number 78. It is a dense, malleable, ductile, highly unreactive, precious, silverish-white transition metal. Its name originates from Spanish , a diminutive of \"silver\".\nPlatinum is a member of the platinum group of elements and group 10 of the periodic table of elements. It has six naturally occurring isotopes. It is one of the rarer elements in Earth's crust, with an average abundance of approximately 5\u00a0\u03bcg/kg. It occurs in some nickel and copper ores along with some native deposits, with deposits from across Russia's Ural Mountains, Colombia, the Sudbury basin of Canada, and a large reserve in South Africa all accounting for a major portion of mined platinum. Because of its scarcity in Earth's crust, barely a few hundred metric tonnes are produced annually, and given its important uses, it is highly valuable as well as a major precious metal commodity.\nPlatinum does not corrode, even at high temperatures, and is therefore considered a noble metal. Consequently, platinum is often found chemically uncombined as native platinum. Because it occurs naturally in the alluvial sands of various rivers, it was first used by pre-Columbian South American natives to produce artifacts. It was referenced in European writings as early as the 16th century, but it was not until Antonio de Ulloa published a report on a new metal of Colombian origin in 1748 that it began to be investigated by scientists.\nPlatinum is used in catalytic converters, laboratory equipment, electrical contacts and electrodes, platinum resistance thermometers, dentistry equipment, and jewelry. Platinum is used in the glass industry to manipulate molten glass, which does not \"wet\" platinum. Elemental platinum has not been linked to adverse health effects. Compounds containing platinum, such as cisplatin, oxaliplatin and carboplatin, are applied in chemotherapy as treatment for certain types of cancer.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical.\nPlatinum is a lustrous, ductile, and malleable, silver-white metal. Platinum is more ductile than gold, silver or copper, thus being the most ductile of pure metals.\nIts physical characteristics and chemical stability make it useful for industrial applications. Its resistance to wear and tarnish is well suited to use in fine jewelry.\nChemical.\nPlatinum does not corrode, and bulk platinum does not oxidize in air at any temperature, but heated metal wires lose weight faster in air or oxygen than it does in a vacuum. The suggestion is that Pt forms a thin surface film of that decomposes when heated above 500\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe most common oxidation states of platinum are +2 and +4. The +1 and +3 oxidation states are less common, and are often stabilized by metal bonding in bimetallic (or polymetallic) species. Tetracoordinate platinum(II) compounds tend to adopt 16-electron square planar geometries. Although elemental platinum is generally unreactive, it is attacked by chlorine, bromine, iodine, and sulfur. It reacts vigorously with fluorine at to form platinum tetrafluoride. Platinum is insoluble in hydrochloric and nitric acid, but dissolves in hot \"aqua regia\" (a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids), to form aqueous chloroplatinic acid, :\nAs a soft acid, the ion has a great affinity for sulfide and sulfur ligands. Numerous DMSO complexes have been reported and care is taken in the choosing of reaction solvents.\nIn 2007, the German scientist Gerhard Ertl won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for determining the detailed molecular mechanisms of the catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide over platinum (catalytic converter).\nIsotopes.\nPlatinum has six naturally occurring isotopes: 190Pt, 192Pt, 194Pt, 195Pt, 196Pt, and 198Pt. The most abundant of these is 195Pt, comprising 33.83% of all platinum; it is the only stable isotope with a non-zero spin, of 1/2, and it is favorable for use in 195Pt NMR. Due to its spin and large abundance, 195Pt satellite peaks are also often observed in 1H and 31P NMR spectroscopy (\"e.g.,\" for Pt-phosphine and Pt-alkyl complexes). The radioactive 190Pt is the least abundant of these at only 0.012%; it undergoes alpha decay with a half-life of 4.83\u00d71011\u00a0years, causing the very low activity of 16.8 Bq/kg of natural platinum. The decay of this isotope has some use in isotope geology, though not directly for dating.\nThe other natural isotopes are theoretically capable of alpha decay also, but this has never been observed, and therefore they are considered stable. Platinum also has 38 synthetic isotopes ranging in atomic mass from 165 to 208, making the total number of known isotopes 44. The most stable of these radioisotopes is 193Pt, with a half-life of 50\u00a0years. Most platinum isotopes decay by some combination of beta decay and (on the proton-rich side) alpha decay. 188Pt, 191Pt, and 193Pt decay only by electron capture (besides the very small alpha branch of the first). 190Pt and 198Pt are predicted to have energetically favorable double beta decay paths.\nOccurrence.\nPlatinum is an extremely rare metal on Earth, occurring at a concentration of only 0.005 ppm in Earth's crust. Platinum is often found chemically uncombined as native platinum and as alloy with the other platinum-group metals mostly. Most often native platinum is found in secondary deposits among alluvial deposits. The alluvial deposits used by pre-Columbian people in the Choc\u00f3 Department, Colombia are still a source for platinum-group metals. Another large alluvial deposit is in the Ural Mountains, Russia, and it is still mined.\nIn nickel and copper deposits, platinum-group metals occur as sulfides (e.g., , tellurides (e.g., ), antimonides (PdSb), and arsenides (e.g. ), and as end alloys with nickel or copper. Platinum arsenide, sperrylite (), is a major source of platinum associated with nickel ores in the Sudbury Basin deposit in Ontario, Canada. At Platinum, Alaska, about was mined between 1927 and 1975. The mine ceased operations in 1990. The rare sulfide mineral cooperite, , contains platinum along with palladium and nickel. Cooperite occurs in the Merensky Reef within the Bushveld complex, Gauteng, South Africa.\nIn 1865, chromites were identified in the Bushveld region of South Africa, followed by the discovery of platinum in 1906. In 1924, the geologist Hans Merensky discovered a large supply of platinum in the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa. The specific layer he found, named the Merensky Reef, contains around 75% of the world's known platinum. The large copper\u2013nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia, and the Sudbury Basin, Canada, are the two other large deposits. In the Sudbury Basin, the huge quantities of nickel ore processed make up for the fact platinum is present as only 0.5 ppm in the ore. Smaller reserves can be found in the United States, for example in the Absaroka Range in Montana. In 2010, South Africa was the top producer of platinum, with an almost 77% share, followed by Russia at 13%; world production in 2010 was .\nAdvanced techniques to finding platinum deposits by studying ground water found some evidence of new deposits in the state of Tamil Nadu, India.\nPlatinum exists in somewhat higher quantity on the Moon and in meteorites. Correspondingly, platinum is found in slightly higher abundances at sites of bolide impact on Earth that are associated with resulting post-impact volcanism and can be mined economically; the Sudbury Basin is one such example.\nCompounds.\nHalides.\nHexachloroplatinic acid mentioned above is probably the most important platinum compound, as it serves as the precursor for many other platinum compounds. By itself, it has various applications in photography, zinc etchings, indelible ink, plating, mirrors, porcelain coloring, and as a catalyst.\nTreatment of hexachloroplatinic acid with an ammonium salt, such as ammonium chloride, gives ammonium hexachloroplatinate, which is relatively insoluble in ammonium solutions. Heating this ammonium salt in the presence of hydrogen reduces it to elemental platinum. Potassium hexachloroplatinate is similarly insoluble, and hexachloroplatinic acid has been used in the determination of potassium ions by gravimetry.\nWhen hexachloroplatinic acid is heated, it decomposes through platinum(IV) chloride and platinum(II) chloride to elemental platinum, although the reactions do not occur stepwise:\n \nAll three reactions are reversible. Platinum(II) and platinum(IV) bromides are known as well. Platinum hexafluoride is a strong oxidizer capable of oxidizing oxygen.\nOxides.\nPlatinum(IV) oxide, , also known as \"Adams' catalyst\", is a black powder that is soluble in potassium hydroxide (KOH) solutions and concentrated acids. and the less common both decompose upon heating. Platinum(II,IV) oxide, , is formed in the following reaction:\nOther compounds.\nUnlike palladium acetate, platinum(II) acetate is not commercially available. Where a base is desired, the halides have been used in conjunction with sodium acetate. The use of platinum(II) acetylacetonate has also been reported.\nPlatinum exhibits negative oxidation states at surfaces reduced electrochemically, and several \"platinides\" have been synthesized in which platinum exhibits oxidation states ranging from \u22121 to \u22122. The negative oxidation states exhibited by platinum are unusual for metallic elements, and they are attributed to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s orbitals. Barium platinides include BaPt, Ba3Pt2, and Ba2Pt. Caesium platinide, Cs2Pt, a dark-red transparent crystalline compound has been shown to contain Pt anions. The \"platinum Grignard\" Pt(MgCl)2\u00b7nTHF conjecturally contains Pt2\u2212 as well.\nIt is predicted that even the cation PtO42+ in which platinum exists in the +10 oxidation state may be achievable.\nZeise's salt, containing an ethylene ligand, was one of the first organometallic compounds discovered. Dichloro(cycloocta-1,5-diene)platinum(II) is a commercially available olefin complex, which contains easily displaceable cod ligands (\"cod\" being an abbreviation of 1,5-cyclooctadiene). The cod complex and the halides are convenient starting points to platinum chemistry.\nCisplatin, or \"cis\"-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) is the first of a series of square planar platinum(II)-containing chemotherapy drugs. Others include carboplatin and oxaliplatin. These compounds are capable of crosslinking DNA, and kill cells by similar pathways to alkylating chemotherapeutic agents. (Side effects of cisplatin include nausea and vomiting, hair loss, tinnitus, hearing loss, and nephrotoxicity.)\nOrganoplatinum compounds such as the above anti-tumor agents, as well as soluble inorganic platinum complexes, are routinely characterized using 195Pt nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.\nNon-reactivity with animal life.\nPlatinum exposure has shown no adverse effects with animal life as it is one of the least reactive metals.\nAs platinum is a catalyst in the manufacture of the silicone rubber and gel components of several types of medical implants (breast implants, joint replacement prosthetics, artificial lumbar discs, vascular access ports, etc.), the possibility that platinum could enter the body and cause adverse effects has been studied. The Food and Drug Administration and other institutions have reviewed the issue and found no evidence to suggest toxicity in vivo.\nPlatinum salts.\nShort-term exposure to platinum salts may cause irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat, and long-term exposure may cause both respiratory and skin allergies. The current OSHA standard is 2\u00a0micrograms per cubic meter of air averaged over an 8-hour work shift.\nHistory.\nEarly uses.\nArchaeologists have discovered traces of platinum in the gold used in ancient Egyptian burials. For example, a small box from burial of Shepenupet II was found to be decorated with gold-platinum hieroglyphics. However, the extent of early Egyptians' knowledge of the metal is unclear. It is quite possible they did not recognize there was platinum in their gold.\nThe metal was used by Native Americans near modern-day Esmeraldas, Ecuador to produce artifacts of a white gold-platinum alloy. Archeologists usually associate the tradition of platinum-working in South America with the La Tolita Culture (c.\u2009600 BCE \u2013 200 CE), but precise dates and location are difficult, as most platinum artifacts from the area were bought secondhand through the antiquities trade rather than obtained by direct archeological excavation. To work the metal, they would combine gold and platinum powders by sintering. The resulting gold\u2013platinum alloy would then be soft enough to shape with tools. The platinum used in such objects was not the pure element, but rather a naturally occurring mixture of the platinum group metals, with small amounts of palladium, rhodium, and iridium.\nEuropean discovery.\nThe first European reference to platinum appears in 1557 in the writings of the Italian humanist Julius Caesar Scaliger as a description of an unknown noble metal found between Dari\u00e9n and Mexico, \"which no fire nor any Spanish artifice has yet been able to liquefy\". From their first encounters with platinum, the Spanish generally saw the metal as a kind of impurity in gold, and it was treated as such. It was often simply thrown away, and there was an official decree forbidding the adulteration of gold with platinum impurities.\nIn 1735, Antonio de Ulloa and Jorge Juan y Santacilia saw Native Americans mining platinum while the Spaniards were travelling through Colombia and Peru for eight years. Ulloa and Juan found mines with the whitish metal nuggets and took them home to Spain. Antonio de Ulloa returned to Spain and established the first mineralogy lab in Spain and was the first to systematically study platinum, which was in 1748. His historical account of the expedition included a description of platinum as being neither separable nor calcinable. Ulloa also anticipated the discovery of platinum mines. After publishing the report in 1748, Ulloa did not continue to investigate the new metal. In 1758, he was sent to superintend mercury mining operations in Huancavelica.\nIn 1741, Charles Wood, a British metallurgist, found various samples of Colombian platinum in Jamaica, which he sent to William Brownrigg for further investigation.\nIn 1750, after studying the platinum sent to him by Wood, Brownrigg presented a detailed account of the metal to the Royal Society, stating that he had seen no mention of it in any previous accounts of known minerals. Brownrigg also made note of platinum's extremely high melting point and refractoriness toward borax. Other chemists across Europe soon began studying platinum, including Andreas Sigismund Marggraf, Torbern Bergman, J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius, William Lewis, and Pierre Macquer. In 1752, Henrik Scheffer published a detailed scientific description of the metal, which he referred to as \"white gold\", including an account of how he succeeded in fusing platinum ore with the aid of arsenic. Scheffer described platinum as being less pliable than gold, but with similar resistance to corrosion.\nMeans of malleability.\nKarl von Sickingen researched platinum extensively in 1772. He succeeded in making malleable platinum by alloying it with gold, dissolving the alloy in hot \"aqua regia\", precipitating the platinum with ammonium chloride, igniting the ammonium chloroplatinate, and hammering the resulting finely divided platinum to make it cohere. Franz Karl Achard made the first platinum crucible in 1784. He worked with the platinum by fusing it with arsenic, then later volatilizing the arsenic.\nBecause the other platinum-family members were not discovered yet (platinum was the first), Scheffer and Sickingen made the false assumption that due to its hardness\u2014which is slightly more than for pure iron\u2014platinum would be a relatively non-pliable material, even brittle at times, when in fact its ductility exceeds that of gold and its malleability similar to gold's. Their assumptions could not be avoided because the platinum they experimented with was highly contaminated with minute amounts of platinum-family elements such as osmium and iridium, amongst others, which embrittled the platinum alloy. Alloying this impure platinum residue called \"plyoxen\" with gold as the only solution at the time to obtain a pliable compound. Presently, very pure platinum is readily available, and extremely long wires can easily be drawn from pure platinum due to its crystalline structure, which is similar to that of many soft metals.\n\"Platinum age\" in Spain.\nIn 1786, Charles III of Spain provided a library and laboratory to Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Chabaneau to aid in his research of platinum. Chabaneau succeeded in removing various impurities from the ore, including gold, mercury, lead, copper, and iron. This led him to believe he was working with a single metal, but in truth the ore still contained the yet-undiscovered platinum-group metals. This led to inconsistent results in his experiments. At times, the platinum seemed malleable, but when it was alloyed with iridium, it would be much more brittle. Sometimes the metal was entirely incombustible, but when alloyed with osmium, it would volatilize. After several months, Chabaneau succeeded in producing 23\u00a0kilograms of pure, malleable platinum by hammering and compressing the sponge form while white-hot. Chabeneau realized the infusibility of platinum would lend value to objects made of it and so started a business with Joaqu\u00edn Cabezas producing platinum ingots and utensils. This started what is known as the \"platinum age\" in Spain.\nProduction.\nPlatinum, along with the rest of the platinum-group metals, is obtained commercially as a by-product from nickel and copper mining and processing. During electrorefining of copper, noble metals such as silver, gold and the platinum-group metals as well as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as \"anode mud\", which forms the starting point for the extraction of the platinum-group metals.\nIf pure platinum is found in placer deposits or other ores, it is isolated from them by various methods of subtracting impurities. Because platinum is significantly denser than many of its impurities, the lighter impurities can be removed by simply floating them away in a liquid. Platinum is paramagnetic, whereas nickel and iron are both ferromagnetic. These two impurities are thus removed by running an electromagnet over the mixture. Because platinum has a higher melting point than most other substances, many impurities can be burned or melted away without melting the platinum. Finally, platinum is resistant to hydrochloric and sulfuric acids, whereas other substances are readily attacked by them. Metal impurities can be removed by stirring the mixture in either of the two acids and recovering the remaining platinum.\nOne suitable method for purification for the raw platinum, which contains platinum, gold, and the other platinum-group metals, is to process it with \"aqua regia\", in which palladium, gold and platinum are dissolved, whereas osmium, iridium, ruthenium and rhodium stay unreacted. The gold is precipitated by the addition of iron(II) chloride and after filtering off the gold, the platinum is precipitated as ammonium chloroplatinate by the addition of ammonium chloride. Ammonium chloroplatinate can be converted to platinum by heating. Unprecipitated hexachloroplatinate(IV) may be reduced with elemental zinc, and a similar method is suitable for small scale recovery of platinum from laboratory residues. Mining and refining platinum has environmental impacts.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nApplications.\nOf the 218\u00a0tonnes of platinum sold in 2014, 98\u00a0tonnes were used for vehicle emissions control devices (45%), 74.7\u00a0tonnes for jewelry (34%), 20.0\u00a0tonnes for chemical production and petroleum refining (9.2%), and 5.85\u00a0tonnes for electrical applications such as hard disk drives (2.7%). The remaining 28.9\u00a0tonnes went to various other minor applications, such as medicine and biomedicine, glassmaking equipment, investment, electrodes, anticancer drugs, oxygen sensors, spark plugs and turbine engines.\nCatalyst.\nThe most common use of platinum is as a catalyst in chemical reactions, often as platinum black. It has been employed as a catalyst since the early 19th century, when platinum powder was used to catalyze the ignition of hydrogen. In an automobile catalytic converter, it completes the combustion of low concentrations of unburned hydrocarbons from the exhaust into carbon dioxide and water vapor. Platinum is also used in the petroleum industry as a catalyst in a number of separate processes, but especially in catalytic reforming of straight-run naphthas into higher-octane gasoline that becomes rich in aromatic compounds. , also known as Adams' catalyst, is used as a hydrogenation catalyst, specifically for vegetable oils. Platinum also strongly catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen and it is used in fuel cells as a catalyst for the reduction of oxygen.\nGreen energy transition.\nAs a fuel cell catalyst, platinum enables hydrogen and oxygen reactions to take place at an optimum rate. It is used in platinum-based proton exchange membrane (PEM) technologies required in green hydrogen production as well as fuel cell electric vehicle adoption (FCEV).\nStandard.\nFrom 1889 to 1960, the meter was defined as the length of a platinum-iridium (90:10) alloy bar, known as the international prototype meter. The previous bar was made of platinum in 1799. Until May 2019, the kilogram was defined as the mass of the international prototype of the kilogram, a cylinder of the same platinum-iridium alloy made in 1879.\nThe Standard Platinum Resistance Thermometer (SPRT) is one of the four types of thermometers used to define the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90), the international calibration standard for temperature measurements. The resistance wire in the thermometer is made of pure platinum (NIST manufactured the wires from platinum bar stock with a chemical purity of 99.999% by weight). In addition to laboratory uses, Platinum Resistance Thermometry (PRT) also has many industrial applications, industrial standards include ASTM E1137 and IEC 60751.\nThe standard hydrogen electrode also uses a platinized platinum electrode due to its corrosion resistance, and other attributes.\nAs an investment.\nPlatinum is a precious metal commodity; its bullion has the ISO currency code of XPT. Coins, bars, and ingots are traded or collected. Platinum finds use in jewelry, commonly sold as .999 or .9995 fine. It is used for this purpose for its prestige and inherent bullion value.\nIn watchmaking, Rolex, Vacheron Constantin, Patek Philippe, Breitling, and other master watchmakers use platinum in select watches. Watchmakers appreciate the unique properties of platinum, as it is more durable than gold, but similar to gold as it does not tarnish.\nDuring periods of sustained economic stability and growth, the price of platinum can exceed that of the price of gold. As an investment, platinum is similar to gold in being a relatively low risk investment, or \"safe-haven\", in times of economic crisis. When the price of gold has exceeded that of platinum, many buyers in major markets, including the famous Dubai \"gold souk\" have turned to buying platinum instead for investment and for jewelry.\nIn the 18th century King Louis XV of France said of platinum that it is \"the only metal fit for a king\", owing to platinum's scarcity, traits, and intrinsic value.\nAs of 2024, the American multinational warehouse club chain, Costco, sells platinum bars on its website.\nOther uses.\nIn the laboratory, platinum wire is used for electrodes; platinum pans and supports are used in thermogravimetric analysis because of the stringent requirements of chemical inertness upon heating to high temperatures (~1000\u00a0\u00b0C). Platinum is used as an alloying agent for various metal products, including fine wires, noncorrosive laboratory containers, medical instruments, dental prostheses, electrical contacts, and thermocouples. Platinum-cobalt, an alloy of roughly three parts platinum and one part cobalt, is used to make relatively strong permanent magnets. Platinum-based anodes are used in ships, pipelines, and steel piers. Platinum drugs are used to treat a wide variety of cancers, including testicular and ovarian carcinomas, melanoma, small-cell and non-small-cell lung cancer, myelomas and lymphomas.\nSymbol of prestige in marketing.\nPlatinum's rarity as a metal has caused advertisers to associate it with exclusivity and wealth. \"Platinum\" debit and credit cards have greater privileges than \"gold\" cards. \"Platinum awards\" are frequently the highest, or near highest possible, often ranking above \"gold\", \"silver\" and \"bronze\". In the United States, a musical album that has sold more than 1\u00a0million copies will be credited as \"platinum\". Some products, such as blenders and vehicles, with a silvery-white color are identified as \"platinum\". The frame of the Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, manufactured for her coronation as Consort of King George VI, is made of platinum. It was the first British crown to be made of this particular metal.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23325", "revid": "22732625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23325", "title": "Polonium", "text": "element with atomic number 84 (Po)\nPolonium is a chemical element; it has symbol Po and atomic number 84. A rare and highly radioactive metal (although sometimes classified as a metalloid) with no stable isotopes, polonium is a chalcogen and chemically similar to selenium and tellurium, though its metallic character resembles that of its horizontal neighbors in the periodic table: thallium, lead, and bismuth. Due to the short half-life of all its isotopes, its natural occurrence is limited to tiny traces of the fleeting polonium-210 (with a half-life of 138 days) in uranium ores, as it is the penultimate daughter of natural uranium-238. Though two longer-lived isotopes exist (polonium-209 with a half-life of 124 years and polonium-208 with a half-life of 2.898 years), they are much more difficult to produce. Today, polonium is usually produced in milligram quantities by the neutron irradiation of bismuth. Due to its intense radioactivity, which results in the radiolysis of chemical bonds and radioactive self-heating, its chemistry has mostly been investigated on the trace scale only.\nPolonium was discovered on 18 July 1898 by Marie Sk\u0142odowska-Curie and Pierre Curie, when it was extracted from the uranium ore pitchblende and identified solely by its strong radioactivity: it was the first element to be discovered in this way. Polonium was named after Marie Sk\u0142odowska-Curie's homeland of Poland, which at the time was partitioned between three countries. Polonium has few applications, and those are related to its radioactivity: heaters in space probes, antistatic devices, sources of neutrons and alpha particles, and poison (e.g., poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko). It is extremely dangerous to humans.\nCharacteristics.\n210Po is an alpha emitter that has a half-life of 138.4\u00a0days; it decays directly to its stable daughter isotope, 206Pb. A milligram (5\u00a0curies) of 210Po emits about as many alpha particles per second as 5\u00a0grams of 226Ra, which means it is 5,000 times more radioactive than radium. A few curies (1\u00a0curie equals 37\u00a0gigabecquerels, 1\u00a0Ci = 37\u00a0GBq) of 210Po emit a blue glow which is caused by ionisation of the surrounding air.\nAbout one in 100,000\u00a0alpha emissions causes an excitation in the nucleus which then results in the emission of a gamma ray with a maximum energy of 803\u00a0keV.\nSolid state form.\nPolonium is a radioactive element that exists in two metallic allotropes. The alpha form is the only known example of a simple cubic crystal structure in a single atom basis at STP (space group Pm3m, no. 221). The unit cell has an edge length of 335.2 picometers; the beta form is rhombohedral. The structure of polonium has been characterized by X-ray diffraction and electron diffraction.\n210Po has the ability to become airborne with ease: if a sample is heated in air to , 50% of it is vaporized in 45 hours to form diatomic Po2 molecules, even though the melting point of polonium is and its boiling point is .\nMore than one hypothesis exists for how polonium does this; one suggestion is that small clusters of polonium atoms are spalled off by the alpha decay.\nChemistry.\nThe chemistry of polonium is similar to that of tellurium, although it also shows some similarities to its neighbor bismuth due to its metallic character. Polonium dissolves readily in dilute acids but is only slightly soluble in alkalis. Polonium solutions are first colored in pink by the Po2+ ions, but then rapidly become yellow because alpha radiation from polonium ionizes the solvent and converts Po2+ into Po4+. As polonium also emits alpha-particles after disintegration, this process is accompanied by bubbling and emission of heat and light by glassware due to the absorbed alpha particles; as a result, polonium solutions are volatile and will evaporate within days unless sealed. At pH about 1, polonium ions are readily hydrolyzed and complexed by acids such as oxalic acid, citric acid, and tartaric acid.\nCompounds.\nPolonium has no common compounds, and almost all of its compounds are synthetically created; more than 50 of those are known. The most stable class of polonium compounds are polonides, which are prepared by direct reaction of two elements. Na2Po has the antifluorite structure, the polonides of Ca, Ba, Hg, Pb and lanthanides form a NaCl lattice, BePo and CdPo have the wurtzite and MgPo the nickel arsenide structure. Most polonides decompose upon heating to about 600\u00a0\u00b0C, except for HgPo that decomposes at ~300\u00a0\u00b0C and the lanthanide polonides, which do not decompose but melt at temperatures above 1000\u00a0\u00b0C. For example, the polonide of praseodymium (PrPo) melts at 1250\u00a0\u00b0C, and that of thulium (TmPo) melts at 2200\u00a0\u00b0C. PbPo is one of the very few naturally occurring polonium compounds, as polonium alpha decays to form lead.\nPolonium hydride (PoH2) is a volatile liquid at room temperature prone to dissociation; it is thermally unstable. Water is the only other known hydrogen chalcogenide which is a liquid at room temperature; however, this is due to hydrogen bonding. The three oxides, PoO, PoO2 and PoO3, are the products of oxidation of polonium.\nHalides of the structure PoX2, PoX4 and PoF6 are known. They are soluble in the corresponding hydrogen halides, i.e., PoClX in HCl, PoBrX in HBr and PoI4 in HI. Polonium dihalides are formed by direct reaction of the elements or by reduction of PoCl4 with SO2 and with PoBr4 with H2S at room temperature. Tetrahalides can be obtained by reacting polonium dioxide with HCl, HBr or HI.\nOther polonium compounds include the polonite, potassium polonite; various polonate solutions; and the acetate, bromate, carbonate, citrate, chromate, cyanide, formate, (II) or (IV) hydroxide, nitrate, selenate, selenite, monosulfide, sulfate, disulfate or sulfite salts.\nA limited organopolonium chemistry is known, mostly restricted to dialkyl and diaryl polonides (R2Po), triarylpolonium halides (Ar3PoX), and diarylpolonium dihalides (Ar2PoX2). Polonium also forms soluble compounds with some ligands, such as 2,3-butanediol and thiourea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"All nuclear data not otherwise stated is from the standard source:\"\nIsotopes.\nThere are 42 known isotopes of polonium (84Po), all radioactive, stretching from 186Po to 227Po. The isotopes 210 through 218 occur naturally in the four principal decay chains; of these, 210Po with a half-life of 138.376 days has the longest half-life and is, therefore, the most abundant by mass. It is also the most easily synthesized isotope, by neutron capture on natural bismuth, and so by far the most abundant artificial isotope as well.\nTwo other isotopes have longer lives: 209Po with a half-life of 124 years and 208Po with a half-life of 2.898 years. Both are made by using a cyclotron to bombard bismuth with protons.\nHistory.\nTentatively called \"radium F\", polonium was discovered by Marie and Pierre Curie in July 1898, and was named after Marie Curie's native land of Poland (). Poland at the time was under Russian, German, and Austro-Hungarian partition, and did not exist as an independent country. It was Curie's hope that naming the element after her native land would publicize its lack of independence. Polonium may be the first element named to highlight a political controversy.\nThis element was the first one discovered by the Curies while they were investigating the cause of pitchblende radioactivity. Pitchblende, after removal of the radioactive elements uranium and thorium, was more radioactive than the uranium and thorium combined. This spurred the Curies to search for additional radioactive elements. They first separated out polonium from pitchblende in July 1898, and five months later, also isolated radium. German scientist Willy Marckwald successfully isolated 3 milligrams of polonium in 1902, though at the time he believed it was a new element, which he dubbed \"radio-tellurium\", and it was not until 1905 that it was demonstrated to be the same as polonium.\nIn the United States, polonium was produced as part of the Manhattan Project's Dayton Project during World War II. Polonium and beryllium were the key ingredients of the 'Urchin' initiator at the center of the bomb's spherical pit. 'Urchin' initiated the nuclear chain reaction at the moment of prompt-criticality to ensure that the weapon did not fizzle. 'Urchin' was used in early U.S. weapons; subsequent U.S. weapons utilized a pulse neutron generator for the same purpose.\nMuch of the basic physics of polonium was classified until after the war. The fact that a polonium-beryllium (Po-Be) initiator was used in the gun-type nuclear weapons was classified until the 1960s.\nThe Atomic Energy Commission and the Manhattan Project funded human experiments using polonium on five people at the University of Rochester between 1943 and 1947. The people were administered between of polonium to study its excretion.\nOccurrence and production.\nPolonium is a very rare element in nature because of the short half-lives of all its isotopes. Nine isotopes, from 210 to 218 inclusive, occur in traces as decay products: 210Po, 214Po, and 218Po occur in the decay chain of 238U; 211Po and 215Po occur in the decay chain of 235U; 212Po and 216Po occur in the decay chain of 232Th; and 213Po and 217Po occur in the decay chain of 237Np. (No primordial 237Np survives, but traces of it are continuously regenerated through (n,2n) knockout reactions in natural 238U.) Of these, 210Po is the only isotope with a half-life longer than 3\u00a0minutes.\nPolonium can be found in uranium ores at about 0.1\u00a0mg per metric ton (1 part in 1010), which is approximately 0.2% of the abundance of radium. The amounts in the Earth's crust are not harmful. Polonium has been found in tobacco smoke from tobacco leaves grown with phosphate fertilizers.\nBecause it is present in small concentrations, isolation of polonium from natural sources is a tedious process. The largest batch of the element ever extracted, performed in the first half of the 20th century, contained only (9\u00a0mg) of polonium-210 and was obtained by processing 37 tonnes of residues from radium production. Polonium is now usually obtained by irradiating bismuth with high-energy neutrons or protons.\nIn 1934, an experiment showed that when natural 209Bi is bombarded with neutrons, 210Bi is created, which then decays to 210Po via beta-minus decay. By irradiating certain bismuth salts containing light element nuclei such as beryllium, a cascading (\u03b1,n) reaction can also be induced to produce 210Po in large quantities. The final purification is done pyrochemically followed by liquid-liquid extraction techniques. Polonium may now be made in milligram amounts in this procedure which uses high neutron fluxes found in nuclear reactors. Only about 100\u00a0grams are produced each year, practically all of it in Russia, making polonium exceedingly rare.\nThis process can cause problems in lead-bismuth based liquid metal cooled nuclear reactors such as those used in the Soviet Navy's K-27. Measures must be taken in these reactors to deal with the unwanted possibility of 210Po being released from the coolant.\nThe longer-lived isotopes of polonium, 208Po and 209Po, can be formed by proton or deuteron bombardment of bismuth using a cyclotron. Other more neutron-deficient and more unstable isotopes can be formed by the irradiation of platinum with carbon nuclei.\nApplications.\nPolonium-based sources of alpha particles were produced in the former Soviet Union. Such sources were applied for measuring the thickness of industrial coatings via attenuation of alpha radiation.\nBecause of intense alpha radiation, a one-gram sample of 210Po will spontaneously heat up to above generating about 140 watts of power. Therefore, 210Po is used as an atomic heat source to power radioisotope thermoelectric generators via thermoelectric materials. For example, 210Po heat sources were used in the Lunokhod 1 (1970) and Lunokhod 2 (1973) Moon rovers to keep their internal components warm during the lunar nights, as well as the Kosmos 84 and 90 satellites (1965).\nThe alpha particles emitted by polonium can be converted to neutrons using beryllium oxide, at a rate of 93 neutrons per million alpha particles. Po-BeO mixtures are used as passive neutron sources with a gamma-ray-to-neutron production ratio of 1.13 \u00b1 0.05, lower than for nuclear fission-based neutron sources. Examples of Po-BeO mixtures or alloys used as neutron sources are a neutron trigger or initiator for nuclear weapons and for inspections of oil wells. About 1500 sources of this type, with an individual activity of , had been used annually in the Soviet Union.\nPolonium was also part of brushes or more complex tools that eliminate static charges in photographic plates, textile mills, paper rolls, sheet plastics, and on substrates (such as automotive) prior to the application of coatings. Alpha particles emitted by polonium ionize air molecules that neutralize charges on the nearby surfaces. Some anti-static brushes contain up to of 210Po as a source of charged particles for neutralizing static electricity. In the US, devices with no more than of (sealed) 210Po per unit can be bought in any amount under a \"general license\", which means that a buyer need not be registered by any authorities. Polonium needs to be replaced in these devices nearly every year because of its short half-life; it is also highly radioactive and therefore has been mostly replaced by less dangerous beta particle sources.\nTiny amounts of 210Po are sometimes used in the laboratory and for teaching purposes\u2014typically of the order of , in the form of sealed sources, with the polonium deposited on a substrate or in a resin or polymer matrix\u2014are often exempt from licensing by the NRC and similar authorities as they are not considered hazardous. Small amounts of 210Po are manufactured for sale to the public in the United States as \"needle sources\" for laboratory experimentation, and they are retailed by scientific supply companies. The polonium is a layer of plating which in turn is plated with a material such as gold, which allows the alpha radiation (used in experiments such as cloud chambers) to pass while preventing the polonium from being released and presenting a toxic hazard.\nPolonium spark plugs were marketed by Firestone from 1940 to 1953. While the amount of radiation from the plugs was minuscule and not a threat to the consumer, the benefits of such plugs quickly diminished after approximately a month because of polonium's short half-life and because buildup on the conductors would block the radiation that improved engine performance. (The premise behind the polonium spark plug, as well as Alfred Matthew Hubbard's prototype radium plug that preceded it, was that the radiation would improve ionization of the fuel in the cylinder and thus allow the motor to fire more quickly and efficiently.)\nBiology and toxicity.\nOverview.\nPolonium can be hazardous and has no biological role. By mass, polonium-210 is around 250,000 times more toxic than hydrogen cyanide (the LD50 for 210Po is less than 1 microgram for an average adult (see below) compared with about 250 milligrams for hydrogen cyanide). The main hazard is its intense radioactivity (as an alpha emitter), which makes it difficult to handle safely. Even in microgram amounts, handling 210Po is extremely dangerous, requiring specialized equipment (a negative pressure alpha glove box equipped with high-performance filters), adequate monitoring, and strict handling procedures to avoid any contamination. Alpha particles emitted by polonium will damage organic tissue easily if polonium is ingested, inhaled, or absorbed, although they do not penetrate the epidermis and hence are not hazardous as long as the alpha particles remain outside the body and do not come near the eyes, which are living tissue. Wearing chemically resistant and intact gloves is a mandatory precaution to avoid transcutaneous diffusion of polonium directly through the skin. Polonium delivered in concentrated nitric acid can easily diffuse through inadequate gloves (e.g., latex gloves) or the acid may damage the gloves.\nPolonium does not have toxic chemical properties.\nIt has been reported that some microbes can methylate polonium by the action of methylcobalamin. This is similar to the way in which mercury, selenium, and tellurium are methylated in living things to create organometallic compounds. Studies investigating the metabolism of polonium-210 in rats have shown that only 0.002 to 0.009% of polonium-210 ingested is excreted as volatile polonium-210.\nAcute effects.\nThe median lethal dose (LD50) for acute radiation exposure is about 4.5\u00a0Sv. The committed effective dose equivalent 210Po is 0.51\u00a0\u03bcSv/Bq if ingested, and 2.5\u00a0\u03bcSv/Bq if inhaled. A fatal 4.5\u00a0Sv dose can be caused by ingesting , about 50\u00a0nanograms (ng), or inhaling , about 10\u00a0ng. One gram of 210Po could thus in theory poison 20\u00a0million\u00a0people, of whom 10\u00a0million would die. The actual toxicity of 210Po is lower than these estimates because radiation exposure that is spread out over several weeks (the biological half-life of polonium in humans is 30\u00a0to 50\u00a0days) is somewhat less damaging than an instantaneous dose. It has been estimated that a median lethal dose of 210Po is , or 0.089\u00a0micrograms (\u03bcg), still an extremely small amount. For comparison, one grain of table salt is about 0.06\u00a0mg = 60\u00a0\u03bcg.\nLong term (chronic) effects.\nIn addition to the acute effects, radiation exposure (both internal and external) carries a long-term risk of death from cancer of 5\u201310% per Sv. The general population is exposed to small amounts of polonium as a radon daughter in indoor air; the isotopes 214Po and 218Po are thought to cause the majority of the estimated 15,000\u201322,000 lung cancer deaths in the US every year that have been attributed to indoor radon. Tobacco smoking causes additional exposure to polonium.\nRegulatory exposure limits and handling.\nThe maximum allowable body burden for ingested 210Po is only , which is equivalent to a particle massing only 6.8 picograms. The maximum permissible workplace concentration of airborne 210Po is about 10\u00a0Bq/m3 (\u00a0\u03bcCi/cm3). The target organs for polonium in humans are the spleen and liver. As the spleen (150\u00a0g) and the liver (1.3 to 3\u00a0kg) are much smaller than the rest of the body, if the polonium is concentrated in these vital organs, it is a greater threat to life than the dose which would be suffered (on average) by the whole body if it were spread evenly throughout the body, in the same way as caesium or tritium (as T2O).\n210Po is widely used in industry, and readily available with little regulation or restriction. In the US, a tracking system run by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was implemented in 2007 to register purchases of more than of polonium-210 (enough to make up 5,000 lethal doses). The IAEA \"is said to be considering tighter regulations\u00a0... There is talk that it might tighten the polonium reporting requirement by a factor of 10, to .\" As of 2013, this is still the only alpha emitting byproduct material available, as a NRC Exempt Quantity, which may be held without a radioactive material license.\nPolonium and its compounds must be handled with caution inside special alpha glove boxes, equipped with HEPA filters and continuously maintained under depression to prevent the radioactive materials from leaking out. Gloves made of natural rubber (latex) do not properly withstand chemical attacks, a.o. by concentrated nitric acid (e.g., 6 M ) commonly used to keep polonium in solution while minimizing its sorption onto glass. They do not provide sufficient protection against the contamination from polonium (diffusion of 210Po solution through the intact latex membrane, or worse, direct contact through tiny holes and cracks produced when the latex begins to suffer degradation by acids or UV from ambient light); additional surgical gloves are necessary (inside the glovebox to protect the main gloves when handling strong acids and bases, and also from outside to protect the operator hands against 210Po contamination from diffusion, or direct contact through glove defects). Chemically more resistant, and also denser, neoprene and butyl gloves shield alpha particles emitted by polonium better than natural rubber. The use of natural rubber gloves is not recommended for handling 210Po solutions.\nCases of poisoning.\nDespite the element's highly hazardous properties, circumstances in which polonium poisoning can occur are rare. Its extreme scarcity in nature, the short half-lives of all its isotopes, the specialised facilities and equipment needed to obtain any significant quantity, and safety precautions against laboratory accidents all make harmful exposure events unlikely. As such, only a handful of cases of radiation poisoning specifically attributable to polonium exposure have been confirmed.\n20th century.\nIn response to concerns about the risks of occupational polonium exposure, quantities of 210Po were administered to five human volunteers at the University of Rochester from 1944 to 1947, in order to study its biological behaviour. These studies were funded by the Manhattan Project and the AEC. Four men and a woman participated, all suffering from terminal cancers, and ranged in age from their early thirties to early forties; all were chosen because experimenters wanted subjects who had not been exposed to polonium either through work or accident. 210Po was injected into four hospitalised patients, and orally given to a fifth. None of the administered doses (all ranging from 0.17 to 0.30 \u03bcCi kg\u22121) approached fatal quantities.\nThe first documented death directly resulting from polonium poisoning occurred in the Soviet Union, on 10 July 1954. An unidentified 41-year-old man presented for medical treatment on 29 June, with severe vomiting and fever; the previous day, he had been working for five hours in an area in which, unknown to him, a capsule containing 210Po had depressurised and begun to disperse in aerosol form. Over this period, his total intake of airborne 210Po was estimated at 0.11 GBq (almost 25 times the estimated LD50 by inhalation of 4.5 MBq). Despite treatment, his condition continued to worsen and he died 13 days after the exposure event.\nFrom 1955 to 1957 the Windscale Piles had been releasing polonium-210. The Windscale fire brought the need for testing of the land downwind for radioactive material contamination, and this is how it was found. An estimate of 8.8 terabecquerels (240 Ci) of polonium-210 has been made.\nIt has also been suggested that Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie's 1956 death from leukaemia was owed to the radiation effects of polonium. She was accidentally exposed in 1946 when a sealed capsule of the element exploded on her laboratory bench.\nAs well, several deaths in Israel during 1957\u20131969 have been alleged to have resulted from 210Po exposure. A leak was discovered at a Weizmann Institute laboratory in 1957. Traces of 210Po were found on the hands of Professor Dror Sadeh, a physicist who researched radioactive materials. Medical tests indicated no harm, but the tests did not include bone marrow. Sadeh, one of his students, and two colleagues died from various cancers over the subsequent few years. The issue was investigated secretly, but there was never any formal admission of a connection between the leak and the deaths.\nThe Church Rock uranium mill spill 16 July 1979 is reported to have released polonium-210. The report states animals had higher concentrations of lead-210, polonium-210 and radium-226 than the tissues from control animals.\n21st century.\nThe cause of the 2006 death of Alexander Litvinenko, a former Russian FSB agent who had defected to the United Kingdom in 2001, was identified to be poisoning with a lethal dose of 210Po; it was subsequently determined that the 210Po had probably been deliberately administered to him by two Russian ex-security agents, Andrey Lugovoy and Dmitry Kovtun. As such, Litvinenko's death was the first (and, to date, only) confirmed instance in which polonium's extreme toxicity has been used with malicious intent.\nIn 2011, an allegation surfaced that the death of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, who died on 11 November 2004 of uncertain causes, also resulted from deliberate polonium poisoning, and in July 2012, concentrations of 210Po many times more than normal were detected in Arafat's clothes and personal belongings by the Institut de Radiophysique in Lausanne, Switzerland. Even though Arafat's symptoms were acute gastroenteritis with diarrhoea and vomiting, the institute's spokesman said that despite the tests the symptoms described in Arafat's medical reports were not consistent with 210Po poisoning, and conclusions could not be drawn. In 2013 the team found levels of polonium in Arafat's ribs and pelvis 18 to 36 times the average, even though by this point in time the amount had diminished by a factor of 2 million. Forensic scientist Dave Barclay stated, \"In my opinion, it is absolutely certain that the cause of his illness was polonium poisoning. ... What we have got is the smoking gun - the thing that caused his illness and was given to him with malice.\" Subsequently, French and Russian teams claimed that the elevated 210Po levels were not the result of deliberate poisoning, and did not cause Arafat's death.\nIt has also been suspected that Russian businessman Roman Tsepov was killed with polonium. He had symptoms similar to Aleksander Litvinenko.\nTreatment.\nIt has been suggested that chelation agents, such as British anti-Lewisite (dimercaprol), can be used to decontaminate humans. In one experiment, rats were given a fatal dose of 1.45\u00a0MBq/kg (8.7\u00a0ng/kg) of 210Po;\nall untreated rats were dead after 44 days, but 90% of the rats treated with the chelation agent\nHOEtTTC remained alive for five months.\nDetection in biological specimens.\nPolonium-210 may be quantified in biological specimens by alpha particle spectrometry to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients or to provide evidence in a medicolegal death investigation. The baseline urinary excretion of polonium-210 in healthy persons due to routine exposure to environmental sources is normally in a range of 5\u201315 mBq/day. Levels in excess of 30 mBq/day are suggestive of excessive exposure to the radionuclide.\nOccurrence in humans and the biosphere.\nPolonium-210 is widespread in the biosphere, including in human tissues, because of its position in the uranium-238 decay chain. Natural uranium-238 in the Earth's crust decays through a series of solid radioactive intermediates including radium-226 to the radioactive noble gas radon-222, some of which, during its 3.8-day half-life, diffuses into the atmosphere. There it decays through several more steps to polonium-210, much of which, during its 138-day half-life, is washed back down to the Earth's surface, thus entering the biosphere, before finally decaying to stable lead-206.\nAs early as the 1920s, French biologist Antoine Lacassagne, using polonium provided by his colleague Marie Curie, showed that the element has a specific pattern of uptake in rabbit tissues, with high concentrations, particularly in liver, kidney, and testes. More recent evidence suggests that this behavior results from polonium substituting for its congener sulfur, also in group 16 of the periodic table, in sulfur-containing amino-acids or related molecules and that similar patterns of distribution occur in human tissues. Polonium is indeed an element naturally present in all humans, contributing appreciably to natural background dose, with wide geographical and cultural variations, and particularly high levels in arctic residents, for example.\nTobacco.\nPolonium-210 in tobacco contributes to many of the cases of lung cancer worldwide. Most of this polonium is derived from lead-210 deposited on tobacco leaves from the atmosphere; the lead-210 is a product of radon-222 gas, much of which appears to originate from the decay of radium-226 from fertilizers applied to the tobacco soils.\nThe presence of polonium in tobacco smoke has been known since the early 1960s. Some of the world's biggest tobacco firms researched ways to remove the substance\u2014to no avail\u2014over a 40-year period. The results were never published.\nFood.\nPolonium is found in the food chain, especially in seafood.\nIn popular culture.\nPolonium poisoning has been used as a plot point on the American daytime television show General Hospital for many years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23326", "revid": "43646904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23326", "title": "Party of Democratic Socialism (Germany)", "text": "German socialist political party\nThe Party of Democratic Socialism (, PDS) was a left-wing populist political party in Germany active between 1989 and 2007. It was the legal successor to the communist Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), which ruled the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) as leading governing party of the National Front until 1989. From 1990 through to 2005, the PDS had been seen as the left-wing \"party of the East\". While it achieved minimal support in western Germany, it regularly won 15% to 25% of the vote in the eastern new states of Germany, entering coalition governments with the Social Democratic Party of Germany in the federal states of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern and Berlin.\nIn 2005, the PDS, renamed The Left Party.PDS (\"Die Linkspartei.PDS\"), entered an electoral alliance with the Western Germany-based Electoral Alternative for Labour and Social Justice (WASG) and won 8.7% of the vote in Germany's September 2005 federal elections (more than double the 4% share achieved by the PDS alone in the 2002 federal election). On 16 June 2007, the two groupings merged to form a new party called Die Linke (The Left). The party had many socially progressive policies, including support for legalisation of same-sex marriage and greater social welfare for immigrants.\nPDS was a co-founder of the Party of the European Left and was the largest party in the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) group in the European Parliament.\nHistory.\nFall of communism.\nOn 18 October 1989, longtime East German leader Erich Honecker was forced to resign from his post of General Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), under pressure from both civil rights movements in the German Democratic Republic (GDR) and the party base itself. He was replaced by Egon Krenz, who was not, however, able to stop the collapse of the party and the government. On 9 November 1989 the Berlin Wall fell, borders between East and West Germany were reopened and on 1 December 1989 the \"Volkskammer\" abrogated the constitutional provisions that gave the SED a monopoly of power in the GDR.\nOn 3 December 1989, Krenz and the entire SED politburo resigned and were all expelled from the party by the central committee, which in turn dissolved itself soon after that. This empowered a younger generation of reform politicians in East Germany's ruling socialist class, who looked to Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's \"glasnost\" and \"perestroika\" as their model for political change. Reformers like authors Stefan Heym and Christa Wolf and attorney Gregor Gysi, lawyer of dissidents like Robert Havemann and Rudolf Bahro, soon began to re-invent a party infamous for its rigid Marxist\u2013Leninist orthodoxy and police-state methods.\nA special party congress convened in the Dynamo-Sporthalle in East Berlin on 8\u20139 December 1989 and elected Gregor Gysi as new party Chairman, along Hans Modrow and Wolfgang Berghofer as his deputies. By the time of a special party conference on 16 December 1989, it was obvious that the SED was no longer a Marxist-Leninist party. During the second session, the party accepted a proposal from Gysi that the party adopt a new name, \"Party of Democratic Socialism\". Gysi felt a name change was necessary to distance the reformed party from its repressive past. The proposal came directly after a speech from Michael Schumann highlighting the injustices perpetrated under the SED, and distancing the conference from certain high-profile party leaders \u2013 notably Honecker and the country's last Communist leader, Egon Krenz. Above all Schumann's speech opened the way for the party to reinvent itself, using a phrase that was later much quoted: \"We break irrevocably with Stalinism as a system!\" A brief transitional period followed, during which the party was named \"Socialist Unity Party of Germany - Party of Democratic Socialism\" (SED - PDS).\nBy the end of 1989, the last hardline members of the party's Central Committee had either resigned or been pushed out; meanwhile, by 1990, 95% of the SED's 2.3 million members had left the party. On 4 February 1990, the party was formally renamed the PDS. However, neo-Marxist and communist minority factions continued to exist. By the time the party had formally renamed itself into the PDS, it had expelled most of the remaining prominent Communist-era leaders from its ranks\u2014including Honecker and Krenz. Meanwhile, a faction of hardline Marxists-Leninists opposing reforms had split away from the party and had re-established the Communist Party of Germany (KPD), which included Erich and Margot Honecker in its ranks.\nThis was not enough to save the party when it faced the voters for the first time in the 1990 East German elections\u2014the first and only free elections held in East Germany. The party was roundly defeated, winning only 66 seats in the 400-seat \"Volkskammer\", finishing a distant third behind the East German wings of the Christian Democratic Union and the recently refounded Social Democratic Party.\nReunified Germany.\nIn the first all-German elections in 1990, the PDS won only 2.4% of the nationwide vote. However, a one-time exception to Germany's electoral law allowed eastern-based parties to qualify for representation if they won five percent of the vote in the former East Germany. As a result, the PDS entered the Bundestag with 17 deputies led by Gysi. However, it was only recognised as a group within the Bundestag, and not a full-fledged parliamentary faction.\nIn the 1994 federal election, in spite of an anti-communist \"Red Socks\" campaign by the then-ruling Christian Democrats aimed at scaring off eastern voters, the PDS increased its vote to 4.4%. More importantly, Gysi was reelected from his Berlin seat, and three other PDS members were elected from districts in the former East Berlin, the party's power base. Under a provision of the German constitution intended to benefit regional parties, a party that wins at least three directly-elected seats is eligible for proportional representation, even if it falls short of the five percent threshold. This allowed it to re-enter the Bundestag with an enlarged caucus of 30 deputies. \nIn the 1998 federal election, the party reached the high-water mark in its fortunes by tallying 5.1% of the national vote and 36 seats, thus clearing the critical 5% threshold required for guaranteed proportional representation and full parliamentary status in the Bundestag.\nThe party's future seemed bright, but it suffered from a number of weaknesses, not the least of which was its dependence on Gysi, considered by supporters and critics alike as a super-star in German politics who stood in stark contrast to a colourless general membership. Gysi's resignation in 2000 after losing a policy debate with party leftists soon spelled trouble for the PDS. In the 2002 federal election, the party's vote sank back to 4.0%, and was able to seat only two back-benchers elected directly from their districts, Petra Pau and Gesine L\u00f6tzsch.\nAfter the 2002 debacle, the PDS adopted a new programme and re-installed a respected moderate, long-time Gysi ally Lothar Bisky, as chair. A renewed sense of self-confidence soon re-energised the party. In the 2004 elections to the European Parliament, the PDS won 6.1% of the vote nationwide, its highest total at that time in a federal election. Its electoral base in the eastern German states continued to grow, where it ranked with the CDU and SPD one of the region's three strong parties. However, low membership and voter support in Germany's western states continued to plague the party on the federal level until it formed an electoral alliance in July 2005 with Labour and Social Justice \u2013 The Electoral Alternative (WASG), a leftist faction of dissident Social Democrats and trade unionists which had split away from the SPD some months prior, with the merged list being called the Left Party. In the 2005 federal election the Left Party received 8.7% of the nationwide vote and won 54 seats in the German Bundestag.\nAlliance with the WASG.\nAfter marathon negotiations, the PDS and WASG agreed on terms for a combined ticket to compete in the 2005 federal election and pledged to unify into a single left-wing party in 2006 or 2007. According to the pact, the parties did not compete against each another in any district. Instead, WASG candidates\u2014including the former SPD leader, Oskar Lafontaine\u2014were nominated on the PDS electoral list. To symbolize the new relationship, the PDS changed its name to The Left Party/PDS or The Left/PDS, with the letters \"PDS\" optional in western states where many voters still regarded the PDS as an \"eastern\" party.\nThe alliance provided a strong electoral base in the east and benefited from WASG's growing voter potential in the west. Gregor Gysi, returning to public life only months after brain surgery and two heart attacks, shared the spotlight with Lafontaine as co-leader of the party's energetic and professional campaign. Both politicians co-chaired The Left's caucus in the German Bundestag after the election.\nPolls early in the summer showed the unified Left list on a \"high-altitude flight\", winning as much as 12% of the vote, and for a time it seemed possible the party would surge past the Alliance '90/The Greens and the pro-business Free Democratic Party and become the third-strongest force in the Bundestag. But, alarmed by the Left's unexpected rise in the polls, Germany's mainstream politicians hit back at Lafontaine and Gysi as \"left populists\" and \"demagogues\" and accused the party of flirting with neo-Nazi voters. A gaffe by Lafontaine, who described \"foreign workers\" as a threat in one speech early in the campaign, provided ammunition for charges that the Left was attempting to exploit German xenophobia.\nAlthough Germany's once-powerful trade unions distanced themselves from The Left in the 2005 federal election, some union leaders expressed interest in cooperating with the party after the election. A number of regional trade union leaders and mid-level functionaries were active supporters.\n2005 federal election outcome.\nAt the 2005 federal election, the Left Party became the fourth-largest party in the Bundestag, with 54 Members of Parliament (MPs) (https://), ahead of the Greens (51) but behind the Free Democratic Party (61). Three Left Party MPs were directly elected on a constituency basis: Gregor Gysi, Gesine L\u00f6tzsch and Petra Pau, all in Eastern Berlin constituencies. In addition, 51 Left Party MPs were elected through the party list element of Germany's seat linkage system of mixed-member proportional representation. These include Lothar Bisky, Katja Kipping, Oskar Lafontaine, and Paul Sch\u00e4fer. Besides Lafontaine, a number of other prominent SPD defectors won election to the Bundestag on the Left Party list, including a prominent leader of Germany's Turkish minority, Hakk\u0131 Keskin, German Federal Constitutional Court justice Wolfgang Neskovic, and the former SPD leader in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Ulrich Maurer.\nWhen the votes were counted, the party doubled its federal vote from 1.9 million (PDS result in 2002) to more than 4 million\u2014including an electoral breakthrough in industrial Saarland where, for the first time in a western state, it surpassed the Greens and FDP due, in large part to Lafontaine's popularity and Saarland roots. It is now the second strongest party in three states, all of them in the former GDR, (Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia) and the third strongest in four others, all but Saarland in the former GDR, (Saarland, Berlin, Saxony, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern). It was the only party to win over protest voters broadly across Germany's political spectrum: nearly one million Social Democratic voters defected to the Left while the Christian Democrats and Greens together lost half a million votes to the resurgent party.\nExit polls showed the Left had a unique appeal to non-voters: 390,000 Germans who refused to support any party in 2002 returned to the ballot box to vote for the Left Party. The Left's image as the last line of defense for Germany's traditional \"social state\" () proved to be a magnet for voters in western as well as eastern Germany.\nAll other established parties had ruled out the possibility of a coalition with the Left Party prior to the election (in other words, a ), and refused to reconsider in the light of the closeness of the election result, which prevented either of the usual ideologically-coherent coalitions from attaining a majority. The possibility of a minority SPD\u2013Green government tolerated by the Left Party was the closest the Left Party came to potential participation in government at this election.\n2006 state election results.\nThe Left Party suffered serious losses in the 2006 elections for the city-state government of Berlin, losing nearly half of its vote and falling to 13%\u2014slightly ahead of the Greens. Berlin's popular Social Democratic mayor, Klaus Wowereit, nevertheless decided to retain the weakened party as his coalition partner.\nIn Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, the Left Party suffered no serious losses and remains the third-strongest party in the state. However, it was dropped as a coalition partner by the Social Democratic premier, Harold Ringstorff, and now heads the opposition in the state assembly.\nDespite its losses in Berlin, support for the Left Party/PDS and its WASG ally remains stable at about eight to ten percent of the vote. Cooperation between the two parties on a national level and in their single Bundestag delegation has been largely free of tensions. Though a minority of WASG members opposed the merger of the two parties scheduled for June 2007, the new party \u2013 The Left \u2013 was on Germany's political stage before the federal elections.\nIn state and local government.\nThe PDS had experience as a junior coalition partner in two federal states\u2014Berlin and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania\u2014where it co-governed until 2006 with the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). Political responsibility has burnished the Left's reputation as a pragmatic, rather than ideological party. It remained strong in local government in eastern Germany, with more than 6,500 town councillors and 64 elected mayors. The party continued to win eastern voters by emphasizing political competence and refused to be labelled as merely a \"protest party\", although it certainly attracted millions of protest voters in the federal election, profiting from growing dissatisfaction with high unemployment and cutbacks in public health insurance, unemployment benefits, and labour rights.\nControversies.\nStasi connections.\nAfter German reunification, leading members of the PDS were frequently suspected of having connections to East Germany's secret police, the Stasi (State Security Service). Shortly after the 2005 federal election, Marianne Birthler, the official in charge of the Stasi archives, accused the Left Party of harboring at least seven former Stasi informants in its newly elected parliamentary group. At about the same time, the media revealed that Lutz Heilmann, a Left Party Bundestag deputy from the state of Schleswig-Holstein, had worked for several years for the Stasi. While the first accusation proved to be false, Heilmann's connection with the Stasi remained controversial. Though Heilmann had served as a bodyguard, not as an informant or secret police officer, he violated a Left Party regulation obliging candidates to reveal Stasi involvement. Nevertheless, the Left Party membership in Schleswig-Holstein narrowly passed a vote of confidence in Heilmann, and he continued to serve in the Bundestag.\nCharges of a Stasi past were also a factor in the Bundestag's decision to reject Lothar Bisky as the Left Party's candidate for the post of parliamentary vice president. Though Bisky's candidacy was supported by the Greens and by some Christian Democratic and Social Democratic leaders, including Chancellor Angela Merkel, after two failed votes the party withdrew his nomination. Five months later, the Left Party's Petra Pau was elected vice president.\nIn the Saxony, the chairman of the Left Party group, Peter Porsch, faced losing his mandate in the Saxon parliament because of his alleged Stasi past. In May 2006, all parties represented in the parliament, except the Left Party, voted to initiate proceedings against Porsch. However, in November, the state's constitutional court dismissed the complaint against Porsch on technical grounds.\nSED assets.\nThe SED had sequestered money overseas in secret accounts, including some which turned up in Liechtenstein in 2008. This was returned to the German government, as the PDS had rejected claims to overseas SED assets in 1990. The vast majority of domestic SED assets were transferred to the GDR government before unification. Legal issues over back taxes possibly owed by the PDS on former SED assets were eventually settled in 1995, when an agreement between the PDS and the Independent Commission on Property of Political Parties and Mass Organizations of the GDR was confirmed by the Berlin Administrative Court.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23328", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23328", "title": "PipeLine", "text": ""}
{"id": "23329", "revid": "26742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23329", "title": "Pythonidae", "text": "Family of snakes\nThe Pythonidae, commonly known as pythons, are a family of nonvenomous snakes found in Africa, Asia, and Australia. Among its members are some of the largest snakes in the world. Ten genera and 39 species are currently recognized. Being naturally non-venomous, pythons must constrict their prey to induce cardiac arrest prior to consumption. Pythons will typically strike at and bite their prey of choice to gain hold of it; they then must use physical strength to constrict their prey, by coiling their muscular bodies around the animal, effectively suffocating it before swallowing whole. This is in stark contrast to venomous snakes such as the rattlesnake, for example, which delivers a swift, venomous bite but releases, waiting as the prey succumbs to envenomation before being consumed. Collectively, the pythons are well-documented and studied as constrictors, much like other non-venomous snakes, including the boas and even kingsnakes of the New World.\nPythons are indigenous to the Old World Tropics, including sub-Saharan Africa, tropical to subtropical Asia, and Australia, Pythons are ambush predators that primarily kill prey by constriction, causing cardiac arrest. Pythons are oviparous, laying eggs that females incubate until they hatch. They possess premaxillary teeth, with the exception of adults in the Australian genus \"Aspidites\". While many species are available in the exotic pet trade, caution is needed with larger species due to potential danger. The taxonomy of pythons has evolved, and they are now known to be more closely related to sunbeam snakes and the Mexican burrowing python. \nPythons are frequently poached for their skins, with the export market for skins from Southeast Asia estimated at a billion dollars in 2012. They are also sold and consumed as meat. They can carry diseases, such as salmonella and leptospirosis, which can be transmitted to humans. Pythons are also used in African traditional medicine to treat ailments like rheumatism and mental illnesses. Their body parts, including blood and organs, are believed to have various healing properties. In some African cultures, pythons have significant roles in folklore and mythology, often symbolizing strength or having sacred status.\nDistribution and habitat.\nPythons are found in sub-Saharan Africa, Nepal, India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Southeast Asia, southeastern Pakistan, southern China, the Philippines and Australia.\nInvasive populations.\nTwo known populations of invasive pythons exist in the Western Hemisphere. In the United States, an introduced population of Burmese pythons (\"Python bivittatus\") has existed as an invasive species in Everglades National Park since the late 1990s. As of January 2023, estimates place the Floridian Burmese python population at around half a million. Local bounties are awarded and scientists study dead Burmese pythons to better understand breeding cycles and trends associated with rapid population explosion. The pythons readily prey on native North American fauna in Florida, including (but not limited to) American alligators, birds, bobcats, American bullfrogs, opossums, raccoons, river otters, white-tailed deer, and occasionally domestic pets and livestock. They are also known to prey on other invasive and introduced animals to Florida, such as the green iguana and nutria (coypu), though not at a rate as to lower their numbers rapidly or effectively.\nIn Puerto Rico, a population of reticulated pythons (\"Malayopython reticulatus\") are known to be currently established, with a remarkably high rate of albinism, suggesting establishment from domesticated pet stock. Records of reticulated pythons date back to as early as 2009, and the population was recognized as established by 2017.\nConservation.\nMany species have been hunted aggressively, which has greatly reduced the population of some, such as the Indian python (\"Python molurus\") and the ball python (\"Python regius\").\nBehavior.\nMost members of this family are ambush predators, in that they typically remain motionless in a camouflaged position, and then strike suddenly at passing prey. Attacks on humans, although known to occur, are extremely rare.\nFeeding.\nPythons use their sharp, backward-curving teeth, four rows in the upper jaw, two in the lower, to grasp prey which is then killed by constriction; after an animal has been grasped to restrain it, the python quickly wraps a number of coils around it. Death occurs primarily by cardiac arrest. Even the larger species, such as the reticulated python (\"Malayopython reticulatus\"), do not crush their prey to death.\nLarger specimens usually eat animals about the size of a domestic cat, but larger food items are known; some large Asian species have been known to take down adult deer, and the Central African rock python (\"Python sebae\") has been known to eat antelope. The reticulated python is the only python species known to sometimes eat humans in its natural habitat in Sulawesi, Indonesia. All prey is swallowed whole, and may take several days or even weeks to fully digest.\nReproduction.\nPythons are oviparous. This sets them apart from the family Boidae (boas), most of which bear live young (ovoviviparous). After they lay their eggs, females typically incubate them until they hatch. This is achieved by causing the muscles to \"shiver\", which raises the temperature of the body to a certain degree, and thus that of the eggs. Keeping the eggs at a constant temperature is essential for healthy embryo development. During the incubation period, females do not eat and leave only to bask to raise their body temperature.\nCaptivity.\nMost species in this family are available in the exotic pet trade. However, caution must be exercised with the larger species, as they can be dangerous; rare cases of large specimens killing their owners have been documented.\nTaxonomy.\nObsolete classification schemes\u2014such as that of Boulenger (1890)\u2014place pythons in Pythoninae, a subfamily of the boa family, Boidae. However, despite a superficial resemblance to boas, pythons are more closely related to the sunbeam snakes (\"Xenopeltis\") and the Mexican burrowing python (\"Loxocemus\").\nRelationship with humans.\nSkin and meat trade.\nTrade in python skins is a lucrative business with the export market from Southeast Asia estimated at US$1 billion as of 2012. Much of the trade is illegal, and python farming is very expensive. Pythons are poached for their meat, mostly consumed locally as bushmeat, and their skin, which is sent to Europe and North America for manufacture of accessories like bags, belts and shoes.\nIn Cameroon bushmeat markets, the Central African rock python (\"Python sebae\") is sold for meat. Hunting, killing and selling pythons is illegal in Cameroon under national wildlife law, but there is little to no enforcement.\nPythons and human health.\nPythons are not venomous, but like other reptiles, they can be vectors for infections that affect humans, such as salmonella. Such diseases may be transmitted to humans through excreted waste, open wounds, and contaminated water.\nPythons are also integrated into some aspects of African health and belief use, often with the added risk of contacting zoonotic diseases. Python bodies and blood are used for African traditional medicines and other belief uses as well, one in-depth study of all animals used by the Yorubas of Nigeria for traditional medicine found that the African Python is used to cure rheumatism, snake poison, appeasing witches, and accident prevention.\nPython habitats, diets, and invasion into new areas also impact human health and prosperity. A University of Florida Institute of Food and Agriculture Sciences study found that the Burmese python, as an invasive species, enters new habitats and eats an increasing number of mammals, leaving limited species for mosquitoes to bite, forcing them to bite disease-carrying hispid cotton rats and then infect humans with the Everglades virus, a dangerous infection that is carried by very few animals. While direct human-python interactions can be potentially dangerous, the risk of zoonotic diseases is always a concern, whether considering medical and belief use in Nigeria or when addressing invasive species impacts in Florida. In 2022, a woman who lived near a lake area in south-eastern New South Wales state, Australia, was found to be infested with the Ophidascaris robertsi roundworm which is common in carpet pythons - non-venomous snakes found across much of Australia.\nTraditional use.\nSkin.\nPython skin has traditionally been used as the attire of choice for medicine men and healers. Typically, South African Zulu traditional healers will use python skin in ceremonial regalia. Pythons are viewed by the Zulu tradition to be a sign of power. Healers are seen as all-powerful since they have a wealth of knowledge, as well as accessibility to the ancestors.\nFat.\nTypically, species are attributed to healing various ailments based on their likeliness to a specific bodily attribute. For example, in many cultures, the python is seen as a strong and powerful creature. As a result, pythons are often prescribed as a method of increasing strength. It is very common for the body fat of pythons to be used to treat a large variation of issues such as joint pain, rheumatic pain, toothache and eye sight. Additionally, python fat has been used to treat those suffering from mental illnesses like psychosis. Their calm nature is thought to be of use to treat combative patients. The fat of the python is rubbed onto the body part that is in pain. To improve mental illnesses, it is often rubbed on the temple. The existence of evidence for genuine anti inflammatory and anti-microbial properties of the refined 'snake oil' is ironic with respect to the expression \"snake oil salesman\".\nFeces.\nThe Sukuma tribe of Tanzania have been known to use python feces in order to treat back pain. The feces are frequently mixed with a little water, placed on the back, and left for two to three days.\nOrgans.\nIn Nigeria, the gallbladder and liver of a python are used to treat poison or bites from other snakes. The python head has been used to \"appease witches\". Many traditional African cultures believe that they can be cursed by witches. In order to reverse spells and bad luck, traditional doctors will prescribe python heads.\nFolklore.\nIn northwestern Ghana, people see pythons as a savior and have taboos to prevent the snake from being harmed or eaten. Their folklore states that this is because a python once helped them flee from their enemies by transforming into a log to allow them to cross a river.\nIn Botswana, San ritual practices surrounding pythons date back 70,000 years. In San mythology the python is a sacred creature that is highly respected. They believe that mankind was made by a python that moved in between hills to create stream beds.\nIn Benin, Vodun practitioners believe that pythons symbolize strength and the spirit of Dagbe [\"to do good\" in Yoruba].\u00a0Annually, people sacrifice animals and proclaim their sins to pythons that are kept inside temples.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23332", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23332", "title": "Pennsylvania", "text": "U.S. state\nPennsylvania, officially the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, is a state spanning the Mid-Atlantic, Northeastern, Appalachian, and Great Lakes regions of the United States. It borders Delaware to its southeast, Maryland to its south, West Virginia to its southwest, Ohio and the Ohio River to its west, Lake Erie and New York to its north, the Delaware River and New Jersey to its east, and the Canadian province of Ontario to its northwest via Lake Erie. Pennsylvania's most populous city is Philadelphia. The state capital is Harrisburg. Among all states, Pennsylvania is the fifth-most populous with over 13 million residents as of the 2020 United States census, the ninth-highest by population density, and the 33rd-largest by land area. The largest metropolitan statistical area is the southeastern Philadelphia metropolitan area, centered on Philadelphia, the state's most populous and nation's sixth-most populous city. The second-largest metropolitan area, Greater Pittsburgh, is centered in and around Pittsburgh, the state's second-largest city.\nPennsylvania was founded in 1681 through a royal land grant to William Penn, the son of the state's namesake. Before that, between 1638 and 1655, a southeast portion of the state was part of New Sweden, a Swedish colony. Established as a haven for religious and political tolerance, the colonial-era Province of Pennsylvania was known for its relatively peaceful relations with native tribes, innovative government system, and religious pluralism. Pennsylvania played a vital and historic role in the American Revolution and the ultimately successful quest for independence from the British Empire, hosting the First and Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, the latter of which formed the Continental Army commanded by George Washington in 1775, during the American Revolutionary War, unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence the following year. On December 12, 1787, Pennsylvania was the second state to ratify the U.S. Constitution, right after Delaware.\nThe Battle of Gettysburg, fought in July 1863 around Gettysburg, was the bloodiest battle of the American Civil War with over 51,000 Union and Confederate casualties, and resulted in a repulsion of the Confederacy's invasion of the North. Throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries, the state's steel production and manufacturing-based economy contributed to the development of much of the nation's early infrastructure, including key bridges, skyscrapers, and military hardware used in U.S.-led victories in World War I, World War II, and the Cold War.\nPennsylvania's geography is highly diverse. The Appalachian Mountains run through the center of the state, the Allegheny and Pocono mountains span much of Northeastern Pennsylvania, and close to 60% of the state is forested. Although it has no ocean shoreline, it has of waterfront along Lake Erie and the tidal Delaware River.\nHistory.\nIndigenous settlement.\nPennsylvania's history of human habitation extends thousands of years before the foundation of the colonial Province of Pennsylvania in 1681. Archaeologists believe the first settlement of the Americas occurred at least 15,000 years ago, during the Last Glacial Period, though it is unclear when humans first inhabited present-day Pennsylvania. Between 10,000 and 16,000 years ago, Native Americans crossed the two continents, arriving in North America. Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Jefferson Township includes the earliest known signs of human activity in Pennsylvania and perhaps all of North America, including the remains of a civilization that existed over 10,000 years ago and possibly pre-dated the Clovis culture. By 1000 AD, in contrast to their nomadic hunter-gatherer ancestors, the native population of Pennsylvania had developed agricultural techniques and a mixed food economy.\nBy the time European colonization of the Americas began, at least two major Native American tribes inhabited Pennsylvania. The first, the Lenape, spoke an Algonquian language and inhabited the eastern region of the state, then known as Lenapehoking. It included most of present-day New Jersey and the Lehigh Valley and Delaware Valley regions in eastern and southeastern Pennsylvania. The Lenape's territory ended somewhere between the Delaware River in the east and the Susquehanna River in central Pennsylvania. The second tribe, the Susquehannock, spoke an Iroquoian language and were based in Eastern Pennsylvania along the Susquehanna River. European disease and constant warfare with several neighboring tribes and groups of Europeans weakened these two tribes, and they were grossly outpaced financially as the Hurons and Iroquois blocked them from proceeding west into Ohio during the Beaver Wars. As they lost numbers and land, the Hurons abandoned much of their western territory and moved closer to the Susquehanna River, and the Iroquois and Mohawk tribes moved further north. Northwest of the Allegheny River was the Iroquoian Petun, who were fragmented into three groups during the Beaver Wars: the Petun of New York, the Wyandot of Ohio, and the Tiontatecaga of the Kanawha River in southern West Virginia. South of the Allegheny River was a nation known as Calicua, which may have been part of the Monongahela culture.\n17th century.\nIn the 17th century, the Dutch and the English each claimed both sides of the Delaware River as part of their colonial lands in America. The Dutch were the first to take possession. By June 3, 1631, the Dutch began settling the Delmarva Peninsula by establishing the Zwaanendael Colony on the site of present-day Lewes, Delaware. In 1638, Sweden established the New Sweden Colony in the region of Fort Christina on the site of present-day Wilmington, Delaware. New Sweden claimed and, for the most part, controlled the lower Delaware River region, including parts of present-day Delaware, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, but settled few colonists there.\nOn March 12, 1664, King Charles II of England gave James, Duke of York a grant that incorporated all lands included in the original Virginia Company of Plymouth Grant and other lands. This grant was in conflict with the Dutch claim for New Netherland, which included parts of today's Pennsylvania.\nOn June 24, 1664, the Duke of York sold the portion of his large grant that included present-day New Jersey to John Berkeley and George Carteret for a proprietary colony. The land was not yet in British possession, but the sale boxed in the portion of New Netherland on the West side of the Delaware River. The British conquest of New Netherland began on August 29, 1664, when New Amsterdam was coerced to surrender while facing cannons on British ships in New York Harbor. The conquest was completed in October 1664, when the British captured Fort Casimir in what today is New Castle, Delaware. The Treaty of Breda between England, France, and the Netherlands confirmed the English conquest on July 21, 1667, although there were temporary reversions.\nOn September 12, 1672, during the Third Anglo-Dutch War, the Dutch reconquered New York Colony/New Amsterdam, establishing three County Courts, which went on to become original Counties in present-day Delaware and Pennsylvania. The one that later transferred to Pennsylvania was Upland. This was partially reversed on February 9, 1674, when the Treaty of Westminster ended the Third Anglo-Dutch War and reverted all political situations to the \"status quo ante bellum\". The British retained the Dutch Counties with their Dutch names. By June 11, 1674, New York reasserted control over the outlying colonies, including Upland, and the names started to be changed to British names by November 11, 1674. Upland was partitioned on November 12, 1674, producing the general outline of the current border between Pennsylvania and Delaware.\nOn February 28, 1681, Charles II granted a land charter to Quaker leader William Penn to repay a debt of \u00a316,000 (around \u00a32,100,000 in 2008, adjusting for retail inflation) owed to William's father. The transaction represents one of the largest land grants to an individual in history. Penn proposed that the land be called New Wales, but there were objections to that name, so he recommended Sylvania (from the Latin \"silva\": \"forest, woods\"). The King named it Pennsylvania (literally \"Penn's Woods\") in honor of Admiral Penn. The younger Penn was embarrassed at this name, fearing that people would think he had named it after himself, but King Charles would not rename the grant. Penn established a government with two innovations, the county commission and freedom of religion, which were subsequently replicated in many of the Thirteen Colonies.\nWhat had been Upland on the Pennsylvania side of the Pennsylvania-Delaware border was renamed Chester County when Pennsylvania instituted its colonial governments on March 4, 1681. Penn signed a peace treaty with Tamanend, leader of the Lenape, which began a long period of friendly relations between the Quakers and the Indians. Additional treaties between Quakers and other tribes followed. The Treaty of Shackamaxon of William Penn was never violated.\n18th century.\nBetween 1730 and when the Pennsylvania Colony was shut down by Parliament with the Currency Act in 1764, the Pennsylvania Colony made its own paper money to account for the shortage of actual gold and silver. The paper money was called Colonial Scrip.\nThe Colony issued bills of credit, which were as good as gold or silver coins because of their legal tender status. Since they were issued by the government and not a banking institution, they were interest-free, largely defraying the expense of the government and therefore taxation of the people. It also promoted general employment and prosperity, since the government used discretion and did not issue excessive amounts that inflated the currency. Benjamin Franklin had a hand in creating this currency, whose utility, he said, was never to be disputed. The currency also met with \"cautious approval\" by Adam Smith.\nIn 1740, Franklin also founded the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. The university, one of nine colonial colleges, was the first college established in Pennsylvania and one of the first in the nation. Today, it is an Ivy League university, which is routinely ranked among the world's best universities. Dickinson College in Carlisle, founded by Benjamin Rush and named after John Dickinson, was the first college founded after Revolutionary War and the unification of the states. Established in 1773, it was ratified on September 9, 1783, five days after the Treaty of Paris.\nJames Smith wrote that in 1763, \"the Indians again commenced hostilities, and were busily engaged in killing and scalping the frontier inhabitants in various parts of Pennsylvania. This state was then a Quaker government, and at the first of this war the frontiers received no assistance from the state.\" The ensuing hostilities became known as Pontiac's War.\nAfter the Stamp Act Congress of 1765, delegate John Dickinson of Philadelphia wrote the Declaration of Rights and Grievances. The Congress was the first meeting of the Thirteen Colonies, which convened at the request of the Massachusetts assembly; nine of the 13 colonies sent delegates. Dickinson then wrote \"Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, To the Inhabitants of the British Colonies\", which were published in the Pennsylvania Chronicle between December 2, 1767, and February 15, 1768.\nWhen the Founding Fathers convened in Philadelphia in 1774, 12 colonies sent representatives to the First Continental Congress. The Second Continental Congress, which began in May 1775, authored and signed the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia, but when Philadelphia fell to the British in the Philadelphia campaign, the Continental Congress moved west, where it met at the Lancaster courthouse on Saturday, September 27, 1777, and then to York. In York, the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, largely authored by Pennsylvania delegate John Dickinson, that formed 13 independent States into a new union. Later, the Constitution was written, and Philadelphia was once again chosen to be cradle to the new nation. The Constitution was drafted and signed at the Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia, now known as Independence Hall, the same building where the Declaration of Independence was previously adopted and signed in 1776.\nOn December 12, 1787, Pennsylvania was the second state to ratify the U.S. Constitution, five days after Delaware became the first. At the time, Pennsylvania was the most ethnically and religiously diverse of the thirteen colonies. Because a third of Pennsylvania's population spoke German, the Constitution was presented in German so those citizens could participate in the discussion about it. Reverend Frederick Muhlenberg, a Lutheran minister and the first Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, acted as chairman of Pennsylvania's ratifying convention.\nFor half a century, the Pennsylvania General Assembly met at various places in the Philadelphia area before it began meeting regularly in Independence Hall in Philadelphia for 63 years. However, events such as the Paxton Boys massacres of 1763 had made the legislature aware of the need for a central capital. In 1799, the General Assembly moved to the Lancaster Courthouse.\n19th century.\nThe Pennsylvania General Assembly met in the old Dauphin County Court House until December 1821 when the Federal-style Hills Capitol, named for Lancaster architect Stephen Hills, was constructed on a hilltop land grant of four acres set aside for a seat of state government in Harrisburg by the son and namesake of John Harris, Sr., a Yorkshire native who founded a trading post and ferry on the east shore of the Susquehanna River in 1705. The Hills Capitol burned down on February 2, 1897, during a heavy snowstorm, presumably because of a faulty flue.\nThe General Assembly met at a nearby Methodist Church until a new capitol could be built. Following an architectural selection contest, Chicago architect Henry Ives Cobb was asked to design and build a replacement building. However, the legislature had little money to allocate to the project. When they dubbed the roughly finished, somewhat industrial Cobb Capitol building complete, the General Assembly refused to occupy the building. In 1901, political and popular indignation prompted a second contest that was restricted to Pennsylvania architects; Joseph Miller Huston of Philadelphia was chosen to design the present Pennsylvania State Capitol that incorporated Cobb's building into a magnificent public work, finished and dedicated in 1907.\nFrom 1857 to 1861, James Buchanan, a Franklin County native, served as the 15th U.S. president, the first president to be born in Pennsylvania.\nOver three days, from July 1 to July 3, 1863, during the American Civil War, the Battle of Gettysburg was fought near Gettysburg. The Battle of Gettysburg was the bloodiest battle of both the Civil War and of any battle in American history. The Union army's victory at Gettysburg also proved the Civil War's turning point, leading to the Union's victory two years later and the nation's preservation. Several months later, on November 19, 1863, then U.S. president Abraham Lincoln traveled to Gettysburg, where he participated in a ceremonial consecration of present-day Gettysburg National Cemetery and delivered the Gettysburg Address, a 271-word speech that is one of the most famous speeches in American history. During the Civil War, an estimated 350,000 Pennsylvanians served in the Union army, including 8,600 African American military volunteers.\nThe politics of Pennsylvania were for decades dominated by the financially conservative Republican-aligned Cameron machine, established by U.S. Senator Simon Cameron, who later served as Lincoln's Secretary of War. Control of the machine was subsequently passed on to Cameron's son J. Donald Cameron, whose ineffectiveness resulted in a transfer of power to Matthew Quay and later to Boies Penrose.\nThe post-Civil War era, known as the Gilded Age, saw the continued rise of industry in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania was home to some of the largest steel companies in the world. Andrew Carnegie founded the Carnegie Steel Company in Pittsburgh and Charles M. Schwab founded Bethlehem Steel in Bethlehem. Other titans of industry, including John D. Rockefeller and Jay Gould, also operated in Pennsylvania. In the latter half of the 19th century, the U.S. oil industry was born in Western Pennsylvania, which supplied the vast majority of kerosene for years thereafter. As the Pennsylvania oil rush developed, Pennsylvania's oil boom towns, such as Titusville, rose and later fell. Coal mining, primarily in the state's Coal Region in the northeast region of the state, also was a major industry for much of the 19th and 20th centuries. In 1903, Milton S. Hershey began construction on a chocolate factory in Hershey, Pennsylvania; The Hershey Company grew to become the largest chocolate manufacturer in North America. Heinz Company was also founded during this period. These huge companies exercised a large influence on the politics of Pennsylvania; as Henry Demarest Lloyd put it, oil baron John D. Rockefeller \"had done everything with the Pennsylvania legislature except refine it\". Pennsylvania created a Department of Highways and engaged in a vast program of road-building, while railroads continued to see heavy usage.\nThe growth of industry eventually provided middle class incomes to working-class households after the development of labor unions helped them gain living wages. However, the rise of unions also led to a rise of union busting with several private police forces springing up. Pennsylvania was the location of the first documented organized strike in North America, and Pennsylvania was the location of two hugely prominent strikes, the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 and the Coal Strike of 1902. The eight-hour day was eventually adopted, and the coal and iron police were banned.\n20th century.\nIn the beginning of the 20th century, Pennsylvania's economy was centered on steel manufacturing, logging, coal mining, textile production, and other forms of industrial manufacturing. A surge in immigration to the U.S. during the late 19th and early 20th centuries provided a steady flow of cheap labor for these industries, which often employed children and people who could not speak English from Southern and Eastern Europe. Thousands of Pennsylvanians volunteered during the Spanish\u2013American War. Pennsylvania was an important industrial center during World War I. The state provided over 300,000 soldiers during the war. On May 31, 1918, the Pittsburgh Agreement was signed in Pittsburgh, signed by Tom\u00e1\u0161 Masaryk and established Czechoslovakia as an independent nation.\nIn 1922, 310,000 Pennsylvania miners joined the UMW General coal strike, which lasted 163 days and shut down most of the state's coal mines.\nIn 1923, President Calvin Coolidge established the Allegheny National Forest under the authority of the Weeks Act of 1911. The forest is located in the northwest part of the state in Elk, Forest, McKean, and Warren Counties for the purposes of timber production and watershed protection in the Allegheny River basin. The Allegheny is the state's only national forest.\nIn 1922, the Benjamin Franklin Bridge began being constructed for the Sesquicentennial Exposition in Philadelphia being held in 1926. The chief engineer of the bridge was Polish-born Ralph Modjeski, the design engineer was Leon Moisseiff, the supervising architect was Paul Philippe Cret, and the construction engineer was Montgomery B. Case. Work began on January 6, 1922. At the peak of construction, 1,300 people worked on the bridge, and 15 died during its construction. The bridge was originally painted by a commercial painting company owned by David A. Salkind, of Philadelphia, which also painted the Golden Gate Bridge. The bridge opened to traffic on July 1, 1926, three days ahead of its scheduled opening on the nation's 150th anniversary. At completion, its 1,750-foot (533-meter) span was the world's longest for a suspension bridge, a distinction it held until the opening of the Ambassador Bridge connecting \u00a0Detroit, Michigan, with Windsor, Ontario, Canada, in 1929.\nDuring World War II, Pennsylvania manufactured 6.6 percent of total U.S. military armaments for the war, the sixth-most of the 48 states. Philadelphia Naval Shipyard served as an important naval base during the war, and Pennsylvania produced many of the war's most important military leaders, including George C. Marshall, Hap Arnold, Jacob Devers, and Carl Spaatz. During World War II, over a million Pennsylvanians served in the armed forces, and more Medals of Honor were awarded to Pennsylvanians than to individuals from any other state.\nOn March 28, 1979, the Three Mile Island accident was the most significant nuclear accident in U.S. commercial nuclear power plant history. The state was hard-hit by the decline and restructuring of the steel industry and other heavy industries during the late 20th century. With job losses came heavy population losses, especially in the state's largest cities. Pittsburgh lost its place among the top ten most populous cities in the United States in 1950, and Philadelphia dropped to the fifth and is currently the sixth-largest city after decades of ranking among the top three.\nAfter 1990, as information-based industries became more important in the economy, state and local governments put more resources into the old, well-established public library system. Some localities, however, used new state funding to cut local taxes. New ethnic groups, especially Hispanics and Latinos, began entering the state to fill low-skill jobs in agriculture and service industries. For example, in Chester County, Mexican immigrants brought the Spanish language, increased Catholicism, high birth rates, and cuisine when they were hired as agricultural laborers; in some rural localities, they made up half or more of the population.\nStateside Puerto Ricans have built a large community in the state's third-largest city, Allentown, where they comprise over 40% of the city's population as of 2000.\nIn the late 20th century, as Pennsylvania's historical national and even global leadership in mining largely ceased and its steelmaking and other heavy manufacturing sectors slowed, the state sought to grow its service and other industries to replace the jobs and economic productivity lost from the downturn of these industries. Pittsburgh's concentration of universities has enabled it to be a leader in technology and healthcare. Similarly, Philadelphia has a concentration of university expertise. Healthcare, retail, transportation, and tourism are some of the state's growing industries of the postindustrial era. As in the rest of the nation, most residential population growth has occurred in suburban rather than central city areas, although both major cities have had significant revitalization in their downtown areas. Philadelphia anchors the seventh-largest metropolitan area in the country and one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world, and Pittsburgh is the center of the nation's 27th-largest metropolitan areas. As of 2020, the Lehigh Valley in eastern Pennsylvania is the nation's 69th-largest metropolitan area. Pennsylvania also has six additional metropolitan areas that rank among the nation's 200-most populous metropolitan areas. Philadelphia forms part of the Northeast megalopolis and is associated with the Northeastern United States. Pittsburgh is part of the Great Lakes megalopolis and is often associated with the Rust Belt.\n21st century.\nDuring the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, the small town of Shanksville, Pennsylvania, received worldwide attention after United Airlines Flight 93 crashed into a field in Stonycreek Township, located north of the town. All 40 civilians and 4 Al-Qaeda hijackers on board were killed. The hijackers had intended to crash the plane into either the United States Capitol or The White House. After learning from family members via air phone of the earlier attacks on the World Trade Center, however, Flight 93's passengers revolted against the hijackers and fought for control of the plane, causing it to crash. It was the only one of the four aircraft hijacked that day that never reached its intended target and the heroism of the passengers has been commemorated.\nIn October 2018, the Tree of Life \u2013 Or L'Simcha Congregation, a conservative Jewish synagogue, experienced the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting, which resulted in 11 fatalities. On July 13, 2024, near Butler, Pennsylvania, an assassination attempt on the 45th President of the United States Donald Trump occurred.\nGeography.\nPennsylvania is north to south and east to west. Of a total , are land, are inland waters, and are waters in Lake Erie. It is the 33rd-largest state in the United States. Pennsylvania has of coastline along Lake Erie and of shoreline along the Delaware Estuary. Of the original Thirteen Colonies, Pennsylvania is the only state that does not border the Atlantic Ocean.\nThe boundaries of the state are the Mason\u2013Dixon line (39\u00b043' N) to the south, Twelve-Mile Circle on the Pennsylvania-Delaware border, the Delaware River to the east, 80\u00b031' W to the west, and the 42\u00b0 N to the north, except for a short segment on the western end where a triangle extends north to Lake Erie. The state has five geographical regions: Allegheny Plateau, Ridge and Valley, Atlantic Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and Erie Plain.\nClimate.\nPennsylvania's diverse topography produces a variety of climates, though the entire state experiences cool to cold winters and very warm, humid summers. Straddling two major zones, much of the state has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa \" or \"Dfb\"). The southern portion of the state has a humid subtropical climate. The largest city, Philadelphia, has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\").\nSummers are generally hot and humid. Moving toward the mountainous interior of the state, the winter climate becomes colder, the number of cloudy days increases, and snowfall amounts are greater. Western areas of the state, particularly locations near Lake Erie, can receive over of snowfall annually, and the entire state receives plentiful precipitation throughout the year. The state may be subject to severe weather from spring through summer into autumn. Tornadoes occur annually in the state, sometimes in large numbers, such as 30 recorded tornadoes in 2011; violent tornadoes, however, are rarer than they are in states further west.\nMunicipalities.\nCities in Pennsylvania include Philadelphia, Reading, Lebanon, and Lancaster in the southeast, Pittsburgh in the southwest, and the tri-cities of Allentown, Bethlehem, and Easton in the central east, known as the Lehigh Valley. The northeast includes the former anthracite coal mining cities of Scranton, Wilkes-Barre, Pittston, Nanticoke, and Hazleton. Erie is located in the northwest. State College is located in the central region. Williamsport is in the north-central region with York, Carlisle, and the state capital Harrisburg on the Susquehanna River in the east-central region of the state. Altoona and Johnstown are in the state's west-central region.\nThe state's three-most populated cities, in order of size, are Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Allentown.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 U.S. census, Pennsylvania had a population of 13,011,844, up from 12,702,379 in 2010. Pennsylvania is the fifth-most populated state in the U.S. after California, Texas, Florida, and New York. In 2019, net migration to other states resulted in a decrease of 27,718, and immigration from other countries resulted in an increase of 127,007. Net migration to Pennsylvania was 98,289. Migration of native Pennsylvanians resulted in a decrease of 100,000 people. 7.2% of the population was foreign-born as of 2021. Pennsylvania's center of population is in Duncannon in Perry County.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 12,691 homeless people in Pennsylvania.\nPlace of origin.\nAmong Pennsylvania residents, as of 2020, nearly three out of four, 74.5%, are native to the state and were born in Pennsylvania, 18.4% were born in a different U.S. state, 1.5% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 5.6% were foreign born. Foreign-born Pennsylvanians are largely from Asia (36.0%), Europe (35.9%), and Latin America (30.6%) with the remainder from Africa (5%), North America (3.1%), and Oceania (0.4%). The state's largest ancestry groups, expressed as a percentage of total people who responded with a particular ancestry for the 2010 census, were German 28.5%, Irish 18.2%, Italian 12.8%, African Americans 9.6%, English 8.5%, Polish 7.2%, and French 4.2%. As of 2018, the top countries of origin for Pennsylvania's immigrants were India, the Dominican Republic, China, Mexico, and Vietnam.\nRace and ethnicity.\nThe vast majority of Pennsylvania's population is made up of whites, blacks and Hispanics, with the latter two being minorities and having significant populations. Non-Hispanic Whites make up the majority of Pennsylvania; they are mostly descended from German, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, Italian, and English immigrants. Rural portions of South Central Pennsylvania are recognized nationally for their Amish communities. Wyoming Valley, including Scranton and Wilkes-Barre, has the highest percentage of white residents of any metropolitan area with a population of 500,000 or above in the U.S.; in Wyoming Valley, 96.2% of the population claim to be white with no Hispanic background. The state's Hispanic or Latino American population grew by 82.6% between 2000 and 2010, marking one of the largest increases in a state's Hispanic population. The significant growth of the Hispanic or Latino population is due to migration to the state mainly from Puerto Rico, a U.S. territory, and to a lesser extent immigration from countries such as the Dominican Republic, Mexico, and various Central and South American nations and a wave of Hispanic and Latinos leaving New York City and New Jersey for more affordable living.\nRomani people have been present in the state since the mid-1800s.\nThe majority of Hispanic or Latino Americans in Pennsylvania are of Puerto Rican descent. Most of the remaining Hispanic or Latino population is made up of Mexicans and Dominicans, and the majority of Hispanics and Latinos are concentrated in Philadelphia, the Lehigh Valley, and South Central Pennsylvania. The Hispanic or Latino population is greatest in Bethlehem, Allentown, Reading, Lancaster, York, and around Philadelphia. As of 2010, the vast majority of Hispanics and Latino Americans in Pennsylvania, about 85%, live within a radius of Philadelphia, and about 20% live in the city itself.\nThe Asian population swelled by almost 60%, mostly Indian, Vietnamese, and Chinese immigrants, and many Asians moving to Philadelphia from New York City. The rapid growth of this community has given Pennsylvania one of the largest Asian populations in the nation. The African American population grew by 13%, which was the largest increase in that population among the state's peers of New York, New Jersey, Ohio, Illinois, and Michigan. Pennsylvania has a high in-migration of black and Hispanic people from other nearby states with the eastern and south-central portions of the state seeing the bulk of the increases.\nAmong the state's black population, the vast majority in the state are African American. There are also a growing number of black residents of West Indian, recent African, and Hispanic or Latino origins. Most Blacks live in the Philadelphia area, Pittsburgh, or South Central Pennsylvania. Additionally, in 2020, 31,052 identified as being Native American alone, and 158,112 did in combination with one or more other races.\nBirth data.\n\"Note: data for births of White Hispanic origin have not been collected, but included in one \"Hispanic\" group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.\"\nAge and poverty.\nAs of the 2010 census, Pennsylvania had the fourth-highest proportion of elderly (65+) citizens in the nation at 15.4%, compared to a national average of 13.0%. According to U.S. Census Bureau estimates, the state's poverty rate was 12.5% in 2017 compared to 13.4% for the U.S. as a whole.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2010, 90.2% (10,710,239) of Pennsylvania residents age five and older spoke English at home as a primary language while 4.1% (486,058) spoke Spanish, 0.9% (103,502) spoke German, including Pennsylvania Dutch, and 0.5% (56,052) spoke Chinese, including Mandarin. In total, 9.9% (1,170,628) of Pennsylvania's population age5 and older spoke a mother tongue other than English.\nPennsylvania Dutch language.\nPennsylvania German, spoken by nearly one percent of Pennsylvania's population as of 2010, is often misleadingly called Pennsylvania Dutch. The term Dutch was used to mean German, including the Netherlands, before the Latin name for them replaced it. When referring to the language spoken by the Pennsylvania Dutch people, Pennsylvania German, it means German. In fact, Germans, in their own language, call themselves Deutsch, (Pennsylvania German: \"Deitsch\"). Pennsylvania Dutch is a descendant of German in the West Central German dialect family and is closest to Palatine German. Pennsylvania German is still very vigorous as a first language among Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonites, principally in the Lancaster County and Berks County areas; it is almost extinct as an everyday language outside the plain communities, though a few words have passed into English usage.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf the original Thirteen Colonies, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island had the most religious freedom. Voltaire, writing of William Penn in 1733, observed: \"The new sovereign also enacted several wise and wholesome laws for his colony, which have remained invariably the same to this day. The chief is, to ill-treat no person on account of religion, and to consider as brethren all those who believe in one God.\" One result of this uncommon freedom was a wide religious diversity, which continues to the present.\nPennsylvania's population in 2010 was 12,702,379; of these, 6,838,440 (53.8%) were estimated to belong to some sort of organized religion. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) at Pennsylvania State University, the largest religious bodies in Pennsylvania by adherents were the Catholic Church with 3,503,028 adherents, the United Methodist Church with 591,734 members, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 501,974 members. Since 2014, among the state's religious population, 73% were Christian, according to Pew Research Center. In 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute estimated 68% of the population identified with Christianity. As of 2014, 47% of all Pennsylvanians identified as Protestants, making Protestantism far and away the most prominent religious affiliation among Pennsylvanians. Among all self-identified Christians in the state, however, 24% identified as Catholics, the most of any Christian religious affiliation. In April 2023, a \"Franklin &amp; Marshall College\" poll found that a plurality of Pennsylvania residents were unaffiliated, with the rest predominately being Protestant or Catholic.\nPennsylvania, especially the Greater Pittsburgh area, has one of the largest communities of Presbyterians in the nation, the third-highest by percentage of population and the largest outright in membership as Protestant Christians. The American Presbyterian Church, with about 250,000 members and 1,011 congregations, is the largest Presbyterian denomination, and the Presbyterian Church in America is also significant, with 112 congregations and approximately 23,000 adherents; the EPC has around 50 congregations, including the ECO, according to 2010 estimates. The fourth-largest Protestant denomination, the United Church of Christ, has 180,000 members and 627 congregations in the state. The American Baptist Churches USA, also referred to as the Northern Baptist Convention is based in King of Prussia.\nPennsylvania was the center state of the German Reformed denomination from the 1700s. Bethlehem is one of the headquarters of the Moravian Church in the U.S. Pennsylvania also has a very large Amish population, second only to Ohio among U.S. states. As of 2000, there was a total Amish population of 47,860 in Pennsylvania and an additional 146,416 Mennonites and 91,200 Brethren. The total Anabaptist population including Bruderhof was 232,631, about two percent of the population. While Pennsylvania owes its existence to Quakers, and much of the historic character of Pennsylvania is ideologically rooted in the teachings of the Religious Society of Friends (as they are officially known), practicing Quakers are a small minority of about 10,000 adherents as of 2010.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2024, Pennsylvania's gross state product (GSP) is $1.017 trillion, the sixth-largest among all U.S. states, behind California, Texas, New York, Florida, and Illinois. If Pennsylvania were an independent country, its economy, as of 2023, would rank as the 20th-largest in the world. On a per capita basis, Pennsylvania's 2021 per capita income of $68,957 ranks 21st among the 50 states. As of 2016, there were 5,354,964 people in employment in Pennsylvania with 301,484 total employer establishments. As of January 2024, the state's unemployment rate is 3.4%.\nThe state has five manufacturing centers: Philadelphia in the southeast, Pittsburgh in the southwest, Erie in the northwest, Scranton-Wilkes-Barre in the northeast, and the Lehigh Valley in the east.\nPennsylvania is home to 23 of the nation's 500 largest companies that comprise the \"Fortune\" 500, including two that rank in the top 100, Cencora (formerly AmeriSource Bergen) in Conshohocken, which is the nation's 11th-largest company, and Comcast in Philadelphia, which is the 29th-largest. Philadelphia is home to six of the \"Fortune\" 500 companies, with more located in suburbs like King of Prussia; it is a leader in the financial and insurance industries. Pittsburgh is home to eight \"Fortune\" 500 companies, including U.S. Steel, PPG Industries, Heinz, and GE Transportation. Hershey is home to The Hershey Company, one of the world's largest chocolate manufacturers. In eastern Pennsylvania, the Lehigh Valley has become an epicenter for the growth of the U.S. logistics industry, including warehousing and the intermodal transport of goods.\nLike many U.S. states, Walmart is the largest private employer in Pennsylvania. The state's second-largest employer is the University of Pennsylvania, an Ivy League private research university in Philadelphia. Pennsylvania is home to the oldest investor-owned utility company in the U.S., The York Water Company.\nAs of 2018, Pennsylvania ranks first in the nation in a few economic sectors and niches, including barrels of beer produced annually (3.9 million), farmers' markets (over 6,000), food processing companies (2,300), hardwood lumber production (a billion board feet annually), mushroom farms (68), natural gas production, potato chip manufacturing (24 facilities manufacturing one-fourth of the nation's total), and pretzel manufacturing (80 percent of the nation's total).\nOther notable Pennsylvania companies include C. F. Martin &amp; Company, based in Nazareth, which manufacturers Martin Guitars, used by some of the world's most prominent guitarists, including Johnny Cash, Elvis Presley, Bob Dylan, Neil Young, John Lennon, Kurt Cobain, Eric Clapton, and others.\nAgriculture.\nPennsylvania ranks 19th overall among all states in agricultural production. Its leading agricultural products are mushrooms, apples, Christmas trees, layer chickens, nursery, sod, milk, corn for silage, grapes (including juice grapes), and horses production. Pennsylvania ranks eighth in the nation in winemaking.\nThe Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture worked with private companies to establish \"PA Preferred\" as a way to brand agricultural products grown or made in the state. The financial impact of agriculture in Pennsylvania includes employment of more than 66,800 people employed by the food manufacturing industry and over $1.7\u00a0billion in food product export as of 2011.\nBanking.\nThe first nationally chartered bank in the U.S., the Bank of North America, was founded in 1781 in Philadelphia. After a series of mergers, the Bank of North America is now part of Wells Fargo. Pennsylvania is home to the first nationally chartered bank under the 1863 National Banking Act. That year, the Pittsburgh Savings &amp; Trust Company received a national charter and renamed itself the First National Bank of Pittsburgh as part of the National Banking Act. That bank is still in existence today as PNC and remains based in Pittsburgh. PNC is currently the state's largest and the nation's sixth-largest bank.\nFilm.\nThe Pennsylvania Film Production Tax Credit began in 2004 and stimulated the development of a film industry in the state.\nGambling.\nCasino gambling was legalized in Pennsylvania in 2004. As of 2010, there are 16 casinos in the state.\nMining.\nCoal mining in Pennsylvania dates back to the mid-1700s. Since then, over 15 billion tons of coal were removed from the state. Production peaked in 1918. As mine output decreased, some 250,000 acres of mine land were abandoned. As of 2024, the state has the largest inventory of abandoned mines in the United States, creating environmental problems such as water pollution and ground subsidence which damages above-ground buildings. Allegheny and Westmoreland counties alone account for over 550 abandoned sites. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection is responsible for remediation of such problems.\nHealthcare.\nPennsylvania has 52 trauma centers, including 20 Level 1 trauma centers.\nAs of 2024, Highmark is the dominant health insurance company in most regions with the exception of the Philadelphia metropolitan area where Independence Blue Cross is number one and the Bloomsburg\u2013Berwick metropolitan area where Geisinger Health System is dominant. Across the state, CVS (Aetna) is second. Other major companies providing insurance plans include Capital Blue Cross, UnitedHealth, and University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.\nState government.\nPennsylvania has had five constitutions during its statehood: https://, https://, https://, https://, and https://. Before that the province of Pennsylvania was governed for a century by a Frame of Government, of which there were four versions: 1682, 1683, 1696, and 1701. The capital of Pennsylvania is Harrisburg. The legislature meets there in the State Capitol.\nIn a 2020 study, Pennsylvania was ranked as the 19th-hardest state for citizens to vote.\nExecutive.\nThe current Governor is Josh Shapiro. The other elected officials composing the executive branch are the Lieutenant Governor Austin Davis, Attorney General Dave Sunday, Auditor General Timothy DeFoor, and Pennsylvania Treasurer Stacy Garrity. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor run as a ticket in the general election and are up for re-election every four years during the midterm elections. The elections for Attorney General, Auditor General, and Treasurer are held every four years coinciding with a Presidential election.\nLegislative.\nPennsylvania has a bicameral legislature that was established in the Pennsylvania Constitution, which was ratified in 1790. The original Frame of Government of William Penn had a unicameral legislature. The General Assembly includes 50 senators and 203 representatives. Kim L. Ward is currently president pro tempore of the State Senate, Joe Pittman the majority leader, and Jay Costa the minority leader. Joanna McClinton is speaker of the House of Representatives, with Matthew Bradford as majority leader and Bryan Cutler as minority leader. As of 2025, the Republicans hold the majority in the State Senate (27\u201323) and the Democrats in the State House (102\u2013101). Pennsylvania is one of four states that currently have divided party control of the state legislature.\nJudiciary.\nPennsylvania is divided into 60 judicial districts. With the exception of Philadelphia County, most have district justices and justices of the peace who preside over most preliminary hearings in felony and misdemeanor offenses, all minor (summary) criminal offenses, and small civil claims. Most criminal and civil cases originate in the Courts of Common Pleas, which also serve as appellate court. The Superior Court hears all appeals from the Courts of Common Pleas not expressly designated to the Commonwealth Court or Supreme Court. The Superior Court also has original jurisdiction to review probable cause governmental requests for warrants in wiretap surveillance. The Commonwealth Court is limited to appeals from final orders of certain state agencies and certain designated cases from the Courts of Common Pleas. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania is the state's final appellate court. All judges in Pennsylvania are elected, and the chief justice of the state's Supreme Court is determined by seniority.\nLocal government.\nPennsylvania is divided into 67 counties. Counties are further subdivided into municipalities that are either incorporated as cities, boroughs, or townships. The most populous county in Pennsylvania and 24th-most populous county in the United States \nis Philadelphia County, which includes the city of Philadelphia, with a 2020 population of 1,603,797; the state's least populous county is Cameron with a population of 4,547.\nThere are a total of 56 cities in Pennsylvania, which are classified by population as either first-class, second-class, or third-class cities. Philadelphia, the state's largest city with a population exceeding 1.6 million, is Pennsylvania's only first-class city. Pittsburgh (303,000) and Scranton (76,000) are second-class and second-class 'A' cities, respectively. All of the state's remaining cities including Allentown, the state's third-largest city, and Reading, its fourth-largest, to Parker, the state's smallest city with a population of only 820, are designated as third-class cities. First- and second-class cities are governed by a \"strong mayor\" form of mayor\u2013council government, whereas third-class cities are governed by either a \"weak mayor\" form of government or a council\u2013manager government.\nPennsylvania boroughs are generally smaller in population than the state's cities, and most of the state's cities were incorporated as boroughs prior to being designated cities. There are 958 boroughs in Pennsylvania, all of which are governed by the \"weak mayor\" form of mayor-council government. The largest borough in Pennsylvania is State College (40,501) and the smallest is Centralia.\nTownships are the third type of municipality in Pennsylvania and are classified as either first-class or second-class townships. There are 1,454 second-class townships and 93 first-class townships. Second-class townships can become first-class townships if they have a population density greater than and a referendum is passed supporting the change. Pennsylvania's largest township is Upper Darby Township (85,681), and the smallest is East Keating Township.\nThere is one exception to the types of municipalities in Pennsylvania: Bloomsburg was incorporated as a town in 1870 and is, officially, the only town in the state. In 1975, McCandless Township adopted a home-rule charter under the name of \"Town of McCandless\", but is, legally, still a first-class township. The state has 56 cities, 958 boroughs, 93 first-class townships, 1,454 second-class townships, and one town (Bloomsburg) for a total of 2,562 municipalities.\nTaxation.\nPennsylvania had the 15th-highest state and local tax burden in the nation as of 2012, according to the Tax Foundation. Residents paid a total of $83.7 billion in state and local taxes with a per capita average of $4,589 annually. Residents share 76% of the total tax burden. Many state politicians have tried to increase the share of taxes paid by out-of-state sources. Suggested revenue sources include taxing natural gas drilling as Pennsylvania is the only state without such a tax on gas drilling. Additional revenue prospects include trying to place tolls on interstate highways; specifically Interstate 80, which is used heavily by out of state commuters with high maintenance costs.\nSales taxes provide 39% of Pennsylvania's state revenue; personal income taxes 34%; motor vehicle taxes about 12%, and taxes on cigarettes and alcoholic beverages 5%. The personal income tax is a flat 3.07%. An individual's taxable income is based on the following eight types of income: compensation (salary); interest; dividends; net profits from the operation of a business, profession or farm; net gains or income from the dispositions of property; net gains or income from rents, royalties, patents and copyrights; income derived through estates or trusts; and gambling and lottery winnings (other than Pennsylvania Lottery winnings).\nCounties, municipalities, and school districts levy taxes on real estate. In addition, some local bodies assess a wage tax on personal income. Generally, the total wage tax rate is capped at 1% of income but some municipalities with home rule charters may charge more than 1%. Thirty-two of Pennsylvania's sixty-seven counties levy a personal property tax on stocks, bonds, and similar holdings. With the exception of the city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, municipalities and school districts are allowed to enact a local earned income tax within the purview of Act 32. Residents of these municipalities and school districts are required to file a local income tax return in addition to federal and state returns. This local return is filed with the local income tax collector, a private collection agency appointed by a particular county to collect the local earned income and local services tax (the latter a flat fee deducted from salaried employees working within a particular municipality or school district).\nPhiladelphia has its own local income taxation system. Philadelphia-based employers are required to withhold the Philadelphia wage tax from the salaries of their employees. Residents of Philadelphia working for an employer are not required to file a local return as long as their Philadelphia wage tax is fully withheld by their employer. If their employer does not withhold the Philadelphia wage tax, residents are required to register with the Revenue Department and file an Earnings Tax return. Residents of Philadelphia with self-employment income are required to file a Net Profits Tax (NPT) return, while those with business income from Philadelphia sources are required to obtain a Commercial Activity License (CAL) and pay the Business Income and Receipts Tax (BIRT) and the NPT. Residents with unearned income except interest from checking and savings accounts are required to file and pay the School Income-tax (SIT).\nThe complexity of Pennsylvania's local tax filing system has been criticized by experts, who note that the outsourcing of collections to private entities is akin to tax farming and that many new residents are caught off guard and end up facing failure to file penalties even if they did not owe any tax. Attempts to transfer local income tax collections to the state level by having a separate local section on the state income tax return, currently the method used to collect local income taxes in New York, Maryland, Indiana, and Iowa, have been unsuccessful.\nState law enforcement.\nThe Pennsylvania State Police is the chief law enforcement agency in the Pennsylvania.\nPolitics.\nSince the latter half of the 20th century, Pennsylvania has been perceived as a powerful swing state, and winning Pennsylvania has since been deemed as essential to U.S. presidential candidates. Only thrice between 1932 and 1988 (1932, 1948, and 1968, with Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, and Richard Nixon, respectively) has a presidential candidate been able to win the White House while losing Pennsylvania.\nBetween 1992 and 2016, Pennsylvania trended Democratic in presidential elections; Bill Clinton won the state twice by large margins and Al Gore won it by a slightly closer margin in 2000. In the 2004 presidential election, John F. Kerry beat President George W. Bush in Pennsylvania, 2,938,095 (51%) to 2,793,847 (48%). In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama defeated Republican John McCain in Pennsylvania, 3,276,363 (54%) to 2,655,885 (44%).\nIn the 2016 United States presidential election, however, Republican Donald Trump broke the Democratic streak in the state, winning by 2,970,733 (48%) votes to 2,926,441 (47%) votes. The state returned to the Democratic column in 2020 by voting for Joe Biden over Trump, 3,458,229 (50%) to 3,377,674 (49%). In 2024, Pennsylvania swung back to Trump, with the former president winning 3,543,308 (50%) to Vice President Kamala Harris's 3,423,042 (49%). The state holds 19 electoral votes.\nDespite voting for the Democratic ticket for president in every election between 1992 and 2012, Pennsylvania has a history of electing Republican U.S. senators. From 2009 to 2011, the state was represented by two Democratic senators for the first time since 1947 after Republican Senator Arlen Specter switched party affiliation. In 2010, Republicans recaptured a U.S. Senate seat and a majority of the state's congressional seats, control of both chambers of the state legislature, and the governorship. Democrats won back the governorship, however, four years later in the 2014 election. It was the first time since a governor became eligible for reelection that an incumbent governor had been defeated in a reelection bid.\nHistorically, Democratic strength was concentrated in Philadelphia in the southeast, the Pittsburgh, and Johnstown areas in the southwest, and Scranton and Wilkes-Barre in the northeast. Republican strength was concentrated in the Philadelphia suburbs and the more rural areas in the state's central, northeastern, and western portions, some of which have long been considered among the nation's most conservative areas. Since 1992, however, the Philadelphia suburbs have swung Democratic; the brand of Republicanism there was traditionally moderate. In the 21st century, however, Pittsburgh suburbs, which historically had been Democratic strongholds, have swung more Republican.\nDemocratic political consultant James Carville once pejoratively described Pennsylvania as \"Philadelphia in the east, Pittsburgh in the west, and Alabama in the middle\", suggesting that political power in the state was based in its two largest cities, which have been reliably Democratic, offset by the state's large rural power base, which has proven equally reliably Republican. Political analysts and editorials refer to central Pennsylvania as the \"T\" in statewide elections. The state's three valleys (Delaware, Lehigh, and Wyoming Valleys) and Greater Pittsburgh generally vote Democratic, while the majority of the counties in the central part of the state vote Republican. As a result, maps showing the results of statewide elections invariably form a shape that resembles a \"T\".\nPennsylvania retains the death penalty, although there is currently a gubernatorial hold on executions.\nFederal representation.\nPennsylvania's two U.S. senators are Republican Dave McCormick and Democrat John Fetterman.\nPennsylvania has 17 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives as of 2023.\nEducation.\nPennsylvania has 500 public school districts, thousands of private schools, publicly funded colleges and universities, and over 100 private institutions of higher education.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nUnder state law, school attendance in Pennsylvania is mandatory for children between ages eight and 17, or until graduation from an accredited high school, whichever is earlier, unless students are homeschooled. As of 2005, 83.8% of Pennsylvania residents age 18 to 24 are high school graduates. Among residents age 25 and over, 86.7% have graduated from high school.\nThe following are the four-year graduation rates for students completing high school in 2016:\nAmong Pennsylvania high school graduates as of 2009, 27.5% of them went on to obtain a bachelor's degree or higher degree. State students consistently do well in standardized testing. In 2007, Pennsylvania ranked 14th in the nation in mathematics, 12th in reading, and 10th in writing for eighth grade students. In 1988, the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed Act 169, which allows parents or guardians to homeschool their children as an alternative to compulsory school attendance. The law specifies varying geographic requirements and responsibilities on the part of parents and school districts.\nHigher education.\n\"Pennsylvania has the fourth most higher education institutions of any state,\" according to \"Inside Higher Ed\", with 250 universities and colleges. The state is ranked second among the nation's top destinations for freshman out-of-state college students, according to NPR/PBS affiliate WHYY, which cites a study by the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania (AICUP). Pennsylvania is third in the nation for the quantity of \"Best Colleges\", according to \"The Wall Street Journal\".\nThe Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PASSHE), which includes 14 state-owned universities and colleges, is Pennsylvania's public university system. West Chester University is by far the largest of the 14 with nearly 15,000 students. The Commonwealth System of Higher Education is the organizing body of Pennsylvania's four state-related schools, which include Pennsylvania State University, Lincoln University, the University of Pittsburgh, and Temple University. There are 15 publicly funded two-year community colleges and technical schools in Pennsylvania that are separate from the PASSHE system, and many private two- and four-year technical schools, colleges, and universities.\nCarnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania State University, the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Pittsburgh are members of the Association of American Universities, an invitation-only organization of leading research universities. Lehigh University, founded in 1865 and located in Bethlehem, is a private research university. The Pennsylvania State University is Pennsylvania's land-grant university, Sea Grant College, and Space Grant College.\nThe University of Pennsylvania, founded in West Philadelphia in 1740 by Benjamin Franklin, a Founding Father of the nation, is Pennsylvania's only Ivy League university, and is the geographically most southern of the nation's eight Ivy League universities. The University of Pennsylvania was one of the first universities established in the nation; its medical school, Perelman School of Medicine, founded in 1765, was the first medical school established in the nation.\nThe Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine (LECOM) is a private graduate school of medicine, dentistry, and pharmacy with a main campus in Erie, a branch campus in Greensburg, and two additional campuses outside Pennsylvania. It is the largest medical school in the United States. The Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts is the first and oldest art school in the United States. Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, now part of University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, was the first pharmacy school in the United States.\nRecreation.\nPennsylvania is home to the nation's first zoo, the Philadelphia Zoo. Other zoos also accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) are the Pittsburgh Zoo &amp; PPG Aquarium, Lehigh Valley Zoo and ZooAmerica. Erie Zoo was formerly accredited by AZA, but lost its accreditation in 2021.\nPennsylvania is home to some of the most notable museums in the nation, including the Allentown Art Museum in Allentown, Carnegie Museums in Pittsburgh, the Philadelphia Art Museum in Philadelphia, and . One unique museum is the Houdini Museum in Scranton, the only building in the world devoted to the legendary magician. Pennsylvania is also home to the National Aviary, located in Pittsburgh.\nAll 121 state parks in Pennsylvania feature free admission.\nPennsylvania's notable amusement parks include Conneaut Lake Park, Dorney Park &amp; Wildwater Kingdom, Dutch Wonderland, DelGrosso's Amusement Park, Great Wolf Lodge, Hersheypark, Idlewild Park, Kalahari Resorts Poconos, Kennywood, Knoebels, Lakemont Park, Sandcastle Waterpark, Sesame Place Philadelphia, and Waldameer Park. The largest indoor waterpark resort on the U.S. East Coast is Splash Lagoon in Erie.\nThe state's notable music festivals include Musikfest, the nation's largest free music festival held annually each August in Bethlehem, the Philadelphia Folk Festival, Creation Festival, and Purple Door. The Great Allentown Fair, held annually at the Allentown Fairgrounds since the 19th century, is one of the nation's longest-running annual fairs.\nThere are nearly one million licensed hunters in Pennsylvania. White-tail deer, black bear, cottontail rabbit, squirrel, turkey, and grouse are common game species. Pennsylvania is considered one of the finest wild turkey hunting states in the nation, alongside Texas and Alabama. Sport hunting in Pennsylvania provides a massive boost for the state's economy. A report from The Center for Rural Pennsylvania, a legislative agency of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, reported that hunting, fishing, and furtaking generated a total of $9.6\u00a0billion statewide.\nThe Boone and Crockett Club reports that five of the ten largest black bear entries came from the state. The state also has a tied record for the largest hunter shot black bear in the Boone and Crockett record books at and a skull of 23 3/16, tied with a bear shot in California in 1993. As of 2007, Pennsylvania has the second-highest number of Boone and Crockett-recorded record black bears at 183, behind Wisconsin's 299.\nTransportation.\nThe Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, abbreviated as PennDOT, is responsible for transport issues in Pennsylvania.\nAir.\nPennsylvania has seven major airports: Philadelphia International, Pittsburgh International, Lehigh Valley International, Harrisburg International, Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International, Erie International, and State College Regional. A total of 134\u00a0public-use airports are located in the state.\nBus and coach.\nIntercity bus service is provided between cities in Pennsylvania and other major points in the Northeast by BoltBus, Fullington Trailways, Greyhound Lines, Martz Trailways, Megabus, OurBus, Trans-Bridge Lines, and various Chinatown bus companies. In 2018, OurBus began offering service from West Chester, Malvern, King of Prussia, and Fort Washington to New York City.\nHighways and roads.\nPennDOT owns of the of roadway in the state, making it the fifth-largest state highway system in the United States. The Pennsylvania Turnpike system is long, with the mainline portion stretching from Ohio to Philadelphia and New Jersey. It is overseen by the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission. Another major east\u2013west route is Interstate 80, which runs primarily in the northern tier of the state from Ohio to New Jersey at the Delaware Water Gap. Interstate 90 travels the relatively short distance between Ohio and New York through Erie County, in the extreme northwestern part of the state.\nPrimary north\u2013south highways are Interstate 79 from its terminus in Erie through Pittsburgh to West Virginia, Interstate 81 from New York state through Scranton, Lackawanna County and Harrisburg to Maryland and Interstate 476, which begins north of the Delaware border, in Chester, Delaware County and travels to Clarks Summit, where it joins I-81. All but of I-476 is the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike. The highway south of the Pennsylvania Turnpike is officially called the \"Veterans Memorial Highway\", but is commonly referred to colloquially as the \"Blue Route\".\nRail.\nSEPTA is the sixth-largest transit agency in the United States and operates the commuter, heavy and light rail transit, and transit bus service in the Philadelphia metropolitan area. Pittsburgh Regional Transit is the 25th-largest transit agency and provides transit bus and light rail service in and around Pittsburgh.\nIntercity passenger rail transit is provided by Amtrak, with the majority of traffic occurring on the \"Keystone Service\" in the high-speed Keystone Corridor between Harrisburg and Philadelphia's 30th Street Station before heading north to New York City, and the \"Northeast Regional\", which provides regular high-speed service up and down the Northeast Corridor. The \"Pennsylvanian\" follows the same route from New York City to Harrisburg, but extends out to Pittsburgh. The \"Capitol Limited\" also passes through Pittsburgh, as well as Connellsville, on its way from Chicago to Washington, D.C. Traveling between Chicago and New York City, the \"Lake Shore Limited\" passes through Erie once in each direction. There are 67\u00a0short-line, freight railroads operating in Pennsylvania, the highest number in any U.S. state. With more than four million inter-city rail passengers in 2018, Philadelphia's 30th Street Station is Amtrak's third-busiest train station in the nation after Penn Station in Manhattan and Union Station in Washington, D.C., and North America's 12th-busiest train station overall.\nWater.\nThe Port of Pittsburgh is the second-largest inland port in the United States and the 18th-largest port overall; the Port of Philadelphia is the 24th-largest port in the United States. Pennsylvania's only port on the Great Lakes is located in Erie. The Allegheny River Lock and Dam Two is the most-used lock operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers of its 255 nationwide. The dam impounds the Allegheny River near Downtown Pittsburgh.\nCulture.\nFood.\nIn 2008, author Sharon Hernes Silverman wrote in the \"Pittsburgh Tribune-Review\" that Pennsylvania was the snack food capital of the world. It leads all other states in the manufacture of pretzels and potato chips. In 1861, as the Civil War was beginning, Sturgis Pretzel House in Lititz was first to introduce the pretzel to American consumers. Two other Pennsylvania-based companies, Immergut Hand-Rolled Soft Pretzels in Intercourse and Snyder's of Hanover in Hanover, are leading national pretzel manufacturers. Two of the nation's three leading potato chip companies are based in Pennsylvania: Utz Brands, which started making chips in Hanover in 1921, and Wise Foods, which started making chips in Berwick the same year; the third, Frito-Lay is owned by Plano, Texas-based PepsiCo. Additional Pennsylvania-based companies, including Herr's in Nottingham, Martin's Potato Chips in Thomasville, are popular chip manufacturers.\nThe Hershey Company in Hershey is a nearly $9 billion a year company and one of the world's leading manufacturers of chocolate; the company was founded in Hershey by Milton S. Hershey in 1894. Gertrude Hawk Chocolates is based in Dunmore. Other notable companies include Just Born in Bethlehem, makers of Hot Tamales, Mike and Ikes, the Easter favorite marshmallow Peeps, and Boyer Brothers of Altoona, which manufacturers Mallo Cups. The pretzel company Auntie Anne's began as a market-stand in Downingtown, and now has corporate headquarters in Lancaster. Traditional Pennsylvania Dutch foods include chicken pot pie, ham pot pie, schnitz un knepp (dried apples, ham, and dumplings), fasnachts (raised doughnuts), scrapple, pretzels, bologna, chow-chow, and Shoofly pie. Martin's Famous Pastry Shoppe, based in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, specializes in potato bread, another traditional Pennsylvania Dutch food. D.G. Yuengling &amp; Son, America's oldest brewery, has been brewing beer in Pottsville since 1829.\nAmong the regional foods associated with Philadelphia are cheesesteaks, hoagies, soft pretzels, Italian water ice, Irish potato candy, scrapple, Tastykake, and strombolis. In Pittsburgh, tomato ketchup was improved by Henry John Heinz from 1876 to the early 20th century. Famous to a lesser extent than Heinz ketchup is the Pittsburgh's Primanti Brothers Restaurant sandwiches, pierogies, and city chicken. In northeastern Pennsylvania, Italian heritage has popularized a variety of pizza styles. Outside of Scranton, in Old Forge, there are dozens of Italian restaurants specializing in pizza made with thick, light crust, and American cheese. New York\u2013style pizza is popular in Wilkes-Barre. Erie also has its share of foods, including Greek sauce and sponge candy. Sauerkraut along with pork and mashed potatoes is a traditional meal on New Year's Day in Pennsylvania; its tradition began with the Pennsylvania Dutch who believe the meal leads to good luck in the new year to come. Among other foods and drinks commonly found in Pennsylvania Dutch Country are chicken pot pie (a type of soup made with egg noodles and unrelated to the more commonly found baked pie), shoofly pie, scrapple, sand tarts (a type of thin cookie), and birch beer. Whoopie pies, an American favorite, are also said to trace their roots back to Pennsylvania Dutch Country.\nSports.\nProfessional sports.\nPennsylvania is home to eight major league professional sports teams: the Philadelphia Phillies and Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball, the Philadelphia 76ers of the NBA, the Philadelphia Eagles and Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL, the Philadelphia Flyers and Pittsburgh Penguins of the NHL, and the Philadelphia Union of Major League Soccer. Among them, these teams have accumulated sevenWorld Series championships (with the Pirates winning five and Phillies winning two), 16 National League pennants (with the Pirates winning nine and Phillies winning seven), three pre-Super Bowl era NFL championships (all won by the Eagles), eight Super Bowl championships (with the Steelers winning six and the Eagles two), two NBA championships (both won by the 76ers), and seven Stanley Cup championships (with the Penguins winning five and Flyers winning two).\nWith five professional sports teams and some of the most passionate sports fans in the nation, Philadelphia is often described as the \"nation's best sports city\".\nIn addition to its two Major League Baseball franchises, Pennsylvania is home to two Triple-A-level teams, the highest level of Minor League Baseball play. The Lehigh Valley IronPigs, affiliated with the Philadelphia Phillies, are based in Allentown, where they play at Coca-Cola Park. The Scranton/Wilkes-Barre RailRiders, affiliated with the New York Yankees, are based in Moosic, where they play at PNC Field.\nPennsylvania is home to four Double-A level baseball teams: the Altoona Curve, Erie SeaWolves, Harrisburg Senators, and Reading Fightin Phils. Pennsylvania has two collegiate summer baseball teams affiliated with the MLB Draft League: the State College Spikes and Williamsport Crosscutters. In independent baseball, the state has three teams, the Lancaster Stormers, Washington Wild Things, and York Revolution.\nIn addition to its two National Hockey League teams, Pennsylvania has three American Hockey League ice hockey teams: the Hershey Bears affiliated with the Washington Capitals, the Lehigh Valley Phantoms affiliated with the Philadelphia Flyers, and the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins affiliated with the Pittsburgh Penguins. It also has an ECHL-level ice hockey team, the Reading Royals, and an Arena Football League team, the Philadelphia Soul. These Pennsylvania-based developmental-level professional teams have accumulated 12 Triple-A and Double-A baseball league titles (Altoona Curve (1) Reading Fightin Phils (4), and Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Senators (6)), 3 ArenaBowl championships (Soul), and 11 Calder Cups (Bears).\nIn addition to the Philadelphia Union of Major League Soccer, Pennsylvania has two lower level professional soccer teams: Philadelphia Union II of MLS Next Pro and the Pittsburgh Riverhounds SC of the USL Championship.\nSince 1959, the Little League World Series has been held annually in August in South Williamsport near where Little League Baseball was founded in Williamsport.\nIn professional golf, Arnold Palmer, one of the 20th century's most accomplished professional golfers, comes from Latrobe, and Jim Furyk, a current PGA player grew up near in Lancaster. PGA tournaments in Pennsylvania include the 84 Lumber Classic played at Nemacolin Woodlands Resort in Farmington and the Northeast Pennsylvania Classic played at Glenmaura National Golf Club in Moosic.\nPhiladelphia is home to Love Park, located across from City Hall, which is a popular skateboard location that hosted ESPN's X Games in 2001 and 2002.\nMotorsports.\nIn motorsports, the Mario Andretti dynasty of race drivers hails from Nazareth in the Lehigh Valley. Pennsylvania racetracks include Jennerstown Speedway in Jennerstown, Lake Erie Speedway in North East, Lernerville Speedway in Sarver, and Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, which is home to two NASCAR Cup Series races and an IndyCar Series race. The state is also home to Maple Grove Raceway, near Reading, which hosts major National Hot Rod Association-sanctioned drag racing events each year.\nThere are also two motocross race tracks that host a round of the AMA Toyota Motocross Championships in Pennsylvania. High Point Raceway is located in Mount Morris, Pennsylvania, and Steel City is located in Delmont, Pennsylvania.\nHorse racing tracks in Pennsylvania include The Meadows in North Strabane Township, Mohegan Pennsylvania in Wilkes-Barre, Penn National in Grantville, Presque Isle Downs in Summit Township, and Parx Racing, Harrah's Philadelphia in Chester, which was the home course of Smarty Jones, winner of the 2004 Kentucky Derby and 2004 Preakness Stakes. Harrah's Philadelphia also hosts harness racing and Presque Isle Downs also hosts thoroughbred racing.\nCollege sports.\nIn college football, three Pennsylvania universities compete in NCAA Division I, the highest level of sanctioned collegiate play in the sport: Penn State in the Big Ten Conference, Pitt in the Atlantic Coast Conference, and Temple in the American Athletic Conference.\nOver their respective college football histories, Penn State claims two national championships (1982 and 1986) and seven undefeated seasons (1887, 1912, 1968, 1969, 1973, 1986, and 1994) and Pitt has won nine national championships (1915, 1916, 1918, 1929, 1931, 1934, 1936, 1937, and 1976) and had eight undefeated seasons (1904, 1910, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1920, 1937, and 1976). Penn State plays its home games at Beaver Stadium, a 106,572-capacity stadium that is the second-largest stadium in the nation; the team is coached by James Franklin. Pitt plays its home games at Acrisure Stadium, a 68,400-capacity stadium it shares with the Pittsburgh Steelers; the team is coached by Pat Narduzzi. Over their respective histories, four additional Pennsylvania universities and colleges have won national college football championships: Lafayette in Easton (1896), Villanova in Villanova (2009), Penn in Philadelphia (1895, 1897, 1904, and 1908), and Washington &amp; Jefferson in Washington (1921).\nIn college basketball, six Philadelphia-area universities (Drexel, La Salle, Penn, St. Joseph's, Temple, and Villanova), collectively known as the Big 5, have a rivalry tradition. National titles in college basketball have been won by La Salle (1954), Temple (1938), Penn (1920 and 1921), Pitt (1928 and 1930), and Villanova (1985, 2016, and 2018).\nPennsylvania has several universities and colleges known as national leaders in college wrestling. Penn State, coached by Cael Sanderson, has won ten NCAA Division I Wrestling Championships in its history, second most among all universities and colleges after Oklahoma State. Lehigh in Bethlehem has had 28 NCAA Division I individual champions over its history.\nNicknames.\nSince 1802, Pennsylvania has been known as the Keystone State, which remains the state's most popular and widely used nickname. The nickname \"Keystone State\" originates with the agricultural and architectural term \"keystone\", and is based on the central role that Pennsylvania played geographically and functionally among the original Thirteen Colonies from which the nation was established, the important founding documents, including the Declaration of Independence and U.S. Constitution, that were signed and ratified in Pennsylvania, and the central role that Pennsylvania played in the nation's early manufacturing and agricultural development.\nLess often, Pennsylvania is referred to as the Coal State, the Oil State, and the Steel State, in recognition of the important role these respective industries played in the state in the 19th and 20th centuries. The State of Independence appears on several current day road signs entering Pennsylvania from bordering states.\nPennsylvania residents and those of surrounding states sometimes refer to Pennsylvania by the state's abbreviation, PA.\nPennsylvania was historically referred to by the nickname Quaker State during the colonial era based on the influential role that William Penn and other Quakers played in establishing the first frame of government constitution for the Province of Pennsylvania that guaranteed liberty of conscience, which was a reflection of Penn's knowledge of the hostility Quakers confronted when they opposed religious rituals, taking oaths, violence, war, and military service, and what they viewed as ostentatious frippery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23333", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23333", "title": "Palimpsest", "text": "Reused manuscript with visible prior text\nIn textual studies, a palimpsest () is a manuscript page, either from a scroll or a book, from which the text has been scraped or washed off in preparation for reuse in the form of another document. Parchment was made of lamb, calf, or goat skin and was expensive and not readily available, so, in the interest of economy, a page was often re-used by scraping off the previous writing. In colloquial usage, the term \"palimpsest\" is also used in architecture, archaeology and geomorphology to denote an object made or worked upon for one purpose and later reused for another; for example, a monumental brass on which the blank reverse side has been re-engraved.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"palimpsest\" derives from la \" palimpsestus\", which derives from (from grc \" \"\u03c0\u03ac\u03bb\u03b9\u03bd\" (p\u00e1lin)\"\u00a0'again' and \" \"\u03c8\u03ac\u03c9\" (ps\u00e1\u014d)\"\u00a0'scrape'), a compound word that describes the process: \"The original writing was scraped and washed off, the surface resmoothed, and the new literary material written on the salvaged material.\" The Ancient Greeks used wax-coated tablets to write on with a stylus, and to erase the writing by smoothing the wax surface and writing again. This practice was adopted by Ancient Romans, who also wrote on reusable wax-coated tablets; Cicero's use of the term \"palimpsest\" confirms such a practice.\nDevelopment.\nBecause parchment prepared from animal hides is far more durable than paper or papyrus, most palimpsests known to modern scholars are parchment, which rose in popularity in Western Europe after the 6th century. Where papyrus was in common use, reuse of writing media was less common because papyrus was cheaper and more expendable than costly parchment. Some papyrus palimpsests do survive, and Romans referred to this custom of washing papyrus.\nThe writing was washed from parchment or vellum using milk and oat bran. With the passing of time, the faint remains of the former writing would reappear enough so that scholars can discern the text (called the , the 'underwriting') and decipher it. In the later Middle Ages the surface of the vellum was usually scraped away with powdered pumice, irretrievably losing the writing; hence the most valuable palimpsests are those that were overwritten in the early Middle Ages.\nMedieval codices are constructed in \"gathers\" which are folded (compare \"folio\", 'leaf, page' ablative case of Latin ), then stacked together like a newspaper and sewn together at the fold. Prepared parchment sheets retained their original central fold, so each was ordinarily cut in half, making a quarto volume of the original folio, with the overwritten text running perpendicular to the effaced text.\nModern decipherment.\nFaint legible remains were read by eye before 20th-century techniques helped make lost texts readable. To read palimpsests, scholars of the 19th century used chemical means that were sometimes very destructive, using tincture of gall or, later, ammonium bisulfate. Modern methods of reading palimpsests using ultraviolet light and photography are less damaging.\nInnovative digitized images aid scholars in deciphering unreadable palimpsests. Superexposed photographs exposed in various light spectra, a technique called \"multispectral filming\", can increase the contrast of faded ink on parchment that is too indistinct to be read by eye in normal light. For example, multispectral imaging undertaken by researchers at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Johns Hopkins University recovered much of the undertext (estimated to be more than 80%) from the \"Archimedes Palimpsest\". At the Walters Art Museum where the palimpsest is now conserved, the project has focused on experimental techniques to retrieve the remaining text, some of which was obscured by overpainted icons. One of the most successful techniques for reading through the paint proved to be X-ray fluorescence imaging, through which the iron in the ink is revealed. A team of imaging scientists and scholars from the United States and Europe is currently using spectral imaging techniques developed for imaging the \"Archimedes Palimpsest\" to study more than one hundred palimpsests in the library of Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt.\nRecovery.\nA number of ancient works have survived only as palimpsests. Vellum manuscripts were over-written on purpose mostly due to the dearth or cost of the material. In the case of Greek manuscripts, the consumption of old codices for the sake of the material was so great that a synodal decree of the year 691 forbade the destruction of manuscripts of the Scriptures or the church fathers, except for imperfect or injured volumes. Such a decree put added pressure on retrieving the vellum on which secular manuscripts were written. The decline of the vellum trade with the introduction of paper exacerbated the scarcity, increasing pressure to reuse material.\nTexts most susceptible to being overwritten included obsolete legal and liturgical ones, sometimes of intense interest to the historian. Early Latin translations of Scripture were rendered obsolete by Jerome's Vulgate. Texts might be in foreign languages or written in unfamiliar scripts that had become illegible over time. The codices themselves might be already damaged or incomplete. Heretical texts were dangerous to harbor\u2014there were compelling political and religious reasons to destroy texts viewed as heresy, and to reuse the media was less wasteful than simply to burn the books.\nVast destruction of the broad quartos of the early centuries took place in the period which followed the fall of the Western Roman Empire, but palimpsests were also created as new texts were required during the Carolingian Renaissance. The most valuable Latin palimpsests are found in the codices which were remade from the early large folios in the 7th to the 9th centuries. It has been noticed that no entire work is generally found in any instance in the original text of a palimpsest, but that portions of many works have been taken to make up a single volume. An exception is the \"Archimedes Palimpsest\" (see below). On the whole, early medieval scribes were thus not indiscriminate in supplying themselves with material from any old volumes that happened to be at hand.\nFamous examples.\nAbout sixty palimpsest manuscripts of the Greek New Testament have survived to the present day. Uncial codices include:\nPorphyrianus, Vaticanus 2061 (double palimpsest), Uncial 064, 065, 066, 067, 068 (double palimpsest), 072, 078, 079, 086, 088, 093, 094, 096, 097, 098, 0103, 0104, 0116, 0120, 0130, 0132, 0133, 0135, 0208, 0209.\nLectionaries include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23334", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23334", "title": "Pergamon", "text": "Ancient Greek city in Anatolia\nPergamon or Pergamum ( or ; ), also referred to by its modern Greek form Pergamos (), was a rich and powerful ancient Greek city in Aeolis. It is located from the modern coastline of the Aegean Sea on a promontory on the north side of the river Caicus (modern-day Bak\u0131r\u00e7ay) and northwest of the modern city of Bergama, Turkey.\nDuring the Hellenistic period, it became the capital of the Kingdom of Pergamon in 281\u2013133\u00a0BC under the Attalid dynasty, who transformed it into one of the major cultural centres of the Greek world. The remains of many of its monuments are still visible today, most notably the masterpiece of the Pergamon Altar. Pergamon was the northernmost of the seven churches of Asia cited in the New Testament Book of Revelation.\nThe city is centered on a mesa of andesite, which formed its acropolis. This mesa falls away sharply on the north, west, and east sides, but three natural terraces on the south side provide a route up to the top. To the west of the acropolis, the Selinus River (modern Bergama\u00e7ay) flows through the city, while the Cetius river (modern Kestel\u00e7ay) passes by to the east.\nPergamon was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2014.\nLocation.\nPergamon lies on the north edge of the Caicus plain in the historic region of Mysia in the northwest of Turkey. The Caicus river breaks through the surrounding mountains and hills at this point and flows in a wide arc to the southwest. At the foot of the mountain range to the north, between the rivers Selinus and Cetius, there is the massif of Pergamon which rises above sea level. The site is only 26\u00a0km from the sea, but the Caicus plain is not open to the sea, since the way is blocked by the Karada\u011f massif. As a result, the area has a strongly inland character. In Hellenistic times, the town of Elaia at the mouth of the Caicus served as the port of Pergamon. The climate is Mediterranean with a dry period from May to August, as is common along the west coast of Asia Minor.\nThe Caicus valley is mostly composed of volcanic rock, particularly andesite, and the Pergamon massif is also an intrusive stock of andesite. The massif is about one kilometre wide and around 5.5\u00a0km long from north to south. It consists of a broad, elongated base and a relatively small peak - the upper city. The side facing the Cetius river is a sharp cliff, while the side facing the Selinus is a little rough. On the north side, the rock forms a wide spur of rock. To the southeast of this spur, which is known as the 'Garden of the Queen', the massif reaches its greatest height and breaks off suddenly immediately to the east. The upper city extends for another to the south, but it remains very narrow, with a width of only . At its south end the massif falls gradually to the east and south, widening to around and then descends to the plain towards the southwest.\nHistory.\nPre-Hellenistic period.\nEarlier habitation in the Bronze Age cannot be demonstrated, although Bronze Age stone tools are found in the surrounding area.\nSettlement of Pergamon can be detected as far back as the Archaic period, thanks to modest archaeological finds, especially fragments of pottery imported from the west, particularly eastern Greece and Corinth, which date to the late 8th century BC.\nThe earliest mention of Pergamon in literary sources comes from Xenophon's \"Anabasis\", since the march of the Ten Thousand under Xenophon's command ended at Pergamon in 400/399 BC. Xenophon, who calls the city Pergamos, handed over the rest of his Greek troops (some 5,000 men according to Diodorus) to Thibron, who was planning an expedition against the Persian satraps Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, at this location in March 399 BC. At this time Pergamon was in the possession of the family of Gongylos from Eretria, a Greek favourable to the Achaemenid Empire who had taken refuge in Asia Minor and obtained the territory of Pergamon from Xerxes I, and Xenophon was hosted by his widow Hellas.\nIn 362 BC, Orontes, satrap of Mysia, used Pergamon as his base for an unsuccessful revolt against the Persian Empire. Only with Alexander the Great were Pergamon and the surrounding area removed from Persian control. There are few traces of the pre-Hellenistic city, since in the following period the terrain was profoundly changed and the construction of broad terraces involved the removal of almost all earlier structures. Parts of the temple of Athena, as well as the walls and foundations of the altar in the sanctuary of Demeter, go back to the fourth century.\nHellenistic period.\nLysimachus, King of Thrace, took possession in 301\u00a0BC, and the town was enlarged by his lieutenant Philetaerus. In 281 BC the kingdom of Thrace collapsed and Philetaerus became an independent ruler, founding the Attalid dynasty. His family ruled Pergamon from 281 until 133 BC: Philetaerus 281\u2013263; Eumenes I 263\u2013241; Attalus I 241\u2013197; Eumenes II 197\u2013159; Attalus II 159\u2013138; and Attalus III 138\u2013133. Philetaerus controlled only Pergamon and its immediate environs, but the city acquired much new territory under Eumenes I. In particular, after the Battle of Sardis in 261 BC against Antiochus I, Eumenes was able to appropriate the area down to the coast and some way inland. Despite this increase of his domain, Eumenes did not take a royal title. In 238 his successor Attalus I defeated the Galatians, to whom Pergamon had paid tribute under Eumenes I. Attalus thereafter declared himself leader of an entirely independent Pergamene kingdom.\nThe Attalids became some of the most loyal supporters of Rome in the Hellenistic world. Attalus I allied with Rome against Philip V of Macedon, during the first and second Macedonian Wars. In the Roman\u2013Seleucid War, Pergamon joined the Romans' coalition against Antiochus III, and was rewarded with almost all the former Seleucid domains in Asia Minor at the Peace of Apamea in 188 BC. The kingdom's territories thus reached their greatest extent. Eumenes II supported Rome again in the Third Macedonian War, but the Romans heard rumours of his conducting secret negotiations with their opponent Perseus of Macedon. On this basis, Rome denied any reward to Pergamon and attempted to replace Eumenes with the future Attalus II, who refused to cooperate. These incidents cost Pergamon its privileged status with the Romans, who granted it no further territory.\nNevertheless, under the brothers Eumenes II and Attalus II, Pergamon reached its apex and was rebuilt on a monumental scale. It had retained the same dimensions for a long interval after its founding by Philetaerus, covering c. . After 188\u00a0BC a massive new city wall was constructed, long and enclosing an area of approximately . The Attalids' goal was to create a second Athens, a cultural and artistic hub of the Greek world. They remodeled their Acropolis after the Acropolis in Athens, and the Library of Pergamon was renowned as second only to the Library of Alexandria. Pergamon was also a flourishing center for the production of parchment, whose name is a corruption of \"pergamenos\", meaning \"from Pergamon\". Despite this etymology, parchment had been used in Asia Minor long before the rise of the city; the story that it was invented by the Pergamenes, to circumvent the Ptolemies' monopoly on papyrus production, is not true. In fact, parchment had been in use in Anatolia and elsewhere long before the rise of Pergamon.\nSurviving epigraphic documents show how the Attalids supported the growth of towns by sending in skilled artisans and by remitting taxes. They allowed the Greek cities in their domains to maintain nominal independence, and sent gifts to Greek cultural sites like Delphi, Delos, and Athens. The two brothers Eumenes II and Attalus II displayed the most distinctive trait of the Attalids: a pronounced sense of family without rivalry or intrigue - rare amongst the Hellenistic dynasties. Attalus II bore the epithet 'Philadelphos', 'he who loves his brother', and his relations with Eumenes II were compared to the harmony between the mythical brothers Cleobis and Biton.\nWhen Attalus III died without an heir in 133\u00a0BC, he bequeathed the whole of Pergamon to Rome. This was challenged by Aristonicus, who claimed to be Attalus III's brother and led an armed uprising against the Romans with the help of Blossius, a famous Stoic philosopher. For a period he enjoyed success, defeating and killing the Roman consul P. Licinius Crassus and his army, but he was defeated in 129 BC by the consul M. Perperna. The Attalid kingdom was divided between Rome, Pontus, and Cappadocia, with the bulk of its territory becoming the new Roman province of Asia. The city itself was declared free and served briefly as capital of the province, before this distinction was transferred to Ephesus.\nRoman period.\nIn 88 BC, Mithridates VI Eupator made Pergamon his headquarters in his first war against Rome, in which he was defeated. The victorious Romans deprived Pergamon of all its benefits and of its status as a free city. Henceforth the city was required to pay tribute and accommodate and supply Roman troops, and the property of many of the inhabitants was confiscated. Imported Pergamene goods were among the luxuries enjoyed by Lucullus. The members of the Pergamene aristocracy, especially Diodorus Pasparus in the 70s BC, used their own possessions to maintain good relationships with Rome, by acting as donors for the development of the city. Numerous honorific inscriptions indicate Pasparus' work and his exceptional position in Pergamon at this time.\nPergamon still remained a famous city, and was the seat of a \"conventus\" (regional assembly). Its neocorate, granted by Augustus, was the first manifestation of the imperial cult in the province of Asia. Pliny the Elder refers to the city as the most important in the province and the local aristocracy continued to reach the highest circles of power in the 1st century AD, like Aulus Julius Quadratus who was consul in 94 and 105.\nYet it was only under Trajan and his successors that a comprehensive redesign and remodelling took place, with the construction of a Roman 'new city' at the base of the Acropolis. The city was the first in the province to receive a second neocorate, from Trajan in AD 113/4. Hadrian raised the city to the rank of metropolis in 123 and thereby elevated it above its local rivals, Ephesus and Smyrna. An ambitious building programme was carried out: massive temples, a stadium, a theatre, a huge forum and an amphitheatre were constructed. In addition, at the city limits the shrine to Asclepius (the god of healing) was expanded into a lavish spa. This sanctuary grew in fame and was considered one of the most famous healing centers of the Roman world.\nIn the middle of the 2nd century Pergamon was one of the largest cities in the province, and had around 200,000 inhabitants. Galen, the most famous physician of antiquity aside from Hippocrates, was born at Pergamon and received his early training at the Asclepieion. At the beginning of the 3rd century Caracalla granted the city a third neocorate, but a decline had already set in. The economic strength of Pergamon collapsed during the crisis of the Third Century, as the city was badly damaged in an earthquake in 262 and was sacked by the Goths shortly thereafter. In late antiquity, it experienced a limited economic recovery.\nByzantine period.\nIn AD 663/4, Pergamon was captured by raiding Arabs for the first time. As a result of the ongoing Arab threat, the area of settlement retracted to the acropolis, which the Emperor Constans II (r.\u2009641\u00a0\u2013\u00a0668) fortified with a wall built of spolia.\nDuring the middle Byzantine period, the city was part of the Thracesian Theme, and from the time of Leo VI the Wise (r.\u2009886\u00a0\u2013\u00a0912) of the Theme of Samos. 7th-century sources attest an Armenian community in Pergamon, probably formed of refugees from the Muslim conquests; this community produced the emperor Philippicus (r.\u2009711\u00a0\u2013\u00a0713). In 716, Pergamon was sacked again by the armies of Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik. It was again rebuilt and refortified after the Arabs abandoned their Siege of Constantinople in 717\u2013718.\nPergamon suffered from the Seljuk invasion of western Anatolia after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071. Attacks in 1109 and 1113 largely destroyed the city, which was only rebuilt, by Emperor Manuel I Komnenos (r.\u20091143\u00a0\u2013\u00a01180), around 1170. It likely became the capital of the new theme of Neokastra, established by Manuel. Under Isaac II Angelos (r.\u20091185\u00a0\u2013\u00a01195), the local see was promoted to a metropolitan bishopric, having previously been a suffragan diocese of the Metropolis of Ephesus.\nAfter the Sack of Constantinople in 1204 during the Fourth Crusade, Pergamon became part of the Empire of Nicaea. When Emperor Theodore II Laskaris (r.\u20091254\u00a0\u2013\u00a01285) visited Pergamon in 1250, he was shown the house of Galen, but he saw that the theatre had been destroyed and, except for the walls which he paid some attention to, only the vaults over the Selinus seemed noteworthy to him. The monuments of the Attalids and the Romans were only plundered ruins by this time.\nWith the expansion of the Anatolian beyliks, Pergamon was absorbed into the beylik of Karasids shortly after 1300, and then conquered by the Ottoman beylik. The Ottoman Sultan Murad III had two large alabaster urns transported from the ruins of Pergamon and placed on two sides of the nave in the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul.\nPergamon in myth.\nPergamon, which traced its founding back to Telephus, the son of Heracles, is not mentioned in Greek myth or epic of the archaic or classical periods. However, in the Epic Cycle the Telephus myth is already connected with the area of Mysia. Searching for his mother, Telephus visits Mysia on the advice of an oracle. There he becomes Teuthras' son-in-law or foster-son and inherits his kingdom of Teuthrania, encompassing the area between Pergamon and the mouth of the Caicus. Telephus refuses to participate in the Trojan War, but his son Eurypylus fights on the side of the Trojans. This material was dealt with in a number of tragedies, such as Aeschylus' \"Mysi\", Sophocles' \"Aleadae\", and Euripides' \"Telephus\" and \"Auge\", but Pergamon does not seem to have played any role in any of them. The adaptation of the myth is not entirely smooth.\nThus, on the one hand, Eurypylus who must have been part of the dynastic line as a result of the appropriation of the myth, was not mentioned in the hymn sung in honour of Telephus in the Asclepieion. Otherwise he does not seem to have been paid any heed. But the Pergamenes made offerings to Telephus and the grave of his mother Auge was located in Pergamon near the Caicus. Pergamon thus entered the Trojan epic cycle, with its ruler said to have been an Arcadian who had fought with Telephus against Agamemnon when he landed at the Caicus, mistook it for Troy and began to ravage the land.\nOn the other hand, the story was linked to the foundation of the city with another myth \u2013 that of Pergamus, the eponymous hero of the city. He also belonged to the broader cycle of myths related to the Trojan War as the grandson of Achilles through his father Neoptolemus and of Eetion of Thebe through his mother Andromache (concubine to Neoptolemus after the death of Hector of Troy). With his mother, he was said to have fled to Mysia where he killed the ruler of Teuthrania and gave the city his own name. There he built a heroon for his mother after her death. In a less heroic version, Grynos the son of Eurypylus named a city after him in gratitude for a favour. These mythic connections seem to be late and are not attested before the 3rd century BC. Pergamus' role remained subordinate, although he did receive some cult worship. Beginning in the Roman period, his image appears on civic coinage and he is said to have had a heroon in the city. Even so, he provided a further, deliberately crafted link to the world of Homeric epic. Mithridates VI was celebrated in the city as a new Pergamus.\nHowever, for the Attalids, it was apparently the genealogical connection to Heracles that was crucial, since all the other Hellenistic dynasties had long established such links: the Ptolemies derived themselves directly from Heracles, the Antigonids inserted Heracles into their family tree in the reign of Philip V at the end of the 3rd century BC at the latest, and the Seleucids claimed descent from Apollo. All of these claims derive their significance from Alexander the Great, who claimed descent from Heracles, through his father Philip II.\nIn their constructive adaptation of the myth, the Attalids stood within the tradition of the other, older Hellenistic dynasties, who legitimized themselves through divine descent, and sought to increase their own prestige. The inhabitants of Pergamon enthusiastically followed their lead and took to calling themselves \"Telephidai\" () and referring to Pergamon itself in poetic registers as the 'Telephian city' ().\nHistory of research and excavation.\nThe first mention of Pergamon in written records after ancient times comes from the 13th century. Beginning with Ciriaco de' Pizzicolli in the 15th century, ever more travellers visited the place and published their accounts of it. The key description is that of Thomas Smith, who visited the Levant in 1668 and transmitted a detailed description of Pergamon, to which the great 17th century travellers Jacob Spon and George Wheler were able to add nothing significant in their own accounts.\nIn the late 18th century, these visits were reinforced by a scholarly (especially ancient historical) desire for research, epitomised by Marie-Gabriel-Florent-Auguste de Choiseul-Gouffier, a traveller in Asia Minor and French ambassador to the Sublime Porte in Istanbul from 1784 to 1791. At the beginning of the 19th century, Charles Robert Cockerell produced a detailed account and Otto Magnus von Stackelberg made important sketches. A proper, multi-page description with plans, elevations, and views of the city and its ruins was first produced by Charles Texier when he published the second volume of his \"Description de l'Asie mineure\".\nIn 1864\u20135, the German engineer Carl Humann visited Pergamon for the first time. For the construction of the road from Pergamon to Dikili for which he had undertaken planning work and topographical studies, he returned in 1869 and began to focus intensively on the legacy of the city. In 1871, he organised a small expedition there under the leadership of Ernst Curtius. As a result of this short but intensive investigation, two fragments of a great frieze were discovered and transported to Berlin for detailed analysis, where they received some interest, but not a lot. It is not clear who connected these fragments with the Great Altar in Pergamon mentioned by Lucius Ampelius. However, when the archaeologist Alexander Conze took over direction of the department of ancient sculpture at the Royal Museums of Berlin, he quickly initiated a programme for the excavation and protection of the monuments connected to the sculpture, which were widely suspected to include the Great Altar.\nAs a result of these efforts, Carl Humann, who had been carrying out low-level excavations at Pergamon for the previous few years and had discovered for example the architrave inscription of the Temple of Demeter in 1875, was entrusted with carry out work in the area of the altar of Zeus in 1878, where he continued to work until 1886. With the approval of the Ottoman Empire, the reliefs discovered there were transported to Berlin, where the Pergamon Museum was opened for them in 1907. The work was continued by Conze, who aimed for the most complete possible exposure and investigation of the historic city and citadel that was possible. He was followed by the architectural historian Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld from 1900 to 1911, who was responsible for the most important discoveries. Under his leadership the Lower Agora, the House of Attalos, the Gymnasion, and the Sanctuary of Demeter were brought to light.\nThe excavations were interrupted by the First World War and were only resumed in 1927 under the leadership of Theodor Wiegand, who remained in this post until 1939. He concentrated on further excavation of the upper city, the Asklepieion, and the Red Basilica. The Second World War also caused a break in work at Pergamon, which lasted until 1957. From 1957 to 1968, Erich Boehringer worked on the Asklepieion in particular, but also carried out important work on the lower city as a whole and performed survey work, which increased knowledge of the countryside surrounding the city. In 1971, after a short pause, Wolfgang Radt succeeded him as leader of excavations and directed the focus of research on the residential buildings of Pergamon, but also on technical issues, like the water management system of the city which supported a population of 200,000 at its height. He also carried out conservation projects which were of vital importance for maintaining the material remains of Pergamon. Since 2006, the excavations have been led by Felix Pirson.\nMost of the finds from the Pergamon excavations before the First World War were taken to the Pergamon Museum in Berlin, with a smaller portion going to the \u0130stanbul Archaeological Museum after it was opened in 1891. After the First World War the Bergama Museum was opened, which has received all finds discovered since then.\nIn May 2022, archaeologists announced the discovery of a 1,800-year-old well-preserved geometric patterned floor mosaic around the Red Basilica.\nMain sights.\nUpper Acropolis.\nPergamon Altar.\nThe most famous structure from the city is the monumental altar, sometimes called the Great Altar, which was probably dedicated to Zeus and Athena. The foundations are still located in the Upper city, but the remains of the Pergamon frieze, which originally decorated it, are displayed in the Pergamon museum in Berlin, where the parts of the frieze taken to Germany have been installed in a partial reconstruction.\nFor the altar's construction, the required flat area was skillfully created through terracing, in order to allow it to be oriented in relation to the neighbouring Temple of Athena. The base of the altar measured around 36 x 33 metres and was decorated on the outside with a detailed depiction in high relief of the Gigantomachy, the battle between the Olympian gods and the Giants. The frieze is 2.30 metres high and has a total length of 113 metres, making it the second longest frieze surviving from antiquity, after the Parthenon Frieze in Athens. A staircase cut into the base on the western side leads up to the upper structure, which is surrounded by a colonnade, and consists of a colonnaded courtyard, separated from the staircase by a colonnade. The interior walls of this colonnade had a further frieze, depicting the life of Telephus, the son of Heracles and mythical founder of Pergamon. This frieze is around 1.60 metres high and thus is clearly smaller than the outer frieze.\nIn the New Testament Book of Revelation, the faith of the Pergamon believers, who \"dwell where Satan's throne is\" is commended by the author. Many scholars believe that the \"seat of Satan\" refers to the Pergamon Altar, due to its resemblance to a gigantic throne.\nTheatre.\nThe well-preserved Theatre of Pergamon dates from the Hellenistic period and had space for around 10,000 people, in 78 rows of seats. At a height of 36 metres, it is the steepest of all ancient theatres. The seating area (\"koilon\") is divided horizontally by two walkways, called \"diazomata\", and vertically by stairways into seven sections in the lowest part of the theatre and six in the middle and upper sections. Below the theatre is a and up to terrace, which rested on a high retaining wall and was framed on the long side by a stoa. Coming from the Upper market, one could enter this from a tower-building at the south end. This terrace had no space for the circular orchestra, which was normal in a Greek theatre, so only a wooden stage building was built which could be taken down when there was no performance taking place. Thus, the view along the terrace to the Temple of Dionysos at the northern end was unimpeded. A marble stage building was only built in the 1st century BC. Additional theatres were built in the Roman period, one in the Roman new city and the other in the sanctuary of Asclepius.\nTemple of Trajan (Traianeum).\nOn the highest point of the citadel is the Temple of Trajan, the Traianeum or Trajaneum. The Temple is also called the Temple of Zeus Philios, as both Zeus and Trajan were worshiped in the Temple, the former sharing it with the latter. The temple sits on a podium on top of a vaulted terrace. The temple itself was a Corinthian peripteros temple, about 18 metres wide with six columns on the short sides and nine columns on the long sides, and two rows of columns in antis. To the north, the area was closed off by a high stoa, while on the west and east sides it was surrounded by simple ashlar walls, until further stoas were inserted in Hadrian's reign.\nDuring the excavations fragments of statues of Trajan and Hadrian were found in the rubble of the cella, including their portrait heads, as well as fragments of the cult statue of Zeus Philios.\nTemple of Dionysus.\nAt Pergamon, Dionysus had the epithet \"Kathegemon\", 'the guide', and was already worshiped in the last third of the 3rd century BC, when the Attalids made him the chief god of their dynasty. In the 2nd century BC, Eumenes II (probably) built a temple for Dionysus at the northern end of the theatre terrace. The marble temple sits on a podium, 4.5 metres above the level of the theatre terrace and was an Ionic prostyle temple. The pronaos was four columns wide and two columns deep and was accessed by a staircase of twenty-five steps. Only a few traces of the Hellenistic structure survive. The majority of the surviving structure derives from a reconstruction of the temple which probably took place under Caracalla, or perhaps under Hadrian.\nTemple of Athena.\nPergamon's oldest temple is a sanctuary of Athena from the 4th century BC. It was a north-facing Doric peripteros temple with six columns on the short side and ten on the long side and a cella divided into two rooms. The foundations, measuring around 12.70 x 21.80 metres, are still visible today. The columns were around 5.25 metres high, 0.75 metres in diameter, and the distance between the columns was 1.62 metres, so the colonnade was very light for a temple of this period. This is matched by the shape of the triglyphs, which usually consist of a sequence of two triglyphs and two metopes, but are instead composed of three of triglyphs and three metopes. The columns of the temple are unfluted and retained bossage, but it is not clear whether this was a result of carelessness or incompleteness.\nA two-story stoa surrounding the temple on three sides was added under Eumenes II, along with the propylon in the southeast corner, which is now found, largely reconstructed, in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin. The balustrade of the upper level of the north and east stoas was decorated with reliefs depicting weapons which commemorated Eumenes II's military victory. The construction mixed Ionic columns and Doric triglyphs (of which five triglyphs and metopes survive). In the area of the sanctuary, Attalos I and Eumenes II constructed victory monuments, most notably the Gallic dedications. The northern stoa seems to have been the site of the Library of Pergamon.\nLibrary.\nThe Library of Pergamon was the second largest in the ancient Greek world after the Library of Alexandria, containing at least 200,000 scrolls. The location of the library building is not certain. Since the 19th century excavations, it has generally been identified with an annex of the northern stoa of the sanctuary of Athena in the Upper Citadel, which was built by Eumenes II. Inscriptions in the gymnasium which mention a library might indicate, however, that the building was located in that area.\nOther structures.\nOther notable structures still in existence on the upper part of the Acropolis include:\nThe site is today easily accessible by the Bergama Acropolis Gondola from the base station in northeastern Bergama.\nLower Acropolis.\nGymnasium.\nA large gymnasium area was built in the 2nd century BC on the south side of the Acropolis. It consisted of three terraces, with the main entrance at the southeast corner of the lowest terrace. The lowest and southernmost terrace is small and almost free of buildings. It is known as the Lower Gymnasium and has been identified as the boys' gymnasium. The middle terrace was around 250 metres long and 70 metres wide at the centre. On its north side there was a two-story hall. In the east part of the terrace there was a small prostyle temple in the Corinthian order. A roofed stadium, known as the Basement Stadium is located between the middle terrace and the upper terrace.\nThe upper terrace measured 150 x 70 metres square, making it the largest of the three terraces. It consisted of a courtyard surrounded by stoas and other structures, measuring roughly 36 x 74 metres. This complex is identified as a palaestra and had a theatre-shaped lecture hall beyond the northern stoa, which is probably of Roman date and a large banquet hall in the centre. Further rooms of uncertain function were accessible from the stoas. In the west was a south-facing Ionic antae temple, the central sanctuary of the gymnasium. The eastern area was replaced with a bath complex in Roman times. Further Roman baths were constructed to the west of the Ionic temple.\nSanctuary of Hera.\nThe sanctuary of Hera Basileia ('the Queen') lay north of the upper terrace of the gymnasium. Its structure sits on two parallel terraces, the south one about 107.4 metres above sea level and the north one about 109.8 metres above sea level. The Temple of Hera sat in the middle of the upper terrace, facing to the south, with a exedra to the west and a building whose function is very unclear to the east. The two terraces were linked by a staircase of eleven steps around 7.5 metres wide, descending from the front of the temple.\nThe temple was about 7 metres wide by 12 metres long, and sat on a three-stepped foundation. It was a Doric tetrastyle prostyle temple, with three triglyphs and metopes for each span in the entablature. All the other buildings in the sanctuary were made out of trachyte, but the visible part of the temple was made of marble, or at least had a marble cladding. The base of the cult image inside the cella supported three cult statues.\nThe surviving remains of the inscription on the architrave indicate that the building was the temple of Hera Basileia and that it was erected by Attalus II.\nSanctuary of Demeter.\nThe Sanctuary of Demeter occupied an area of 50 x 110 metres on the middle level of the south slope of the citadel. The sanctuary was old; its activity can be traced back to the fourth century BC.\nThe sanctuary was entered through a Propylon from the east, which led to a courtyard surrounded by stoas on three sides. In the centre of the western half of this courtyard, stood the Ionic temple of Demeter, a straightforward Antae temple, measuring 6.45 x 12.7 metres, with a porch in the Corinthian order which was added in the time of Antoninus Pius. The rest of the structure was of Hellenistic date, built in local marble and had a marble frieze decorated with bucrania. About 9.5 metres in front of the east-facing building, there was an altar, which was 7 metres long and 2.3 metres wide. The temple and the altar were built for Demeter by Philetaerus, his brother Eumenes, and their mother Boa.\nIn the east part of the courtyard, there were more than ten rows of seating laid out in front of the northern stoa for participants in the mysteries of Demeter. Roughly 800 initiates could fit in these seats.\nOther structures.\nThe lower part of the Acropolis also contains the following structures:\nAt the foot of the Acropolis.\nSanctuary of Asclepius (Asclepieion).\n south of the Acropolis (at 39\u00b0 7\u2032 9\u2033 N, 27\u00b0 9\u2032 56\u2033 E), down in the valley, is the Sanctuary of Asclepius, the god of healing. The Sanctuary of Asclepius, more commonly left untranslated Asclepieion (from Greek), or sometimes Asclepium (from Latin), was approached along an colonnaded sacred way. In this place people with health problems could bathe in the water of the sacred spring, and in the patients' dreams Asclepius would appear in a vision to tell them how to cure their illness. Archeology has found many gifts and dedications that people would make afterwards, such as small terracotta body parts, no doubt representing what had been healed. Galen, the most famous doctor in the ancient Roman Empire and personal physician of Emperor Marcus Aurelius, worked in the Asclepieion for many years. \nNotable extant structures in the Asclepieion include:\nSerapis Temple.\nPergamon's other notable structure is the great temple of the Egyptian gods Isis and/or Serapis, known today as the Red Basilica (or \"K\u0131z\u0131l Avlu\" in Turkish), about south of the Acropolis at (39 7' 19\" N, 27 11' 1\" E). It consists of a main building and two round towers within an enormous \"temenos\" or sacred area. The temple towers flanking the main building had courtyards with pools used for ablutions at each end, flanked by stoas on three sides. The forecourt of the Temple of Isis/Sarapis is still supported by the Pergamon Bridge, the largest bridge substruction of antiquity.\nAccording to Christian tradition, in the year 92 Saint Antipas, the first bishop of Pergamum ordained by John the Apostle, was a victim of an early clash between Serapis worshippers and Christians. An angry mob is said to have burned Saint Antipas alive in front of the Temple inside a brazen bull-like incense burner, which represented the bull god Apis. His martyrdom is one of the first recorded in Christian history, highlighted by the Christian Scripture itself through the https:// sent to the Pergamon Church in the Book of Revelation.\nInfrastructure and housing.\nPergamon is a good example of a city that expanded in a planned and controlled manner.\nPhiletairos transformed Pergamon from an archaic settlement into a fortified city. He or his successor Attalos I built a wall around the whole upper city, including the plateau to the south, the upper agora and some of the housing \u2013 further housing must have been found outside these walls. Because of the growth of the city, the streets were expanded and the city was monumentalised. Under Attalos I some minor changes were made to the city of Philetairos.\nDuring the reign of Eumenes II and Attalos II, there was a substantial expansion of the city. A new street network was created and a new city wall, with a monumental gatehouse called the Gate of Eumenes, was built south of the Acropolis. The wall, with numerous gates, now surrounded the entire hill, not just the upper city and the flat area to the southwest, all the way to the Selinus river. Numerous public buildings were constructed, as well as a new marketplace south of the acropolis and a new gymnasion in the east. The southeast slope and the whole western slope of the hill were now settled and opened up by streets.\nThe plan of Pergamon was affected by the extreme steepness of the site. As a result of this, the streets had to turn hairpin corners, so that the hill could be climbed as comfortably and quickly as possible. For the construction of buildings and laying out of the agoras, extensive work on the cliff-face and terracing had to be carried out. A consequence of the city's growth was the construction of new buildings over old ones, since there was not sufficient space.\nSeparate from this, a new area was laid out in Roman times, consisting of a whole new city west of the Selinus river, with all necessary infrastructure, including baths, theatres, stadiums, and sanctuaries. This Roman new city was able to expand without any city walls constraining it because of the absence of external threats.\nHousing.\nGenerally, most of the Hellenistic houses at Pergamon were laid out with a small, centrally-located and roughly square courtyard, with rooms on one or two sides of it. The main rooms are often stacked in two levels on the north side of the courtyard. A wide passage or colonnade on the north side of the courtyard often opened onto foyers, which enabled access to other rooms. An exact north\u2013south arrangement of the city blocks was not possible because of the topographical situation and earlier construction. Thus the size and arrangement of the rooms differed from house to house. From the time of Philetairos, at the latest, this kind of courtyard house was common and it was ever more widespread as time went on, but not universal. Some complexes were designed as Prostas houses, similar to designs seen at Priene. Others had wide columned halls in front of main rooms to the north. Especially in this latter type there is often a second story accessed by stairways. In the courtyards there were often cisterns, which captured rain water from the sloping roofs above. For the construction under Eumenes II, a city block of 35 x 45 m can be reconstructed, subject to significant variation as a result of the terrain.\nOpen spaces.\nFrom the beginning of the reign of Philetairos, civic events in Pergamon were concentrated on the Acropolis. Over time the so-called 'Upper agora' was developed at the south end of this. In the reign of Attalos I, a Temple of Zeus was built there. To the north of this structure there was a multi-story building, which propbably had a function connected to the marketplace. With progressive development of the open space, these buildings were demolished, while the Upper Agora itself took on a more strongly commercial function, while still a special space as a result of the temple of Zeus. In the course of the expansion of the city under Eumenes, the commercial character of the Upper Agora was further developed. The key signs of this development are primarily the halls built under Eumenes II, whose back chambers were probably used for trade. In the west, the 'West Chamber' was built which might have served as a market administration building. After these renovations, the Upper Agora thus served as a centre for trade and spectacle in the city.\nBecause of significant new construction in the immediate vicinity \u2013 the renovation of the Sanctuary of Athena and the Pergamon altar and the redesign of the neighbouring area - the design and organisational principle of the Upper Agora underwent a further change. Its character became much more spectacular and focussed on the two new structures looming over it, especially the altar which was visible on its terrace from below since the usual stoa surrounding it was omitted from the design.\nThe 80 m long and 55 m wide 'Lower Agora' was built under Eumenes II and was not significantly altered until Late Antiquity. As with the Upper Agora, the rectangular form of the agora was adapted to the steep terrain. The construction consisted in total of three levels. Of these the Upper Level and the 'Main Level' opened onto a central courtyard. On the lower level there were rooms only on the south and east sides because of the slope of the land, which led through a colonnade to the exterior of the space. The whole market area extended over two levels with a large columned hall in the centre, which contained small shop spaces and miscellaneous rooms.\nStreets and bridges.\nThe course of the main street, which winds up the hill to the Acropolis with a series of hairpin turns, is typical of the street system of Pergamon. On this street were shops and warehouses. The surface of the street consisted of andesite blocks up to 5 metres wide, 1 metre long and 30\u00a0cm deep. The street included a drainage system, which carried the water down the slope. Since it was the most important street of the city, the quality of the material used in its construction was very high.\nPhiletairos' design of the city was shaped above all by circumstantial considerations. Only under Eumenes II was this approach discarded and the city plan begins to show signs of an overall plan. Contrary to earlier attempts at an orthogonal street system, a fan-shaped design seems to have been adopted for the area around the gymnasium, with streets up to four metres wide, apparently intended to enable effective traffic flow. In contrast to it, Philetairos' system of alleys was created unsystematically, although the topic is still under investigation. Where the lay of the land prevented the laying of a street, small alleys were installed as connections instead. In general, therefore, there are large, broad streets (\"plateiai\") and small, narrow connecting streets (\"stenopoi\").\nThe nearly 200 metre wide Pergamon Bridge under the forecourt of the Red Basilica in the centre of Bergama is the largest bridge substruction from antiquity.\nWater supply.\nThe inhabitants of Pergamon were supplied with water by an effective system. In addition to cisterns, there was a system of nine pipes (seven Hellenistic ceramic pipes and two open Roman channels. The system provided around 30,000\u201335,000 cubic metres of water per day.\nThe Madrada\u011f aqueduct was a ceramic pipe with a diameter of 18\u00a0cm which already brought water to the citadel from a source over 40 kilometres away in the Madrada\u011f mountains at 1174 m above sea level in the Hellenistic period. Their significance for architectural history lies in the form of the last kilometres from the mountains through a valley to the Akropolis. The pipe consisted of three channels, which ended 3\u00a0km north of the citadel, before reaching the valley, and emptied into a pool, which included a double sedimentation tank. This pool was 35 metres higher than the summit of the citadel. The pipe from the pool to the Acropolis consisted of only a single channel \u2013 a lead pipe pressurised to 200 mH2O. The water was able to cross the valley between the pool and the citadel with the help of this pressurised conduit. It functioned as a communicating vessel, such that the water rose to the height of the citadel on its own as a result of the pressurised pipe.\nInscriptions.\nGreek inscriptions discovered at Pergamon include the rules of the town clerks, the so-called Astynomoi inscription, which has added to understanding of Greek municipal laws and regulations, including how roads were kept in repair, regulations regarding the public and private water supply and lavatories.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"Altert\u00fcmer von Pergamon\".\nThe archaeological reports from Pergamon are published in German as \"Altert\u00fcmer von Pergamon\" (de Gruyter, Berlin)."}
{"id": "23335", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23335", "title": "Parsec", "text": "Unit of length in astronomy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe parsec (symbol: pc) is a unit of length used to measure the large distances to astronomical objects outside the Solar System, approximately equal to or (AU), i.e. . The parsec unit is obtained by the use of parallax and trigonometry, and is defined as the distance at which 1 AU subtends an angle of one arcsecond ( of a degree). The nearest star, Proxima Centauri, is about from the Sun: from that distance, the gap between the Earth and the Sun spans slightly less than one arcsecond. Most stars visible to the naked eye are within a few hundred parsecs of the Sun, with the most distant at a few thousand parsecs, and the Andromeda Galaxy at over 700,000 parsecs.\nThe word \"parsec\" is a shortened form of \"a distance corresponding to a parallax of one second\", coined by the British astronomer Herbert Hall Turner in 1913. The unit was introduced to simplify the calculation of astronomical distances from raw observational data. Partly for this reason, it is the unit preferred in astronomy and astrophysics, though in popular science texts and common usage the light-year remains prominent. Although parsecs are used for the shorter distances within the Milky Way, multiples of parsecs are required for the larger scales in the universe, including kiloparsecs (kpc) for the more distant objects within and around the Milky Way, megaparsecs (Mpc) for mid-distance galaxies, and gigaparsecs (Gpc) for many quasars and the most distant galaxies.\nIn August 2015, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) passed Resolution B2 which, as part of the definition of a standardized absolute and apparent bolometric magnitude scale, mentioned an existing explicit definition of the parsec as exactly \u00a0au, or approximately \u00a0metres, given the IAU 2012 exact definition of the astronomical unit in metres. This corresponds to the small-angle definition of the parsec found in many astronomical references.\nHistory and derivation.\nImagining an elongated right triangle in space, where the shorter leg measures one au (astronomical unit, the average Earth\u2013Sun distance) and the subtended angle of the vertex opposite that leg measures one arcsecond (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443600 of a degree), the parsec is defined as the length of the \"adjacent\" leg. The value of a parsec can be derived through the rules of trigonometry. The distance from Earth whereupon the radius of its solar orbit subtends one arcsecond.\nOne of the oldest methods used by astronomers to calculate the distance to a star is to record the difference in angle between two measurements of the position of the star in the sky. The first measurement is taken from the Earth on one side of the Sun, and the second is taken approximately half a year later, when the Earth is on the opposite side of the Sun. The distance between the two positions of the Earth when the two measurements were taken is twice the distance between the Earth and the Sun. The difference in angle between the two measurements is twice the parallax angle, which is formed by lines from the Sun and Earth to the star at the distant vertex. Then the distance to the star could be calculated using trigonometry. The first successful published direct measurements of an object at interstellar distances were undertaken by German astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in 1838, who used this approach to calculate the 3.5-parsec distance of 61\u00a0Cygni.\nThe parallax of a star is defined as half of the angular distance that a star appears to move relative to the celestial sphere as Earth orbits the Sun. Equivalently, it is the subtended angle, from that star's perspective, of the semimajor axis of the Earth's orbit. Substituting the star's parallax for the one arcsecond angle in the imaginary right triangle, the long leg of the triangle will measure the distance from the Sun to the star. A parsec can be defined as the length of the right triangle side adjacent to the vertex occupied by a star whose parallax angle is one arcsecond.\nThe use of the parsec as a unit of distance follows naturally from Bessel's method, because the distance in parsecs can be computed simply as the reciprocal of the parallax angle in arcseconds (i.e.: if the parallax angle is 1\u00a0arcsecond, the object is 1\u00a0pc from the Sun; if the parallax angle is 0.5\u00a0arcseconds, the object is 2\u00a0pc away; etc.). No trigonometric functions are required in this relationship because the very small angles involved mean that the approximate solution of the skinny triangle can be applied.\nThough it may have been used before, the term \"parsec\" was first mentioned in an astronomical publication in 1913. Astronomer Royal Frank Watson Dyson expressed his concern for the need of a name for that unit of distance. He proposed the name \"astron\", but mentioned that Carl Charlier had suggested \"siriometer\" and Herbert Hall Turner had proposed \"parsec\". It was Turner's proposal that stuck.\nCalculating the value of a parsec.\nBy the 2015 definition, of arc length subtends an angle of at the center of the circle of radius . That is, \nformula_1 by definition \nConverting from degree/minute/second units to radians,\nformula_2, and\nformula_3 (exact by the 2012 definition of the au)\nTherefore,\nformula_4 (exact by the 2015 definition)\nTherefore,\nformula_5 (to the nearest metre).\nApproximately,\nIn the diagram above (not to scale), S represents the Sun, and E the Earth at one point in its orbit (such as to form a right angle at S). Thus the distance ES is one astronomical unit (au). The angle SDE is one arcsecond ( of a degree) so by definition D is a point in space at a distance of one parsec from the Sun. Through trigonometry, the distance SD is calculated as follows:\nformula_6\nBecause the astronomical unit is defined to be , the following can be calculated:\nTherefore, if \u2248 , \n Then \u2248 \nA corollary states that a parsec is also the distance from which a disc that is one au in diameter must be viewed for it to have an angular diameter of one arcsecond (by placing the observer at D and a disc spanning ES).\nMathematically, to calculate distance, given obtained angular measurements from instruments in arcseconds, the formula would be:\nformula_7\nwhere \"\u03b8\" is the measured angle in arcseconds, Distanceearth-sun is a constant ( or ). The calculated stellar distance will be in the same measurement unit as used in Distanceearth-sun (e.g. if Distanceearth-sun = , unit for Distancestar is in astronomical units; if Distanceearth-sun = , unit for Distancestar is in light-years).\nThe length of the parsec used in IAU 2015 Resolution B2 (exactly astronomical units) corresponds exactly to that derived using the small-angle calculation. This differs from the classic inverse-tangent definition by about , i.e.: only after the 11th significant figure. As the astronomical unit was defined by the IAU (2012) as an exact length in metres, so now the parsec corresponds to an exact length in metres. To the nearest metre, the small-angle parsec corresponds to .\nUsage and measurement.\nThe parallax method is the fundamental calibration step for distance determination in astrophysics; however, the accuracy of ground-based telescope measurements of parallax angle is limited to about , and thus to stars no more than distant. This is because the Earth's atmosphere limits the sharpness of a star's image, blurring the almost-point into a seeing disc whose position can only be measured approximately. Space-based telescopes are not limited by this effect and can accurately measure distances to objects beyond the limit of ground-based observations. Between 1989 and 1993, the \"Hipparcos\" satellite, launched by the European Space Agency (ESA), measured parallaxes for about stars with an astrometric precision of about , and obtained accurate measurements for stellar distances of stars up to away.\nESA's \"Gaia\" satellite, which launched on 19 December 2013, gathered data with a goal of measuring one billion stellar distances to within s, producing errors of 10% in measurements as far as the Galactic Centre, about away in the constellation of Sagittarius.\nDistances in parsecs.\nDistances less than a parsec.\nDistances expressed in fractions of a parsec usually involve objects within a single star system. So, for example:\nParsecs and kiloparsecs.\nDistances expressed in parsecs (pc) include distances between nearby stars, such as those in the same spiral arm or globular cluster. A distance of is denoted by the kiloparsec (kpc). Astronomers typically use kiloparsecs to express distances between parts of a galaxy or within groups of galaxies. So, for example:\nMegaparsecs and gigaparsecs.\nAstronomers typically express the distances between neighboring galaxies and galaxy clusters in megaparsecs (Mpc).\nA megaparsec is one million parsecs, or about 3.26 million light years. Sometimes, galactic distances are given in units of Mpc/\"h\" (as in \"50/\"h\"\u00a0Mpc\", also written \"50 Mpc \"h\"\u22121\"). \"h\" is a constant (the \"dimensionless Hubble constant\") in the range 0.5 &lt; \"h\" &lt; 0.75 reflecting the uncertainty in the value of the Hubble constant \"H\" for the rate of expansion of the universe: \"h\" =. The Hubble constant becomes relevant when converting an observed redshift \"z\" into a distance \"d\" using the formula \"d\" \u2248 \u00d7 \"z\".\nOne gigaparsec (Gpc) is one billion parsecs \u2014 one of the largest units of length commonly used. One gigaparsec is about , or roughly of the distance to the horizon of the observable universe (dictated by the cosmic microwave background radiation). Astronomers typically use gigaparsecs to express the sizes of large-scale structures such as the size of, and distance to, the CfA2 Great Wall; the distances between galaxy clusters; and the distance to quasars.\nFor example:\nVolume units.\nTo determine the number of stars in the Milky Way, volumes in cubic kiloparsecs (kpc3) are selected in various directions. All the stars in these volumes are counted and the total number of stars statistically determined. The number of globular clusters, dust clouds, and interstellar gas is determined in a similar fashion. To determine the number of galaxies in superclusters, volumes in cubic megaparsecs (Mpc3) are selected. All the galaxies in these volumes are classified and tallied. The total number of galaxies can then be determined statistically. The huge Bo\u00f6tes Void is measured in cubic megaparsecs.\nIn physical cosmology, volumes of cubic gigaparsecs (Gpc3) are selected to determine the distribution of matter in the visible universe and to determine the number of galaxies and quasars. The Sun is currently the only star in its cubic parsec, (pc3) but in globular clusters the stellar density could be from .\nThe observational volume of gravitational wave interferometers (e.g., LIGO, Virgo) is stated in terms of cubic megaparsecs (Mpc3) and is essentially the value of the effective distance cubed.\nIn popular culture.\nThe parsec is used incorrectly as a measurement of time by Han Solo in the first \"Star Wars\" film, when he claims his ship, the \"Millennium Falcon\" \"made the Kessel Run in less than 12 parsecs,\" originally with the intention of presenting Solo as \"something of a bull artist who didn't always know precisely what he was talking about.\" The claim is repeated in ', but in ' it is stated that the \"Millennium Falcon\" has traveled a shorter distance (as opposed to a quicker time) due to a more dangerous route through the Kessel Run, enabled by its speed and maneuverability. It is also used incorrectly in \"The Mandalorian\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23336", "revid": "49959671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23336", "title": "Parchment", "text": "Writing material made from animal skins\nParchment is a writing material made from specially prepared untanned skins of animals\u2014primarily sheep, calves and goats. It has been used as a writing medium in West Asia and Europe for more than two millennia. By 400 AD many of the written works intended for preservation in these regions had been transferred from papyrus to parchment. \"Vellum\" is a type of fine-quality parchment made from the skins of young animals such as lambs and young calves.\nThe generic term animal membrane is sometimes used by libraries and museums that wish to avoid distinguishing between parchment and vellum.\nParchment and vellum.\nToday the term \"parchment\" is often used in non-technical contexts to refer to any animal skin, particularly goat, sheep or cow, that has been scraped or dried under tension. The term originally referred only to the skin of sheep and, occasionally, goats. The equivalent material made from calfskin, which was of finer quality, was known as \"vellum\" (from the Old French or , and ultimately from the Latin , meaning a calf); whilst the finest of all was \"uterine vellum.\" Many sources believed the starting material for the higher quality was taken from a calf foetus or stillborn calf. Modern research has provided evidence that this was not the case in samples of the 13th century parchment from pocket Bibles. Instead the authors hypothesize that the finer grade was actually the result of some now-lost technique and not fetal hides.\nSome authorities have sought to observe these distinctions strictly: for example lexicographer Samuel Johnson in 1755 and master calligrapher Edward Johnston in 1906. However when old books and documents are encountered it may be difficult, without scientific analysis, to determine the precise animal origin of a skin, either in terms of its species or in terms of the animal's age. In practice therefore there has long been considerable blurring of the boundaries between the different terms. In 1519 William Horman wrote in his \"Vulgaria\": \"That stouffe that we wrytte upon, and is made of beestis skynnes, is somtyme called parchement, somtyme velem, somtyme abortyve, somtyme membraan.\" In Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" (written c.1599\u20131602) the following exchange occurs:\nHamlet: &lt;q&gt;Is not parchment made of sheepskins?&lt;/q&gt;Horatio: &lt;q&gt;Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.&lt;/q&gt;\nLee Ustick, writing in 1936, commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To-day the distinction, among collectors of manuscripts, is that \"vellum\" is a highly refined form of skin, \"parchment\" a cruder form, usually thick, harsh, less highly polished than vellum, but with no distinction between skin of calf, or sheep, or of goat.\nIt is for these reasons that many modern conservators, librarians and archivists prefer to use either the broader term \"parchment\" or the neutral term \"animal membrane\".\nHistory.\nThe word parchment evolved (via the Latin and the French ) from the name of the city of Pergamon, which was a thriving center of parchment production during the Hellenistic period. The city so dominated the trade that a legend later arose that said that parchment had been invented in Pergamon to replace the use of papyrus, which had become monopolized by the rival city of Alexandria. This account, originating in the writings of Pliny the Elder (\"Natural History\", Book XIII, 69\u201370), is almost assuredly false because parchment had been in use in Anatolia and elsewhere long before the rise of Pergamon.\nHerodotus mentions writing on skins as common in his time, the 5th century BC; and in his \"Histories\" (v.58) he states that the Ionians of Asia Minor had been accustomed to give the name of \"skins\" () to books; this word was adapted by Hellenized Jews to describe scrolls. Writing on prepared animal skins had a long history in other cultures outside of the Greeks as well. David Diringer noted that \"the first mention of Egyptian documents written on leather goes back to the Fourth Dynasty (c. 2550\u20132450 BC), but the earliest of such documents extant are: a fragmentary roll of leather of the Sixth Dynasty (c. 24th century BC), unrolled by Dr. H. Ibscher, and preserved in the Cairo Museum; a roll of the Twelfth Dynasty (c. 1990\u20131777 BC) now in Berlin; the mathematical text now in the British Museum (MS. 10250); and a document of the reign of Ramses II (early thirteenth century BC).\" Civilizations such as the Assyrians and the Babylonians most commonly impressed their cuneiform on clay tablets, but they also wrote on parchment from the 6th century BC onward.\nBy the fourth century AD, in cultures that traditionally used papyrus for writing, parchment began to become the new standard for use in manufacturing important books, and most works which wished to be preserved were eventually moved from papyrus to parchment.\nIn the later Middle Ages, especially the 15th century, parchment was largely replaced by paper for most uses except luxury manuscripts, some of which were also on paper. New techniques in paper milling allowed it to be much cheaper than parchment; it was made of textile rags and of very high quality. Following the arrival of printing in the later fifteenth century AD, the supply of animal skins for parchment could not keep up with the demands of printers.\nThere was a short period during the introduction of printing where parchment and paper were used at the same time, with parchment (in fact vellum) the more expensive luxury option, preferred by rich and conservative customers. Although most copies of the Gutenberg Bible are on paper, some were printed on parchment; 12 of the 48 surviving copies, with most incomplete. In 1490, Johannes Trithemius preferred the older methods, because \"handwriting placed on parchment will be able to endure a thousand years. But how long will printing last, which is dependent on paper? For if ... it lasts for two hundred years that is a long time.\" In fact, high-quality paper from this period has survived 500 years or more very well, if kept in reasonable library conditions.\nModern use.\nParchment (or vellum) continues to be used for ritual or legal reasons. Rabbinic literature traditionally maintains that the institution of employing parchment made of animal hides for the writing of ritual objects, as detailed below. In the United Kingdom, until 2015 Acts of Parliament were printed on vellum, and it is still used for the covers of record copies of Acts.\nThe heyday of parchment use was during the medieval period, but there has been a growing revival of its use among artists since the late 20th century. Although parchment never stopped being used (primarily for governmental documents and diplomas) it had ceased to be a primary choice for artists' supports by the end of the 15th century Renaissance. This was partly due to its expense and partly due to its unusual working properties. Parchment consists mostly of collagen. When the water in paint media touches the parchment's surface, the collagen melts slightly, forming a raised bed for the paint, a quality highly prized by some artists.\nParchment is also extremely affected by its environment and changes in humidity, which can cause buckling. Books with parchment pages were bound with strong wooden boards and clamped tightly shut by metal (often brass) clasps or leather straps; this acted to keep the pages pressed flat despite humidity changes. Such metal fittings continued to be found on books as decorative features even after the use of paper made them unnecessary.\nManufacture.\nParchment is prepared from pelt\u00a0\u2013 i.e. wet, unhaired, and limed skin\u00a0\u2013 by drying at ordinary temperatures under tension, most commonly on a wooden frame known as a stretching frame.\nSkinning, soaking, and dehairing.\nAfter a carcass is skinned, the hide is soaked in water for about a day. This removes blood and grime and prepares the skin for a dehairing liquor. The dehairing liquor was originally made of rotted, or fermented, vegetable matter, like beer or other liquors, but by the Middle Ages a dehairing bath included lime. Today, the lime solution is occasionally sharpened by the use of sodium sulfide. The liquor bath would have been in wooden or stone vats and the hides stirred with a long wooden pole to avoid human contact with the alkaline solution. Sometimes the skins would stay in the dehairing bath for eight or more days depending how concentrated and how warm the solution was kept \u2013 dehairing could take up to twice as long in winter. The vat was stirred two or three times a day to ensure the solution's deep and uniform penetration. Replacing the lime water bath also sped the process up. However, if the skins were soaked in the liquor too long, they would be weakened and not able to stand the stretching required for parchment.\nStretching.\nAfter soaking in water to make the skins workable, the skins were placed on a stretching frame. A simple frame with nails would work well in stretching the pelts. The skins could be attached by wrapping small, smooth rocks in the skins with rope or leather strips. Both sides would be left open to the air so they could be scraped with a sharp, semi-lunar knife to remove the last of the hair and get the skin to the right thickness. The skins, which were made almost entirely of collagen, would form a natural glue while drying and once taken off the frame they would keep their form. The stretching aligned the fibres to be more nearly parallel to the surface.\nTreatments.\nTo make the parchment more aesthetically pleasing or more suitable for the scribes, special treatments were used. According to Reed there were a variety of these treatments. Rubbing pumice powder into the flesh side of parchment while it was still wet on the frame was used to make it smooth and to modify the surface to enable inks to penetrate more deeply. Powders and pastes of calcium compounds were also used to help remove grease so the ink would not run. To make the parchment smooth and white, thin pastes (starchgrain or staunchgrain) of lime, flour, egg whites and milk were rubbed into the skins.\nMeliora di Curci in her paper, \"The History and Technology of Parchment Making\", notes that parchment was not always white. \"Cennini, a 15th-century craftsman provides recipes to tint parchment a variety of colours including purple, indigo, green, red and peach.\" The Early medieval Codex Argenteus and Codex Vercellensis, the Stockholm Codex Aureus and the Codex Brixianus give a range of luxuriously produced manuscripts all on purple vellum, in imitation of Byzantine examples, like the Rossano Gospels, Sinope Gospels and the Vienna Genesis, which at least at one time are believed to have been reserved for Imperial commissions.\nMany techniques for parchment repair exist, to restore creased, torn, or incomplete parchments.\nReuse.\nBetween the seventh and the ninth centuries, many earlier parchment manuscripts were scrubbed and scoured to be ready for rewriting, and often the earlier writing can still be read. These recycled parchments are known as palimpsests.\nJewish parchment.\nThe way in which parchment was processed (from hide to parchment) has undergone a tremendous evolution based on time and location. Parchment and vellum are not the sole methods of preparing animal skins for writing. In the Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 14B), Moses is described as having written the first Torah Scroll on the unsplit cow-hide called \"gevil\".\nParchment is still the only medium used by traditional religious Jews for Torah scrolls or tefillin and mezuzahs, and is produced by large companies in Israel. This usage is Sinaitic in origin, with special designations for different types of parchment such as gevil and klaf. For those uses, only hides of kosher animals are permitted. Since there are many requirements for it being fit for the religious use, the liming is usually processed under supervision of a qualified Rabbi.\nAdditional uses of the term.\nIn some universities, the word parchment is still used to refer to the certificate (scroll) presented at graduation ceremonies, even though the modern document is printed on paper or thin card; although doctoral graduates may be given the option of having their scroll written by a calligrapher on vellum. Heriot-Watt University still uses goatskin parchment for their degrees.\nPlant-based parchment.\nVegetable (paper) parchment is made by passing a waterleaf (an unsized paper like blotters) made of pulp fibers into sulfuric acid. The sulfuric acid hydrolyses and solubilises the main natural organic polymer, cellulose, present in the pulp wood fibers. The paper web is then washed in water, which stops the hydrolysis of the cellulose and causes a kind of cellulose coating to form on the waterleaf. The final paper is dried. This coating is a natural non-porous cement, that gives to the vegetable parchment paper its resistance to grease and its semi-translucency.\nOther processes can be used to obtain grease-resistant paper, such as waxing the paper or using fluorine-based chemicals. Highly beating the fibers gives an even more translucent paper with the same grease resistance. Silicone and other coatings may also be applied to the parchment. A silicone-coating treatment produces a cross-linked material with high density, stability and heat resistance and low surface tension which imparts good anti-stick or release properties. Chromium salts can also be used to impart moderate anti-stick properties.\nParchment craft.\nHistorians believe that parchment craft originated as an art form in Europe during the fifteenth or sixteenth centuries. Parchment craft at that time occurred principally in Catholic communities, where crafts persons created lace-like items such as devotional pictures and communion cards. The craft developed over time, with new techniques and refinements being added. Until the sixteenth century, parchment craft was a European art form. However, missionaries and other settlers relocated to South America, taking parchment craft with them. As before, the craft appeared largely among the Catholic communities. Often, young girls receiving their first communion received gifts of handmade parchment crafts.\nAlthough the invention of the printing press led to a reduced interest in hand made cards and items, by the eighteenth century, people were regaining interest in detailed handwork. Parchment cards became larger in size and crafters began adding wavy borders and perforations. In the nineteenth century, influenced by French romanticism, parchment crafters began adding floral themes and cherubs and hand embossing.\nParchment craft today involves various techniques, including tracing a pattern with white or colored ink, embossing to create a raised effect, stippling, perforating, coloring and cutting. Parchment craft appears in hand made cards, as scrapbook embellishments, as bookmarks, lampshades, decorative small boxes, wall hangings and more.\nTechnical analysis.\nThe radiocarbon dating techniques that are used on papyrus can be applied to parchment as well. They do not date the age of the writing but the preparation of the parchment itself. While it is feasibly possible also to radiocarbon date certain kinds of ink, it is extremely difficult to do due to the fact that they are generally present on the text only in trace amounts, and it is hard to get a carbon sample of them without the carbon in the parchment contaminating it.\nAn article published in 2009 considered the possibilities of tracing the origin of medieval parchment manuscripts and codices through DNA analysis. The methodology would employ polymerase chain reaction to replicate a small DNA sample to a size sufficiently large for testing. The article discusses the use of DNA testing to estimate the age of the calf at the creation of the vellum parchment. A 2006 study revealed the genetic signature of several Greek manuscripts to have \"goat-related sequences\". Utilizing these techniques we may be able to determine whether related library materials were made from genetically related animals (perhaps from the same herd) and locate the vellum's origination.\nIn 2020, it was reported that the species of several of the animals used to provide parchment for the Dead Sea Scrolls could be identified, and the relationship between skins obtained from the same animal inferred. The breakthrough was made possible by the use of whole genome sequencing.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "23337", "revid": "41591971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23337", "title": "Phobia", "text": "Anxiety disorder classified by a persistent and excessive fear of an object or situation\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA phobia is an anxiety disorder, defined by an irrational, unrealistic, persistent and excessive fear of an object or situation. Phobias typically result in a rapid onset of fear and are usually present for more than six months. Those affected go to great lengths to avoid the situation or object, to a degree greater than the actual danger posed. If the object or situation cannot be avoided, they experience significant distress. Other symptoms can include fainting, which may occur in blood or injury phobia, and panic attacks, often found in agoraphobia and emetophobia. Around 75% of those with phobias have multiple phobias.\nPhobias can be divided into specific phobias, social anxiety disorder, and agoraphobia. Specific phobias are further divided to include certain animals, natural environment, blood or injury, and particular situations. The most common are fear of spiders, fear of snakes, and fear of heights. Specific phobias may be caused by a negative experience with the object or situation in early childhood to early adulthood. Social phobia is when a person fears a situation due to worries about others judging them. Agoraphobia is a fear of a situation due to perceived difficulty or inability to escape.\nIt is recommended that specific phobias be treated with exposure therapy, in which the person is introduced to the situation or object in question until the fear resolves. Medications are not helpful for specific phobias. Social phobia and agoraphobia may be treated with counseling, medications, or a combination of both. Medications used include antidepressants, benzodiazepines, or beta-blockers.\nSpecific phobias affect about 6\u20138% of people in the Western world and 2\u20134% in Asia, Africa, and Latin America in a given year. Social phobia affects about 7% of people in the United States and 0.5\u20132.5% of people in the rest of the world. Agoraphobia affects about 1.7% of people. Women are affected by phobias about twice as often as men. The typical onset of a phobia is around 10\u201317, and rates are lower with increasing age. Those with phobias are more likely to attempt suicide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nFear is an emotional response to a current perceived danger. This differs from anxiety which is a response in preparation of a future threat. Fear and anxiety often can overlap but this distinction can help identify subtle differences between disorders, as well as differentiate between a response that would be expected given a person's developmental stage and culture.\nICD-11.\nThe International Classification of Diseases (11th version: ICD-11) is a globally used diagnostic tool for epidemiology, health management and clinical purposes maintained by the World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD classifies phobic disorders under the category of mental, behavioural or neurodevelopmental disorders. The ICD-10 differentiates between Phobic anxiety disorders, such as Agoraphobia, and Other anxiety disorders, such as Generalized anxiety disorder. The ICD-11 merges both groups together as Anxiety or fear-related disorders.\nDSM-5.\nMost phobias are classified into 3 categories. According to the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition\" (DSM-5), such phobias are considered subtypes of anxiety disorder. The categories are:\nPhobias vary in severity among individuals. Some individuals can avoid the subject and experience relatively mild anxiety over that fear. Others experience full-fledged panic attacks with all the associated impairing symptoms. Most individuals understand that their fear is irrational but cannot override their panic response. These individuals often report dizziness, loss of bladder or bowel control, tachypnea, feelings of pain, and shortness of breath.\nCauses.\nPhobias may develop for a variety of reasons. Childhood experiences, past traumatic experiences, brain chemistry, genetics, or learned behavior, can all be reasons why phobias develop. There are even phobias that may run in families and be passed down from one generation to another.\nThere are multiple theories about how phobias develop and likely occur due to a combination of environmental and genetic factors. The degree to whether environment or genetic influences have a more significant role varies by condition, with social anxiety disorder and agoraphobia having around a 50% heritability rate.\nEnvironmental.\nRachman proposed three pathways for the development of phobias: direct or classical conditioning (exposure to phobic stimulus), vicarious acquisition (seeing others experience phobic stimulus), and informational/instructional acquisition (learning about phobic stimulus from others).\nClassical conditioning.\nMuch of the progress in understanding the acquisition of fear responses in phobias can be attributed to classical conditioning (Pavlovian model). When an aversive stimulus and a neutral one are paired together, for instance, when an electric shock is given in a specific room, the subject can start to fear not only the shock but the room as well. In behavioral terms, the room is a conditioned stimulus (CS). When paired with an aversive unconditioned stimulus (UCS) \"(the shock)\", it creates a conditioned response (CR) \"(fear for the room)\" (CS+UCS=CR). For example, in case of the fear of heights (acrophobia), the CS is heights. Such as a balcony on the top floors of a high rise building. The UCS can originate from an aversive or traumatizing event in the person's life, such as almost falling from a great height. The original fear of nearly falling is associated with being high, leading to a fear of heights. In other words, the CS \"(heights)\" associated with the aversive UCS \"(almost falling)\" leads to the CR \"(fear)\".\nIt is possible, however, to extinguish the CR, and reversing the effects of the CS and UCS. Repeatedly presenting the CS alone, without the UCS, can exinguish the CR.\nThough historically influential in the theory of fear acquisition, this direct conditioning model is not the only proposed way to acquire a phobia. This theory in fact has limitations as not everyone that has experienced a traumatic event develops a phobia and vice versa.\nVicarious conditioning.\nVicarious fear acquisition is learning to fear something, not by a subject's own experience of fear, but by watching others, oftentimes a parent (observational learning). For instance, when a child sees a parent reacting fearfully to an animal, the child can also become afraid of the animal. Through observational learning, humans can learn to fear potentially dangerous objects\u2014a reaction observed in other primates. A study on non-human primates, showed that the primates learned to fear snakes at a fast rate after watching parents' fearful reactions. An increase in fearful behaviours was observed as the non-human primates observed their parents' fearful reactions. Although observational learning has proven effective in creating reactions of fear and phobias, it has also been shown that by physically experiencing an event, increases the chance of fearful and phobic behaviours. In some cases, physically experiencing an event may increase the fear and phobia more than observing a fearful reaction of another human or non-human primate.\nInformational/Instructional acquisition.\nInformational/instructional fear acquisition is learning to fear something by getting information. For instance, fearing electrical wire after hearing that touching it causes an electric shock.\nA conditioned fear response to an object or situation is not always a phobia. There must also be symptoms of impairment and avoidance. Impairment is defined as an inability to complete routine tasks, whether occupational, academic, or social. For example, an occupational impairment can result from acrophobia, from not taking a job solely because of its location on the top floor of a building, or socially not participating in an event at a theme park. The avoidance aspect is defined as behaviour that results in the omission of an aversive event that would otherwise occur, intending to prevent anxiety.\nGenetic.\nWith the completion of the Human Genome Project in 2003, much research has been completed looking at specific genes that may cause or contribute to medical conditions. Candidate genes were the focus of most of these studies until the past decade, when the cost and ability to perform genome-wide analyses became more available. The GLRB gene was identified as a possible target for agoraphobia. An area still in development is reviewing epigenetic components or the interaction of the environment on genes through methylation. A number of genes are being examined through this epigenetic lens which may be linked with social anxiety disorder, including MAOA, CRHR1, and OXTR. Each phobia related disorder has some degree of genetic susceptibility. Those with specific phobias are more likely to have first degree relatives with the same specific phobia. Similarly, social anxiety disorder is found two to six times more frequently in those with first degree relatives that have it versus those that do not. Agoraphobia is believed to have the strongest genetic association.\nMechanism.\nLimbic system.\nBeneath the lateral fissure in the cerebral cortex, the insula, or insular cortex, of the brain has been identified as part of the limbic system, along with the cingulated gyrus, hippocampus, corpus callosum, and other nearby cortices. This system has been found to play a role in emotion processing, and the insula, in particular, may contribute to maintaining autonomic functions. Studies by Critchley et al. indicate the insula as being involved in the experience of emotion by detecting and interpreting threatening stimuli. Similar studies monitoring insula activity have shown a correlation between increased insular activation and anxiety.\nIn the frontal lobes, other cortices involved with phobia and fear are the anterior cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. In the processing of emotional stimuli, studies on phobic reactions to facial expressions have indicated that these areas are involved in the processing and responding to negative stimuli. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex has been said to influence the amygdala by monitoring its reaction to emotional stimuli or even fearful memories. Most specifically, the medial prefrontal cortex is active during the extinction of fear and is responsible for long-term extinction. Stimulation of this area decreases conditioned fear responses, so its role may be in inhibiting the amygdala and its reaction to fearful stimuli.\nThe hippocampus is a horseshoe-shaped structure that plays an essential part in the brain's limbic system. This is because it forms memories and connects them with emotions and the senses. When dealing with fear, the hippocampus receives impulses from the amygdala that allow it to connect the fear with a certain sense, such as a smell or sound.\nAmygdala.\nThe amygdala is an almond-shaped mass of nuclei located deep in the brain's medial temporal lobe. It processes the events associated with fear and is linked to social phobia and other anxiety disorders. The amygdala's ability to respond to fearful stimuli occurs through fear conditioning. Like classical conditioning, the amygdala learns to associate a conditioned stimulus with a negative or avoidant stimulus, creating a conditioned fear response often seen in phobic individuals. The amygdala is responsible for recognizing certain stimuli or cues as dangerous and plays a role in the storage of threatening stimuli to memory. The basolateral nuclei (or basolateral amygdala) and the hippocampus interact with the amygdala in-memory storage. This connection suggests why memories are often remembered more vividly if they have emotional significance.\nIn addition to memory, the amygdala also triggers the secretion of hormones that affect fear and aggression. When the fear or aggression response is initiated, the amygdala releases hormones into the body to put the human body into an \"alert\" state, which prepares the individual to move, run, fight, etc. This defensive \"alert\" state and response are known as the fight-or-flight response.\nHowever, inside the brain, this stress response can be observed in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA). This circuit incorporates the process of receiving stimuli, interpreting them, and releasing certain hormones into the bloodstream. The parvocellular neurosecretory neurons of the hypothalamus release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which is sent to the anterior pituitary. Here the pituitary releases adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which ultimately stimulates the release of cortisol. In relation to anxiety, the amygdala activates this circuit, while the hippocampus is responsible for suppressing it. Glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus monitor the amount of cortisol in the system and through negative feedback can tell the hypothalamus to stop releasing CRH.\nStudies on mice engineered to have high concentrations of CRH showed higher levels of anxiety, while those engineered to have no or low amounts of CRH receptors were less anxious. In people with phobias, therefore, high amounts of cortisol may be present, or there may be low levels of glucocorticoid receptors or even serotonin (5-HT).\nDisruption by damage.\nFor the areas in the brain involved in emotion \u2013 most specifically, fear \u2013 the processing and response to emotional stimuli can be altered when there are damage to any of these regions. Damage to the cortical areas involved in the limbic system, such as the cingulate cortex or frontal lobes, has resulted in extreme emotion changes. Other types of damage include Kl\u00fcver\u2013Bucy syndrome and Urbach\u2013Wiethe disease. In Kl\u00fcver\u2013Bucy syndrome, a temporal lobectomy, or removal of the temporal lobes, results in changes involving fear and aggression. Specifically, the removal of these lobes results in decreased fear, confirming its role in fear recognition and response. Damage to both side (Bilateral damage) of the medial temporal lobes is known as Urbach\u2013Wiethe disease. It presents with similar symptoms of decreased fear and aggression but with the addition of the inability to recognize emotional expressions, especially angry or fearful faces.\nThe amygdala's role in learned fear includes interactions with other brain regions in the neural circuit of fear. While damage in the amygdala can inhibit its ability to recognize fearful stimuli, other areas such as the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala can affect the region's ability to not only become conditioned to fearful stimuli but to extinguish them eventually. Through receiving stimulus info, the basolateral nuclei undergo synaptic changes that allow the amygdala to develop a conditioned response to fearful stimuli. Damage to this area, therefore, have been shown to disrupt the acquisition of learned responses to fear. Likewise, damage in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (the area responsible for monitoring the amygdala) has been shown to slow down the speed of extinguishing a learned fear response and how effective the extinction is. This suggests there is a pathway or circuit among the amygdala and nearby cortical areas that process emotional stimuli and influence emotional expression, all of which can be disrupted when damage occurs.\nDiagnosis.\nIt is recommended that the terms \"distress\" and \"impairment\" take into account the context of the person's environment during diagnosis. The DSM-IV-TR states that if a feared stimulus, whether it be an object or a situation, is absent entirely in an environment, a diagnosis cannot be made. An example of this situation would be an individual who has a fear of mice but lives in an area without mice. Even though the concept of mice causes marked distress and impairment within the individual, because the individual does not usually encounter mice, no actual distress or impairment is ever experienced. It is recommended that proximity to, and ability to escape from, the stimulus also be considered. As the phobic person approaches a feared stimulus, anxiety levels increase, and the degree to which the person perceives they might escape from the stimulus affects the intensity of fear in instances such as riding an elevator (e.g. anxiety increases at the midway point between floors and decreases when the floor is reached and the doors open). The DSM-V has been updated to reflect that an individual may have changed their daily activities around the feared stimulus in such a way that they may avoid it altogether. The person may still meet criteria for the diagnosis if they continue to avoid or refuse to participate in activities they would involve possible exposure to the phobic stimulus.\nSpecific phobias.\nA specific phobia is a marked and persistent fear of an object or situation. Specific phobias may also include fear of losing control, panicking, and fainting from an encounter with the phobia. Specific phobias are defined concerning objects or situations, whereas social phobias emphasize social fear and the evaluations that might accompany them.\nThe DSM breaks specific phobias into five subtypes: animal, natural environment, blood-injection-injury, situational and other. In children, blood-injection-injury phobia, animal phobias, and natural environment phobias usually develop between the ages of 7 and 9 reflective of normal development. Additionally, specific phobias are most prevalent in children between the ages 10 and 13. Situational phobias are typically found in older children and adults.\nTreatments.\nThere are various methods used to treat phobias. These methods include systematic desensitization, progressive relaxation, virtual reality, modeling, medication, and hypnotherapy. Over the past several decades, psychologists and other researchers have developed effective behavioral, pharmacological, and technological interventions for the treatment of phobia.\nVirtual Reality treatments produce similar effects to in vivo exposure, another efficacious therapy great for treating phobias. Although Virtual Reality is great for treating phobias, the treatment will not work for every phobia. The treatment has positive effects, but depending on the phobia, in vivo would be another ideal treatment to use over Virtual Reality. In vivo exposure is a great way to reduce fear over time and is actually more preferred when trying to treat anxiety and fear related problems.\nTherapy.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is an evidence-based treatment that can help with phobias. It is a talk therapy that can be used alone or along with other therapies. CBT is there to help manage stressful situations and respond better. This therapy requires the person to be honest with themselves and confront their feelings and phobias.\nCognitive Behavioral Therapy can be beneficial by allowing the person to challenge dysfunctional thoughts or beliefs by being mindful of their feelings to recognize that their fear is irrational. CBT may occur in a group setting. Gradual desensitization treatment and CBT are often successful, provided the person is willing to endure some discomfort. In one clinical trial, 90% of people no longer had a phobic reaction after successful CBT treatment. Research in the UK has suggested that for childhood phobias a single session of CBT can be effective.\nEvidence supports that eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is effective in treating some phobias. Its effectiveness in treating complex or trauma-related phobias has not been empirically established. Primarily used to treat post-traumatic stress disorder, EMDR has been demonstrated to ease phobia symptoms following a specific trauma, such as a fear of dogs following a dog bite.\nSystematic desensitization.\nSystematic desensitization is a process in which people seeking help slowly become accustomed to their phobia, and ultimately overcome it. Traditional systematic desensitization involves a person being exposed to the object they are afraid of over time so that the fear and discomfort do not become overwhelming. This controlled exposure to the anxiety-provoking stimulus is key to the effectiveness of exposure therapy in the treatment of specific phobias. It has been shown that humor is an excellent alternative when traditional systematic desensitization is ineffective. Humor systematic desensitization involves a series of treatment activities that elicit humor with the feared object. Previously learned progressive muscle relaxation procedures can be used as the activities become more difficult. Progressive muscle relaxation helps people relax before and during exposure to the feared stimulus.\nVirtual reality therapy is another technique that helps phobic people confront a feared object. It uses virtual reality to generate scenes that may not have been possible or ethical in the physical world. It is equally as effective as traditional exposure therapy and offers additional advantages. These include controlling the scenes and having the phobic person endure more exposure than they might handle in reality.\nMedications.\nMedications are a treatment option often utilized in combination with CBT or if CBT was not tolerated or effective. Medications can help regulate apprehension and fear of a particular fearful object or situation. There are various medication options available for both social anxiety disorder and agoraphobia. The use of medications for specific phobias, besides the limited role of benzodiazepines, do not currently have established guidelines due to minimal supporting evidence.\nAntidepressants.\nAntidepressant medications such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) may be helpful in some cases. SSRIs / SNRIs act on serotonin, a neurotransmitter in the brain. Because of serotonin's positive impacts on mood, an antidepressant may be offered and prescribed as a treatment option. For social anxiety, the SSRIs sertraline, paroxetine, fluvoxamine, and the SNRI venlafaxine have FDA approval. Similar medications may be offered for agoraphobia.\nBenzodiazepines.\nSedatives such as benzodiazepines (clonazepam, alprazolam) are another therapeutic option, which can help people relax by reducing the amount of anxiety they feel. Benzodiazepines may be useful in the acute treatment of severe symptoms, but the risk-benefit ratio usually goes against their long-term use in phobic disorders. This class of medication has recently been shown as effective if used with negative behaviours such as excessive alcohol use. Despite this positive finding, benzodiazepines are used with caution due to side effects and risk of developing dependence or withdrawal symptoms. In specific phobia for example if the phobic stimulus is one that is not regularly encountered such as flying a short course may be provided.\nBeta-blockers.\nBeta blockers (propranolol) are another therapeutic option, particularly for those with the performance only subtype of social anxiety disorder. They may stop the stimulating effects of adrenaline, such as sweating, increased heart rate, elevated blood pressure, tremors, and the feeling of a pounding heart. By taking beta-blockers before a phobic event, these symptoms are decreased, making the event less frightening. Beta-blockers are not effective for generalized social anxiety disorder.\nHypnotherapy.\nHypnotherapy is another effective therapy that uses hypnosis to help manage anxiety and stress. This therapy can help people gain control over their phobias.\nHypnotherapy can be used alone and in conjunction with systematic desensitization to treat phobias. Through hypnotherapy, the underlying cause of the phobia may be uncovered. The phobia may be caused by a past event that the person does not remember, a phenomenon known as repression. The mind represses traumatic memories from the conscious mind until the person is ready to deal with them.\nHypnotherapy may also eliminate the conditioned responses that occur during different situations. People are first placed into a hypnotic trance, an extremely relaxed state in which the unconscious can be retrieved. This state makes people more open to suggestion, which helps bring about desired change. Consciously addressing old memories helps individuals understand the event and see it less threateningly.\nPrognosis.\nOutcomes vary widely among the phobic anxiety disorders. There is a possibility that remission occurs without intervention but relapses are common. Response to treatment as well as remission and relapse rates are impacted by the severity of an individual's disorder as well as how long they have been experiencing symptoms. For example, in social anxiety disorder (social phobia) a majority of individuals will experience remission within the first couple of years of symptom onset without specific treatment. On the other hand, in Agoraphobia as few as 10% of individuals are seen to reach complete remission without treatment. A study looking at the 2 year remission rates for anxiety disorders found that those with multiple anxieties were less likely to experience remission.\nSpecific phobia.\nThe majority of those that develop a specific phobia first experience symptoms in childhood. Often individuals will experience symptoms periodically with periods of remission before complete remission occurs. However, specific phobias that continue into adulthood are likely to experience a more chronic course. Specific phobias in older adults has been linked with a decrease in quality of life. Those with specific phobias are at an increased risk of suicide. Greater impairment is found in those that have multiple phobias. Response to treatment is relatively high but many do not seek treatment due to lack of access, ability to avoid phobia, or unwilling to face feared object for repeated CBT sessions.\nComorbidities.\nMany of those with a phobia often have more than one phobia. There are also a number of psychological and physiological disorders that tend to occur or coexist at higher rates among this population. As with all anxiety disorders the most common psychiatric condition to occur with a phobia is major depressive disorder. Additionally bipolar disorder, substance dependence disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and post traumatic stress disorder have also been found to occur in those with phobias at higher rates.\nEpidemiology.\nPhobias are a common form of anxiety disorder, and distributions are heterogeneous by age and gender. An American study by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) found that between 8.7 percent and 18.1 percent of Americans have phobias, making it the most common mental illness among women in all age groups and the second most common illness among men older than 25. Between 4 percent and 10 percent of all children experience specific phobias during their lives, and social phobias occur in one percent to three percent of children.\nA Swedish study found that females have a higher number of cases per year than males (26.5 percent for females and 12.4 percent for males). Among adults, 21.2 percent of women and 10.9 percent of men have a single specific phobia, while multiple phobias occur in 5.4 percent of females and 1.5 percent of males. Women are nearly four times as likely as men to have a fear of animals (12.1 percent in women and 3.3 percent in men) \u2014 a higher dimorphic than with all specific or generalized phobias or social phobias. Social phobias are more common in girls than boys, while situational phobia occurs in 17.4 percent of women and 8.5 percent of men.\nHistory.\nIn the 9th century, Islamic polymath Abu Zayd al-Balkhi (850-934) was likely the first to identify phobias accurately. In his treatise \"Sustenance of the Body and Soul\", Al Balkhi described phobia as a psychological disorder that may manifest with physical symptoms such as paleness of the skin and trembling of the hands. Remarkably, Al-Balkhi not only recognised phobias as psychological in nature but also proposed a treatment approach that included cognitive techniques and exposure therapy. He recommended that individuals gradually expose themselves to feared stimuli and train themselves to tolerate the experience until they reach habituation, an approach that mirrors modern therapeutic techniques for treating phobias. This is an exceptional accomplishment considering that the physical symptoms of phobias were mistakenly grouped under physical rubrics in Western medical textbooks and were not believed to be associated with phobias until the 19th century. \nThe Western understanding of phobias as a physical condition was influenced by a combination of medical dogma and a limited understanding of psychology and mental health. This view persisted from antiquity through the Renaissance and into the 19th century, until more nuanced psychological frameworks were developed.\nIn the early history of Western medicine, mental and emotional disturbances, including phobias, were often viewed through a physiological lens, with causes linked to physical imbalances. Hippocrates (460\u2013370 BCE), the father of medicine, proposed that mental health issues were caused by imbalances in the four humors (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile), and emotional conditions like fear were incorrectly seen as physical symptoms of these imbalances. Galen, a Roman physician, expanded this idea, attributing mental disturbances to bodily humors and brain function.\nIn the Middle Ages, medical explanations shifted to spiritual causes, with mental disorders seen as linked to demonic possession or divine punishment. Physical symptoms, like trembling or paleness, were often misattributed to fever or other bodily ailments rather than psychological distress.\nBy the Early Modern period (16th\u201317th centuries), interest in neurology grew, but mental illnesses, including phobias, were still primarily seen as physical conditions. Treatments like bloodletting or purging were common, reflecting the belief that emotional symptoms stemmed from bodily imbalances rather than psychological processes.\nThe 19th century marked a shift as psychological models began to re-emerge. Jean-Martin Charcot and Sigmund Freud explored the mental roots of phobias, though Freud still linked them to unconscious conflicts. The emergence of behavioural psychology, particularly John B. Watson's work on conditioned fear responses, began to highlight the psychological basis of phobias. However, theories by Charcot, Freud and Watson were still not as robust as Al-Balkhi's theory of phobias proposed almost a millennia earlier. \nBy the 20th century, the understanding of phobias in the West evolved integrating emotional, cognitive, and biological components, largely aligning with Al-Balkhi's holistic view of phobias as a psychological disorder.\nSociety and culture.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"phobia\" comes from the (\"ph\u00f3bos\"), meaning \"fear\" or \"morbid fear\". The regular system for naming specific phobias uses prefixes based on a Greek word for the object of the fear, plus the suffix \"-phobia\". Benjamin Rush's 1786 satirical text, 'On the different Species of Phobia', established the term's dictionary sense of specific morbid fears. However, many phobias are irregularly named with Latin prefixes, such as apiphobia instead of melissaphobia (fear of bees) or aviphobia instead of ornithophobia (fear of birds). Creating these terms is something of a word game. Such fears are psychological rather than physiological in origin, and few of these terms are found in medical literature. In ancient Greek mythology Phobos was the twin brother of Deimos (terror).\nThe word \"phobia\" may also refer to conditions other than true phobias. For example, the term \"hydrophobia\" is an old name for rabies, since an aversion to water is one of that disease's symptoms. A specific phobia to water is called aquaphobia instead. A hydrophobe is a chemical compound that repels water. Similarly, photophobia usually refers to a physical complaint (aversion to light due to inflamed eyes or excessively dilated pupils), rather than an irrational fear of light.\nNon-medical, deterrent and political use.\nSeveral terms with the suffix -phobia are used non-clinically to imply irrational fear or hatred. Examples include:\nUsually, these kinds of \"phobias\" are described as fear, dislike, disapproval, prejudice, hatred, discrimination, or hostility towards the object of the \"phobia\". It is a form of hyperbole.\nPopular culture.\nA number of films and TV shows have portrayed individuals with a variety of phobic disorders.\nResearch directions.\nBefore the development of pharmacotherapy, the treatment of phobias and mental health disorders relied solely on therapy such as CBT. Although therapy can be incredibly effective for many, it does not always achieve the desired effect. Interventional psychiatry is an additional branch in medicine that has expanded treatment options, and further research continues to explore effectiveness and applications. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) are two examples of device-based interventions widely utilized. In terms of use in treating phobias and anxiety disorders as a whole, TMS is being explored as an augmentation option for those who do not have the desired response to other therapeutic options or side effects from medications. A majority of research has been conducted exploring the use of TMS in PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder. A meta\u2010analysis conducted in 2019 found only two clinical trials for the use of TMS in specific phobias, one of which explored anxiety and avoidance rates in individuals with acrophobia. Although the study found decreased rates in both anxiety and avoidance after two TMS sessions because of the limited number of studies and small sample size, few conclusions can be made. D-cycloserine (DCS), a partial N-methyl-D-aspartate agonist, is an additional investigational approach to augmentation specific phobias that a meta-analysis suggested had better outcomes and less symptom severity when utilized before initiating CBT.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23338", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23338", "title": "Pittsburgh Steelers", "text": "National Football League franchise in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania\nThe Pittsburgh Steelers are a professional American football team based in Pittsburgh. The Steelers compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. Founded in 1933, the Steelers are the seventh-oldest franchise in the NFL, and the oldest franchise in the AFC.\nIn contrast with their status as a perennial losing franchise in the pre-merger NFL, where they were the oldest team never to have won a league championship, the Steelers of the post-merger (modern) era are among the most successful NFL franchises, especially during their dynasty in the 1970s. The team is tied with the New England Patriots for the most Super Bowl titles at six, and they have both played in (16 times) and hosted (11 times) more conference championship games than any other team in the NFL. The Steelers have also won eight AFC championships, tied with the Denver Broncos, but behind the Patriots' record 11 AFC championships. The team is tied with the Broncos, Dallas Cowboys, and San Francisco 49ers for the second-most Super Bowl appearances with eight.\nThe Steelers, whose history may be traced to a regional pro team that was established in the early 1920s, joined the NFL as the Pittsburgh Pirates on July 8, 1933. The team was owned by Art Rooney and took its original name from the baseball team of the same name, as was common practice for NFL teams at the time. To distinguish them from the baseball team, local media took to calling the football team the Rooneymen, an unofficial nickname that persisted for decades after the team had adopted its current nickname. The ownership of the Steelers has remained within the Rooney family since the organization's founding. Art Rooney's son, Dan Rooney, owned the team from 1988 until his death in 2017. Much control of the franchise has been given to Dan Rooney's son, Art Rooney II.\nThe Steelers enjoy a large, widespread fanbase nicknamed Steeler Nation. They currently play their home games at Acrisure Stadium on Pittsburgh's North Side in the North Shore neighborhood, which also hosts the University of Pittsburgh Panthers. Built in 2001 as Heinz Field, the stadium replaced Three Rivers Stadium, which had hosted the Steelers for 31 seasons. Prior to Three Rivers, the Steelers had played their games in Pitt Stadium and at Forbes Field.\nHistory.\nRooney family era (1933\u2013present).\nThe Steelers first took to the field as the Pittsburgh Pirates on September 20, 1933, losing 23\u20132 to the New York Giants. Through the 1930s, the Pirates never finished higher than second place in their division, or with a record better than .500 (1936). Pittsburgh did make history in 1938 by signing Byron White, a future Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, to what was at the time the biggest contract in NFL history, but he played only one year with the Pirates before signing with the Detroit Lions. Prior to the 1940 season, the Pirates renamed themselves the Steelers.\nDuring World War II, the Steelers experienced player shortages. They twice merged with other NFL franchises to field a team. During the 1943 season, they merged with the Philadelphia Eagles forming the \"Phil-Pitt Eagles\" and were known as the \"Steagles\". This team went 5\u20134\u20131. In 1944, they merged with the Chicago Cardinals and were known as Card-Pitt (or, mockingly, as the \"Carpets\"). This team finished 0\u201310, marking the only winless team in franchise history.\nThe Steelers made the playoffs for the first time in 1947, tying for first place in the division at 8\u20134 with the Philadelphia Eagles. This forced a tie-breaking playoff game at Forbes Field, which the Steelers lost 21\u20130. That would be Pittsburgh's only playoff game in the pre-merger era; they did qualify for a \"Playoff Bowl\" in 1962 as the second-best team in their conference, but this was not considered an official playoff.\nIn 1970, the year they moved into Three Rivers Stadium and the year of the AFL\u2013NFL merger, the Pittsburgh Steelers were one of three old-guard NFL teams to switch to the newly formed American Football Conference (the others being the Cleveland Browns and the Baltimore Colts), in order to equalize the number of teams in the two conferences of the newly merged league. The Steelers also received a $3\u00a0million ($ million today) relocation fee, which was a windfall for them; for years they rarely had enough to build a true contending team.\nChuck Noll years (1969\u20131991).\nThe Steelers' history of bad luck changed with the hiring of coach Chuck Noll from the NFL champion Baltimore Colts for the 1969 season. Noll's most remarkable talent was in his draft selections, taking Hall of Famers \"Mean\" Joe Greene in 1969, Terry Bradshaw and Mel Blount in 1970, Jack Ham in 1971, Franco Harris in 1972, and finally, in 1974, pulling off the incredible feat of selecting four Hall of Famers in one draft year, Lynn Swann, Jack Lambert, John Stallworth, and Mike Webster. The Pittsburgh Steelers' 1974 draft was their best ever; no other team has ever drafted four future Hall of Famers in one year, and only very few (including the 1970 Steelers) have drafted two or more in one year.\nThe players drafted in the early 1970s formed the base of an NFL dynasty, making the playoffs in eight seasons and becoming the only team in NFL history to win four Super Bowls in six years, as well as the first to win more than two. They also enjoyed a regular-season streak of 49 consecutive wins (1971\u20131979) against teams that would finish with a losing record that year.\nThe Steelers suffered a rash of injuries in the 1980 season and missed the playoffs with a 9\u20137 record. The 1981 season was no better, with an 8\u20138 showing. The team was then hit with the retirements of all their key players from the Super Bowl years. \"Mean\" Joe Greene retired after the 1981 season, Lynn Swann and Jack Ham after 1982's playoff berth, Terry Bradshaw and Mel Blount after 1983's divisional championship, and Jack Lambert after 1984's AFC Championship Game appearance.\nAfter those retirements, the franchise skidded to its first losing seasons since 1971. Though still competitive, the Steelers would not finish above .500 in 1985, 1986, and 1988. In 1987, the year of the players' strike, the Steelers finished with a record of 8\u20137, but missed the playoffs. In 1989, they would reach the second round of the playoffs on the strength of Merrill Hoge and Rod Woodson before narrowly missing the playoffs in each of the next two seasons, Noll's last seasons.\nNoll's career record with Pittsburgh was 209\u2013156\u20131.\nBill Cowher years (1992\u20132006).\nIn 1992, Chuck Noll retired and was succeeded by Kansas City Chiefs defensive coordinator Bill Cowher, a native of the Pittsburgh suburb of Crafton.\nCowher led the Steelers to the playoffs in each of his first six seasons, a feat that had been accomplished only by legendary coach Paul Brown of the Cleveland Browns. In those first six seasons, Cowher coached them as deep as the AFC Championship Game three times and following the 1995 season an appearance in Super Bowl XXX on the strength of the \"Blitzburgh\" defense. However, the Steelers lost to the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl XXX, two weeks after a thrilling AFC Championship victory over the Indianapolis Colts. Cowher produced the franchise's record-tying fifth Super Bowl win in Super Bowl XL over the NFC champion Seattle Seahawks ten years later. With that victory, the Steelers became the third team to win five Super Bowls, and the first sixth-seeded playoff team to reach and win the Super Bowl since the NFL expanded to a 12-team post-season tournament in 1990. He coached through the 2006 season which ended with an 8\u20138 record, just short of the playoffs. Overall Cowher's teams reached the playoffs 10 of 15 seasons with six AFC Championship Games, two Super Bowl berths and a championship.\nCowher's career record with Pittsburgh was 149\u201390\u20131 in the regular season and 161\u201399\u20131 overall, including playoff games.\nMike Tomlin years (2007\u2013present).\nOn January 7, 2007, Cowher resigned from coaching the Steelers, citing a need to spend more time with his family. He did not use the term \"retire\", leaving open a possible return to the NFL as coach of another team. A three-man committee consisting of Art Rooney II, Dan Rooney, and Kevin Colbert was set up to conduct interviews for the head coaching vacancy. On January 22, 2007, Minnesota Vikings defensive coordinator Mike Tomlin was announced as Cowher's successor as head coach. Tomlin is the first African-American to be named head coach of the team in its 75-year history. In his first season, he led the Steelers to a 10\u20136 record and AFC North title. The team fell to the Jacksonville Jaguars 31\u201329 in the Wild Card Round to end the season. The following year, he led the Steelers to a 12\u20134 mark and a division title. With wins over the San Diego Chargers in the Divisional Round and the Baltimore Ravens in the AFC Championship, Tomlin became the third consecutive Steelers Head Coach to go to the Super Bowl, equaling the Dallas Cowboys (Tom Landry, Jimmy Johnson and Barry Switzer) in this achievement. On February 1, 2009, Tomlin led the Steelers to their second Super Bowl of this decade, and went on to win 27\u201323 against the Arizona Cardinals. At age 36, he was the youngest head coach to ever win the Super Bowl, and he is only the second African-American coach to ever win the Super Bowl (Tony Dungy was the first). In their title defense, the Steelers went 9\u20137 and missed the postseason in the 2009 season. In the 2010 season, Tomlin led the team to a 12\u20134 record and an AFC North title. The team defeated the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional Round and the New York Jets in the AFC Championship. Tomlin became the only coach to reach the Super Bowl twice before the age of 40 as he took the team to Super Bowl XLV on February 6, 2011. However, the Steelers were defeated by the Green Bay Packers, 31\u201325.\nIn the 2011 season, the Steelers made the postseason with a 12\u20134 record. They lost in overtime to the Denver Broncos in the Wild Card Round. The Steelers recorded their 400th victory in Week 8 of the 2012 season after defeating the Washington Redskins. Overall, the Steelers went 8\u20138 and missed the postseason in 2012. In the 2013 season, the Steelers went 8\u20138 and missed the postseason. In the 2014 season, the Steelers won the AFC North with a 11\u20135 record. They lost 30\u201317 to the Baltimore Ravens in the Wild Card Round. The Steelers finished with a 10\u20136 record and made the playoffs in the 2015 season. They defeated the Cincinnati Bengals in the Wild Card Round and lost to the Denver Broncos in the Divisional Round. In the 2016 season, the Steelers won the AFC North with a 11\u20135 record. They defeated the Miami Dolphins in the Wild Card Round and the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round before falling to the New England Patriots in the AFC Championship. In the 2017 season, the Steelers won the AFC North with a 13\u20133 mark. Their postseason was short lived with a 45\u201342 loss to the Jacksonville Jaguars. Despite a 9\u20136\u20131 record in the 2018 season, the Steelers missed the playoffs. The Steelers went 8\u20138 and missed the postseason in the 2019 season. The 2020 season saw the Steelers have franchise-best 11\u20130 start. However, the team faded at the end of the season to finish 12\u20134. The team lost in the Wild Card Round to the Cleveland Browns 48\u201337. The 2021 season saw the team go 9\u20137\u20131 and make the postseason. The Steelers lost 42\u201321 to the Kansas City Chiefs in the Wild Card Round. Longtime quarterback Ben Roethlisberger retired following the 2021 season.\nThrough the end of the 2021 season, Tomlin's record is 162\u201394\u20132 (), including playoffs. He is the first Pittsburgh coach to never post a losing season. The 2013\u201317 seasons were noted for record performances from the \"Killer B's\". This trio consisted of Antonio Brown, Ben Roethlisberger and Le'Veon Bell. Occasionally, the \"Killer B's\" has also included kicker Chris Boswell due to his ability to hit game-winning field goals.\nPrior to the 2022 season, the team drafted Pitt quarterback Kenny Pickett with their first round pick in the 2022 NFL draft. Pickett started 12 games as the Steelers went 9\u20138 and missed the postseason in the 2022 season. In the 2023 season, the team finished 10\u20137 and third in the AFC North. They made the playoffs and were defeated by the Buffalo Bills in the Wild Card Round 31\u201317. Prior to the 2024 season, the Steelers traded Pickett to the Philadelphia Eagles. The team traded for Justin Fields from the Chicago Bears and signed Russell Wilson, who was released from the Denver Broncos.\nSummary.\nSince the NFL merger in 1970, the Pittsburgh Steelers have compiled a regular-season record of 444\u2013282\u20132 (.635) and an overall record of 480\u2013305\u20132 (.635) including the playoffs, reached the playoffs 30 times, won their division 22 times, played in 16 AFC championship games, and won six of eight Super Bowls. They are also the only NFL team not to have a season with 12 or more losses since the league expanded to a 16-game schedule in 1978.\nOwnership.\nSince 2008, the Rooney family has brought in several investors for the team while retaining control of the team itself. This came about so that the team could comply with NFL ownership regulations. Dan Rooney, and his son, Art Rooney II, president of the franchise, wanted to stay involved with the franchise, while two of the brothers\u00a0\u2013 Timothy and Patrick\u00a0\u2013 wanted to further pursue racetracks that they own in Florida and New York. Since 2006, many of the racetracks have added video slot machines, causing them to violate \"NFL policy that prohibits involvement with racetrack and gambling interests\".\nUpon Dan Rooney's death in 2017, he and Art Rooney II retained control of the team with the league-minimum 30%, the following made up the other investors at the time:\nThree minority investors in the Steelers have since became majority owners of other NFL teams:\nSeason-by-season records.\nThrough the end of the 2023 season, the Steelers have an all-time record of 707\u2013606\u201322, including playoffs. In recent seasons the Steelers have generally performed well, qualifying for the playoffs six times in the past ten seasons, while winning their division four times.\nIn the NFL's \"modern era\" (since the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970) the Steelers have posted the best record in the league. The franchise has won the most regular-season games, the most playoff games (33 playoff wins; the Dallas Cowboys are second with 32), won the most divisional titles (20), has played in the most conference championship games (15), hosted the most conference championship games (11), and is tied with the Dallas Cowboys, the Denver Broncos and the New England Patriots for the most Super Bowl appearances (8). The Steelers have the best winning percentage (including every expansion team), earned the most All-Pro nominations, and have accumulated the most Super Bowl wins (6) since the modern game started in 1970. In 2017, they became the first team to reach 450 victories in the regular season since the 1970 merger. The Steelers are 36\u201326 (.580) in the postseason, with all but one (the 1947 playoff) having been played since the merger.\nCivil rights advocacy.\nThe franchise, along with the Rooney family have for generations been strong advocates for equality of opportunity for both minorities and women. Among these achievements of the Steelers was the first to hire an African-American assistant coach (September 29, 1957, with Lowell Perry), the first to start an African-American quarterback (December 3, 1973, with Joe Gilliam), the first team to boast of an African-American Super Bowl MVP (January 12, 1975, with Franco Harris), the first to hire an African-American Coordinator (September 2, 1984, with Tony Dungy), the first owner to push for passage of an \"equal opportunity\" mandating that at least one minority candidate is given an interview in all head coach hiring decisions throughout the league (the Rooney Rule in the early 2000s), and the first to hire a female as full-time athletic trainer (Ariko Iso on July 24, 2002).\nChampionships.\nDivision championships.\nThe Steelers were a part of the NFL Eastern Division from 1933 to 1943 and were briefly in the Western Division in 1944, before returning to the Eastern Division until 1949. The team was then in the American Conference from 1950 to 1952, and the Eastern Conference from 1953 to 1966. They were then placed in the Century Division of the Eastern Conference in 1967. When the league reformed into the NFC and AFC in 1970, the Steelers were placed in the AFC Central until 2001 when they were realigned into the AFC North Division.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe Steelers have used black and gold as their colors since the club's inception, the lone exception being the 1943 season when they merged with the Philadelphia Eagles and formed the \"Steagles\"; the team's colors at that time were green and white as a result of wearing Eagles uniforms. Originally, the team wore solid gold-colored helmets and black jerseys. The Steelers' black and gold colors are now shared by all major professional teams in the city, including the Pittsburgh Pirates in baseball and the Pittsburgh Penguins in ice hockey. The shade of gold differs slightly among teams: the Penguins have previously used \"Vegas Gold\", a color similar to metallic gold, and the Pirates' gold is a darker mustard yellow-gold, while the Steelers \"gold\" is more of a bright canary yellow. Black and gold are also the colors of the city's official flag.\nThe Steelers logo was introduced in 1962 and is based on the \"Steelmark\", originally designed by Pittsburgh's U.S. Steel and now owned by the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI). In fact, it was Cleveland-based Republic Steel that suggested the Steelers adopt the industry logo. It consists of the word \"Steelers\" surrounded by three astroids (hypocycloids of four cusps). The original meanings behind the astroids were, \"Steel lightens your work, brightens your leisure, and widens your world.\" Later, the colors came to represent the ingredients used in the steel-making process: yellow for coal, red for iron ore, and blue for scrap steel. While the formal Steelmark logo contains only the word \"Steel\", the team was given permission to add \"ers\" in 1963 after a petition to AISI.\nThe Steelers are the only NFL team that puts its logo on only one side of the helmet (the right side). Longtime field and equipment manager Jack Hart was instructed to do this by Art Rooney as a test to see how the logo appeared on the gold helmets; however, its popularity led the team to leave it that way permanently. A year after introducing the logo, they switched to black helmets to make it stand out more.\nThe Steelers, along with the New York Giants, are one of only two teams in the National Football League to have the players' uniform numbers on both the front and back of the helmets.\nThe current uniform designs were introduced in 1968. The design consists of gold pants and either black jerseys or white jerseys, except for the 1970 and 1971 seasons when the Steelers wore white pants with their white jerseys. In 1997, the team switched to rounded numbers on the jersey to match the number font (Futura Condensed) on the helmets, and a Steelers logo was added to the left side of the jersey.\nThe 2007\u20132011 third uniform, consisting of a black jersey with gold lettering, white pants with black and gold stripes, and a gold helmet were first used during the Steelers' 75th anniversary season in 2007. They were meant to evoke the memory of the 1963\u20131964 era uniforms. The uniforms were so popular among fans that the Steelers' organization decided to keep them and use them as a third option during home games only.\nIn 2012, the Steelers introduced a new third uniform, consisting of a yellow jersey with black horizontal lines (making a bumble bee like pattern) with black lettering and black numbers placed inside a white box, to represent the jerseys worn by the Steelers in their 1934 season. The rest of the uniform consists of beige pants, yellow with black horizontal striped socks, and the Steelers regular black helmet. The uniforms were used for the Steelers' 80th anniversary season. Much like the previous alternate these jerseys were so popular that they were used up through the 2016 season. The jerseys were nicknamed the \"bumblebee jerseys\" due to looking like the pattern of a bumblebee. The jerseys were retired after the 2016 season.\nAlso in 2016, the Steelers introduced its alternate black \"Color Rush\" uniforms. These were based on the uniforms they wore from 1946 to 1965, but with black pants in place of either gold or white pants.\nIn 2018, the Steelers unveiled a third uniform based on those worn from 1968 to 1997, coinciding with the Steel Curtain teams of the 1970s. It is similar to the current uniforms but without the Steelers logo on the left chest and use block lettering and numbers in place of Futura Condensed.\nIn 1979, the team owners were approached by then-Iowa Hawkeyes Head Coach Hayden Fry about designing his fading college team's uniforms in the image of the Steelers. Three days later, the owners sent Fry the reproduction jerseys (home and away versions) of then quarterback Terry Bradshaw. Today, the Hawkeyes still retain the 1979 Steelers uniforms as their home, and away colors.\nRivals.\nThe Pittsburgh Steelers have three primary rivals, all within their division: (Cleveland Browns, Baltimore Ravens, and Cincinnati Bengals). They also have rivalries with other teams that arose from post-season battles in the past, most notably the Las Vegas Raiders, Dallas Cowboys, Denver Broncos, New England Patriots, and Tennessee Titans. They also have an intrastate rivalry with the Philadelphia Eagles, but under the current scheduling the teams play each other only once every four years.\nDivisional rivals.\nCleveland Browns.\nThe Steelers and Cleveland Browns have been divisional rivals since the two cities' teams began playing against each other in 1950. After posting a 9\u201331 record in the first 40 games of the series between the two cities, the Steelers have gone 66\u201327\u20131 (including 42\u20136 in games played in Pittsburgh) since 1970 and currently lead the series 75\u201358\u20131; The Steelers have particularly dominated the Browns since their return to the NFL in 1999 and won twelve straight meetings between 2003 and 2009. Additionally, the Browns posted losing streaks of 16 (1970\u201385) and 15 (2004\u2013present) games in Pittsburgh. Former Steelers head coach Bill Cowher coached the Browns special teams and secondary before following Marty Schottenheimer for a brief tenure as Kansas City Chiefs defensive coordinator and then hired by Pittsburgh. This has only intensified the rivalry. The teams have met three times in the postseason (1994, 2002, and 2021) with the Steelers winning the first two meetings, but losing the most recent in 2021.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nPittsburgh's rivalry with the Baltimore Ravens has had several memorable matchups and has escalated into a fierce divisional rivalry. Both teams handed the other their first losses at their current home stadiums. The Steelers won the inaugural game played at Baltimore's M&amp;T Bank Stadium in 1998, 20\u201313, and three years later the Ravens handed the Steelers their first-ever loss at Heinz Field, 13\u201310. Later that season (2001) Pittsburgh won a 27\u201310 against Baltimore, who was the defending Super Bowl champion. During their NFL championship season in 2000, the Ravens defeated the Steelers in Pittsburgh, 16\u20130, in the season opener with the Steelers later exacting revenge, 9\u20136, in Baltimore (the Ravens' final loss of the season). During the Steelers 2008 Championship run, they beat the Ravens three times, including a win in the AFC Championship game. The two teams complement each other by consistently fielding strong defenses. The Steelers lead the all-time series (including playoffs), 32\u201324. The teams have met four times in the postseason, with the Steelers owning a 3\u20131 record.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nThe Steelers' rivalry with the Cincinnati Bengals dates from the 1970 season, when the AFL\u2013NFL merger was completed. In 1976, the Steelers kept their playoff hopes alive (they later won the division) with a late-season 7\u20133 win in snowy Cincinnati. One of the most memorable games was the , in which the Steelers, en route to a Super Bowl title, won a 31\u201317 come-from-behind victory after Bengals quarterback Carson Palmer was forced to leave the game with a knee injury. The injury happened when nose tackle Kimo von Oelhoffen contacted Palmer's knee during a passing play. The Bengals players called this a dirty play; the NFL ruled that it was accidental and did not fine von Oelhoffen for the hit. The incident led to an intensifying of the rivalry. The Bengals beat the Steelers in Week 13 of the 2005 season 38\u201331, and wide receiver T. J. Houshmandzadeh used a Terrible Towel to polish his cleats while walking up the tunnel after the game, fueling the rivalry. The Steelers and Bengals finished 2005 and 2006 with identical records (11\u20135 and 8\u20138 respectively), splitting both regular-season series, the Bengals winning the tiebreaker both years due to having a superior division record. The Steelers also are responsible for ending the Bengals' season in Cincinnati two years in a row, eliminating them from the playoffs in 2005 and taking them out of contention in 2006. The rivalry has become more intense again since the 2015 season. A central figure is Bengals linebacker Vontaze Burfict, often inflicting brutal hits, resulting in serious injuries to several Steelers on multiple occasions. In the 2015 Wild Card playoff game in Cincinnati, Burfict was the culprit of a late penalty directly responsible for an extremely unlikely 18\u201316 Steelers comeback victory. The Steelers lead the all-time series, 63\u201335. The teams have met twice in the postseason, with the Steelers winning both times.\nConference.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe New England Patriots emerged as a prominent rival in league circles when the Patriots upset the Steelers in the 2001 AFC Championship Game at Heinz Field, though the two teams had met in the postseason twice before; the Patriots defeated the Steelers in 1996 28\u20133 while the Steelers won 7\u20136 in 1997; both times, the Patriots fielded players with Pittsburgh-area roots in Ty Law and Curtis Martin. Martin's final game with the Patriots was in the 1997 playoffs before he departed to the rival New York Jets. Following the 2001 AFC title upset, the Patriots defeated the Steelers 30\u201314 at the start of the 2002 season. Pittsburgh did not exact revenge for the two losses until ending the Patriots' record-setting 21-game winning streak in week 6 of the 2004 NFL season. Later that season, the Steelers lost to the eventual Super Bowl champion Patriots in the AFC Championship game after a 15\u20131 regular season.\nThe Patriots won six of seven meetings over a ten-year period (1998\u20132007) before the Steelers broke through with a 33\u201310 victory at Foxborough in 2008, after Matt Cassel turned the ball over five times. The Patriots in 2013 then made history by becoming the first opponent to score 55 points on the Steelers, winning 55\u201331. The Patriots won again in 2015 (28\u201321) and 2016's regular season (27\u201316) and then won 36\u201317 in the 2016 AFC Championship Game. They also won in 2017 when a go-ahead touchdown reception by Steelers' tight end Jesse James was controversially called back. Though they ultimately missed the playoffs, the Steelers defeated the Patriots by a score of 17\u201310 on December 16, 2018, in Pittsburgh.\nIn the postseason, the Patriots have outscored the Steelers 135\u201375, with the Patriots maintaining a 4\u20131 record. The only other franchises with winning AFC playoff records against Steelers include the Los Angeles Chargers (2\u20131), the Jacksonville Jaguars (2\u20130), and the Denver Broncos (5\u20133). The Steelers have an all-time regular-season record of 16\u201315 against the Patriots. In their last matchup, on September 21, 2025, the Steelers beat the Patriots 21\u201314. In the Bill Belichick era, the main period of the rivalry, the Patriots had a 12\u20134 record against the Steelers.\nTennessee Titans.\nThe Steelers have a rivalry with the Tennessee Titans, formerly the Houston/Tennessee Oilers. The Oilers were aligned into the AFC Central with the Steelers in 1970 and were division rivals for 32 seasons. The Steelers dominated the rivalry during the Houston era and defeated the Oilers in all three of their playoff matchups. However, since the franchise moved to Tennessee in 1997, the rivalry shifted, with the Titans winning 13 of 22 meetings (including a bitter 34\u201331 playoff showdown in 2002); the Titans won seven in a row in the 1997\u20132001 period, the longest win streak by either team in the series. The Steelers have won 47 of 79 career meetings following their 27\u201324 win at Nissan Stadium in 2020.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Denver Broncos in 2011 broke a tie with the Oakland Raiders for the most playoff meetings versus the Steelers and added yet another meeting in 2015 (the Broncos have met Pittsburgh eight times to Oakland's six). The Steelers' rivalry with the Broncos dates from 1970, but the first notable contest came in 1973, when Denver dealt Pittsburgh its first regular-season defeat at Three Rivers Stadium, 23\u201313. The following year, they met in the NFL's first regular-season overtime game, which ended in a 35\u201335 tie. Denver's first playoff game had them hosting the Steelers in the 1977 divisional round; the Broncos won 34\u201321. The following year, the Steelers hosted and defeated Denver 33\u201310 in the divisional round. Their next playoff matchup was the 1984 divisional round in Mile High Stadium; the Steelers pulled the upset 24\u201317. They nearly pulled the upset again 5 years later in Denver, but the Broncos prevailed in the divisional playoff, 24\u201323.\nIn 1997, the two teams met in Pittsburgh for the AFC Championship Game, where Denver squeaked out at 24\u201321 win. Eight years later, the Steelers advanced to Super Bowl XL by beating Denver 34\u201317 in Colorado. In 2011, after appearing in Super Bowl XLV, the Steelers had their campaign to repeat as AFC Champions dashed in Denver after a stunning overtime upset by the Tim Tebow-led Broncos in January 2012, in what would become known as the \"316 game\". The following September the Steelers were defeated in Denver 31\u201319 in Peyton Manning's debut as Broncos quarterback. The two clubs met twice in 2015, as the Steelers defeated the Broncos in the regular season but fell in the Divisional Round of the AFC playoffs; through the 2021 season, Denver leads the series 20\u201313\u20131, including 5\u20133 in the playoffs. Neither team has beaten the other more than three times in a row. In their last matchup, the Steelers beat the Broncos on October 10, 2021, in Pittsburgh by the score of 27\u201319.\nLas Vegas Raiders.\nThe Steelers have a rivalry with the Las Vegas Raiders, formerly the Oakland/Los Angeles Raiders. Games between the Steelers and the Raiders were some of the most heated battles of the 1970s and early to mid-1980s. The Steelers' first playoff victory in franchise history came against the Raiders, which occurred on December 23, 1972, in a 13\u20137 victory over the Raiders; the victory occurred when Terry Bradshaw threw a pass intended for John Fuqua that was deflected into the hands of Franco Harris, who scooped the ball from nearly hitting the ground and carried the ball in for a touchdown, which was later referred to as the Immaculate Reception, while attracting controversy from Raiders players and coaches, who alleged that the ball had bounced off Fuqua, which would have made it an illegal play per the rules of the time. The victory sent Pittsburgh to their first-ever AFC Championship Game. The following year, the two teams met in the Divisional Round again, and the Raiders responded with a 33\u201314 victory to advance to the AFC title game. However, Pittsburgh fired back with two straight AFC Championship victories over the Raiders in 1974 (24\u201313) and 1975 (16\u201310) to reach the Super Bowl. The Raiders responded with a victory over Pittsburgh in the 1976 AFC Championship game 24\u20137 (the third consecutive AFC title game between the two teams), but not before Chuck Noll referred to Raider George Atkinson as part of the NFL's \"criminal element\" after his alleged cheap-shot on Lynn Swann during a regular-season matchup. Atkinson and the Raiders later filed a defamation of character lawsuit against Noll, but lost. Following the 1983 regular season, the Los Angeles Raiders defeated the Steelers 38\u201310 in the AFC Divisional round, which turned out to be the last NFL game for Steeler Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterback Terry Bradshaw, who did not play due to injury.\nWhile the rivalry has dissipated over the years (mostly due to the Raiders decline after 2002), the teams have had notable games against each other, including an upset Steelers victory towards the end of the 2000 season to prevent the Raiders from obtaining homefield advantage in the playoffs, and an upset Raiders victory in week 8 of the 2006 NFL season (20\u201313), which helped cost the Steelers a playoff berth. In Week 13 of the 2009 season, another Raiders upset victory happened; the game lead changed five times on five touchdowns in the fourth quarter until Raiders QB Bruce Gradkowski's third touchdown of the quarter won it with nine seconds to go. The 27\u201324 loss cost the Steelers another playoff run. The teams met at Pittsburgh in 2010, where the Steelers blew out the Raiders 35\u20133, and ended their 3-game winning streak; the game was further notable for a punch thrown by Richard Seymour of the Raiders against Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger. The Raiders then hosted the Steelers in 2012 and erased a 31\u201321 gap to win 34\u201331. The two clubs met again in 2013 and the Raiders won again, 21\u201318. In 2015, the Steelers defeated the Raiders 38\u201335 at Heinz Field.\nOn December 9, 2018, in Oakland, the Raiders defeated the Steelers 24\u201321, which, ironically, would cost Pittsburgh another playoff berth. The Raiders won at Pittsburgh on September 19, 2021, 26\u201317, then fell on Christmas Eve 2022 at Pittsburgh 13\u201310 on a last-minute touchdown by rookie Steelers quarterback Kenny Pickett. A lifeless performance in a 23\u201318 loss at Vegas on September 23, 2023, contributed to the later firing of Raiders coach Josh McDaniels and GM Dave Ziegler. As of the 2024 season, the Raiders lead the all-time series 17\u201316.\nInterconference.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Steelers once took part in a historic rivalry with the Dallas Cowboys started with the Cowboys' first game as a franchise in 1960 (against the Steelers) at the Cotton Bowl with the Steelers coming away with a 35\u201328 victory. These teams hold a record for the most times (three) that two teams have met in a Super Bowl. The first two times the favored Steelers and Cowboys met came with Pittsburgh victories in the Orange Bowl Super Bowl X 21\u201317 and Super Bowl XIII 35\u201331. The Cowboys never won a regular-season game in the Orange Bowl and lost three Super Bowl games (once to the Baltimore Colts and twice to the Steelers). Between the Cowboys and Steelers, Super Bowl XIII had the greatest number of future Pro Football Hall of Fame players participating, which as of 2021 numbered 25\u00a0\u2013 16 players and nine coaches/front office, including Ernie Stautner, defensive coordinator for the Cowboys who was a HoF defensive tackle for the Steelers. The teams featured an all-star matchup at quarterback between the Steelers' Terry Bradshaw and the Cowboys' Roger Staubach, both of whom are in the Hall of Fame. In 1977, Staubach and the Cowboys won Super Bowl XII, their second and last loss of their season being inflicted by Bradshaw and the Steelers, 28\u201313 at Three Rivers Stadium in November. In 1979, Staubach's final season, the two defending conference champs met again at Three Rivers, the Steelers winning 14\u20133 en route to winning their fourth Super Bowl title. The Steelers won six of eight meetings during the 1970s and 80s, before the Cowboys won all four meetings during the 1990s, including the teams' record third Super Bowl meeting in 1996, as this time the heavily favored Cowboys beat the Steelers 27\u201317. Dallas cornerback Larry Brown intercepted Pittsburgh quarterback Neil O'Donnell twice and was named the game's MVP. The teams' first two meetings of the 21st century (2004 and 2008) were won by the Steelers, including a come from behind victory on December 7, 2008, in Pittsburgh, when the Steelers drove the length of the field to tie the game 13\u201313, then cornerback Deshea Townsend returned an intercepted pass from Tony Romo for the game's final score, Steelers 20, Cowboys 13. The Cowboys won on December 16, 2012, at Cowboys Stadium by a 27\u201324 margin in overtime and won 35\u201330 at Heinz Field on November 13, 2016. The all-time series is led by the Dallas Cowboys, 17\u201316. The Pittsburgh/Dallas rivalry served as a backdrop to the 1977 film \"Black Sunday\", parts of which were filmed during Super Bowl X. Most recently, the Steelers beat the Cowboys by a 24\u201319 margin.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nThe Philadelphia Eagles and Steelers are both located in Pennsylvania and began play in 1933. From that season through 1966, this was a major rivalry for both teams, as both were part of the same division. In 1967, they were placed in separate divisions, but remained in the same conference for three years. In 1970 the Steelers (along with the Cleveland Browns and Baltimore Colts) moved to the American Football Conference, while the Eagles stayed with the rest of the old-line NFL teams in the National Football Conference. As a result, the Eagles and Steelers no longer played each other every year; instead, they are scheduled to meet once every four years in the regular season. The most recent meeting was in 2024 at Lincoln Financial Field, a game in which the Eagles won 27\u201313. The Steelers have lost 11 straight games on the road against the Eagles dating back to 1966, which was also the start of the Super Bowl era. The Eagles lead the all-time series 50\u201329\u20133.\nCulture.\nMascot.\nPrior to the 2007 season, the Steelers introduced Steely McBeam as their official mascot. As part of the 75th anniversary celebrations of the team, his name was selected from a pool of 70,000 suggestions submitted by fans of the team. Diane Roles of Middlesex Township, submitted the winning name which was \"meant to represent steel for Pittsburgh's industrial heritage, \"Mc\" for the Rooney family's Irish roots, and Beam for the steel beams produced in Pittsburgh, as well as for Jim Beam, her husband's favorite alcoholic beverage.\" Steely McBeam is visible at all home games and participates in the team's charitable programs and other club-sponsored events. Steely's autograph is known to be drawn with an oversized \"S\", and the \"L\" is drawn to look like a beam of steel.\nFanbase.\nThe Steelers have a tradition of having a large fanbase, which has spread from Pittsburgh. In August 2008, ESPN.com ranked the Steelers' fans as the best in the NFL, citing their \"unbelievable\" sellout streak of 299\u00a0consecutive games. The team gained a large fan base nationally based on its success in the 1970s, but many consider the collapse of the city's steel industry at the end of the 1970s dynasty into the 1980s (and the resulting diaspora) to be a large catalyst for the size of the fan base in other cities. The Steelers have sold out every home game since the 1972 season.\nThe Pittsburgh Steelers have numerous unofficial fan clubs in many cities throughout the country, that typically meet in bars or taverns on game days. This phenomenon is known to occur for other NFL teams as well, but \"Steeler bars\" are more visible than most, including representative establishments even in cities that field their own NFL teams.\nThe Terrible Towel has been described by the Associated Press as \"arguably the best-known fan symbol of any major pro sports team\". Conceived of by broadcaster Myron Cope in 1975, the towel's rights have since been given to the Allegheny Valley School in Coraopolis, which cares for over 900 people with intellectual disability and physical disabilities, including Cope's autistic son. Since 1996, proceeds from the Terrible Towel have helped raise more than $2.5\u00a0million for the school.\nFight songs.\nThe Steelers have no official fight song, but many fan versions of \"Steelers Polka\" (a parody of \"Pennsylvania Polka\") by ethnic singer Jimmy Pol, both originating in the 1970s, have been recorded. Since 1994, the song \"Here We Go\" by local singer Roger Wood has been popular among fans. Since 2002, the 1979 Styx song \"Renegade\" is played near the end of the third quarter or the start of the fourth quarter at the start of a defensive stand to rally the crowd, featuring a compilation of recent Steelers defensive highlights. Another song from hometown rapper Wiz Khalifa, \"Black and Yellow\", which is an ode to growing up in Pittsburgh, is also a standard part of the Steelers home game experience.\nCheerleaders.\nThe Steelers were the first NFL team to have a cheerleading squad. Known as the Steelerettes, their run lasted only from 1961 to 1969.\nBasketball.\nDuring the offseason, the Steelers have long participated in charity basketball games throughout Western Pennsylvania and neighboring areas. The games usually feature six active players as well as their player-coach playing against a group of local civic leaders. The players, whose participants aren't announced until the day of the game, sign free autographs for fans during halftime.\nFacilities.\nStadiums.\nIn 2001, the Steelers moved into Heinz Field. The franchise dating back to 1933 has had several homes. For 31 seasons, the Steelers shared Forbes Field with the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1933 to 1963. In 1958, though they started splitting their home games at Pitt Stadium three blocks away at the University of Pittsburgh. From 1964 to 1969, the Steelers played exclusively at the on-campus facility before moving with the Pirates to Three Rivers Stadium on the city's Northside. The team moved to what was then known as Heinz Field in 2001. In February 2022, after Heinz declined to sign a new deal after naming rights expired, the Steelers signed a deal with Acrisure and renamed the stadium to Acrisure Stadium.\nTraining camp.\nThe Steelers hold training camp east of the city at Saint Vincent College in Latrobe. The site is one of the most storied in the league with Peter King of SI.com describing it as: \"... I love the place. It's the perfect training-camp setting, looking out over the rolling hills of the Laurel Highlands in west-central Pennsylvania, an hour east of Pittsburgh. On a misty or foggy morning, standing atop the hill at the college, you feel like you're in Scotland. Classic, wonderful slice of American culture. If you can visit one training camp, this is the one to see.\"\nThe team has its headquarters and practice facilities at the state-of-the-art University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Sportsplex on Pittsburgh's Southside. Constructed in 2000, the facility combines the vast expertise of sports medical professionals and researchers as well as hosting the University of Pittsburgh Panthers football team.\nIn 2020 and 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Steelers held their training camp at Heinz Field. They returned to Saint Vincent College for the 2022 season.\nHistorical facilities.\nThe Rooney family has long had a close relationship with Duquesne University in the city and from the teams founding in the 1930s to the late 1990s used Art Rooney Field and other facilities on campus as either its primary or secondary in-season training site as well as Greenlee Field during the 1930s.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, the team had season scrimmages at South Park in the suburban south hills of Pittsburgh. During various seasons including the strike season of 1987, the Steelers used Point Stadium in nearby Johnstown for game week practices. During the 1950s St. Bonaventure University (where Art Rooney's brother Silas was serving as athletic director) and suburban Ligonier also served as a pre-season training camp sites.\nPlayers of note.\nRetired uniform numbers.\nThe Steelers retired Stautner's #70 in 1964 before creating a 50-year tradition of not retiring numbers. The team retired Greene's #75 in 2014 and left the possibility open that they would retire other players' jersey numbers at later dates. However, several numbers have not been reissued since the retirement of the players who wore them, including:\nNumbers 1 (by Anthony Wright), 47 (by several players), and 59 (by Todd Seabaugh) were regularly issued for a time before being taken out of circulation. Number 31 was initially taken out of circulation in honor of Donnie Shell, but was reissued with Shell's blessing in 2001 to Mike Logan, who grew up in suburban McKeesport and had idolized Shell when he was younger. After Logan retired in 2006, 31 returned to regular circulation, likely due to 36 being removed for Bettis as well as 47 being removed due to some controversy involving the number being issued multiple times following Blount's retirement. Notably, numbers 80 (Jack Butler), 82 (John Stallworth), 83 (Louis Lipps &amp; Heath Miller), 84 (Antonio Brown), and 88 (Lynn Swann) remain in circulation despite the NFL relaxing uniform numbering rules and more numbers being available for receivers.\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\n\"Primary\" inductees.\nThe Steelers boast the third most \"primary\" inductees into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, i.e. inductees that spent most or all of their NFL careers in Pittsburgh. They also can claim the most honorees of any franchise founded on or after 1933 and the only franchise with three members of ownership in the Hall of Fame.\nPro Bowl players.\nThe following Steelers players have been named to the Pro Bowl:\nRookie of the Year Award winners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNFL All-Decade Teams.\nThe following Steelers were named to NFL All-Decade Teams (and 75th and 100th Anniversary All-Time Teams, selected in 1994 and 2019, respectively). Only those who spent time with Pittsburgh during the respective decades are listed.\nBold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll-time team.\nIn 2007, in celebration of the franchise's 75th season, the team announced an updated All-Time team of the 33 best players who have ever played for the Steelers. This team supplanted the previous All-Time team of 24 players named as part of the 50th anniversary commemoration in 1982.\nA \"Legends team\" consisting of the club's best pre-1970s players was released concurrently with the latest All-Time team.\nDapper Dan Sportsman of the Year.\nThe regional Dapper Dan Charities has since 1939 named the \"Sportsman of the Year\" in the Pittsburgh region. 19 Steelers have won the award in 23 events:\nHall of Honor.\nThe Pittsburgh Steelers Hall of Honor was established on August 1, 2017. There have been 60 inductees.\nCoaches.\nThe Steelers have had 16 coaches through their history. They have cycled through the fewest head coaches in the modern NFL history. Their first coach was Forrest Douds, who coached them to a 3\u20136\u20132 record in 1933. Chuck Noll had the longest term as head coach with the Steelers; he is one of only four coaches to coach a single NFL team for 23 years. Hired prior to the 2007 season, the Steelers current coach is Mike Tomlin.\nOffensive coordinator history.\nSource:\nDefensive coordinator history.\nSource:\nMedia.\nThe Steelers' flagship radio stations are WDVE 102.5 FM and WBGG 970 AM. Both stations are owned by iHeartMedia. Games are also available on 51 radio stations in Pennsylvania, Western Maryland, Ohio, and Northern West Virginia. The announcers are Rob King and Max Starks. Missi Matthews is the sideline reporter. Myron Cope, the longtime color analyst and inventor of the \"Terrible Towel\", retired after the 2004 season after broadcasting games since 1970, and died in 2008. Longtime lead announcer Bill Hillgrove retired after the 2023 season, having served as the play-by-play announcer since 1994. Color commentator Tunch Ilkin joined Hillgrove in the booth from 1998 to 2020. Ilkin's friend and former teammate Craig Wolfley was the sideline reporter from 2002 to 2020 and was the color commentator from 2021 to 2024.\nPre-season games not shown on one of the national broadcasters are seen on CBS O&amp;O KDKA-TV, channel 2; independent sister station WPKD-TV, channel 19; and AT&amp;T SportsNet Pittsburgh. KDKA-TV's Bob Pompeani and former Steelers quarterback Charlie Batch do the announcing for the pre-season games, as well as the two hosting the pre-game program \"Steelers Kickoff\" during the regular season prior to the national airing of \"The NFL Today\". Pompeani and former Steelers lineman Chris Hoke also host the \"Xfinity Xtra Point\" following the game on days when CBS does not have that week's NFL doubleheader. When CBS has a week's doubleheader, the show airs on WPKD-TV. Coach Mike Tomlin's weekly press conference is shown live on AT&amp;T SportsNet Pittsburgh. Both Batch and Hoke replaced former Steelers lineman Edmund Nelson, who retired from broadcasting in 2015.\n\"Thursday Night Football\" broadcasts are shown locally on Fox affiliate WPGH-TV, channel 53 (along with home games with NFC opponents and some flexed interconference games), while \"ESPN Monday Night Football\" broadcasts are shown locally on WTAE-TV, channel 4. (WTAE-TV is owned by the Hearst Corporation, which owns a 20% stake in ESPN.) By virtue of being members of the AFC, most of the Steelers' games air on CBS and KDKA. \"NBC Sunday Night Football\" games are carried by WPXI, channel 11, in the market.\nThe Steelers hold a national contract with Grupo Imagen for radio rights to their games in Mexico; Imagen broadcasts the Steelers on their stations in 17 Mexican cities.\nFigures with broadcasting r\u00e9sum\u00e9s.\nThe Steelers franchise has a rich history of producing well-known sportscasters over the years. The most famous of these is probably Myron Cope, who served as a Steelers radio color commentator for 35 seasons (1970\u20132004).\nSeveral former Steelers players have gone on to careers in media after completing their playing careers.\nNewspaper.\nThe \"Steelers Digest\" is the only official newspaper for the Pittsburgh Steelers. It has been published for 22 years and is currently published by Dolphin/Curtis Publishing in Miami, Florida, which also handles several other publications. The newspaper is very widely acknowledged by Steelers fans. Issues are mailed out to paying subscribers weekly through the season after every regular-season game and continue through playoffs as long as the Steelers do. After a Super Bowl victory, a bonus issue is published, which is followed by a draft preview, draft recap, and training camp edition every other month, then leading into the pre-season. There are typically 24 issues of the paper within a publishing year. The newspaper is listed on the official Steelers.com page.\nUsage in popular culture.\nThe Steelers' success over several decades has permeated film and literature. The Steelers are portrayed in the following big-budget Hollywood films:\nThe protagonist of John Grisham's novel \"The Associate\" is a staunch Steelers fan.\nIn the summer of 2019, the Kennywood theme park located near Pittsburgh, opened a new land themed to the Pittsburgh Steelers, Steelers Country, featuring a major record-breaking coaster, the Steel Curtain. The land, in addition to this ride, features a Steelers-themed experience, and an 'End Zone Restaurant'.\nThe Chuck Noll Foundation for Brain Injury Research.\nThe Steelers helped launch the Chuck Noll Foundation for Brain Injury Research in November 2016 by donating $1\u00a0million. The Foundation, started by Steelers president Art Rooney II, focuses on education and research regarding brain injuries and sports-related concussions.\nIn June 2017, the Steelers announced an inaugural charity walk to raise money for the foundation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "23339", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23339", "title": "Philadelphia Eagles", "text": "National Football League franchise in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania\nThe Philadelphia Eagles are a professional American football team based in Philadelphia. The Eagles compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) East division. The team plays its home games at Lincoln Financial Field in the South Philadelphia Sports Complex.\nThe franchise was established in 1933 as a replacement for the bankrupt Frankford Yellow Jackets when a group led by Bert Bell secured the rights to an NFL franchise in Philadelphia. Since their formation, the Eagles have appeared in the playoffs 31 times, won 16 division titles (including 13 in the NFC East), appeared in four pre-merger NFL Championship Games, winning three of them (1948, 1949, and 1960), and appeared in five Super Bowls, winning Super Bowls LII and LIX.\nThe Philadelphia Eagles rank among the best teams in the NFL for attendance and have sold out every home game continuously since the 1999 season.\nThe Eagles are owned by Jeffrey Lurie, who bought the team in 1994 for $185 million. In December 2024, the Eagles became one of the first teams in the NFL to sell an ownership stake to outside investors. The deal sold 8% of the franchise at a valuation of $8.3 billion.\nHistory.\nNFL in Philadelphia (1899\u20131931).\nThe Frankford Athletic Association was organized in May 1899 in the parlor of the Suburban Club. The cost of purchasing a share in the association was $10. However, there also were contributing memberships, ranging from $1 to $2.50, made available to the general public. The Association was a community-based non-profit organization of local residents and businesses. In keeping with its charter, which stated that \"all profits shall be donated to charity\", all of the team's excess income was donated to local charitable institutions. The original Frankford Athletic Association apparently disbanded prior to the 1909 football season. Several of the original players from the 1899 football team kept the team together, and they became known as Loyola Athletic Club. In keeping with Yellow Jackets tradition, they carried the \"Frankford\" name again in 1912, to become the Frankford Athletic Association.\nIn the early 1920s, the Frankford Athletic Association's Yellow Jackets gained a reputation as being one of the best independent football teams in the nation. In 1922, Frankford absorbed the Philadelphia City Champion team, the Union Quakers of Philadelphia. That year, Frankford captured the unofficial championship of Philadelphia. During the 1922 and 1923 seasons, the Yellow Jackets compiled a 6\u20132\u20131 record against teams from the National Football League. This led to the Association being granted an NFL franchise in 1924, thus becoming the Frankford Yellow Jackets. In spite of winning the NFL championship in 1926, midway through the 1931 season, the Yellow Jackets went bankrupt and were forced to cease operations.\nBell and Wray era (1933\u20131940).\nAfter more than a year of searching for a suitable replacement for the Yellow Jackets in the lucrative Philadelphia market, the National Football League granted an expansion franchise to an ownership group headed by Bert Bell and Lud Wray, who were also awarded the liquidated assets of the defunct Yellow Jackets organization. The Bell\u2013Wray group had to pay an entry fee of $3,500, or roughly US$67,000 in inflation-adjusted 2022 dollars and assumed a total debt of $11,000 the Yellow Jackets owed to three other NFL franchises. Drawing inspiration from the Blue Eagle logo of the National Recovery Administration, a centerpiece of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal policies, Bell and Wray named their new franchise the Philadelphia Eagles. While it could seem as if the Yellow Jackets simply rebranded as the Eagles, both the Eagles organization and the NFL officially regard the teams as two separate entities. Not only was there no Philadelphia NFL team for a season and a half, but almost no players from the 1931 Yellow Jackets appeared on the Eagles' first roster.\nIn the 1933 NFL season, the Eagles were one of three teams, along with the Pittsburgh Pirates (now the Pittsburgh Steelers) and the now-defunct Cincinnati Reds, to join the NFL as expansion teams. Wray became the Eagles' first head coach after being persuaded to assume the position by Bell, his former teammate at Penn. The Eagles originally intended to play their home games at Shibe Park, which was the home of the Philadelphia Athletics professional baseball in Philadelphia. When negotiations for the use of Shibe Park fell through, however, the Eagles struck a deal with the Athletics' crosstown rival, the Philadelphia Phillies, to begin playing at the Baker Bowl.\nThe Eagles played their first game on October 15, 1933, against the New York Giants at the Polo Grounds in New York City, and lost the game 56\u20130. The Eagles struggled over the course of their first decade, never winning more than four games in any of their first ten seasons. Their best finish was in 1934, the second season for the Eagles, when they tied for third in the East. The Eagles' early rosters largely consisted of former Penn, Temple, and Villanova players who played for the Eagles for a few years before going on to other things.\nIn 1935, Bell proposed an annual college draft to equalize talent across the league. The draft was a revolutionary concept in professional sports. Having teams select players in inverse order of their finish in the standings, a practice still followed today, strove to increase fan interest by guaranteeing that even the worst teams would have the opportunity for annual infusions of the best college talent. Between 1927, when the NFL changed from a sprawling Midwestern-based association to a narrower, major-market league, and 1934, three teams, the Chicago Bears, New York Giants, and Green Bay Packers, won all but one title with the exception of the Providence Steam Roller, which won in 1928. By 1936, the Eagles suffered significant financial losses and were sold through a public auction. Bert Bell was the only bidder and became the sole owner of the team. Wray refused a reduction in his salary and left the team. Bell assumed the head coaching position and led the team to a record of 1\u201311, last place in the league.\nFrom 1936 to 1939, the Eagles played at Municipal Stadium in South Philadelphia. In 1940, Bell balked at a 66% rent increase plus 10% of the gate receipts proposed by the City of Philadelphia for the use of Municipal Stadium and signed a lease for Shibe Park, which was renamed Connie Mack Stadium in 1954. At Connie Mack Stadium, the Eagles were also able to play night games, since lights were installed at the stadium the year before. In the 1941 season, the Eagles played their home opener at Municipal Stadium, and then moved to Shibe Park. To accommodate football at Shibe Park during the winter, management erected stands in right field, parallel to 20th Street. Some 20 feet high, these east stands included 22 rows of seats. The goalposts stood along the first base line and in left field. The uncovered east stands enlarged the park's capacity to over 39,000, but the Eagles rarely drew more than 25,000 to 30,000. The Eagles finished the 1937 season 2\u20138\u20131 and continued to struggle over the next three seasons.\nThompson, Wolman and the Happy Hundred era (1941\u20131969).\nIn December 1940, Bell intervened to stop the sale of Art Rooney's Steelers to Alexis Thompson, and Rooney then acquired half of Bell's interest in the Eagles. In a series of events known as the Pennsylvania Polka, Rooney and Bell exchanged their entire Eagles roster and their territorial rights in Philadelphia to Thompson for his entire Steelers roster and his rights in Pittsburgh. Rooney provided assistance to Bell by rewarding him with a 20% commission on the sale of the Steelers. Bell became the Steelers' head coach and Rooney became the Steelers' general manager.\nGreasy Neale years (1941\u20131950).\nAfter assuming ownership, Thompson promptly hired Greasy Neale as the team's head coach. During the first years under Neale, the Eagles' struggles continued, and they finished the 1941 season with a 2\u20138\u20131 record. In the 1942 season, there was no improvement as the team finished the season 2\u20139.\nSteagles (1943).\nIn 1943, with player shortages stemming from the U.S. entry engagement in World War II, it became difficult to fill the roster, and the team merged with the Steelers to form the \"Phil-Pitt Combine\", known as the Steagles. Greasy Neale continued to coach the team along with Steelers head coach Walt Kiesling. The team finished the 1943 season with a 5\u20134\u20131 record, and the merger, which was never intended to be a permanent arrangement, was dissolved at the season's end.\nIn 1944, the Eagles, led by head coach Greasy Neale and running back Steve Van Buren, had their first winning season in team history. After two second-place finishes in 1945 and 1946, the team reached the NFL Championship game for the first time in 1947. Van Buren, Pete Pihos, and Bosh Pritchard fought valiantly, but the young team lost to the Chicago Cardinals, 28\u201321 at Comiskey Park in Chicago.\nNFL champions (1948).\nUndeterred, the young team rebounded in 1948 to return to the NFL Championship game. With home-field advantage and a blinding snowstorm on their side, the Eagles won their first NFL Championship against the Chicago Cardinals by a score of 7\u20130. The only score came in the fourth quarter when Steve Van Buren ran for a five-yard touchdown. Because of the severe weather, few fans witnessed the joyous occasion.\nPrior to the start of the 1949 season, the Eagles were sold by Thompson to a syndicate of 100 buyers, known as the \"Happy Hundred\", each of whom paid $3,000 for a share of the team. While the leader of the \"Happy Hundred\" was noted Philadelphia businessman James P. Clark, one unsung investor was Leonard Tose.\nNFL champions (1949).\nIn 1949, the Eagles returned to the NFL Championship game for a third consecutive year. The Eagles were favored by a touchdown, and won 14\u20130 for their second consecutive title game shutout. Running back Steve Van Buren rushed for 196 yards on 31 carries for the Eagles, and their defense held the Rams to just 21 yards on the ground. Chuck Bednarik was selected as the first overall pick in the 1949 NFL draft. An All-American lineman/linebacker from the University of Pennsylvania, Bednarik would go on to become one of the greatest and most beloved players in Eagles history.\nIn 1950, the Eagles opened the season against the AAFC champion Cleveland Browns, who, along with two other AAFC franchises, had just joined the NFL. The Eagles were expected to make short work of the Browns, who were widely considered the dominant team in a lesser league. However, the Browns lit up the Eagles' vaunted defense for 487 total yards, including 246 passing yards, in a 35\u201310 rout. The Eagles never recovered from the loss and finished the 1950 season 6\u20136.\nFollowing the 1950 season, Greasy Neale retired and was replaced by Bo McMillin. Two games into the 1951 season, McMillin was forced to retire following a diagnosis of terminal stomach cancer. Wayne Millner finished out the season before being replaced by Jim Trimble.\nWhile the remnants of the great 1940s teams managed to stay competitive for the first few years of the decade, and younger players like Bobby Walston and Sonny Jurgensen occasionally provided infusions of talent, the team lacked the total talent necessary for true greatness during most of the 1950s.\nAfter the 1957 season, the Eagles moved from Connie Mack Stadium to Franklin Field at the University of Pennsylvania. Franklin Field had a vastly expanded seating capacity for the Eagles. While Connie Mack Stadium had a capacity of 39,000, Franklin Field's capacity was 60,000. In 1969, the grass field at Franklin Field was replaced by AstroTurf, making Franklin Field the first NFL stadium to use artificial turf.\nBuck Shaw years (1958\u20131960).\nIn 1958, the Eagles took several steps to improve, hiring Buck Shaw as head coach and acquiring quarterback Norm Van Brocklin in a trade with the Los Angeles Rams. During the 1959 season, the team showed flashes of talent, and finished in second place in the Eastern Division. Former Eagles owner and co-founder Bert Bell had become NFL commissioner, and attended the Eagles game on October 11 at Franklin Field against the Pittsburgh Steelers, a team Bell used to own. Bell refused the box seats that the Eagles reserved for him and purchased his own tickets to sit with the fans. During the fourth quarter, while sitting behind the end zone, Bell suffered a heart attack and died later that day.\nNFL champions (1960).\nThe Eagles' 1960 season remains one of the most celebrated years in team history. Shaw, Van Brocklin, and Bednarik, each in their last season before retirement, led an Eagles team more notable for its grit than its talent. One observer later quipped that the team had \"nothing but a championship\" to its first division title since 1949. The team was aided by their two Pro Bowl receivers, wide receiver Tommy McDonald, who later wrote an autobiography titled \"They Pay Me to Catch Footballs\", and tight end Pete Retzlaff.\nOn November 20, 1960, at Yankee Stadium in The Bronx, Bednarik launched a tackle against New York Giants' running back Frank Gifford, which has come to be known as The Hit, a tackle that is routinely ranked as one of the hardest and most vicious hits in NFL history. With the game tied 10 to 10 in the fourth quarter, Gifford caught a short pass over the middle and was immediately hit by Bednarik with a clothesline tackle so hard that it dropped Gifford to the ground unconscious. Gifford was removed from the field on a stretcher and transported to a local hospital by ambulance, where he remained for ten days. Gifford was diagnosed with a deep concussion that resulted in his retirement from the game for 18 months. On the 100th anniversary of the NFL's founding, the NFL ranked Bednarik's tackle the 44th greatest play in league history.\nOn December 26, 1960, one of the coldest days in recorded Philadelphia history, the Eagles faced Vince Lombardi's Green Bay Packers in the 1960 NFL Championship Game and dealt the formidable Lombardi the sole championship game loss of his storied career. Bednarik lined up at center on offense and at linebacker on defense. Fittingly, the game ended as Bednarik tackled a struggling Jim Taylor and refused to allow him to stand until the last seconds had ticked away.\nVan Brocklin came to Philadelphia and agreed to play through 1960 with an understanding that, upon his retirement as a player, he would succeed Shaw as head coach. Ownership, however, opted to promote assistant coach Nick Skorich instead, and Van Brocklin quit the organization in a fit of pique, instead becoming head coach of the expansion Minnesota Vikings. Back-up quarterback Sonny Jurgensen became the Eagles' starter for the 1961 season; they finished a half-game behind the New York Giants for first place in the Eastern Conference standings with a 10\u20134 record. Despite the on-the-field success, however, the franchise was in turmoil.\nThe 1962 team, decimated by injury, managed only three wins and were embarrassed at home in a 49\u20130 loss to the Packers. The off-field chaos continued through 1963, as the 65 shareholders remaining from the original Happy Hundred sold the team to Jerry Wolman, a 36-year-old millionaire Washington developer who outbid local bidders for the team, paying an unprecedented $5.505\u00a0million for control of the club.\nIn 1964, Wolman hired former Cardinals and Washington Redskins coach Joe Kuharich to a 15-year contract. Over the next five seasons, the team failed to make the playoffs and the failures of the team over this period were highlighted by the Santa Claus incident, when fans pelted a Santa Claus with snowballs during a halftime Christmas pageant. The team had only one winning season, in 1966, finishing second in the NFL Eastern Conference. The Eagles lost to the Baltimore Colts 20\u201314, in the post-season's third place consolation game, the Playoff Bowl, which was held at the Orange Bowl in Miami. The Eagles finished 6\u20137\u20131 in 1967. In the following season, the Eagles fell even further in the standings, recording a 2\u201312 record in 1968.\nLeonard Tose era (1969\u20131984).\nIn 1969, Leonard Tose bought the team from Wolman for $16.155\u00a0million, the equivalent of $ today, representing a record then for the highest amount ever paid for a professional sports franchise. Tose's first official act was to fire Coach Joe Kuharich after a disappointing 24\u201341\u20131 record during his five-year reign. Tose then named former Eagles wide receiver Pete Retzlaff as the team's general manager and Jerry Williams as its new head coach.\nWith the merger of the NFL and AFL in 1970, the Eagles were placed in the NFC East Division with the New York Giants, Washington Redskins, and Dallas Cowboys. The Eagles' heated rivalry with the Giants is the oldest of the NFC East rivalries, dating back to 1933, and is often cited as one of the best rivalries in the NFL. 1970 was also the last season for the Eagles at Franklin Field; the team finished the first post-merger season in last place in their division at 3\u201310\u20131.\nIn 1971, the Eagles moved to Veterans Stadium, which had just been constructed and was initially acclaimed as a triumph of ultra-modern sports engineering. After a 3\u201310\u20131 record in 1970 and three consecutive blowout losses to Cincinnati, Dallas, and San\u00a0Francisco to open the 1971 season, Williams was fired and replaced by assistant coach Ed Khayat, a defensive lineman on the Eagles' 1960 NFL championship team. Williams and Khayat were hampered by Retzlaff's decision to trade longtime starting quarterback Norm Snead to the Minnesota Vikings in early 1971, leaving the Eagles a choice between journeyman Pete Liske and raw Rick Arrington. Khayat lost his first two games but won six of the season's last nine, thanks largely to the efforts of the Eagles' defense, led by all-pro safety Bill Bradley, who led the NFL in interceptions (11) and interception return yardage (248).\nThe team regressed in 1972 to finish 2\u201311\u20131, and Khayat was released. The two wins (both on the road) proved to be surprises, however. Philadelphia beat the Kansas City Chiefs (which had had the best record in the AFC a year before) 21\u201320 and the Houston Oilers 18\u201317 on six field goals by kicker Tom Dempsey. The latter game had been called the \"Johnny Rodgers Bowl\", because the loser, in finishing last in the league, would gain the first overall pick in the 1973 NFL draft, which was then presumed to be Nebraska wingback Johnny Rodgers, the Heisman Trophy winner. With their loss, the Oilers got first pick and took University of Tampa defensive end John Matuszak, who later faced Philadelphia in Super Bowl XV. With the second overall pick, the Eagles selected USC tight end Charle Young.\nKhayat was replaced by offensive guru Mike McCormack for the 1973 season. Aided by the skills of quarterback Roman Gabriel and towering young wide receiver Harold Carmichael, they managed to infuse a bit of vitality into a previously moribund offense.\nNew general manager Jim Murray also began to add talent on the defensive side of the line, most notably through the addition of future Pro Bowl linebacker Bill Bergey in 1974. Overall, however, the team was still mired in mediocrity. McCormack was fired after a 4\u201310 1975 season.\nDick Vermeil years (1976\u20131982).\nIn 1976, Dick Vermeil was hired from UCLA to coach the struggling Eagles, who had managed only one winning season from 1962 to 1975. Vermeil faced numerous obstacles as he attempted to rejuvenate a franchise that had not seriously contended in well over a decade. Despite the team's young talent and Gabriel's occasional flashes of brilliance, the Eagles finished 1976 with the same 4\u201310 record as in 1975. In 1977, the first seeds of hope began to emerge. The team obtained hard-throwing quarterback Ron Jaworski in a trade from the Los Angeles Rams in exchange for popular tight end Charle Young. The defense, led by Bergey and defensive coordinator Marion Campbell, began earning a reputation as one of the hardest-hitting in the league.\n1978 saw one of the great moments in Eagles history, The Miracle at the Meadowlands, when Herman Edwards returned a fumble by Giants' quarterback Joe Pisarcik for a touchdown with 20 seconds left in the game, resulting in a 19\u201317 Eagles victory. The Eagles would edge into the playoffs with a 9\u20137 season. Young running back Wilbert Montgomery became the first Eagle since Steve Van Buren to exceed 1,000 yards in a season. In 1979, the Eagles tied for first place with an 11\u20135 record, as Montgomery shattered team rushing records with a total of 1,512 yards.\nIn 1980, the team dominated the NFC, facing its chief nemesis, the Dallas Cowboys, in the . The game was played in cold conditions before faithful fans at Veterans Stadium. Led by an outstanding rushing performance by Montgomery, whose long cutback TD run in the first half is one of the most memorable in Eagles history, and a gutsy game from fullback Leroy Harris, who scored the Eagles' only other TD that day, the Birds earned a berth in Super Bowl XV with a 20\u20137 victory.\nThe Eagles traveled to New Orleans for Super Bowl XV, where they were heavily favored over the Oakland Raiders, who had squeaked into the playoffs as a wild-card team. Things did not go the Eagles' way, beginning with Tose's imprudent decision to bring comedian Don Rickles into the pregame locker room to lighten the mood. Jaworski's first pass was intercepted by Rod Martin, setting up an Oakland touchdown. Later in the first quarter, a potential game-tying 40-yard touchdown pass to Rodney Parker was nullified by an illegal-motion penalty. The final score was 27\u201310. Journeyman quarterback Jim Plunkett was named the game's MVP.\nThe team got off to a promising start in the 1981 season by winning their first six games. They ended up 10\u20136 to earn a wild-card berth. However, their hopes to repeat as NFC champs were dashed in the wild-card round by the New York Giants, who won 27\u201321.\nAfter the Eagles finished 3\u20136 in the strike-shortened 1982 season, Vermeil quit the team, citing \"burnout\".\nDefensive coordinator Marion Campbell replaced Vermeil as head coach. Campbell had helped to popularize the \"bend-don't-break\" defensive strategy in the 1970s. Philadelphia struggled through the mid-1980s, marked by flagging fan participation. The team failed to make the playoffs in 1983 and 1984. The team nearly moved to Phoenix, Arizona at the end of the 1984 season.\nNorman Braman era (1985\u20131993).\nIn 1985, Tose was forced to sell the Eagles to Norman Braman and Ed Leibowitz, highly successful automobile dealers from Florida, for a reported $65\u00a0million (equal to $ today) to pay off his more than $25\u00a0million ($ today) in gambling debts at Atlantic City casinos. The team again struggled during the 1985 season, and Campbell was fired after week 16, to be replaced by assistant head coach/defensive backs coach Fred Bruney for the season's last game.\nIn the 1985 Supplemental draft, the Eagles acquired the rights to the Memphis Showboats' elite pass rusher Reggie White.\nBuddy Ryan years (1986\u20131990).\nIn 1986, the arrival of head coach Buddy Ryan and his fiery attitude sparked team performance and ignited the fan base. Immediately infusing the team with his hard-as-nails attitude, the Eagles quickly became known for their tough defense and tougher attitudes. Ryan began rejuvenating the team by releasing several aging players, including Ron Jaworski. Randall Cunningham took his place and, despite a 5\u201310\u20131 season, began showing considerable promise. 1987 saw another strike, which shortened the season by one game. The substitutes who had filled in for the strikers performed poorly and were crushed 41\u201322 by the Dallas Cowboys. After the strike, the regular Eagles' 1987 team won a 37\u201320 revenge game against Dallas. The season record was 7\u20138, of which three games had been played by substitutes.\nThe Eagles reached the playoffs in 1988, but lost to the Chicago Bears, the team that Ryan had helped lead to a Super Bowl XX victory as defensive coordinator. The game became known as the \"Fog Bowl\", due to the inclement weather during the game. The Eagles lost, 20\u201312.\nThe following two years would see playoff appearances as well, but the team never made it past the first round. This failure was very frustrating to Eagles fans, as the team was widely regarded as among the most talented in the NFL. On offense, the Eagles were led by quarterback Cunningham, one of the most exciting players of his generation; tight end Keith Jackson; and running back Keith Byars. The defense is commonly acknowledged as among the greatest in league history, and as the best to never win a championship.\nThe two 1989 matches with Dallas were known as the Bounty Bowls. Both were won easily by the Eagles (the Cowboys finished 1\u201315 that year), and were marked by Ryan insulting new Cowboys coach Jimmy Johnson by placing a bounty on their kicker, and by Eagles fans throwing snowballs at him at Veterans Stadium. On November 12, 1990, during a \"Monday Night Football\" game at the Vet, the Eagles defeated the Washington Redskins by a score of 28\u201314, as the defense scored three of the team's four touchdowns. This game, more lopsided than its score would indicate, was subsequently labeled the Body Bag Game in reference to the number of injuries Eagles players inflicted on the Redskins and the physically tough play of the Eagles in the game. In the game, the Eagles knocked out the starting Washington quarterback, and then seriously injured his replacement. Running back Brian Mitchell, who would later be signed by the Eagles, was called upon to finish the game as the Redskins' quarterback. Washington returned to Philadelphia in the first round of the playoffs to defeat the Eagles 20\u20136, ending their season.\nRyan was fired on January 7, 1991, and was replaced by offensive coordinator Rich Kotite. The team started the 1991 season with the loss of starting quarterback Randall Cunningham due to a knee injury. Backup quarterback Jim McMahon assumed the starting role for the rest of the season. Despite having the top-rated defense in the league, the team failed to make the playoffs by finishing third in the NFC East with a record of 10\u20136.\nOn June 25, 1992, All Pro defensive tackle Jerome Brown was killed in an automobile accident. The team and fan base dedicated the 1992 season to \"bring it home for Jerome\". The team finished second in the NFC East with an 11\u20135 record to earn a wild-card playoff spot. Kotite led the Eagles to a victory over the New Orleans Saints in the wild-card game but then fell to the Dallas Cowboys in the Divisional round. Another blow to the team was the loss of all-time sacks leader Reggie White to free agency in the off-season.\nAmong the team's offensive stars during that period were quarterback Randall Cunningham, tight end Keith Jackson, and running back Herschel Walker. But what was known as the Gang Green defense, led by Reggie White, Jerome Brown, Clyde Simmons, Seth Joyner, Wes Hopkins, Mike Golic, Byron Evans, Eric Allen, Andre Waters, and Mark McMillian, defined the team. In 1993, Kotite's Eagles fell apart after a promising start and miss the playoffs, ending the regular season 8\u20138.\nJeffrey Lurie era (1994\u2013present).\nBy 1994, team owner Norman Braman had become largely unpopular among local fans and a polarizing presence in the front office. Jeffrey Lurie bought the Eagles on May 6, 1994, for an estimated $185\u00a0million.\nIn Lurie's first season as owner in 1994, the team went 7\u20139 and again missed the playoffs. Rich Kotite was fired and replaced by San Francisco 49ers defensive coordinator Ray Rhodes, who successfully lured 49ers star Ricky Watters to join the team as a free agent.\nIn 1995, Rhodes's first season, the Eagles got off to a slow start by losing three of their first four games but subsequently rebounded to finish with a 10\u20136 record and a playoff spot. In the Wild Card Round, the Eagles, playing at home, overwhelmed the Detroit Lions 58\u201337, with 31 of Philadelphia's points coming in the second quarter. However, the Eagles were again eliminated in the next round by the Cowboys by a score of 30\u201311. This would be Randall Cunningham's last game as an Eagle. Cunningham scored the only touchdown of the game and the last Eagles postseason touchdown for six years.\n1995 marked the end of Cunningham's tenure as starting quarterback. Rhodes benched Cunningham in favor of Rodney Peete, leading to friction between the two. Earlier, rumors had circulated that Lurie and Rhodes had tried to trade Cunningham to the Arizona Cardinals. However, no such trade materialized and Cunningham retired shortly after the season.\nIn 1996, the Eagles' uniform colors were changed from the classic kelly green to a darker midnight green. The team got off to a good start, winning three of their first four games. However, a week 5 Monday night game at Veterans Stadium against the rival Cowboys witnessed a season-ending knee injury to Peete, loss of the team's momentum, and the transition to an offense led by Ty Detmer and Watters. While Detmer played well and Watters rushed for 1,411 yards, the season conformed to what had become a familiar pattern: 10\u20136 record and early elimination (a 14\u20130 shutout by the 49ers) in the playoffs. In the 1996 NFL draft, future fan-favorite and hall-of-famer Brian Dawkins was chosen in the second round. The continued early playoff exits led fans and local media to cast blame on high-priced free agents (Irving Fryar, Watters, Troy Vincent, and Guy McIntyre) for not stepping up in big games, especially in the postseason. Rhodes gradually deteriorated under the stress of the job, and players were beginning to grow tired of his brash demeanor and often autocratic coaching style.\nAfter a see-saw 6\u20139\u20131 campaign in 1997, the bottom fell out in 1998. The Eagles suffered a 3\u201313 record, their worst since 1972, and were ranked dead last in numerous offensive statistics. Home attendance was declining, a quarterback controversy was deteriorating an already rudderless locker room, and the players had all but tuned out the embattled coaching staff. Left with little choice after a disastrous season, fan revolt, and sagging team morale, Lurie fired Rhodes and hired Green Bay Packers quarterback coach Andy Reid as head coach.\nAndy Reid years (1999\u20132012).\nThe Eagles reemerged as a predominant NFL team under the leadership of new head coach Andy Reid, who was hired away from the Green Bay Packers, where he was the Packers' quarterback coach. Reid's first notable step was drafting Syracuse quarterback Donovan McNabb with the second overall pick in the 1999 NFL draft. The Eagles' awful 1998 season would have entitled the Eagles to first pick but it was awarded to the rebooted Cleveland Browns. Despite clearing the roster for new talent by releasing unpopular and aging veterans such as Ricky Watters and Irving Fryar, Reid was still a virtual unknown before his arrival as head coach, and his appointment was met initially with skepticism among Philadelphia fans. The drafting of McNabb was unpopular with many Eagles fans, many of whom traveled to Madison Square Garden for the 1999 Draft and booed the selection, believing the Eagles instead should have selected Ricky Williams, a University of Texas running back who had been named the 1998 AP College Player of the Year.\nThe 1999 season was largely a rebuilding year for the Eagles. The team, which routinely sells out its home games in Philadelphia, had two 1999 home games that failed to sell out, resulting in local TV blackouts. Another six home games in the 1999 season sold out only because several local small business owners bought the remaining unsold tickets to spare Philadelphia-area viewers a television blackout of the game.\nThe Week 5 home game at Veterans Stadium on October 10, 1999, against the Dallas Cowboys represented the last play of Cowboys wide receiver Michael Irvin's career. In the game, Irvin was driven into the turf by Eagles safety Tim Hauck, which left Irvin lying motionless. Some Eagles fans responded with applause, giving further rise to Philadelphia's reputation as unduly aggressive and hostile fans. Irvin was transported from the field by stretcher and then by ambulance to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital. Irvin, who was diagnosed with a potentially threatening cervical spine injury and forced to announce his NFL retirement after the injury, later said the Philadelphia fans were applauding his departure rather than his serious injury. The team finished the season with a record of 5\u201311.\nThe 2000 regular-season opener in Dallas on September 3 became known in NFL lore as the \"Pickle Juice Game\". Kickoff temperature in Texas Stadium was 109 degrees Fahrenheit and soared to nearly 120, making it the hottest game in league history, beating a previous record set in a 1997 Cowboys\u2013Cardinals match in Arizona. The nickname came about because an Eagles trainer had prepared for the predicted heat by having the players drink the juice from jars of dill pickles in order to retain body moisture and stave off cramps and heat exhaustion. The experiment proved successful as the Eagles won 41\u201314 while multiple Cowboys players had been consigned to the bench, unable to handle the torrid climate while the Eagles had no players benched. The game was also significant as marking the beginning of Philadelphia's domination of the NFC East. The team finished the season at 11\u20135, reaching the playoffs as a wild card, which restored fan optimism. After brushing aside the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 21\u20133, the Eagles moved to the second round of the playoffs, only to lose 20\u201310 to the New York Giants. After compiling an 11\u20135 record in 2001, the Eagles reached the playoffs again, this time at the top of their division. In a near rerun of the previous year, they disposed of the Buccaneers in a 31\u20139 game. In the second round, the Eagles defeated the Bears 33\u201319 at Soldier Field. In the , they were unable to stop the St. Louis Rams, who defeated them 29\u201324.\nDespite injuries, McNabb led the Eagles to a 12\u20134 season in 2002. Once again, they reached the , but lost at home 27\u201310 to the eventual Super Bowl champion Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the last game at Veterans Stadium.\nIn the opening game of the 2003 season, the Eagles were shut out 17\u20130 by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the first regular-season game ever played at their new home, Lincoln Financial Field. Once again, the team went 12\u20134 for the season and then reached the conference championship game. In doing so, the Eagles became the first team in modern history to get that far in the postseason after having been shut out at home in its first game. They achieved that distinction despite getting only five touchdown receptions all year by their wide receivers, which tied the league-low since the regular-season schedule was lengthened to its present 16 games in 1978 (this record would be broken in 2004 when the New York Giants' wide receivers caught only two touchdown passes). The Eagle receivers went through both September and October without a TD catch; the last time an NFL team had done that was in 1945. In the Divisional Round of the playoffs, the Eagles beat the Green Bay Packers 20\u201317 in overtime thanks in part to a late-game completion from McNabb to Freddie Mitchell on an iconic play that has come to be known as 4th and 26. They lost the to the Carolina Panthers 14\u20133. Panthers cornerback Ricky Manning Jr. had three interceptions in the game.\nThe Eagles actively pursued premier wide receiver Terrell Owens, and acquired him in a controversial three-way deal with the Baltimore Ravens and the San Francisco 49ers, on March 16, 2004. The 2004 season began with a bang as Owens caught three touchdown passes from McNabb in their season opener against the New York Giants. Owens ended up with exactly 1,200 receiving yards and 14 touchdown receptions, although his season ended prematurely with an ankle injury in a December 19 game against the Dallas Cowboys. The Eagles' 12\u20137 victory in this game gave them home-field advantage throughout the conference playoffs for the third year in a row. The Eagles tied a record by clinching the NFC East division crown (their fourth straight) after only their eleventh game of the season, matching the mark set by the 1985 Chicago Bears and the 1997 San Francisco 49ers. Their final two regular-season games thus rendered meaningless, the Eagles sat out most of their first-string players in these games and lost both, yet still finished the season with a 13\u20133 record. McNabb had his best season to date, passing for 3,875 yards and 31 touchdowns, with only eight interceptions. This made him the first quarterback in NFL history to throw 30 or more TD passes and fewer than 10 interceptions in a single regular season. They then began their playoff run with the Divisional round at home against the sixth-seeded Minnesota Vikings. The Eagles led from the start and never looked back, as McNabb led a very efficient passing attack (21 of 33 for 286 yards and 2 TDs), Brian Westbrook dominated on the ground with 70 rushing yards, and Freddie Mitchell performed very well on the receiving corps (5 receptions for 65 yards and a TD), as Philadelphia won 27\u201314, setting up their fourth-straight NFC Championship appearance. Facing the Atlanta Falcons, McNabb threw for 180 yards and two touchdowns, while also rushing for 32 yards. Westbrook rushed for 96 yards and caught five passes for 39. Winning the game 27\u201310, the Eagles advanced to Super Bowl XXXIX, where they faced the New England Patriots. Although McNabb threw 3 touchdown passes and 357 yards in the game, and the score was tied 14\u201314 going into the fourth quarter, the Patriots outscored the Eagles with ten straight points. McNabb completed a 30-yard touchdown pass, and the Eagles defense held the Patriots to a 3 and out, but a crucial interception with 46 seconds left sealed their fate, as the Patriots won 24\u201321.\nThe team took a step back in 2005 with a 6\u201310 record, failing to make the playoffs for the first time since the 1999 season. McNabb had played with a sports hernia and a broken thumb, starting 4\u20132 then losing three in a row, before he finally succumbed to injury and missed the rest of the season. For obnoxious behavior and a feud with McNabb, Owens was suspended after 7 games and was eventually cut.\nIn 2006, the team lost McNabb 10 games in and went into turmoil. However, Westbrook stepped up, and the Eagles earned their fifth NFC East title under coach Reid, with a 10\u20136 record. They won the Wild Card game against the New York Giants, but lost in the Divisional Round to the New Orleans Saints. The 2007 season would end with the Eagles finishing 8\u20138 and failing to make the playoffs for the second time in three seasons. However, in 2008, the team finished the season with a 9\u20136\u20131 record, making the playoffs with a wild card berth, The team upset the Minnesota Vikings in the first round, winning the game 26\u201314. The team then went on to defeat the defending Super Bowl champion New York Giants 23\u201311 en route to their sixth NFC Championship Game. In the , the Eagles rallied from down 24\u20136 at halftime to up 25\u201324 in the fourth quarter, but they lost to the Arizona Cardinals by a score of 32\u201325 after quarterback Kurt Warner scored a touchdown with just under three minutes remaining in regulation.\nEntering the 2009 season, the Eagles signed quarterback Michael Vick. On December 6, 2009, Andy Reid became only the fifth coach in NFL history to win 100 or more games with a single team in a single decade (the other four are Tom Landry, Don Shula, Tony Dungy, and Bill Belichick). McNabb finally had a complete receiving corps, between first-round draft pick Jeremy Maclin, DeSean Jackson's 1,000-yard season, and Brent Celek ranking among the top 5 tight ends in the league. Without Brian Dawkins, defensive end Trent Cole stepped up and became the dominant force on defense with 12 sacks, earning him his second trip to the Pro Bowl and All-Pro honors. In 2009, the Eagles started 5\u20134, then won six straight. After a shutout by the Dallas Cowboys in week 17, the Eagles failed to secure a first-round bye, and with a record of 11\u20135, they were the NFC's sixth seed. In their , the Eagles played against their divisional foes for the second consecutive week, losing 34\u201314 to hand Dallas their first playoff win since .\nOn January 11, 2010, General Manager Tom Heckert, Jr. was hired away by the Cleveland Browns; he was replaced by Howie Roseman, who was promoted from Vice President of Player Personnel. On March 5, 2010, Brian Westbrook was cut from the Eagles after eight seasons with the team. On April 4, 2010, the team traded long-time starting quarterback Donovan McNabb to the Washington Redskins in exchange for a second-round draft pick. Kevin Kolb was immediately named the starter for the 2010 season, but after suffering a concussion in week 1 against the Packers, Vick took over as the starter. Week 4 saw the return of McNabb to Philadelphia. The Redskins got a touchdown early in the first quarter. After that, both offenses sputtered, and the Eagles had to settle for two field goals. But things rapidly fell apart when Vick injured his ribs and chest late in the first quarter when two Redskins defensive backs crushed him from both sides while running near the end zone. Kolb was once again brought out to play but delivered an uninspiring performance. He managed a touchdown pass in the fourth quarter, but it wasn't enough. A two-point conversion attempt after the touchdown failed, and Washington won 16\u201312. In Week 15, the Eagles beat the New York Giants in a stunning upset by overcoming a 21-point deficit in the second half. In the closing seconds of the game, DeSean Jackson returned a punt 65 yards for a touchdown to win 38\u201331. This became known as the Miracle at the New Meadowlands. Vick led the Eagles to their sixth NFC East division title in ten seasons. With a record of 10\u20136, the Eagles clinched the third seed. In the wild card round, the Eagles lost 21\u201316 to the eventual Super Bowl XLV champion Green Bay Packers.\nThe 2011 season for the Eagles was a major disappointment. The off-season was marred by a lockout that began in March after the NFL's collective bargaining agreement expired, making practices, trades, and free agency impossible. During the draft, the Eagles did comparatively little. After the lockout ended in July, the team embarked on a rash of high-profile FA signings, including Raiders CB Nnamdi Asomugha, Dolphins RB Ronnie Brown, Giants WR Steve Smith, Packers TE Donald Lee, Titans DE Jason Babin, and Packers DT Cullen Jenkins. Meanwhile, Kevin Kolb, displeased at losing the starting quarterback job to Michael Vick in 2010, was traded to Arizona for Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie. Replacing him as 2nd-stringer was ex-Titans quarterback Vince Young. Young created a lot of hype by calling Philadelphia the \"Dream Team\". The team managed to finish only 8\u20138 and missed the playoffs.\nIn 2012, the Eagles started off winning three of their first four games but lost their next eight, which eliminated them from the playoff hunt. They won only one of their last four games. After a loss to the New York Giants on December 30, 2012, head coach Andy Reid was fired after fourteen seasons with the team.\nChip Kelly years (2013\u20132015).\nOn January 16, 2013, after a 4\u201312 season, the Eagles brought in University of Oregon head coach Chip Kelly to succeed Reid as head coach. The Philadelphia Eagles named Michael Vick the starting quarterback going into the 2013 season with much promise running Chip Kelly's fast-paced spread offense. The 2013 season proved very successful for the Eagles. While a hamstring injury took Michael Vick out after a 1\u20133 start, his backup Nick Foles led the team to a 10\u20136 regular-season record and its seventh NFC East title in 13 seasons, but the Eagles lost to the New Orleans Saints in the wild card round. Before throwing his first interception in Week 14, Foles had thrown 19 touchdowns, just one shy of the all-time NFL record of consecutive touchdowns without an interception to start a season, set earlier in the season by Peyton Manning. Foles also tied Manning for most touchdown passes in a single game, with seven, against the Oakland Raiders, which also made him the youngest player in NFL history to throw for that many touchdowns in a game. Foles finished the regular season with 27 touchdown passes and only 2 interceptions, giving him the then-best TD-INT ratio in NFL history. (That record was later broken by Tom Brady, in the 2016 season.) He also finished with a 119.0 passer rating, third-highest in league history behind only Aaron Rodgers in 2011 and Peyton Manning in 2004. He was also only the second quarterback in NFL history to have a game in which he topped 400 passing yards and a perfect passer rating. LeSean McCoy finished his Pro Bowl season as the league's top rusher with 1,607 rushing yards (also a franchise record) and 2,146 total yards from scrimmage, also best in the NFL. As a whole, the Eagles offense scored 51 touchdowns, most in franchise history, passing the previous season-high set back in 1948. Following the 2013 season, the Eagles released Pro-Bowl wide receiver DeSean Jackson due to his poor \"work ethic and attitude\", as well as speculation of his involvement in gang-related activities. The team signed All Pro safety Malcolm Jenkins to a three-year contract, worth $16.25\u00a0million.\nThe Eagles opened the 2014 season winning their first three games and making NFL history as the only team ever to trail by ten or more points in their first three games and come back to win. Nick Foles struggled with turnovers, but ultimately did well and led the Eagles to a 6\u20132 record, before breaking his collarbone, resulting in his replacement by Mark Sanchez, who outplayed Foles. The Eagles held the divisional title from Week 1 to Week 15. After going 9\u20133 with a crucial win over the Dallas Cowboys, the Eagles lost their next three, and a week after losing the NFC East title, they lost an upset against the 3\u201311 Washington Redskins and were eliminated from playoff contention with the Cowboys' win over the Indianapolis Colts.\nFollowing the 2014 season, Chip Kelly was given total control and made some controversial personnel moves. He traded LeSean McCoy, who had become the team's all-time leading rusher after the 2014 season, for linebacker Kiko Alonso, a player Kelly coached at Oregon who had missed the entire 2014 season. He also cut ten-year veteran and starter Trent Cole, who was still a consistent threat on defense and was second only to legend Reggie White on the Eagles all-time sack list. He also traded the highly successful Nick Foles for Sam Bradford, who had missed the entire 2014 season with a torn anterior cruciate ligament. Kelly tried to re-sign Jeremy Maclin, who had stepped up as the team's leading wide receiver, but Maclin signed with the Kansas City Chiefs instead. However, the Eagles also acquired league leading rusher DeMarco Murray, which not only helped the Eagles, but hurt their rivals, the Dallas Cowboys. They also obtained Super Bowl champion Byron Maxwell, who left the Seattle Seahawks in free agency to sign a six-year, $63\u00a0million contract. The first two games of the 2015 season were dismal, as they lost both. Bradford had a poor 2\u20134 TD-INT ratio, Maxwell was constantly beaten by Atlanta Falcons wide receiver Julio Jones, and Murray was held to 11 yards on 21 carries. After Murray was injured, Ryan Mathews rushed for over 100 yards in a Week 3 win against the New York Jets. Kelly made Murray the unquestioned starter and although Murray's play improved over the season, he never regained his dominant form and was held to a career-low average of 3.6 yards per carry.\nOn December 29, 2015, with one game left in the season, head coach Chip Kelly was released by the Eagles after a 6\u20139 record. Offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur was named interim head coach for the final game against the rival New York Giants, which Shurmur won 35\u201330.\nDoug Pederson years (2016\u20132020).\nThe Eagles hired Kansas City Chiefs' offensive coordinator Doug Pederson as their next head coach on January 18, 2016. Pederson had been with the Chiefs for the preceding three years after having spent the four seasons before those with the Eagles. He served as a quality control assistant coach for the Eagles in 2009 and 2010 before being promoted to quarterbacks coach for the 2011 and 2012 seasons. He had been praised for his work with Chiefs quarterback Alex Smith over the prior several seasons, particularly 2015, as the Chiefs moved into the top 10 in scoring offense.\nAt the end of the 2015 season, the Eagles were slated for the 13th overall pick in the 2016 NFL draft. They traded that pick, Byron Maxwell, and Kiko Alonso to the Miami Dolphins for the eighth overall pick. Later, they traded the eighth overall pick, their third- and fourth-round picks, a 2017 first-round pick, and a 2018 second-round pick to the Cleveland Browns for the second overall pick and a 2017 fourth-round pick. They used the second overall pick to draft North Dakota State quarterback Carson Wentz. On September 3, 2016, the Eagles traded starting quarterback Sam Bradford to the Minnesota Vikings, who had lost Teddy Bridgewater for the season, for a 2017 first-round pick and a 2018 fourth-round pick. Following the trade, the Eagles named Wentz the starting quarterback for Week 1 of the 2016 season.\nFirst-time head coach Pederson led the Eagles to a 3\u20130 record to start the season. His rookie quarterback started with five touchdowns, no interceptions and over 255 yards per game. After a Week 4 bye, they lost four out of the next five games, including losses to every team in their division. They also lost right tackle Lane Johnson to a 10-game suspension following the Week 5 loss against the Lions, which damaged Carson Wentz's hot start. In those four defeats, their average margin of loss was just under 5 points. Pederson and the Eagles won just three of their final seven games. Although Wentz started off the season well, he finished with a TD\u2013INT ratio of 8:7. The rookie head coach-quarterback tandem led the Eagles to a 7\u20139 record, finishing last in the division.\nSuper Bowl LII Champions.\nThe Eagles started off the season with a 10\u20131 record and finished with a 13\u20133 record in 2017, including a nine-game winning streak. In a Week 14 game against the Los Angeles Rams, starting quarterback Carson Wentz left the game with a torn anterior cruciate ligament, and backup Nick Foles, who had been re-signed in the off-season, took over for the rest of the season. Wentz was considered to have been playing at an MVP level at the time of his injury. Foles's first start was a comeback from a 20\u20137 deficit against the New York Giants where he scored four touchdowns to win 34\u201329. Foles struggled in the last two games of the season against the Oakland Raiders and the Dallas Cowboys and threw a touchdown and two interceptions in those two games. The Eagles clinched the #1 seed and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs after the win against Oakland in Week 16.\nDespite making history by being home underdogs, Foles led the Eagles past the Atlanta Falcons in the Divisional Round 15\u201310. In the , the Eagles dominated the Minnesota Vikings and their league best defense 38\u20137, again having been betting underdogs in the game. Foles elevated his play and threw for 352 passing yards and three touchdowns. The Eagles traveled to Minneapolis to compete in Super Bowl LII, their third attempt at a title, against Tom Brady and the New England Patriots in a rematch of Super Bowl XXXIX from 2005. In the second quarter, Philadelphia faced fourth-and-goal on the 1-yard line with 38 seconds left. Deciding to go for the touchdown, they attempted a trick play similar to one that had failed for the Patriots earlier. It would be the most memorable play of the game. As Foles stepped up to the running back position, Clement took a direct snap and pitched the ball to tight end Trey Burton, who then threw the ball to Foles, who was wide open in the right side of the end zone. Foles caught the ball, making him the first quarterback ever to catch a touchdown pass in a Super Bowl, and the ensuing extra point was good, giving the Eagles a 22\u201312 lead. The scoring play came to be known as the Philly Special. The Eagles went on to win 41\u201333, capturing their first Super Bowl Vince Lombardi Trophy in franchise history and their first championship since 1960, ending the third-longest active championship drought in the NFL at 57 years. Foles won Super Bowl MVP going 28 for 43 with 373 passing yards, three passing touchdowns, one interception, and one receiving touchdown. Foles became the first backup quarterback to start and win a Super Bowl since his opponent Tom Brady won as the backup for Drew Bledsoe in 2002's Super Bowl XXXVI.\nThe combined 74 points scored was one point shy of the Super Bowl record of 75, set in Super Bowl XXIX in 1995; this game marked only the second time in the history of the Super Bowl where the teams combined for 70+ points. The game also set a record for most yardage by both teams (combined) with 1,151 yards, the most for any single game, regular season or postseason.\nBefore the 2018 season started, many injuries plagued the team, including quarterback Carson Wentz, who was still recovering from an anterior cruciate ligament injury that he had sustained during the previous season. Nick Foles was named the starting quarterback to begin the season, and helped the team win their opening game against the Atlanta Falcons, 18\u201312. Wentz returned as the starting quarterback in week 3 after Foles had led the team to a 1\u20131 record. Injuries continued to be a major problem throughout the season, especially on defense as Jalen Mills, Ronald Darby, and Rodney McLeod all suffered season-ending injuries. Wentz suffered a fractured vertebra in his back after a week 14 loss to the Dallas Cowboys, and Foles was again named the starter for remainder of the season. The Eagles' 4\u20136 record after 10 games seemed to give them little chance of making the playoffs, but the team managed to win 5 of their last 6, including upsets over the eventual NFC champion Los Angeles Rams and Houston Texans. The Eagles finished the season with a 9\u20137 record and made the playoffs as the sixth seed.\nIn the game against the Chicago Bears, Foles threw 2 touchdowns and 2 interceptions in a 16\u201315 win. With ten seconds left, Bears kicker Cody Parkey missed a potential game-winning field goal that became known in NFL lore as the Double Doink. This sent the Philadelphia Eagles to an NFC Divisional matchup against the New Orleans Saints. The Eagles offense initially performed well, ending the first quarter with a 14\u20130 lead. The Eagles would not score again after the Saints defense rallied, forcing Foles to throw two interceptions. The Eagles ended up losing by a score of 20\u201314, ending their opportunity to repeat as Super Bowl champions\nIn 2019, the Eagles matched their 9\u20137 record from 2018. They won 4 straight games against divisional opponents to close the season, clinching the NFC East in Week 17 with a 34\u201317 win over the New York Giants and clinched a playoff berth for the third consecutive season. Carson Wentz started his first playoff game in the round against the Seattle Seahawks, but left the game early in the first quarter after suffering a concussion on a controversial helmet-to-helmet hit by Jadeveon Clowney. Backup quarterback Josh McCown finished the game even after suffering a torn hamstring in the second quarter. The Eagles lost to the Seahawks 17\u20139, ending their season.\nThe Eagles opened the 2020 season with consecutive losses to the Washington Football Team and Los Angeles Rams. In week 3, the Eagles tied with the Cincinnati Bengals after controversially punting the ball instead of attempting a potential 64-yard game-winning field goal late in overtime. The decision was widely criticized by sports media and fans as they accused head coach Doug Pederson of settling for a tie, rather than playing to win. Once again, injuries continued to plague the team as almost every offensive starter had suffered an injury throughout the season, and the team fielded 14 different offensive line combinations in 16 games. The team entered the bye week with a 3\u20134\u20131 record and proceeded to lose their next four games. During their week 13 match-up against the Green Bay Packers, rookie quarterback Jalen Hurts entered the game in the third quarter in relief of Wentz after poor play. Hurts would later be named the starting quarterback for the remainder of the season after a career-worst season performance by Wentz. Hurts led the Eagles to a 24\u201321 victory against the New Orleans Saints in week 14. This would be the team's last win of the 2020 season as they lost their next three games, finishing with a 4\u201311\u20131 record and missing the playoffs for the first time in four seasons.\nDuring the off-season, defensive coordinator Jim Schwartz announced that he would step down from his position. A day later, linebackers coach Ken Flajole left his position on the team. Doug Pederson met with Eagles owner Jeffrey Lurie to discuss the future of the team. Pederson proposed changes to the coaching staff that were described by internal reporters as \"underwhelming\" and out of line with Lurie's vision for the team. On January 11, 2021, the Eagles announced that they had fired Pederson. In a statement, Lurie described the move as in the best interests of both Pederson and the team. Pederson became just the first head coach to be fired within three years of winning a Super Bowl since the Baltimore Colts fired Don McCafferty after the 1972 NFL season.\nNick Sirianni years (2021\u2013present).\nThe Eagles hired former Indianapolis Colts' offensive coordinator Nick Sirianni as their next head coach on January 21, 2021. During the offseason, the Eagles traded starting quarterback Carson Wentz to the Colts for a 2021 third-round draft pick and a 2022 conditional second-round pick. In doing so, Wentz was reunited with Frank Reich, head coach of the Colts who served as the Eagles' offensive coordinator for Wentz's first two years in Philadelphia, including during their Super Bowl-winning season in 2017. The Eagles absorbed a $33.8-million dead-cap hit for trading Wentz.\nDuring the 2021 NFL draft, the Eagles selected Heisman Trophy\u2013winning wide receiver DeVonta Smith with the 10th overall pick, and maneuvered around the draft to gain an extra first-round selection in the 2022 NFL draft. Smith was a highly touted prospect out of the University of Alabama, and was the first Heisman winner the Eagles drafted in over fifty years. The drafting of Smith also reunited him with Jalen Hurts, his first quarterback at Alabama. After training camp, Hurts was officially named the Eagles' starting quarterback for the 2021 season by head coach Sirianni. After starting the season 2\u20135, the Eagles went 7\u20133 in their last ten games, clinching a playoff berth in week 17 after a victory over the Washington Football Team along with a loss by the Minnesota Vikings and win by the San Francisco 49ers. The Eagles finished the season with the #1 rushing offense; It was the best rushing offense since the 1985 Chicago Bears, and the best in the franchise history since the 1949 Eagles team. They lost in the wild card game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 31\u201315.\nThe Eagles went on to win their first eight games of the 2022 season and earned the top seed in the NFC with a 14\u20133 overall record. the Eagles matched their franchise-best 13\u20131 start in the 2004 season and secured their third 13-win season win in franchise history, after 2004 and 2017. With a 22\u201316 win over the Giants in Week 18, the Eagles won the NFC East for the first time since 2019, and clinched the NFC's #1 seed for the first time since 2017. The Eagles also reached 14 regular season wins, a franchise record. In the Divisional Round, the Eagles routed the Giants 38\u20137 for their first postseason win since 2018. With this win, Philadelphia completed a 3\u20130 sweep of all three games played against New York, and advanced to the NFC Championship for the first time since 2017. The Eagles went on to win the NFC Championship against an injury depleted San Francisco 49ers team 31\u20137, advancing to Super Bowl LVII, their fourth Super Bowl appearance in franchise history, to face the Kansas City Chiefs and former longtime head coach Andy Reid. The Eagles ultimately lost to the Chiefs by a score of 38\u201335.\nThe Eagles opened the 2023 season as the defending NFC Champions. Despite starting the season 10\u20131, The Eagles failed to equal or improve on their 14\u20133 record from the previous year. Even in victory, the Eagles had problems with a poor defense the entire season, which was ranked 26th out of 32; 8 of their 11 victories fell within one score, none of their aforementioned wins went outside of 2 scores, and their losses to the playoff-bound 49ers and Cowboys were blowouts. The Eagles' late-season woes continued into the playoffs, in which they were eliminated in the Wild Card round by the NFC South champion Tampa Bay Buccaneers in a 32\u20139 blowout loss. The Eagles promptly fired offensive coordinator Brian Johnson and defensive coordinator Sean Desai within a week of their playoff exit. In the subsequent offseason, on March 4, 2024, center Jason Kelce retired after spending his entire 13-year career with the Eagles. On March 10, defensive tackle Fletcher Cox would also retire after spending 12 seasons with the team.\nSuper Bowl LIX Champions.\nOn March 13, 2024, Saquon Barkley, a running back with the New York Giants from 2018 to 2023, became a free agent, and signed a three-year $37.75 million deal with the Eagles. On September 6, 2024, the Eagles opened their season in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil. In his debut, Barkley rushed for 109 yards with two rushing touchdowns and a receiving touchdown in a 34\u201329 victory over the Green Bay Packers, becoming the first Eagles player to score three touchdowns in their debut with the team since Terrell Owens in 2004. Despite a turbulent 2\u20132 start to the season, the Eagles improved on their 11\u20136 record from the previous season, and won ten consecutive games for the first time in franchise history. For the fourth straight year and seventh time in the last 8 seasons the Eagles clinched a playoff berth. Barkley continued his dominance in Week 12 against the Los Angeles Rams, recording 255 rushing yards and 302 total yards. His 255 rushing yards were the ninth-most in a single game in NFL history and the most in Eagles history. In Week 17, the Eagles clinched the NFC East by sweeping the Dallas Cowboys for the first time since 2011. Barkley ran for 167 yards and crossed the 2,000 yard mark, becoming only the ninth running back in NFL history to do so, and recording the second-most yards of any running back in NFL history in a single season. With their Week 18 win over the New York Giants, the Eagles finished 14\u20133 for the second time in three seasons.\nThe Eagles started the playoffs by defeating the Green Bay Packers 22\u201310 in the Wild Card Round. In a snowy rematch of their Week 12 meeting, the Eagles again beat the Los Angeles Rams in the Divisional Round 28\u201322. In the NFC Championship Game, the Eagles dominated their division rival Washington Commanders 55\u201323, setting the record for the most points scored in a conference championship game. In Super Bowl LIX, the Eagles met the Kansas City Chiefs in a rematch of Super Bowl LVII from two years earlier, this time defeating the two-time defending champions by a score of 40\u201322 and winning their second Super Bowl and first since the 2017 season. The Eagles' win prevented the Chiefs from achieving the first-ever Super Bowl three-peat. Barkley recorded 57 rushing yards, setting the NFL record for most rushing (2,504) and scrimmage yards (2,857) in a full season surpassing Terrell Davis. Philadelphia quarterback Jalen Hurts threw for 221 yards with two touchdowns and rushed for 72 yards and a touchdown, breaking his own record for most rushing yards for a quarterback in a Super Bowl, with 72.\nHurts was named Super Bowl MVP for his performance in the victory. The Eagles finished with 18 total wins, tying the NFL record for most total wins in a season along with the 1984 San Francisco 49ers, 1985 Chicago Bears, and 2007 New England Patriots. The Eagles 145 points scored set an NFL record for the most points scored in a postseason.\nChampionships.\nDivision championships.\nThe Eagles were a part of the NFL Eastern Division from 1933 to 1949, the National Conference from 1950 to 1953, and the Eastern Conference from 1953 to 1966. They were then placed in the Capitol Division of the Eastern Conference in 1967. When the league reformed into the NFC and AFC in 1970, the Eagles were placed in the NFC East.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe choice of an eagle as the team mascot honored the insignia of the New Deal program, the National Recovery Administration, which featured a blue eagle as its insignia.\nFor the 1933 and 1934 seasons, the Eagles colors were light blue and yellow. In 1935, they added green to their uniforms and for several decades, their colors were kelly green, silver, and white. In 1954 the Eagles, along with the Baltimore Colts, became the second team ever in the NFL to put a logo on their helmets, with silver wings on a kelly green helmet. In 1969 the team wore two helmet versions: Kelly green with white wings in road games, and white with kelly green wings at home. From 1970 to '73, they wore the white helmets with Kelly green wings exclusively before switching back to Kelly green helmets with silver wings. By 1974, Joseph A. Scirrotto Jr. designed the silver wings within a white outline, and this style on a kelly green helmet became standard for over two decades.\nFrom 1948 to 1995, the team logo was an eagle in flight carrying a football in its claws, although from 1969 to 1972, the eagle took on a more stylized look.\nIn 1973, the team's name was added below the eagle, returning to its pre-1969 look. Both the logo and uniforms were radically altered in 1996, when the primary kelly green color was changed to a darker shade, officially described as \"midnight green\". Silver was practically abandoned, as uniform pants moved to either white or midnight green. The traditional helmet wings were changed to a primarily white color, with silver and black accents. The team's logo combination (the eagle and club name lettering) also changed, with the eagle itself limited to a white (bald eagle) head, drawn in a less realistic, more cartoon-like style, and the lettering changed from calligraphic to block letters. The eagle head is the only NFL logo to \"face left\" which causes the right side of the logo to present a stylized \"E\".\nSince 1996, the team has made only minor alterations, mostly related to jersey/pants combinations worn during specific games. For example, in 1997, against the San Francisco 49ers, the team wore midnight green jerseys and pants for the first of only two occasions in team history. The second occasion was in 2002, during the final regular season game at Veterans Stadium, a win over the division-rival Washington Redskins. A year later, in the first two games of the 2003 season (both home losses, to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and New England Patriots), the Eagles wore white jerseys with white pants. After that, the white jerseys along with white pants were worn exclusively during preseason games from 2004 to 2011, with the exception of 2007 and 2010.\nThe 2003 season also saw the first (though subtle) change to the 1996-style uniform. On both white and green jerseys, black shadows and silver trim were added to both the green and white numbering. The stripe on the pants changed from black-green-black to black-silver-green on the white pants, and from a solid black stripe to one stripe of black, another of silver, with one small white stripe in between for the midnight green pants. The 2003 season also saw the team debut black alternate jerseys, with a green (instead of black) shadow on white numbers, and silver trim. These black jerseys have been worn for two selected home games each season (usually the first home game after a bye week and the season finale). In the 2003 and 2004 regular-season home finales, the team wore the green road pants with the black alternate jerseys, but lost both games. Since then, the Eagles have only worn the black jerseys with the white pants. However, due to the special 75th-anniversary uniforms serving as the \"alternates\" for one game in 2007, the Eagles could not wear the alternate black jersey that season per league rules at the time (alternate uniforms were permitted twice per season but only one can be used). The black jerseys with white pants, however, re-appeared for the 2008 Thanksgiving night game against the Arizona Cardinals. From 2006 to 2013, the Eagles have only worn the alternate black jerseys once a season and for the last November home game, but did not use them in 2007, 2010, and 2011. For the 2007 and 2010 seasons, the Eagles used throwback uniforms in place of the black alternates for their anniversary to commemorate past teams. The team also started wearing black cleats exclusively in 2004, although the rule was relaxed by the mid-2010s.\nTo celebrate the team's 75th anniversary, the 2007 uniforms featured a 75th-season logo patch on the left shoulder. In addition, the team wore \"throwback\" jerseys in a 2007 game against the Detroit Lions. The yellow and blue jerseys, the same colors found on Philadelphia's city flag, are based on those worn by the Philadelphia Eagles in the team's inaugural season, and had been the same colors used by the Frankford Yellow Jackets franchise prior to its suspension of operations in 1931. The Eagles beat Detroit, 56\u201321.\nIn the 2010 season against the Green Bay Packers, on September 12, 2010, the Eagles wore uniforms similar to the ones that were worn by the 1960 championship team in honor the 50th anniversary of that team. In weeks 4 and 6 of the 2010 season, the Eagles wore their white jerseys in a match-up against the Washington Redskins and Atlanta Falcons, respectively, before reverting to their midnight green jerseys for the rest of their home games.\nFor the 2012 season, Nike took over from Reebok as the NFL's official apparel licensee, but the Eagles decided that they would not be adopting Nike's \"Elite 51\" uniform technology. Aside from the Nike logo replacing the Reebok logo, the only other change is the league-wide revision of the NFL shield on the uniform (replacing the NFL Equipment logo). Other than that the uniforms essentially remain unchanged. The Eagles also revived their black alternate jersey and resumed wearing white pants with their white jerseys in the regular season.\nFor the 2014 season, the Eagles officially adopted the \"Elite 51\"-style uniform from Nike. However, they only wore the midnight green jerseys and pants in the second half of that season due to the difficulty of producing their preferred shade of midnight green.\nIn Week 6 of 2014 against the New York Giants, the team introduced black pants to complement their black jerseys, giving them a blackout uniform set. The Eagles won the game 27\u20130. The victory was their first shutout in 18 years. In Week 16 of 2016 (also against the Giants), the Eagles wore a variation of the all-black look as part of the NFL Color Rush program, but with solid black socks as opposed to black with white sanitary socks of the original look. With the exception of 2017 and 2025, the Eagles have regularly worn the all-black uniforms at home against the Giants since the 2014 'blackout' game. The black jerseys/white pants combination was last seen during a preseason road game against the New England Patriots, after which the black jerseys were paired exclusively with the black pants.\nIn 2018, the Eagles' midnight green pants were not worn at all, marking the first such instance since the 1996 rebrand that the Eagles wore only white pants with their primary white or midnight green jerseys.\nIn Week 6 of the 2017 season, the Eagles debuted an all-white look with white jerseys, white pants and solid white socks in a road game against the Carolina Panthers. The all-white look began to be utilized full-time as a road uniform set in 2019 thanks to the NFL's decision to allow teams to wear solid color socks as an alternate look.\nDuring Week 10 of the 2021 season, the Eagles paired their white uniforms with the alternate black pants against the Denver Broncos, marking the first time the black pants were paired with a different colored uniform.\nIn 2022, the Eagles unveiled a new black alternate helmet, which would be worn alongside the all-black uniform. In addition, the team announced that throwback Kelly Green uniforms would return as an alternate uniform starting in the 2023 season. The team originally intended to release the uniforms in 2022, but due to production supply issues, the Eagles elected to delay its release to the 2023 season. The Eagles returned to wearing Kelly Green uniforms as the teams alternate, with their debut being in a Week 7 win vs the Miami Dolphins. With the Kelly Green helmet becoming the team's one alternate, the black helmet was temporarily shelved, and the Eagles returned to wearing their primary midnight green helmets with the all-black uniform.\nBack in 2022, it was released to the media that the Eagles would be changing their wordmark to a more modernized design. Due to supply chain issues, the new wordmark was not able to be applied to the uniforms until the 2024 season. In addition, the black helmet was brought back as the team's third helmet option; while the NFL only allowed teams with new designs to adopt a third helmet in 2024, the Eagles' minor change of jersey wordmark counted as such. The black helmets were worn with the white jerseys, black pants and white socks for the team's Week 1 game in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil against the Green Bay Packers, and again in a 2025 Week 10 rematch at Lambeau Field.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Eagles and Dallas Cowboys rivalry has been listed among the best and most acrimonious in the NFL. The Eagles won the first game in this rivalry 27\u201325 on September 30, 1960. Dallas leads the all-time series 74\u201358 as of the 2024 season, but in recent years, the series has been close, with each team winning 12 games since 2006. There is considerable hostility between the two teams' fan bases, with incidents such as the 1989 Bounty Bowl. The rivalry has even spilled over into draft weekend, with Cowboys legend Drew Pearson and Eagles legend David Akers exchanging insults at the opposing franchise in 2017 and 2018, respectively.\nNew York Giants.\nThe Eagles' rivalry with the New York Giants began in 1933 with the founding of the Eagles and slowly strengthened when both teams came to relative prominence in the 1940s and 1950s. The two teams have played in the same division in the NFL every year since 1933. The ferocity of the rivalry can also be attributed to the geographic New York\u2013Philadelphia rivalry, which is mirrored in Major League Baseball's Mets\u2013Phillies and the NHL's Flyers\u2013Rangers and Flyers\u2013Islanders. It is ranked by NFL Network as one of the greatest rivalries of all time, \"Sports Illustrated\" ranks it as the fourth best NFL rivalry of all time, and according to ESPN, it is one of the fiercest and most well-known rivalries in the football community. As of the 2024 season, the Eagles lead the all-time series 96\u201389\u20132.\nWashington Commanders.\nWhile not as big as the rivalries with the Giants and Cowboys, the Eagles' historical rivalry with the Washington Redskins / Washington Football Team / Washington Commanders has still been fierce. Although the two franchises played in the same division in the Eagles' inaugural 1933 season, their first meeting did not take place until October 21, 1934, during Washington's first year under the Boston Redskins moniker; the Redskins defeated the Eagles 6\u20130 at Fenway Park. Washington currently leads the all-time series 90\u201387\u20136. Since 2010, the rivalry has been very even overall with the Eagles winning 19 of the last 31 matchups.\nConference.\nAtlanta Falcons.\nThe Eagles lead the Atlanta Falcons 21\u201316\u20131, with a 3\u20131 lead in playoff games. The rivalry first emerged after the Falcons upset the Eagles in the 14\u201313, and only intensified further during the 2000s thanks to the rivalry between prominent dual-threat quarterbacks Donovan McNabb and Michael Vick. Recently, the Eagles' path to winning Super Bowl LII included a victory over the Falcons.\nInterconference.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Eagles and Pittsburgh Steelers are both located in Pennsylvania and began play in 1933. From that season through 1966, this was a major rivalry for both teams, as both were part of the same division. In 1967 they were placed in separate divisions, but remained in the same conference for three years. In 1970 the Steelers (along with the Cleveland Browns and Baltimore Colts) moved to the American Football Conference, while the Eagles stayed with the rest of the old-line NFL teams in the National Football Conference. As a result, the Eagles and Steelers no longer played each other every year; instead, they are scheduled to meet once every four years in the regular season. The most recent meeting was in 2024 at Lincoln Financial Field, with the Eagles winning 27\u201313. The Steelers have lost eleven straight games on the road against the Eagles dating back to 1966, which was also the start of the Super Bowl era. As of the 2024 season, the Eagles lead the all-time series 50\u201329\u20133.\nAwards and honors.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\nAs of 2025, 14 individuals who spent a significant part of their career with the Eagles (shown in bold below) have been inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nEagles Hall of Fame.\nIn 1987, the Eagles Honor Roll was established. Every Eagles player who had been elected into the Pro Football Hall of Fame at that point was among the inaugural induction class. By 2012, the Honor Roll had been retitled as the Eagles Hall of Fame. Players are considered for induction three years after their retirement from the NFL, and there have been 52 inductees into the Eagles Hall of Fame as of 2024.\nFranchise records.\nThe following players below have franchise records for the Eagles:\nPassing.\n+ = min. 500 attempts, # = min. 100 attempts, \u2217 = minimum 15 attempts,\nRushing.\n\u2217 = minimum 15 attempts, # = min. 100 attempts, + = min. 500 attempts\nReceiving.\n\u2217 = minimum 4 receptions, # = min. 20 receptions, + = min. 200 receptions\nRadio and television.\nEagles radio affiliates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom 2008 through 2010, Eagles games were broadcast on both rock-formatted WYSP and sports-talk Sports Radio 610 WIP, as both stations were owned and operated by CBS Radio. In 2011, CBS dropped the music on WYSP, renaming it WIP-FM and making it a full simulcast of WIP. By 2020, 610 WIP had changed call letters to WTEL and rebranded to the Philadelphia affiliate for the Black Information Network, while WIP-FM broadcast all Eagles games. In 2017, the Eagles extended their broadcasting contract with WIP-FM through 2024.\nMerrill Reese, who joined the Eagles in 1976, is the play-by-play announcer, and former Eagles wide receiver Mike Quick, who replaced offense lineman Stan Walters beginning in 1998, is the color analyst. The post-game show, which has consisted of many Philadelphia sports personalities, as of the 2014 season is hosted by Kevin Riley, a former Eagles linebacker and special-teamer, and Rob Ellis. Riley was the former post-game host for the show on 94 WYSP before the WIP change over; Rob Ellis hosts a weekly show nightly from 6\u201310 on 94.1 WIP-FM.\nSpanish language broadcasts are on WEMG Mega 105.7FM with Rickie Ricardo on play-by-play, and Oscar Budejen as color commentator.\nIn 2015, the preseason games were being televised on WCAU, the local NBC owned and operated station.\nDuring the regular season, games are governed by the NFL's master broadcasting contract with Fox, CBS, NBC, and ESPN. Most games can be seen on Fox-owned WTXF-TV. When hosting an AFC team, those games can be seen on CBS-owned KYW-TV.\nTraining camp.\nThe Eagles previously held their preseason training camp from the end of July through mid-August each year at Lehigh University in Bethlehem in the Lehigh Valley. In 2013, with the addition of head coach Chip Kelly, the Eagles moved their training camp to the NovaCare Complex in Philadelphia. Training camps were previously held at Chestnut Hill Academy in 1935, Saint Joseph's University in 1939 and 1943, Saranac Lake from 1946 to 1948, Hershey from 1951 to 1967, Albright College from 1968 to 1972, Widener University from 1973 to 1979, and West Chester University from 1980 to 1995.\nFight song.\nThis fight song is heard during Eagles' home games after touchdowns and before the team is introduced prior to kickoff.\nEagles' cheerleaders.\nThe Eagles have their own cheerleading squad, which performs a variety of dance routines for the fans and the Eagles on the sideline. The squad also releases a swimsuit calendar each year, and is the first squad in the league to release the calendar on the Android and iOS mobile systems.\nFans.\nDevotion.\nAlthough the method may vary, studies that attempt to rank the 32 fan bases in the NFL consistently place Eagles fans among the best in the league, noting their \"unmatched fervor\". American City Business Journals, which conducts a regular study to determine the most loyal fans in the NFL, ranked Eagles fans third in both 1999 and 2006. The 2006 study called Eagles fans \"incredibly loyal\", noting that they filled 99.8% of the seats in the stadium over the previous decade. \"Forbes\" placed the Eagles fans first in its 2008 survey, which was based on the correlation between team performance and fan attendance. ESPN.com placed Eagles fans fourth in the league in its 2008 survey, citing the connection between the team's performance and the mood of the city. The last home game that was blacked out on television in the Philadelphia market as a result of not being sold out was against the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday, September 12, 1999, which was Andy Reid's first home game as new head coach of the Eagles.\nThe studies note that, whether the Eagles have winning or losing teams, fans can be counted on to pack the stadium each year. As of August 2008, the team had sold out 71 consecutive games, and 70,000 additional fans were on the Eagles' waiting list for season tickets. Despite finishing with a 6\u201310 record in the 2005 season, the Eagles ranked second in the NFL in merchandise sales, and single-game tickets for the next season were sold out minutes after phone and Internet lines opened.\nEagles fans have also been known to chant the famous, \"E-A-G-L-E-S \u2013 Eagles!\" at Flyers, Phillies, and 76ers games when the team is getting blown out late in a game and a loss is inevitable, signifying their displeasure with the given team's performance, and that they are instead putting their hope into the Eagles. Occasionally, travelling Phillies fans may even chant this when the Phillies appear to be a few innings away from an inevitable win on the road as a way to celebrate their team and Philadelphia as a whole. The Eagles and Phillies were both the main tenants at Veterans Stadium before Lincoln Financial Field and Citizens Bank Park were built.\nNotable famous fans of the Eagles include actors Bradley Cooper, Rob McElhenney, and Miles Teller, actor and comedian Kevin Hart, \"Jeopardy!\" champion Brad Rutter, journalists Jake Tapper and Jesse Watters, morning talk show host Kelly Ripa, TV personality Jim Cramer, and soccer star Carli Lloyd, the latter of whom also appeared at a joint practice of the Eagles with the Baltimore Ravens in 2019 where she nailed a 55-yard field goal attempt. One week later, during an international friendly pitting the United States against Portugal at Lincoln Financial Field, Lloyd celebrated scoring a goal by doing the \"E-A-G-L-E-S, Eagles!\" chant. The United States ultimately won that match 4\u20130.\nThe Eagles also have famous fans from outside of the United States, which include Australian professional wrestler Grayson Waller, who currently wrestles in American pro wrestling promotion WWE (WrestleMania XL, which was held at Lincoln Financial Field itself, saw Waller don Eagles-themed ring gear), and Andrea Bain, a Canadian talk show host best known for her work as one of the four hosts of the lifestyle talk show \"The Social\" on Canadian network CTV.\nBad behavior.\nAlong with their fierce devotion, Eagles fans have a reputation for bad behavior and sports-related violence, especially when the team plays its rivals. One of the most famous incidents occurred in the 1968 season when fans of the struggling 2\u201311 Eagles pelted snowballs at an incarnation of Santa Claus during a halftime Christmas celebration.\nIn 2006, HarperCollins published \"If Football's a Religion, Why Don't We Have a Prayer?\", a book by Jere\u00e9 Longman, in which he describes the fans of the 700 Level at Veterans Stadium as having a reputation for \"hostile taunting, fighting, public urination and general strangeness.\"\nA 1997 game against the San Francisco 49ers in Philadelphia featured so many incidents that, beginning at the following home game, the Eagles appointed a judge, Seamus McCaffery, to preside over a temporary courtroom at the stadium; 20 suspects came before him that day. Fan behavior improved after the team's move to Lincoln Financial Field, and \"Eagles Court\" ended in December 2003.\nDuring a January 2025 home playoff game against the Green Bay Packers, an Eagles fan shouted obscenities at a woman wearing Packers gear; the incident went viral online, leading to the Eagles fan losing his job and receiving a ban from the stadium.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 1976 Philadelphia Eagles season was the subject of the movie \"Invincible\". The movie stars Mark Wahlberg as Vince Papale, a part-time school teacher and diehard Eagles fan who became an Eagles player. The film differs slightly from true events as the selection process was invitation-only, and Papale had at least some previous playing experience. The film \"Silver Linings Playbook\" highlights the 2008 Philadelphia Eagles season, and the novel mentions the 2006 team.\nThe comedy television series \"It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia\" makes several references to the Philadelphia Eagles, most notably on Season 3, Episode 2, \"The Gang Gets Invincible\", a reference to the 2006 Wahlberg film.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "23340", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23340", "title": "Paganism", "text": "Polytheistic religious groups\nPaganism (from la \" paganus\"\u00a0'rural, rustic', later 'civilian') is a term first used in the fourth century by early Christians for people in the Roman Empire who practiced polytheism, or ethnic religions other than Christianity, Judaism, and Samaritanism. In the time of the Roman Empire, individuals fell into the pagan class either because they were increasingly rural and provincial relative to the Christian population, or because they were not \"milites Christi\" (soldiers of Christ). Alternative terms used in Christian texts were \"hellene\", \"gentile\", and \"heathen\". Ritual sacrifice was an integral part of ancient Greco-Roman religion and was regarded as an indication of whether a person was pagan or Christian. Paganism has broadly connoted the \"religion of the peasantry\".\nDuring and after the Middle Ages, the term \"paganism\" was applied to any non-Christian religion, and the term presumed a belief in false gods. The origin of the application of the term \"pagan\" to polytheism is debated. In the 19th century, paganism was adopted as a self-descriptor by members of various artistic groups inspired by the ancient world. In the 20th century, it came to be applied as a self-descriptor by practitioners of modern paganism, modern pagan movements and polytheistic reconstructionists. Modern pagan traditions often incorporate beliefs or practices, such as nature worship, that are different from those of the largest world religions.\nContemporary knowledge of old pagan religions and beliefs comes from several sources, including anthropological field research, the evidence of archaeological artifacts, the philology of ancient language, and the historical accounts of ancient writers regarding cultures known to Classical antiquity. Most modern pagan religions existing today express a worldview that is polytheistic, pantheistic, panentheistic, or animistic, but some are monotheistic.\nEtymology and nomenclature.\nPagan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is crucial to stress right from the start that until the 20th century, people did not call themselves pagans to describe the religion they practiced. The notion of paganism, as it is generally understood today, was created by the early Christian Church. It was a label that Christians applied to others, one of the antitheses that were central to the process of Christian self-definition. As such, throughout history it was generally used in a derogatory sense.\u2014\u200a\nThe term \"pagan\" derives from Late Latin , revived during the Renaissance. Itself deriving from classical Latin which originally meant 'region delimited by markers', had also come to mean 'of or relating to the countryside', 'country dweller', 'villager'; by extension, 'rustic', 'unlearned', 'yokel', 'bumpkin'; in Roman military jargon, 'non-combatant', 'civilian', 'unskilled soldier'. It is related to ('to fasten', 'to fix or affix') and ultimately comes from Proto-Indo-European \"*pag-\" ('to fix' in the same sense):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The adoption of \"paganus\" by the Latin Christians as an all-embracing, pejorative term for polytheists represents an unforeseen and singularly long-lasting victory, within a religious group, of a word of Latin slang originally devoid of religious meaning. The evolution occurred only in the Latin west, and in connection with the Latin church. Elsewhere, Hellene or gentile (\"\") remained the word for pagan; and paganos continued as a purely secular term, with overtones of the inferior and the commonplace.\u2014\u200a\nMedieval writers often assumed that \"paganus\" as a religious term was a result of the conversion patterns during the Christianization of Europe, where people in towns and cities were converted more easily than those in remote regions, where old ways tended to remain. However, this idea has multiple problems. First, the word's usage as a reference to non-Christians pre-dates that period in history. Second, paganism within the Roman Empire centred on cities. The concept of an urban Christianity as opposed to a rural paganism would not have occurred to Romans during Early Christianity. Third, unlike words such as \"rusticitas\", \"paganus\" had not yet fully acquired the meanings (of uncultured backwardness) used to explain why it would have been applied to pagans.\n\"Paganus\" more likely acquired its meaning in Christian nomenclature via Roman military jargon (see above). Early Christians adopted military motifs and saw themselves as \"Milites Christi\" (soldiers of Christ). A good example of Christians still using \"paganus\" in a military context rather than a religious one is in Tertullian's \"De Corona Militis\" XI.V, where the Christian is referred to as \"paganus\" (\"civilian\"):\n\"Paganus\" acquired its religious connotations by the mid-4th century. As early as the 5th century, \"paganos\" was metaphorically used to denote persons outside the bounds of the Christian community. Following the sack of Rome by the Visigoths just over fifteen years after the Christian persecution of paganism under Theodosius I, murmurs began to spread that the old gods had taken greater care of the city than the Christian God. In response, Augustine of Hippo wrote \"De Civitate Dei Contra Paganos\" ('The City of God against the Pagans'). In it, he contrasted the fallen \"city of Man\" with the \"city of God\", of which all Christians were ultimately citizens. Hence, the foreign invaders were \"not of the city\" or \"rural\".\nThe term pagan was not attested in the English language until the 17th century. In addition to \"infidel\" and \"heretic\", it was used as one of several pejorative Christian counterparts to \"goy\" ( / ) as used in Judaism, and to \"kafir\" (, 'unbeliever') and \"mushrik\" (, 'idolater') as in Islam.\nHellene.\nIn the Latin-speaking Western Roman Empire of the newly Christianizing Roman Empire, Koine Greek became associated with the traditional polytheistic religion of Ancient Greece and was regarded as a foreign language (\"lingua peregrina\") in the west. By the latter half of the 4th century in the Greek-speaking Eastern Empire, pagans were\u2014paradoxically\u2014most commonly called \"Hellenes\" (, lit. \"Greeks\") The word had almost entirely ceased being used in a cultural sense. It retained that meaning for roughly the first millennium of Christianity.\nThis was influenced by Christianity's early members, who were Jewish. The Jews of the time distinguished themselves from foreigners according to religion rather than ethno-cultural standards, and early Jewish Christians would have done the same. Since Hellenic culture was the dominant pagan culture in the Roman east, they referred to pagans as Hellenes. Christianity inherited Jewish terminology for non-Jews and adapted it to refer to non-Christians with whom they were in contact. This usage is recorded in the New Testament. In the Pauline epistles, \"Hellene\" is almost always juxtaposed with \"Hebrew\" regardless of actual ethnicity.\nThe usage of Hellene as a religious term was initially part of an exclusively Christian nomenclature, but some Pagans began to defiantly call themselves Hellenes. Other pagans even preferred the narrow meaning of the word from a broad cultural sphere to a more specific religious grouping. However, there were many Christians and pagans alike who strongly objected to the evolution of the terminology. The influential Archbishop of Constantinople Gregory of Nazianzus, for example, took offence at imperial efforts to suppress Hellenic culture (especially concerning spoken and written Greek) and he openly criticized the emperor.\nThe growing religious stigmatization of Hellenism had a chilling effect on Hellenic culture by the late 4th century.\nBy late antiquity, however, it was possible to speak Greek as a primary language while not conceiving of oneself as a Hellene. The long-established use of Greek both in and around the Eastern Roman Empire as a lingua franca ironically allowed it to instead become central in enabling the spread of Christianity\u2014as indicated for example, by the use of Greek for the Epistles of Paul. In the first half of the 5th century, Greek was the standard language in which bishops communicated, and the \"Acta Conciliorum\" (\"Acts of the Church Councils\") were recorded originally in Greek and then translated into other languages.\nHeathen.\n\"Heathen\" comes from (not Christian or Jewish); cf. Old Norse . This meaning for the term originated from Gothic (gentile woman) being used to translate Hellene in Wulfila's Bible, the first translation of the Bible into a Germanic language. This may have been influenced by the Greek and Latin terminology of the time used for pagans. If so, it may be derived from Gothic (dwelling on the heath). However, this is not attested. It may even be a borrowing of Greek () via Armenian .\nThe term has recently been revived in the forms \"Heathenry\" and \"Heathenism\" (often but not always capitalized), as alternative names for the modern Germanic pagan movement, adherents of which may self-identify as Heathens.\nDefinition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is perhaps misleading even to say that there was such a religion as paganism at the beginning of [the Common Era] ... It might be less confusing to say that the pagans, before their competition with Christianity, had no religion at all in the sense in which that word is normally used today. They had no tradition of discourse about ritual or religious matters (apart from philosophical debate or antiquarian treatise), no organized system of beliefs to which they were asked to commit themselves, no authority-structure peculiar to the religious area, above all no commitment to a particular group of people or set of ideas other than their family and political context. If this is the right view of pagan life, it follows that we should look on paganism quite simply as a religion invented in the course of the second to third centuries AD, in competition and interaction with Christians, Jews and others.\u2014\u200a\nDefining paganism is very complex and problematic. Understanding the context of its associated terminology is important. Early Christians referred to the diverse array of cults around them as a single group for reasons of convenience and rhetoric. While paganism generally implies polytheism, the primary distinction between classical pagans and Christians was not one of monotheism versus polytheism, as not all pagans were strictly polytheist. Throughout history, many of them believed in a supreme deity. However, most such pagans believed in a class of subordinate gods/daimons\u2014see henotheism\u2014or divine emanations. To Christians, the most important distinction was whether or not someone worshipped the \"one true God\". Those who did not (polytheist, monotheist, or atheist) were outsiders to the Church and thus considered pagan. Similarly, classical pagans would have found it peculiar to distinguish groups by the number of deities followers venerate. They would have considered the priestly colleges (such as the College of Pontiffs or Epulones) and cult practices more meaningful distinctions.\nReferring to paganism as a pre-Christian indigenous religion is equally untenable. Not all historical pagan traditions were pre-Christian or indigenous to their places of worship.\nOwing to the history of its nomenclature, paganism traditionally encompasses the collective pre- and non-Christian cultures in and around the classical world; including those of the Greco-Roman, Celtic, Germanic, and Slavic tribes. However, modern parlance of folklorists and contemporary pagans in particular has extended the original four millennia scope used by early Christians to include similar religious traditions stretching far into prehistory.\nPerception and Ethnocentrism.\nPaganism came to be equated by Christians with a sense of hedonism, representing those who are sensual, materialistic, self-indulgent, unconcerned with the future, and uninterested in more mainstream religions. Pagans were usually described in terms of this worldly stereotype, especially among those drawing attention to what they perceived as the limitations of paganism. \nRecently, the ethnocentric and moral absolutist origins of the common usage of the term pagan have been proposed, with scholar David Petts noting how, with particular reference to Christianity, \"...local religions are defined in opposition to privileged 'world religions'; they become everything that world religions are not, rather than being explored as a subject in their own right.\" In addition, Petts notes how various spiritual, religious, and metaphysical ideas branded as \"pagan\" from diverse cultures were studied in opposition to Abrahamism in early anthropology, a binary he links to ethnocentrism and colonialism.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nClassical antiquity.\nLudwig Feuerbach defined the paganism of classical antiquity, which he termed ('heathenry') as \"the unity of religion and politics, of spirit and nature, of god and man\", qualified by the observation that man in the pagan view is always defined by ethnicity, i.e., As a result, every pagan tradition is also a national tradition. Modern historians define paganism instead as the aggregate of cult acts, set within a civic rather than a national context, without a written creed or sense of orthodoxy.\nLate Antiquity.\n\"Pagan\" as a religious concept arose out of the development of Christianity, as an exonym to refer to certain non-Christian peoples and practices, both at the center of and in the outer reaches of the Roman Empire.\nEarly Christianity was one of several monotheistic cults within the Roman Empire, emerging from Second Temple Judaism and Hellenistic Judaism. It developed in context, relationship, and competition with other religions advocating both monotheism and polytheism. Early Christianity distinguished itself from these other religions through the concept of paganism, naming those \"pagan\" who did not worship \"the one true God\".\nNotable monotheistic cults contemporary with Early Christianity included those of Dionysus, Neoplatonism, Mithraism, Gnosticism, and Manichaeanism. The cult of Dionysus is thought to have strongly influenced Early Christian themes, and is an example of how Christianity defined itself against \"paganism\" while incorporating \"pagan\" religious themes and practices. Numerous scholars have concluded that the conceptual construction of Jesus the wandering rabbi into the image of Christ the Logos, reflects direct influence from the cult of Dionysus, and the symbolism of wine and the importance it held in the mythology surrounding both Dionysus and Jesus Christ exemplifies this. Peter Wick argues that the use of wine symbolism in the Gospel of John, including the story of the Marriage at Cana at which Jesus turns water into wine, was intended to show Jesus as superior to Dionysus. The scene in \"The Bacchae\" wherein Dionysus appears before King Pentheus on charges of claiming divinity can be compared to the New Testament scene of Jesus being interrogated by Pontius Pilate.\nIn Albania.\nPaganism in Albania serves as an example of how indigenous folk religious practices persisted under official policies of Christian conversion. Proto-Albanian speakers were Christianized under the Latin sphere of influence, specifically in the 4th century CE, as shown by the basic Christian terms in Albanian, which are of Latin origin and entered Proto-Albanian before the Gheg\u2013Tosk dialectal diversification. Regardless of Christianization, paganism persisted among Albanians, and especially within the inaccessible and deep interior where Albanian folklore evolved over the centuries in a relatively isolated tribal culture and society. It has continued to persist, despite partially transformation by Christian, and later Muslim and Marxist beliefs, that were either to be introduced by choice or imposed by force. The Albanian traditional customary law (Kanun) has held a longstanding, unwavering, and sacred \u2013 although secular \u2013 unchallenged authority with a cross-religious effectiveness over the Albanians, which is attributed to an earlier pagan code common to all the Albanian tribes. Historically, the Christian clergy has vigorously fought, but without success, to eliminate the pagan rituals practiced by Albanians for traditional feasts and particular events, especially the fire rituals (Zjarri).\nPostclassical history.\nThe Byzantine lineage.\nChristianity was introduced late in Mani, with the first Greek temples converted into churches during the 11th century. Byzantine monk Nikon \"the Metanoite\" (\u039d\u03af\u03ba\u03c9\u03bd \u1f41 \u039c\u03b5\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u03af\u03c4\u03b5) was sent in the 10th century to convert the predominantly pagan Maniots. Although his preaching began the conversion process, it took over 200 years for the majority to accept Christianity fully by the 11th and 12th centuries. Patrick Leigh Fermor noted that the Maniots, isolated by mountains, were among the last Greeks to abandon the old religion, doing so towards the end of the 9th century: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sealed off from outside influences by their mountains, the semi-troglodytic Maniots themselves were the last of the Greeks to be converted. They only abandoned the old religion of Greece towards the end of the ninth century. It is surprising to remember that this peninsula of rock, so near the heart of the Levant from which Christianity springs, should have been baptised three whole centuries after the arrival of St. Augustine in far-away Kent. According to Constantine VII in \"De Administrando Imperio\", the Maniots were referred to as 'Hellenes' and only fully Christianized in the 9th century, despite some church ruins from the 4th century indicating early Christian presence. The region's mountainous terrain allowed the Maniots to evade the Eastern Roman Empire's Christianization efforts, thus preserving pagan traditions, which coincided with significant years in the life of Gemistos Plethon.\nThe End of the Athenian and Alexandrian Schools (5th\u20136th Century).\nThe continuity of classical philosophical thought, especially Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism, within the Byzantine Empire necessitated a strategic management of theological risk, given that the Hellenic tradition implied pagan cosmology and metaphysics contradicting Christian orthodoxy. Modern scholarship posits that key Byzantine intellectuals employed conscious strategies of intellectual accommodation, or oikonomia, which secured the transmission of non-Christian material, often discussed under the framework of crypto-pagan dissimulation. These strategies allowed for the academic preservation of texts while publicly adhering to Christian orthodoxy.\nThe final generation of Neoplatonists established the survival strategies that would be inherited by Byzantium:\nProclus (412\u2013485) and Damascius (458\u2013538): As the successive heads of the Athenian School, both were overt practitioners of Hellenic paganism and Theurgy. The intellectual survival of their doctrines relied on structural abstraction: Proclus's systematic method in works like the \"Elements of Theology\" made him an indispensable philosophical quarry for later Christian theologians seeking a rigorous conceptual framework, thus ensuring his content's survival under the guise of intellectual utility. Damascius, the last head of the school before its closure in 529, is implicated in the most radical act of dissimulation: the pseudepigraphy of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (c. 500), which placed advanced Proclean Henology under apostolic authority, a strategy interpreted by scholars like Tuomo Lankila as a conscious \"resurrect[ion of] the polytheistic religion\" through concealment.\nAmmonius Hermiae (440\u2013520): In Alexandria, Ammonius employed a pragmatic strategy of accommodation. Although a pagan, he negotiated with the Christian authorities (specifically the patriarch Proterius) to keep the school open, ensuring the continuous teaching of the Aristotelian and Neoplatonic curriculum. This public compliance allowed for the technical preservation of philosophical texts.\nSimplicius of Cilicia (6th century): Following the closure of the Athenian School, Simplicius moved to Persia. His immense commentaries on Aristotle served as a primary strategy of intellectual neutrality. By focusing on the historical and technical exposition of his predecessors' pagan arguments without overtly endorsing them, Simplicius became the essential vehicle for the objective transmission of Greek philosophy into the Byzantine and later Islamic worlds.\nDionysius of Thrace (5th\u20136th century commentator): The tradition surrounding the T\u00e9khn\u0113 grammatik\u1e17 ensured the survival of pagan myth references within a dry, academic structure. Scholars note that the accompanying Christianized scholia (commentaries), written by Unknown early Byzantine commentators (7th\u20138th centuries), preserved the detailed mythological content, only adding perfunctory Christian disclaimers that did not meaningfully engage with or neutralize the pagan knowledge, thus ensuring its continuity. This group of commentators are precursors to the later Aristotelian circle in Constantinople. Figures like John Philoponus (490\u2013570), a student of Ammonius, also preserved Hellenism through the strategic refutation of pagan doctrines, such as in \"Against Proclus on the Eternity of the World\", preserving the detailed philosophical arguments under the guise of neutralization.\nThe Macedonian Renaissance and Komnenian Era (9th\u201312th Century).\nThe revival of scholarship formalized the use of disclaimers and political strategy:\nLeo the Mathematician (c. 790\u2013869) and Theodore of Smyrna (8th\u20139th century): Leo's promotion of advanced mathematics and Platonic-inspired thought while Archbishop and head of the Magnaura School led to explicit accusations of crypto-paganism from contemporaries, who charged him with \"having rejected Christianity and adopted Greek paganism.\" His public disclaimers\u2014or the political defenses he was forced to mount\u2014were essential for his institutional survival. Theodore of Smyrna, often cited as a student of Leo, participated in this transmission, though direct evidence of his own use of disclaimers is less prominent in scholarship.\nPhotius (c. 810\u2013893) and Arethas of Caesarea (c. 860\u2013935): Both utilized a strategy of archival preservation. Photius\u2019s Myriobiblon preserved lost pagan philosophical and historical works by framing them as academic reviews. Arethas\u2019s patronage secured the physical copying of vital pagan texts, including Plato's dialogues. Arethas further used a political disclaimer by publicly attacking others (like Leo) for being \"Hellenic,\" rhetorically distancing himself from the theological risk while actively enabling pagan scholarship.\nMichael Psellos (1017\u20131078): Psellos refined the strategy of the explicit disclaimer through dissimulation (oikonomia). He openly studied Proclus, Plotinus, and the Chaldaean Oracles, while publicly disavowing belief in pagan practices (like astrology) to \"distance himself from heretical doctrines,\" a necessary facade to secure Hellenic philosophical concepts within the Christian educational system.\nJohn Italos (1025\u20131085), Eustratios of Nicaea (960\u20131030), and Michael of Ephesus (11th century): This group formed the core of the 11th-century Aristotelian circle. Italos's reliance on apodeictic proof over patristic authority was perceived as a failure of his disclaimers, leading to his condemnation and ten anathemas in 1082 for promoting \"(crypto-)pagan\" doctrines, recorded in the Synodikon of Orthodoxy. Eustratios, his student, continued the tradition but his strategy of survival lay in focusing commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics (practical philosophy), a less theologically dangerous area, while Michael of Ephesus focused on monumentalizing the complete Aristotelian corpus (e.g., Parva Naturalia), a crucial act of systemic preservation for philosophical completeness.\nThe Palaiologan Renaissance (13th\u201315th Century).\nThis final period saw renewed engagement with classical sources, requiring careful strategies to manage the transmission of volatile texts:\nGregory Choniades (c. 1240\u20131302) and Maximus Planudes (c. 1260\u20131330): Choniades's contribution was the importation of advanced Hellenic astronomical and mathematical knowledge from Persia. His strategy involved the technical translation of these texts into Greek, focusing on their empirical utility rather than their religious or philosophical implications, a form of intellectual compartmentalization aimed at protection. Planudes, a grammarian, employed the strategy of literary preservation, compiling and commenting on potentially controversial texts, such as the Greek Anthology and Ptolemy's works, ensuring their survival through the guise of academic philology.\nTheodore Metochites (1270\u20131332): Metochites championed the preservation of classical science and philosophy through a strategy of apologetic structural integration. His literary projects employed sophisticated apologetic language, positioning pagan customs and prophecies as historical precursors fulfilled by Christian truth. This structure functioned as an overarching disclaimer that neutralized the theological threat of Hellenism through reinterpretation and \"Hellenic-Christian synthesis.\"\nGeorgios Gemistos Plethon (c. 1355\u20131452): Plethon was arguably the most radical proponent of Platonism in the Byzantine world. His intellectual survival strategy was based on radical dissimulation and secrecy: while publicly engaging in political and philosophical debates, he authored the N\u00f3moi (Laws), a text that proposed a comprehensive, state-sanctioned neo-pagan, polytheistic religious system intended to replace Christianity in the reformed Byzantine state. Scholars view this concealed work as the ultimate statement of crypto-paganism, intended for a secret intellectual elite. The failure of this deep concealment led to its discovery after his death by Patriarch Gennadios Scholarios, who condemned Plethon and ordered the destruction by fire of the N\u00f3moi, saving only the table of contents.\nThe Arabic transmission.\nIn the near east, the survival of specific technical and intellectual traditions from late antiquity, including advanced astrology, specialized mathematical techniques, and the corpus of Hermetic alchemy, was secured through organized non-Muslim communities integrated within the Arabic intellectual world. This transmission route was centered on the non-Islamic community of the Sabians of Harran, who employed religious dissimulation (kitm\u0101n) while serving as essential scholars and translators. Their technical expertise allowed them to preserve and transmit non-orthodox cosmological frameworks within scientific pursuits.\nHarran.\nThe city of Harran served as a geographically and politically resilient center for a unique syncretic religion that blended Mesopotamian paganism with Neoplatonism. This persistence allowed the community to function as a crucial hub for intellectual continuity well into the Abbasid period.\nHarran negotiated a peaceful surrender to the Rashidun Caliphate in 639\u2013640. The city gained particular political prominence under the Umayyad Caliph, Marwan II (r. 744\u2013750), serving as his capital. Although it later lost this status, its established schools and university flourished, actively participating in the Translation Movement during the reign of Harun al-Rashid (r. 786\u2013809). Following a decree by Caliph Al-Ma'mun in 830, the community successfully adopted the protected legal status of \"Sabians\" mentioned in the Quran, ensuring the survival of their distinct religious and intellectual identity.\nThe Sabian Core: Pagan Identity and Literary Transmission.\nThe Sabians explicitly maintained a pagan identity, viewing their scientific and esoteric studies as integral to their religious practice. Their devotion to the Chaldean-style astral cultus and their claim that Hermes Trismegistus was their primary prophet made them the natural custodians of the esoteric Greek and Babylonian scientific lineages.\nThe most influential scholarly line was founded by Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra (836\u2013901), a Harranian scholar and major figure in the Translation Movement. Th\u0101bit was an open pagan; his funeral inscription explicitly refers to him as a \"Sabian, son of a Sabian.\" He was a mathematician, astronomer, and translator whose works introduced the theoretical framework for celestial mechanics and the technical basis for talismanic operations into Arabic. His lineage continued through his descendants, including his son Sin\u0101n ibn Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra (c. 880\u2013943) and grandson Ibr\u0101h\u012bm ibn Sin\u0101n ibn Th\u0101bit (c. 908\u2013946), who served as elite court physicians and mathematicians.\nThe foundational corpus of Arabic alchemy is associated with J\u0101bir ibn \u1e24ayy\u0101n (Geber) (c. 721\u2013815). The intellectual history surrounding Geber firmly links his esoteric knowledge to the Harranian scholarly network. This connection is rooted in the Sabian tradition of viewing Hermes as the prophet of alchemy. Geber is understood to have served as a conduit for the technical and intellectual currents connected to the Sabian traditions, embedding a Hermetic and Chaldean-influenced cosmology into early Islamic chemical arts. Scholars such as Ibn Wa\u1e25shiyya (d. 930s) helped codify and transmit texts rooted in ancient Babylonian\u2013Sabian priesthoods, ensuring the literary survival of magical and alchemical lore for subsequent generations of Arabic scholars.\nThe Transmission to the Latin West (13th Century).\nThe established Arabic intellectual heritage, which contained the Sabian cosmological influences, was transmitted directly into the Latin West via the court of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II (1194\u20131250) and his primary translator.\nFrederick was a unique patron who explicitly sought Arabic esoteric knowledge during the Sixth Crusade. His host, the Ayyubid ruler al-K\u0101mil, patronized scholars preserving Harranian-style astral science. Contemporary sources confirm that Frederick requested specific books on astrology, treatises on talismans, and Greek philosophical works preserved in Arabic\u2014the very material in which Harranian scholars specialized. Historians (Burnett, Pingree, Akasoy) concur that Frederick's exposure to this lineage of intellectual knowledge is extremely plausible. This contact was established through meeting scholars associated with the Ayyubid court, rather than through direct contact with the Harranian community itself.\nMichael Scot (c. 1175\u20131232): Frederick II's chief court scholar. His work was the primary literary vector for this transmission into Europe. his writings show clear signs of working within the Arabic Hermetic\u2013astral tradition, a lineage that incorporated elements preserved by the Sabians of Harran; Scot\u2019s corpus reflects a strong indirect link to the Sabian tradition through his translation and use of works by Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra and his connection to the intellectual network that produced Picatrix-type material (the Gh\u0101yat al-\u1e24ak\u012bm), which drew upon Harranian cosmology.\nIslam in Arabia.\nArab paganism gradually disappeared during Muhammad's era through Islamization. The sacred months of the Arab pagans were the 1st, 7th, 11th, and 12th months of the Islamic calendar. After Muhammad had conquered Mecca he set out to convert the pagans. One of the last military campaigns that Muhammad ordered against the Arab pagans was the Demolition of Dhul Khalasa. It occurred in April and May 632 AD, in 10AH of the Islamic Calendar. Dhul Khalasa is referred to as both an idol and a temple, and it was known by some as the Ka'ba of Yemen, built and worshipped by polytheist tribes.\nModern history.\nEarly Modern Renaissance.\nThe Ordine Osirideo Egizio claimed direct descent from a colony of Alexandrian priests who, fleeing persecution after the 4th century AD, sought refuge in Naples, preserving ancient pagan liturgies almost intact. Through the Middle Ages (5th\u201315th centuries) these rites persisted in secret esoteric circles and re-emerged during the Renaissance (14th\u201317th centuries), later inspiring figures such as Raimondo di Sangro (1710\u20131771), Prince of Sansevero.\nInterest in reviving ancient Roman religious traditions can be traced to the Renaissance, with figures such as Gemistus Pletho and Julius Pomponius Laetus advocating for a revival, when Renaissance magic was practiced as a revival of Greco-Roman magic. Gemistus Plethon, who was from Mistras (near the Mani Peninsula\u2014where paganism had endured until the 12th century) encouraged the Medici, descendants of the Maniot Latriani dynasty, to found the Neoplatonic Academy in Florence, helping to spark the Renaissance.\nIn addition Julius Pomponius Laetus (student of Pletho) established the Roman academy which secretly celebrated the Natale di Roma, a festival linked to the foundation of Rome, and the birthday of Romulus. The Academy was dissolved in 1468 when Pope Paul II ordered the arrest and execution of some of the members, Pope Sixtus IV allowed Laetus to open the academy again until the Sack of Rome in 1527.\nAfter the French Revolution, the French lawyer Gabriel Andr\u00e9 Aucler (mid 1700s\u20131815) adopted the name Quintus Nautius and sought to revive paganism, styling himself as its leader. He designed religious clothing and performed pagan rites at his home. In 1799, he published \"La Thr\u00e9icie\", presenting his religious views. His teachings were later analyzed by G\u00e9rard de Nerval in \"Les Illumin\u00e9s\" (1852).\nAdmiring ancient Greece and ancient Rome, Aucler supported the French Revolution and saw it as a path to restoring an ancient republic. He took the name Quintus Nautius, claimed Roman priestly lineage, and performed Orphic rites at his home. His followers were mainly his household. In 1799, he published \"La Thr\u00e9icie\", advocating a revival of paganism in France, condemning Christianity, and promoting universal animation.\nIn the 17th century, the description of paganism turned from a theological aspect to an ethnological one, and religions began to be understood as part of the ethnic identities of peoples, and the study of the religions of so-called primitive peoples triggered questions as to the ultimate historical origin of religion. Jean Bodin viewed pagan mythology as a distorted version of Christian truths. Nicolas Fabri de Peiresc saw the pagan religions of Africa of his day as relics that were in principle capable of shedding light on the historical paganism of Classical Antiquity.\nLate Modern Romanticism.\nThe 19th century saw much scholarly interest in the reconstruction of pagan mythology from folklore or fairy tales. Depictions of reconstructed themes in theater, poetry, and music flourished alongside political invocations of reimagined pagan codes and ethics.\nFolklore reconstructions were notably attempted by the Brothers Grimm, especially Jacob Grimm in his \"Teutonic Mythology\", and Elias L\u00f6nnrot with the compilation of the \"Kalevala\". The work of the Brothers Grimm influenced other collectors, both inspiring them to collect tales and leading them to similarly believe that the fairy tales of a country were particularly representative of it, to the neglect of cross-cultural influence. Among those influenced were the Russian Alexander Afanasyev, the Norwegians Peter Christen Asbj\u00f8rnsen and J\u00f8rgen Moe, and the Englishman Joseph Jacobs. \nPoetic examples display how paganist themes were mobilized in ethical and cultural discourse of the era. G. K. Chesterton wrote: \"The pagan set out, with admirable sense, to enjoy himself. By the end of his civilization he had discovered that a man cannot enjoy himself and continue to enjoy anything else.\" In sharp contrast, the poet Algernon Charles Swinburne would comment on this same theme: \"Thou hast conquered, O pale Galilean; the world has grown grey from thy breath; We have drunken of things Lethean, and fed on the fullness of death.\"\nRomanticist interest in non-classical antiquity coincided with the rise of Romantic nationalism and the rise of the nation state in the context of the 1848 revolutions, leading to the creation of \"national epics\" and national myths for the various newly formed states. Pagan or folkloric topics were also common in the musical nationalism of the period. Paganism resurfaces as a topic of fascination in 18th to 19th-century Romanticism, in particular in the context of the literary Celtic, Slavic and Viking revivals, which portrayed historical Celtic, Slavic and Germanic polytheists as noble savages.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nIn Italy.\nWith the fall of the Papal States the process of Italian unification fostered anti-clerical sentiment among the intelligentsia. \nThe Brotherhood of Myriam, founded in 1899, inherited its lineage from the Ordine Osirideo Egizio and can be understood as a form of modern neopaganism that revives and adapts ancient Egyptian and Greco-Egyptian rituals for contemporary spiritual practice. Intellectuals like archaeologist Giacomo Boni and writer Roggero Musmeci Ferrari Bravo promoted the restoration of Roman religious practices. In 1927, philosopher and esotericist Julius Evola founded the Gruppo di Ur in Rome, along with its journal \"Ur\" (1927\u20131928), involving figures like Arturo Reghini. In 1928, Evola published \"Imperialismo Pagano\", advocating Italian political paganism to oppose the Lateran Pacts. The journal resumed in 1929 as \"Krur\". A mysterious document published in \"Krur\" in 1929, attributed to orientalist Leone Caetani, suggested that Italy's World War I victory and the rise of fascism were influenced by Etruscan-Roman rites.\nLate 20th century.\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw a resurgence in neo-Druidism as well as the rise of modern Germanic paganism in the United States and in Iceland. In the 1970s, Wicca was notably influenced by feminism, leading to the creation of an eclectic, Goddess-worshipping movement known as Dianic Wicca. The 1979 publication of Margot Adler's \"Drawing Down the Moon\" and Starhawk's \"The Spiral Dance\" opened a new chapter in public awareness of paganism. With the growth and spread of large, pagan gatherings and festivals in the 1980s, public varieties of Wicca continued to further diversify into additional, eclectic sub-denominations, often heavily influenced by the New Age and counter-culture movements. These open, unstructured or loosely structured traditions contrast with British Traditional Wicca, which emphasizes secrecy and initiatory lineage.\nThe public appeal for pre-Christian Roman spirituality in the years following fascism was largely driven by Julius Evola. By the late 1960s, a renewed \"operational\" interest in pagan Roman traditions emerged from youth circles around Evola, particularly concerning the experience of the \"Gruppo di Ur\". Evola's writings incorporated concepts from outside classical Roman religion, such as Buddhism, Hinduism, sexual magic, and private ritual nudity. This period saw the rise of the \"Gruppo dei Dioscuri\" in cities like Rome, Naples, and Messina, which published a series of four booklets, including titles such as \"L'Impeto della vera cultura\" and \"Rivoluzione Tradizionale e Sovversione\", before fading from public view. The Evolian journal \"Arthos\", founded in Genoa in 1972 by Renato del Ponte, expressed significant interest in Roman religion. In 1984, the \"Gruppo Arx\" revived Messina's \"Dioscuri\" activities, and Reghini's \"Pythagorean Association\" briefly resurfaced in Calabria and Sicily from 1984 to 1988, publishing \"Ygh\u00eceia\".\nOther publications include the Genoese \"Il Basilisco\" (1979\u20131989), which released several works on pagan studies, and \"Politica Romana\" (1994\u20132004), seen as a high-level Romano-pagan journal. One prominent figure was actor Roberto Corbiletto, who died in a mysterious fire in 1999.The 1980s and 1990s also saw an increasing interest in serious academic research and reconstructionist pagan traditions. The establishment and growth of the Internet in the 1990s brought rapid growth to these, and other pagan movements.\nBy the time of the collapse of the former Soviet Union in 1991, freedom of religion was legally established across Russia and a number of other newly independent states, allowing for the growth in both Christian and non-Christian religions.\nModern paganism.\n21st century.\nIn the 2000s, Associazione Tradizionale Pietas began reconstructing temples across Italy and sought legal recognition from the state, drawing inspiration from similar groups like YSEE in Greece. In 2023, Pietas participated in the ECER meeting, resulting in the signing of the Riga Declaration, which calls for the recognition of European ethnic religions. Public rituals, such as those celebrating the ancient festival of the Natale di Roma, have also resumed in recent years.\nThe idea of practicing Roman religion in the modern era has spread beyond Italy, with practitioners found in countries across Europe and the Americas. The most prominent international organization is Nova Roma, founded in 1998, with active groups worldwide. \nModern paganism, or Neopaganism, includes reconstructed practice such as Roman Polytheistic Reconstructionism, Hellenism, Slavic Native Faith, Celtic Reconstructionist Paganism, or heathenry, as well as modern eclectic traditions such as Wicca and its many offshoots, Neo-Druidism, and Discordianism.\nHowever, there often exists a distinction or separation between some polytheistic reconstructionists such as Hellenism and revivalist neopagans like Wiccans. The divide is over numerous issues such as the importance of accurate orthopraxy according to ancient sources available, the use and concept of magic, which calendar to use and which holidays to observe, as well as the use of the term pagan itself.\nIn 1717 John Toland became the first Chosen Chief of the Ancient Druid Order, which became known as the British Circle of the Universal Bond. Many of the revivals, Wicca and Neo-Druidism in particular, have their roots in 19th century Romanticism and retain noticeable elements of occultism or Theosophy that were current then, setting them apart from historical rural () folk religion. Most modern pagans, however, believe in the divine character of the natural world and paganism is often described as an Earth religion.\nThere are a number of neopagan authors who have examined the relation of the 20th-century movements of polytheistic revival with historical polytheism on one hand and contemporary traditions of folk religion on the other. Isaac Bonewits introduced a terminology to make this distinction.\nPrudence Jones and Nigel Pennick in their \"A History of Pagan Europe\" (1995) classify pagan religions as characterized by the following traits:\nIn modern times, Heathen and Heathenry are increasingly used to refer to those branches of modern paganism inspired by the pre-Christian religions of the Germanic, Scandinavian and Anglo-Saxon peoples.\nIn Iceland, the members of \"\u00c1satr\u00faarf\u00e9lagi\u00f0\" account for nearly 2% of the total population, therefore being nearly six thousand people. In Lithuania, many people practice Romuva, a revived version of the pre-Christian religion of that country. Lithuania was among the last areas of Europe to be Christianized. Heathenry has been established on a formal basis in Australia since at least the 1930s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23341", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23341", "title": "Postulate", "text": ""}
{"id": "23342", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23342", "title": "P", "text": "Sixteenth letter of the Latin alphabet\nP, or p, is the sixteenth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"pee\" (pronounced ), plural \"pees\".\nHistory.\nThe Semitic P\u00ea (mouth), as well as the Greek \u03a0 or \u03c0 (Pi), and the Etruscan and Latin letters that developed from the former alphabet all symbolized , a voiceless bilabial plosive.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English orthography, \u27e8p\u27e9 represents the sound .\nA common digraph in English is \u27e8ph\u27e9, which represents the sound , and can be used to transliterate \u27e8\u03c6\u27e9 \"phi\" in loanwords from Greek. In German, the digraph \u27e8pf\u27e9 is common, representing a labial affricate .\nMost English words beginning with \u27e8p\u27e9 are of foreign origin, primarily French, Latin and Greek; these languages preserve the Proto-Indo-European initial *p. Native English cognates of such words often start with \u27e8f\u27e9, since English is a Germanic language and thus has undergone Grimm's law; a native English word with an initial would reflect Proto-Indo-European initial *b, which is so rare that its existence as a phoneme is disputed. However, native English words with non-initial \u27e8p\u27e9 are quite common; such words can come from either Kluge's law or the consonant cluster (PIE: *p has been preserved after s).\nP is the eighth least frequently used letter in the English language.\nOther languages.\nIn most European languages, \u27e8p\u27e9 represents the sound .\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8p\u27e9 is used to represent the voiceless bilabial plosive.\nRelated characters.\nAncestors, descendants and siblings.\nThe Latin letter P represents the same sound as the Greek letter Pi, but it looks like the Greek letter Rho.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23343", "revid": "7291611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23343", "title": "Page", "text": "Page most commonly refers to:\nPage, PAGE, pages, or paging may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23345", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23345", "title": "Pokey the Penguin", "text": "Comic strip\nPokey the Penguin is an online comic strip created in 1998. It chronicles the adventures of a penguin named Pokey and a large cast of other characters. \"Pokey\" comics are drawn crudely and minimalistically, and they consist largely of a string of non-sequiturs and absurd journeys, with a token effort towards more traditional plots and continuity (such as the conflict with the Italians over arctic-circle candy) that tend to be established through oblique references to off-screen characters and non-events. Today, new comic strips appear sporadically, although formerly the site was updated daily.\nContent and style.\nPokey lives in the Arctic, unlike most penguins, which live in the Southern Hemisphere. He is accompanied by several recurring characters, of which the \"Little Girl\" is the most commonly seen. His main antagonists are the Italians, whom Pokey suspects of intending to steal his Arctic Circle-Candy (which grows in the Arctic). The Italians are usually represented by a ship on the horizon flying the Italian flag; an actual Italian was seen for the first time in a comic posted in late February 2008. In the first strip, \"Pokey\" is described as an \"educational children's cartoon\".\n\"Pokey\"'s artistic style is deliberately crude, even childish. The artwork has rough pixelated edges, jagged lines, and few colors (the hallmarks of Microsoft Paint drawings), and characters are almost always copied and pasted after their first appearance. The comic has been described as resembling \"the ramblings of a deranged child\". Most minor characters are exact copies of Pokey\u2014the various \"Chicken\" characters are not chickens, but ordinary penguins, and the \"Bear\" is merely a brown penguin; the \"Dinosaur\" a green penguin. The comic strips are filled with visible corrections: some words are crossed out, while images are occasionally scribbled over. Some words are left misspelled, such as \"haggas\".\n\"Pokey the Penguin\"'s lettering consists entirely of italicized capitals. The typeface is exclusively Courier, is italicized by shifting pixels of each successive horizontal row further to the left, and is never anti-aliased. Sentences often end without punctuation, or end with multiple exclamation marks or question marks, usually separated by spaces.\nThe strip's dialogue is surreal and often peppered with obscure allusions; illustrative quotes include \"HERE ON RUM ISLAND WE DO NOT BELIEVE IN RUM!\" and \"IN MEAT-SPACE, MR. NUTTY, EVERYONE IS YOUR FRIEND! ! !\" Most strips lack clear punch lines. The comic introduced the expression \"Chicago-style\", meaning \"without pants\".\nTwo animated Pokey adventures (which originally appeared in 2002) have been released into the \"http://\", which also suggests forthcoming availability of Pokey shirts and a book.\nThe Authors.\nThe comic does not name its creator, attributing each comic only to \"THE AUTHORS\". The author is in fact open source developer Steve Havelka of Portland, Oregon, whose identity became public during Pokey's early years. In discussions and message boards dedicated to Pokey, Havelka revealed that Pokey was originally intended as a parody of another MS Paint comic about a penguin. From 2018 to 2024, a second author, Natty Strange of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, contributed at times to the comic's writing.\nCharacters.\nThe characters are as innumerable as the plots are inscrutable. The mainstays are:\nMinor characters.\n\"Pokey the Penguin\" frequently includes minor characters that appear in only one or two comics. Many look like exact copies of Pokey. \"Pokey\" often incorporates familiar characters from fiction such as Batman and Superman, both exact Pokey copies. Celebrities and politicians appear as well, including \"Bobdole\" (who looks exactly like Pokey) and Stephen Hawking (Pokey with a pointed wizard's hat). Variations on other characters appear sometimes, such as \"Old Man Nutty\" and \"the Nostrapotamus.\" In one strip, Pokey's \"son\" appears, created as part of a science experiment.\nPokey in other media.\nIn late 2010, the http:// of Pokey the Penguin was released in book form. More have been released intermittently; there are now 12 volumes in all.\nPokey has been referenced twice in the Hitman series of video games: in ' as an obscure, esoteric easter egg, and more directly in ', where an overheard conversation between guards has one inviting the other to look at the comics on a computer.\n\"Prodly the Puffin\", a work of interactive fiction by Craig Timpany and Jim Crawford, was described by one reviewer as \"sort of a parody and sort of an homage\" to \"Pokey\". It placed 35th out of 53 entries into the 2000 Interactive Fiction Competition.\nA number of Web sites feature \"bootleg\" artwork (fan comics) and fan art dedicated to Pokey. See External Links below.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23346", "revid": "49776337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23346", "title": "Post-communism", "text": "1980s\u20131990s period of transition in communist states\nPost-communism is the period of political and economic transformation or transition in post-Soviet states and other formerly communist states located in Central-Eastern Europe and parts of Latin America, Africa, and Asia, in which new governments aimed to create free market-oriented capitalist economies. In 1989\u20131992, communist party governance collapsed in most communist party-governed states. After severe hardships communist parties retained control in China, Cuba, Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam. SFR Yugoslavia began to disintegrate, which plunged the country into a long complex series of wars between ethnic groups and nation-states. Soviet-oriented communist movements collapsed in countries where they were not in control.\nPolitics.\nThe policies of most communist parties in both the Eastern and Western Blocs had been governed by the example of the Soviet Union. In most countries in the Eastern Bloc, following the Revolutions of 1989 and the fall of communist-led governments that marked the end of the Cold War, the communist parties split in two factions: a reformist social democratic party and a new less reformist-oriented communist party. The newly created social democratic parties were generally larger and more powerful than the remaining communist parties\u2014only in Belarus, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Moldova, Russia, and Tajikistan the communist parties remained a significant force.\nIn the Western Bloc, many of the self-styled communist parties reacted by changing their policies to a social democratic and democratic socialist course. In countries such as Japan, Italy and reunited Germany, post-communism is marked by the increased influence of their existing social democrats. The anti-Soviet communist parties in the Western Bloc (e.g. the Trotskyist parties) who felt that the dissolution of the Soviet Union vindicated their views and predictions did not particularly prosper from it\u2014in fact, some became less radical as well.\nEconomy.\nSeveral communist states had undergone economic reforms from a command economy towards a more market-oriented economy in the 1980s, notably Hungary, Poland, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. The post-communist economic transition was much more abrupt and aimed at creating fully capitalist economies.\nAll the countries concerned have abandoned the traditional tools of communist economic control and moved more or less successfully toward free-market systems. Although some, such as Charles Paul Lewis, stress the beneficial effect of multinational investment, the reforms also had important negative consequences that are still unfolding. Average standards of living registered a catastrophic fall in the early 1990s in many parts of the former Comecon\u2014most notably in the former Soviet Union\u2014and began to rise again only toward the end of the decade. Some populations are still considerably worse off today than they were in 1989 (e.g. Moldova, and Serbia). Others have bounced back considerably beyond that threshold (e.g. the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland) and some such as Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania (Baltic Tiger), and Slovakia underwent an economic boom, although all have suffered from the Great Recession, except for Poland, which was one of two countries (the other was Albania) in Europe maintained growth despite the Great Recession.\nArmenia's economy, like that of other former states of Soviet Union, suffered from the consequences of a centrally-planned economy and the collapse of former Soviet trade patterns. Another important aspect for difficulty of standing up after the collapse is that the investment and funding that was coming to Armenian industry from Soviet Union has been gone, leaving only a few large enterprises in operation. Furthermore, the aftereffects of the 1988 Armenian earthquake were still being felt. Despite the fact that a cease-fire has been in place since 1994, the dispute with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved. Since Armenia was heavily dependent on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials at that time, the resulting closure of both the Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy. During 1992\u20131993, the GDP had dropped around 60% from its peak in 1989. Few years after adoption of national currency, the dram in 1993, it experienced hyperinflation.\nAs of 2021, most post-communist countries in Europe are generally seen to have mixed economies, although some such as Estonia, Romania, and Slovakia often adopt more traditionally free-market policies, such as flat tax rates, than does the Western Bloc. A fundamental challenge in post-communist economies is that institutional pressures that reflect the logic of capitalism and democracy are exerted on organizations, including business firms and government agencies, that were created under communism and to this day are run by managers socialized in that context, resulting in a great deal of continuing tension in organizations in post-communist states.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23347", "revid": "34669967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23347", "title": "Paul Allen", "text": "American businessman (1953\u20132018)\n \nPaul Gardner Allen (January 21, 1953 \u2013 October 15, 2018) was an American businessman, computer programmer, and investor. He co-founded Microsoft Corporation with his childhood friend Bill Gates in 1975, which was followed by the microcomputer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s. He was also known for discovering the wrecks of various famous warships, like the IJN Musashi and USS Indianapolis. Allen was ranked as one of the richest people in American history by \"Forbes\" with an estimated net worth of $20.3 billion at the time of his death in October 2018.\nAllen quit from day-to-day work at Microsoft in early 1983 after a Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis, remaining on its board as vice-chairman. He and his sister, Jody Allen, founded Vulcan Inc. in 1986, a privately held company that managed his business and philanthropic efforts. At the time of his death, he had a multi-billion dollar investment portfolio, including technology and media companies, scientific research, real estate holdings, private space flight ventures, and stakes in other sectors. He owned the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League and the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association, and was part-owner of the Seattle Sounders FC of Major League Soccer. Under Allen's helm, the Seahawks won Super Bowl XLVIII and made it to two other Super Bowls (XL and XLIX). In 2000 he resigned from his position on Microsoft's board and assumed the post of senior strategy advisor to the company's management team.\nAllen founded the Allen Institutes for Brain Science, Artificial Intelligence, and Cell Science, as well as companies like Stratolaunch Systems and Apex Learning. He gave more than $2\u00a0billion to causes such as education, wildlife and environmental conservation, the arts, healthcare, and community services. In 2004, he funded the first crewed private spaceplane with SpaceShipOne. He received numerous awards and honors, and was listed among the \"Time\" 100 Most Influential People in the World in 2007 and 2008.\nAllen was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 2009. He died of septic shock related to cancer on October 15, 2018, at the age of 65. Shortly after his death, in April 2019, the Allen-funded Stratolaunch first flew and became the largest aircraft in history by wingspan.\nEarly life.\nAllen was born on January 21, 1953, in Seattle, Washington, to Kenneth Sam Allen (a librarian) and Edna Faye (n\u00e9e Gardner) Allen (a fourth-grade teacher). From 1965 to 1971 he attended Lakeside School, a private school in Seattle where he befriended Bill Gates, with whom he shared an enthusiasm for computers. They used Lakeside's Teletype terminals to develop their programming skills on several time-sharing computer systems. They also used the laboratory of the Computer Science Department of the University of Washington for personal research and computer programming until they were banned in 1971 for abusing their privileges.\nGates and Allen joined with Ric Weiland and Gates' childhood best friend and first collaborator, Kent Evans, to form the Lakeside Programming Club and find bugs in Computer Center Corporation's software, in exchange for extra computer time. In 1972, after Evans' sudden death in a mountain climbing accident, Gates turned to Allen for help finishing an automated class scheduling system for Lakeside. They then formed Traf-O-Data to make traffic counters based on the Intel 8008 processor. According to Allen, he and Gates would go dumpster diving during their teenage years for computer program code.\nAllen achieved a perfect SAT score of 1600 and went to Washington State University, where he joined the Phi Kappa Theta fraternity. He dropped out of college after two years to work as a programmer for Honeywell in Boston near Harvard University where Gates was enrolled. Allen convinced Gates to drop out of Harvard in order to focus on Microsoft.\nMicrosoft.\nAllen and Gates formed Microsoft in 1975 in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and began marketing a BASIC programming language interpreter, with their first employee being high school friend and collaborator Ric Weiland. Allen came up with the name of \"Micro-Soft\", a combination of \"microcomputer\" and \"software\".\nMicrosoft committed to delivering a disk operating system (DOS) to IBM for the original IBM PC in 1980, although they had not yet developed one, and Allen spearheaded a deal for Microsoft to purchase QDOS (Quick and Dirty Operating System) written by Tim Paterson who was employed at Seattle Computer Products. As a result of this transaction, Microsoft secured a contract to supply the DOS that ran on IBM's PC line, which opened the door to Allen's and Gates' wealth and success.\nThe company restructured on June 25, 1981, to become an incorporated business in its home state of Washington (with a further change of its name to \"Microsoft Corporation, Inc.\"). As part of the restructuring, Gates became president of the company and chairman of the board, and Allen became executive vice president and vice chairman. The relationship between Allen and Gates became strained as they argued even over small things. Allen effectively left Microsoft in 1982 after being diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, though he remained on the board of directors as vice chairman. Gates reportedly asked Allen to give him some of his shares to compensate for the higher amount of work that Gates was doing. According to Allen, Gates said that he \"did almost everything on BASIC\" and the company should be split 60\u201340 in his favor. Allen agreed to this arrangement, which Gates later renegotiated to 64\u201336. In 1983, Gates tried to buy Allen out at $5 per share, but Allen refused and left the company with his shares intact; this made him a billionaire when Microsoft went public, with 25.2% ownership of the company. Gates later repaired his relationship with Allen, and the two men donated $2.2 million to their childhood school Lakeside in 1986. They remained friends for the rest of Allen's life.\nAllen resigned from his position on the Microsoft board of directors on November 9, 2000, but he remained as a senior strategy advisor to the company's executives. In January 2014, he still held 100 million shares of Microsoft.\nBusinesses and investments.\nAerospace.\nAllen confirmed that he was the sole investor behind aerospace engineer and entrepreneur Burt Rutan's SpaceShipOne suborbital commercial spacecraft on October 4, 2004. The craft was developed and flown by Mojave Aerospace Ventures, which was a joint venture between Allen and Rutan's aviation company, Scaled Composites. SpaceShipOne climbed to an altitude of over the Mojave Air and Space Port and was the first privately funded effort to successfully put a civilian in suborbital space. It won the Ansari X Prize competition and received the $10\u00a0million prize.\nOn December 13, 2011, Allen announced the creation of Stratolaunch Systems, based at the Mojave Air and Space Port. The Stratolaunch is a proposed orbital launch system consisting of a dual-bodied, 6-engine jet aircraft, capable of carrying a rocket to high altitude; the rocket would then separate from its carrier aircraft and fire its own engines to complete its climb into orbit. If successful, this project would be the first wholly privately funded space transport system. Stratolaunch, which is partnering with Orbital ATK and Scaled Composites, is intended to launch in inclement weather, fly without worrying about the availability of launch pads and to operate from different locations. Stratolaunch plans to ultimately host six to ten missions per year. On April 13, 2015, Vulcan Aerospace was announced. It is the company within Allen's Vulcan Inc. that plans and executes projects to shift how the world conceptualizes space travel through cost reduction and on-demand access.\nOn April 13, 2019, the Stratolaunch aircraft made its maiden flight, reaching and in a 2 h 29 min flight. Stratolaunch CEO Jean Floyd offered this comment: \"We dedicate this day to the man who inspired us all to strive for ways to empower the world's problem-solvers, Paul Allen. Without a doubt, he would have been exceptionally proud to see his aircraft take flight\". Upon its flight, the airplane became the largest in history by wingspan.\nAs of the end of May 2019, Stratolaunch Systems Corporation had ceased operations.\nReal estate.\nAllen's Vulcan Real Estate division offers development and portfolio management services, and was involved in the redevelopment of the South Lake Union neighborhood immediately north of downtown Seattle. Vulcan has developed of new residential, office, retail and biotechnology research space, and has a total development capacity of . Vulcan advocated for the Seattle Streetcar line known as South Lake Union Streetcar, which runs from Seattle's Westlake Center to the south end of Lake Union. In 2012, \"The Wall Street Journal\" called Allen's South Lake Union investment \"unexpectedly lucrative\" and one that led to his firm selling a office complex to Amazon.com for US$1.16\u00a0billion, one of the most expensive office deals ever in Seattle. \"It's exceeded my expectations\", Allen said of the South Lake Union development.\nSports team ownership.\nPortland Trail Blazers.\nAllen purchased the Portland Trail Blazers NBA team in 1988 from California real estate developer Larry Weinberg for $70\u00a0million. He was instrumental in the development and funding of the Moda Center (previously known as the Rose Garden), the arena where the Blazers play. He purchased the arena on April 2, 2007, and stated that this was a major milestone and a positive step for the franchise. The Allen-owned Trail Blazers reached the playoffs 19 times including the NBA Finals in 1990 and 1992. According to \"Forbes\", the Blazers were valued at $2.09\u00a0billion in 2021 and ranked No. 13 out of 30 NBA teams.\nSeattle Seahawks.\nAllen purchased the National Football League's Seattle Seahawks in 1997 from owner Ken Behring, who had attempted to move the team to southern California the previous year. Herman Sarkowsky, a former Seahawks minority owner, told \"The Seattle Times\" about Allen's decision to buy the team, \"I'm not sure anybody else in this community would have done what [Allen] did.\"\nIn 2002, the team moved into Seahawks Stadium (now known as Lumen Field), after Allen invested into the upgrade of the stadium. Acquired for US$200\u00a0million in 1997, the Seahawks were valued at $1.33\u00a0billion in August 2014 by \"Forbes\", which says the team has \"one of the most rabid fan bases in the NFL\". Under the helm of Allen, the Seahawks made the Super Bowl three times following NFC Championship victories (2005, 2013, 2014), and won Super Bowl XLVIII in February 2014.\nSeattle Sounders FC.\nAllen's Vulcan Sports &amp; Entertainment is part of the ownership team of Seattle Sounders FC, a Major League Soccer (MLS) franchise that began play in 2009 at CenturyLink Field, a stadium which was also controlled by Allen. The ownership team also includes film producer Joe Roth, businessman Adrian Hanauer, and comedian Drew Carey. The Sounders sold out every home game during its first season, setting a new MLS record for average match attendance.\nFilmmaking.\nAllen and his sister, Jody Allen, together were the owners and executive producers of Vulcan Productions, a television and film production company headquartered in Seattle within the entertainment division of Vulcan Inc. Their films have received various recognition, ranging from a Peabody Award to Independent Spirit Awards, Grammys and Emmys.\nIn 2014 alone, Allen's film, \"We The Economy,\" won 12\u00a0awards including a Webby award for best Online News &amp; Politics Series. The films have also been nominated for Golden Globes and Academy Awards among many others. Vulcan Productions' films and documentary projects include \"Far from Heaven\" (2002), \"Hard Candy\" (2005), \"Rx for Survival: A Global Health Challenge\" (2005), \"Where God Left His Shoes\" (2006), \"\" (2007), \"This Emotional Life\" (2010), \"We The Economy\" (2014) \"Racing Extinction\" (2015) and Oscar-nominated \"Body Team 12\" (2015).\nIn 2013, Vulcan Productions co-produced the Richard E. Robbins-directed film \"Girl Rising\" which tells the stories of girls from different parts of the world who seek an education. Globally, over 205\u00a0million households watched \"Girl Rising\" during the CNN premier, and over 4\u00a0million people have engaged with \"Girl Rising\" through websites and social media. Through the associated 10\u00d710 program, over $2.1\u00a0million has been donated to help girls receive an education worldwide.\nAlso in 2013, Vulcan Productions signed on as a producing partner of \"Pandora's Promise\", a documentary about nuclear power, directed by Oscar-nominated director Robert Stone. It was released on CNN in November 2013. A variety of college and private screenings as well as panel discussions have been hosted throughout the country.\nPhilanthropy.\nAllen gave more than $2\u00a0billion towards the advancement of science, technology, education, wildlife conservation, the arts, and community services in his lifetime. The Paul G. Allen Family Foundation, which he founded with his sister Jody, was established to administer a portion of Allen's philanthropic contributions. As of 2015, the foundation had given more than $494\u00a0million to over 1,500 nonprofits. \nin 2010, Allen became a signatory of The Giving Pledge, promising to give at least half of his fortune to philanthropic causes. Allen received commendations for his philanthropy, including the Andrew Carnegie Medal of Philanthropy and \"Inside Philanthropy\"'s \"Philanthropist of the Year\".\nScience and research.\nIn September 2003, Allen launched the Allen Institute for Brain Science with a $100\u00a0million contribution dedicated to understanding how the human brain works. Allen eventually donated $500\u00a0million to the institute, making it his single-largest philanthropic recipient. The institute for has taken a Big Science and open science approach; it makes research tools available to the scientific community. The institute's projects include the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas, Allen Human Brain Atlas and the Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas. It helped to advance and shape the White House's BRAIN Initiative and the Human Brain Project.\nFounded in 2014, the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2)'s main focus is to research and engineer artificial intelligence. The institute is modeled after the Allen Institute for Brain Science and led by researcher and professor Oren Etzioni. As of 2015, AI2 had undertaken four main projects, Semantic Scholar, Euclid, Plato, and Aristo\u2014the latter of which aims to build an AI system that can pass an 8th-grade science exam.\nIn December 2014, Allen committed $100\u00a0million to create the Allen Institute for Cell Science in Seattle. As of 2014, the institute was investigating and creating a virtual model of cells in the hope of finding treatments for diseases. Like Allen's other institutes, all data generated and tools developed will be made publicly available online.\nLaunched in 2016 with a $100\u00a0million commitment, The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group aims to discover and support ideas at the frontier of bioscience in an effort to accelerate the pace of discovery. The group seeks to support scientists and research areas that \"some might consider out-of-the-box at the very edges of knowledge\".\nAllen launched the Allen Distinguished Investigators Awards (ADI) in 2010 to support early-stage research projects that often have difficulty securing funding from traditional sources. Allen donated the seed money to build SETI's Allen Telescope Array, eventually contributing $30\u00a0million to the project.\nThe Paul Allen's flower fly was named in recognition of his contributions to dipterology. \nIn 2022, the Paul Allen estate created the Fund for Science and Technology (FFST) and launched in August 2025 with an initial endowment of $3.1 billion and a plan to deploy at least $500 million across bioscience, the environment and AI. The foundation is led by Lynda Stuart and chaired by Jody Allen.\nEnvironment and conservation.\nAllen provided more than $7\u00a0million to fund a census of elephant populations in Africa, the largest such endeavor since the 1970s. The Great Elephant Census team flew over 20 countries to survey African savannah elephants. The survey results, published in 2015, showed rapid and accelerated decline.\nHe began supporting the University of British Columbia's Sea Around Us Project in 2014 to improve data on global fisheries as a way to fight illegal fishing. Part of his $2.6\u00a0million in funding went towards the creation of FishBase, an online database about adult finfish. Allen funded the Global FinPrint initiative, launched in July 2015, a three-year survey of sharks and rays in coral reef areas. The survey is the largest of its kind and designed to provide data to help conservation programs.\nAllen backed Washington state initiative 1401 to prohibit the purchase, sale and distribution of products made from 10 endangered species including elephants, rhinos, lions, tigers, leopards, cheetahs, marine turtles, pangolins, sharks and rays. The initiative gained enough signatures to be on the state's ballot on November 3, 2015, and passed.\nAlongside the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT), Allen and Vulcan Inc. launched the Smart City Challenge, a contest inviting American cities to transform their transportation systems. Created in 2015 with the USDOT's $40\u00a0million commitment as well as $10\u00a0million from Allen's Vulcan Inc., the challenge aims to create a first-of-its-kind modern city that will demonstrate how cities can improve quality of life while lowering greenhouse gas emissions. The winning city was Columbus, Ohio.\nAs a member of the International SeaKeepers Society, Allen hosted its proprietary SeaKeeper 1000TM oceanographic and atmospheric monitoring system on all three of his megayachts.\nAllen funded the building of microgrids, which are small-scale power grids that can operate independently, in Kenya, to help promote reusable energy and empower its businesses and residents. He was an early investor in the Mawingu Networks, a wireless and solar-powered Internet provider which aims to connect rural Africa with the world, and Off Grid Electric, a company focused on providing solar energy to people in emerging nations.\nEbola.\nIn 2014, Allen pledged at least $100\u00a0million toward the fight to end the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa, making him the largest private donor in the Ebola crisis. He also created a website called TackleEbola.org as a way to spread awareness and serve as a vehicle for donors to fund projects in need. The site highlighted organizations working to stop Ebola that Allen supported, such as International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res, Partners in Health, UNICEF and World Food Program USA. On April 21, 2015, Allen brought together key leaders in the Ebola fight at the Ebola Innovation Summit in San Francisco. The summit aimed to share key learnings and reinforce the need for continued action and support to reduce the number of Ebola cases to zero, which was achieved in January 2016.\nIn October 2015, the Paul G. Allen Family Foundation announced it would award seven new grants totaling $11\u00a0million to prevent future widespread outbreaks of the virus.\nExploration.\nIn 2012, along with his research team and the Royal Navy, Allen attempted to retrieve the ship's bell from , which sank in the Denmark Strait during World War II, but the attempt failed due to poor weather. On August 7, 2015, they tried again and recovered the bell in very good condition. It was restored and put on display in May 2016 in the National Museum of the Royal Navy, Portsmouth, in remembrance of the 1,415 crewmen lost.\nAllen funded the research ship in 2015 and bought it the following year. The project team aboard \"Petrel\" found the wreck of the in 2015. In 2017, at Allen's direction, \"Petrel\" found the wrecks of and and multiple wrecks from the Battle of Surigao Strait and the Battle of Ormoc Bay. In 2018, \"Petrel\" found a lost US Navy C-2A Greyhound aircraft in the Philippine Sea, in the Coral Sea, and the off the coast of the Solomon Islands.\nMuseums and community institutions.\nAllen established non-profit community institutions to display his collections of historic artifacts. These include:\nArt.\nAn active art collector, Allen gave more than $100\u00a0million to support the arts. On October 15, 2012, the Americans for the Arts gave him the Eli and Edythe Broad Award for Philanthropy in the Arts. Allen loaned out more than 300 pieces from his private art collection to 47 venues. The original 541-page typescript of Bram Stoker's novel \"Dracula\" was in his collection at one point. In 2013, Allen sold Barnett Newman's \"Onement VI\" (1953) at Sotheby's in New York for $43.8\u00a0million, then the record for a work by the abstract artist.\nIn 2015, Allen founded the Seattle Art Fair, a four-day event with 60-plus galleries from around the world including the participation of the Gagosian Gallery, David Zwirner. The event drew thousands and inspired other satellite fairs throughout the city.\nIn August 2016, Allen announced the launch of Upstream Music Fest + Summit, an annual festival fashioned after South by Southwest. Held in Pioneer Square, the first festival took place in May 2017. It was cancelled in 2019 following Allen's death in 2018.\nIn November 2022, Allen's art collection was auctioned at Christie's New York. It was the biggest sale in art auction history, surpassing $1.5 billion in sales. Six works sold for more than $100 million: Seurat's \"Les Poseuses Ensemble (Petite version)\", ($149 million, with fees); Paul C\u00e9zanne's 1888-90 \"La Montagne Sainte-Victoire\" ($138 million); van Gogh's \"Verger avec cypr\u00e8s\" ($117 million); and Gustav Klimt's 1903 \"Birch Forest\" ($105 million). The auction also included paintings by Botticelli, David Hockney, Roy Lichtenstein, Edward Hopper, Andy Warhol, Jasper Johns and Jan Brueghel the Younger. Proceeds from the auction benefitted undisclosed philanthropies.\nEducation.\nIn 1989, Allen donated $2\u00a0million to the University of Washington to construct the Allen Library, which was named after his father Kenneth S. Allen, a former associate director of the University of Washington library system. In the same year, Allen donated an additional $8\u00a0million to establish the Kenneth S. Allen Library Endowment. In 2012, the endowment was renamed the Kenneth S. and Faye G. Allen Library Endowment after Allen's mother (a noted bibliophile) died.\nIn 2002, Allen donated $14\u00a0million to the University of Washington to construct the Paul G. Allen Center for Computer Science and Engineering. The building was dedicated in October 2003.\nIn 2010, Allen announced a gift of $26\u00a0million to build the Paul G. Allen School of Global Animal Health at Washington State University, his alma mater. The gift was the largest private donation in the university's history.\nIn 2016, Allen pledged a $10 million donation over four years for the creation of the Allen Discovery Centers at Tufts University and Stanford University. The centers would fund research that would read and write the morphogenetic code. Over eight years the donation could be as much as $20 million.\nIn 2017, Allen donated $40 million (with an additional $10 million from Microsoft) to reorganize the University of Washington's Computer Science and Engineering department into the Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering.\nPersonal life.\nWhile Allen expressed interest in romantic love and one day having a family, he never married and had no children. His marriage plans with his first girlfriend were cancelled as he felt he \"was not ready to marry at 23\". He was sometimes considered reclusive. In the 1990s, he purchased Rock Hudson's Los Angeles estate from film director John Landis and added the Neptune Valley recording studio to the property. Allen's family put the home on the market for $56 million after his death.\nMusic.\nAllen received his first electric guitar at the age of sixteen, and was inspired to play it by listening to Jimi Hendrix. In 2000, Allen played rhythm guitar on the independently produced album \"Grown Men\". In 2013, he had a major label release on Sony's Legacy Recordings: \"Everywhere at Once\" by Paul Allen and the Underthinkers. PopMatters.com described \"Everywhere at Once\" as \"a quality release of blues-rock that's enjoyable from start to finish\".\nOn February 7, 2018, an interview by the magazine \"New York\" on their \"Vulture\" website, Quincy Jones expressed respect for Allen's talent, saying he \"sings and plays just like Hendrix\".\nYachting.\nAllen's yacht, , was launched in 2003. As of 2025, it was 26th on the list of motor yachts by length. The yacht is equipped with two helicopters, a submarine, an ROV, a swimming pool, a music studio and a basketball court. \"Octopus\" is a member of AMVER, a voluntary group ship reporting system used worldwide by authorities to arrange assistance for those in distress at sea. The ship is also known for its annual celebrity-studded parties which Allen hosted at the Cannes film festival, where Allen and his band played for guests. These performances included musicians such as Usher and Dave Stewart. \"Octopus\" was also used in the search for a missing American pilot and two officers whose plane disappeared off Palau, and the study of a rare fish called a coelacanth, among many others. Following Allen's death in 2018, \"Octopus\" was refitted and put on the market for $325 million.\nAllen also owned , one of the world's 100 largest yachts. In January 2016, \"Tatoosh\" severely damaged about 1,300 square meters of coral reef in the West Bay replenishment zone of the Cayman Islands. In April 2016, the Department of Environment and Allen's Vulcan Inc. completed a restoration plan to help speed recovery and protect the future of coral in the area.\n\"Idea Man\".\nIn 2011, Allen's memoir, \"Idea Man: A Memoir by the Co-founder of Microsoft\", was published by Portfolio, a Penguin Group imprint. The book recounts how Allen became enamored with computers and, at an early age, conceived the idea for Microsoft, recruited his friend Bill Gates to join him, and launched what would become the world's most successful software company. It also explores Allen's business and creative ventures following his 1983 departure from Microsoft, including his involvement in SpaceShipOne, his purchase of the Portland Trail Blazers and Seattle Seahawks, his passion for music, and his ongoing support for scientific research. The book made the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list. A paperback version, which included a new epilogue, was published on October30, 2012.\nDeath.\nAllen was diagnosed with Stage 1-A Hodgkin's lymphoma in 1982. His cancer was successfully treated by several months of radiation therapy. Allen was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 2009. Likewise, the cancer was successfully treated until it returned in 2018. It ultimately caused his death by septic shock on October 15, 2018. He was 65 years old.\nAllen's sister, Jody Allen, was named executor and trustee of his estate.\nSeveral Seattle-area landmarks, including the Space Needle, Columbia Center and Lumen Field, as well as various Microsoft offices throughout the United States, were illuminated in blue on November 3, 2018, as a tribute to Allen. He was also honored by his early business partner and lifelong friend Bill Gates, who said in a statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAwards and recognition.\nAllen received numerous awards in many different areas, including sports, technology, philanthropy, and the arts:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23348", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23348", "title": "Pytheas", "text": "Ancient Greek geographer (born ca. 350 BC)\nPytheas of Massalia (; Ancient Greek: \u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ad\u03b1\u03c2 \u1f41 \u039c\u03b1\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u03bb\u03b9\u03ce\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \"Pyth\u00e9\u0101s ho Massali\u014dt\u0113s\"; Latin: \"Pytheas Massiliensis\"; born c. 350 BC, fl. c. 320\u2013306 BC) was a Greek geographer, explorer and astronomer from the Greek colony of Massalia (modern-day Marseille, France). He made a voyage of exploration to Northern Europe in about 325\u00a0BC, but his account of it, known widely in antiquity, has not survived and is now known only through the writings of others.\nOn this voyage, he circumnavigated and visited a considerable part of the British Isles. He was the first known Greek scientific visitor to see and describe the Arctic, polar ice, and the Celtic and Germanic tribes. He is also the first person on record to describe the midnight sun. The theoretical existence of some Northern phenomena that he described, such as a frigid zone, and temperate zones where the nights are very short in summer and the sun does not set at the summer solstice, was already known. Similarly, reports of a country of perpetual snow and darkness (the country of the Hyperboreans) had reached the Mediterranean some centuries before.\nPytheas introduced the idea of distant Thule to the geographic imagination, and his account of the tides is the earliest one known that suggests the moon as their cause.\nRecord.\nPytheas described his travels in a work that has not survived; only excerpts remain, quoted or paraphrased by later authors. Much of what is known about Pytheas comes from commentary written by historians during the classical period hundreds of years after Pytheas's journeys occurred, most familiarly in Strabo's \"Geographica\" (late 1st century BC, or early 1st century AD), passages in the world history written by Diodorus of Sicily between 60 and 30 BC, and Pliny's \"Natural History\" (AD 77).\nDiodorus does not mention Pytheas by name. The association is made as follows: Pliny reports: \"Timaeus says there is an island named Mictis [...] where tin is found, and to which the Britons cross.\" Diodorus says that tin was brought to the island of Ictis, where there was an emporium. Walbank (1956), Mette (1952) and Roller (2006) agree that Diorodus' information on the British Isles is an epitome of Pytheas via Timaeus.\nScholars of the 19th century tended to interpret these titles as the names of distinct works covering separate voyages; for example, Smith's \"Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology\" hypothesizes a voyage to Britain and Thule written about in \"Ocean\" and another from C\u00e1diz to the river Don, written about in \"A Sailing-Around\". As is common with ancient texts, multiple titles may represent a single source, for example, if a title refers to a section rather than the whole. Mainstream consensus is that there was only one work, \"On the Ocean\", which was based on a periplus, a type of navigational literature.\nSurviving fragments.\nOnly 'fragments' (i.e., quotations in other authors) or references/epitomies survive of Pytheas' original work in the works of other authors. Scott (2022) cited at least 39 such examples. \nDating the voyage.\nPliny said that Timaeus (born about 350 BC) believed Pytheas' story of the discovery of amber. First century BC Strabo said that Dicaearchus (died about 285 BC) did not trust the stories of Pytheas. None of Aristotle's works mention Pytheas, nor do those of Ephorus. Thus the terminus post quem for Pytheas' voyage are the works of Aristotle and Ephorus, and the terminus ante quem is that of Aristotle's student, Dicaearchus. Henry Fanshawe Tozer estimated that Pytheas' voyage occurred about 330 BC, derived from three main sources.\nThe earliest extant author to quote Pytheas explicitly is Hipparcus, however he is also widely quoted explicitly by other later authors such as Polybius, Cleomides, Geminus and Aetius; perhaps the last was Dicuil. By far, the most quotations of Pytheas survive in Pliny and Strabo, however they seem to be quoting Pytheas as a teriary source, perhaps through Timaeus. The \"Naturalis Historia\" and \"Geographica\" demonstrate that Pytheas was also used by a range of Hellenistic authors starting with Dicaearchus, Timaeus, Eratosthenes, Polybius, Artemidorus and Xenophon of Lampsacus. The extent to which Hecataeus of Abdera's \"On the Hyperboreans\" may have been inspired by Pytheas is not known.\nElton (1890) summarises the method of dating as:\"The exact date cannot be ascertained, but is found approximately by the facts that the astronomical discoveries of Pytheas were not mentioned by Aristotle, but were controverted on some points by Dicaearchus, the pupil of Aristotle, whose writings were published not long after the famous philosopher\u2019s death.\"With which Roller (2006) agrees: The most that can be said with certainty is that Pytheas\u2019 journey and the research performed during it, which resulted in the treatise \"On the Ocean\", occurred probably in the 320s BC or very shortly thereafter, since it was unknown to (yet based on) Aristotle, and first quoted by Aristotle\u2019s student Dikaiarchos.\nCircumstances of the voyage.\nPytheas was the first documented Mediterranean mariner to reach the British Isles.\nThe start of Pytheas's voyage is unknown. The Carthaginians had closed the Strait of Gibraltar to all ships from other nations. Some historians, mainly of the late 19th century and early, speculated that he must have traveled overland to the mouth of the Loire or the Garonne. Others believed that, to avoid the Carthaginian blockade, he may have stayed close to land and sailed only at night, or taken advantage of a temporary lapse in the blockade.\nAn alternate theory is that by the 4th century BC, the western Greeks, especially the Massaliotes, were on amicable terms with Carthage. In 348\u00a0BC, Carthage and Rome came to terms over the Sicilian Wars with a treaty defining their mutual interests. Rome could use Sicilian markets, Carthage could buy and sell goods at Rome, and slaves taken by Carthage from allies of Rome were to be set free. Rome was to stay out of the western Mediterranean, but these terms did not apply to Massalia, which had its own treaty. During the second half of the 4th century BC, the time of Pytheas' voyage, Massaliotes were presumably free to operate as they pleased; there is, at least, no evidence of conflict with Carthage in any of the sources that mention the voyage.\nThe early part of Pytheas' voyage was outlined by statements of Eratosthenes that Strabo said are false because they were taken from Pytheas. Apparently, Pytheas said that tides ended at the \"sacred promontory\" (\"Hieron akr\u014dt\u0113rion\", or Sagres Point), and from there to Gades is said to be 5 days' sail. Strabo complained about this distance, and about Pytheas' portrayal of the exact location of Tartessos. Mention of these places in a journal of the voyage indicates that Pytheas passed through the Straits of Gibraltar and sailed north along the coast of Portugal.\nVoyage to Britain.\nThe \"circumnavigation\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStrabo reported that Pytheas said he \"travelled over the whole of Britain that was accessible\". Because there are scant first-hand sources available regarding Pytheas's journey, historians have looked at the etymology for clues about the route he took up the north Atlantic. The word \"epelthein\", at root \"come upon\", does not imply any specific method, and Pytheas did not elaborate.\nPytheas did use the word \"whole\" and he stated a \"perimetros\" (\"perimeter\") for Britain of more than 40,000\u00a0stadia. Using Herodotus' standard of for one stadium gives ; however, there is no way to tell which standard foot was in effect. The English foot is an approximation. Strabo wanted to discredit Pytheas on the grounds that 40,000\u00a0stadia is outrageously high and cannot be real.\nDiodorus Siculus gave a similar number: 42,500 stadia, about , and explains that it is the perimeter of a triangle around Britain. The consensus has been that he probably took his information from Pytheas through Timaeaus. Pliny gave the \"circuitus\" reported by Pytheas as 4,875\u00a0Roman miles.\nThe explorer Fridtjof Nansen explained this apparent fantasy of Pytheas as a mistake of Timaeus. Strabo and Diodorus Siculus never saw Pytheas' work, says Nansen, but they and others read of him in Timaeus. Pytheas reported only days' sail. Timaeus converted days to stadia at the rate of 1,000 per day, a standard figure of the times. However, Pytheas only sailed 560\u00a0stadia per day for a total of 23,800, which in Nansen's view is consistent with 700\u00a0stadia per degree.\nNansen later states that Pytheas must have stopped to obtain astronomical data. Presumably, the extra time was spent ashore. Using the stadia of Diodorus Siculus, one obtains 42.5\u00a0days for the time that would be spent in circumnavigating Britain. It may have been a virtual circumnavigation; see under Thule below.\nThe perimeter, according to Nansen based on the 23,800 stadia, was . This number is in the neighborhood of what a triangular perimeter ought to be, but it cannot be verified against anything Pytheas may have said, nor was Diodorus Siculus very precise about the locations of the legs. The \"perimeter\" is often translated as \"coastline\", but this translation is misleading. The coastline, following all the bays and inlets, is (see Geography of the United Kingdom). Pytheas could have travelled any perimeter between that number and Diodorus'. Polybius added that Pytheas said he traversed the whole of Britain on foot, of which he, Polybius, was skeptical. Despite Strabo's conviction of a lie, the perimeter said to have been given by Pytheas is not evidence of it. The issue of what he did say can never be settled until more fragments of Pytheas's writings are found.\nName and description of the British.\nThe first known written use of the word Britain was an ancient Greek transliteration of the original P-Celtic term. It is believed to have appeared within a periplus by Pytheas, but no copies of this work survive. The earliest existing records of the word are quotations of the periplus by later authors, such as those within Strabo's \"Geographica\", Pliny's \"Natural History\" and Diodorus of Sicily's \"Bibliotheca historica\". According to Strabo, Pytheas referred to Britain as \"Bretannik\u0113\", which shares more similarities with spellings in the modern Celtic languages than its Classical Latin variants. From this Greek spelling, the name is treated a feminine noun.\n \"Britain\" is most like Welsh \"Ynys Prydein\", \"the island of Britain\", in which is a P-Celtic cognate of Q-Celtic Cruithne in Irish \"Cruithen-tuath\", \"land of the Picts\". The base word is Scottish/Irish \"cruth\", Welsh \"pryd\", meaning \"form\". The British were the \"people of forms\", with the sense of shapes or pictures, thought to refer to their practice of tattooing or war painting. The Roman word \"Picti\", \"the Picts\", means \"painted\".\nThis etymology suggests Pytheas most likely did not have much interaction with the Irish as their language was Q-Celtic. Rather, Pytheas brought back the P-Celtic form from more geographically accessible regions where Welsh or Breton are spoken presently. Furthermore, some proto-Celtic was spoken over all of Greater Britain, and this particular spelling is prototypical of those more populous regions, but there is no evidence that Pytheas distinguished between the peoples of the archipelago.\nDiodorus \u2013 based on Pytheas \u2013 reported that Britain is cold and subject to frosts, being \"too much subject to the Bear\", and not \"under the Arctic pole\", as some translations say. The numerous population of natives, he says, live in thatched cottages, store their grain in subterranean caches and bake bread from it. They are \"of simple manners\" (\"\u0113thesin haplous\") and are content with plain fare. They are ruled by many kings and princes who live in peace with each other. Their troops fight from chariots, as did the Greeks in the Trojan War.\nThe three corners of Britain: Kantion, Belerion and Orkas.\nOpposite Europe in Diodorus is the promontory (\"akr\u014dt\u0113rion\") of \"Kantion\" (Kent), 100 stadia, about , from the land, but the text is ambiguous: \"the land\" could be either Britain or the continent. Four days' sail beyond that is another promontory, \"Belerion\", which can only be Cornwall, as Diodorus is describing the triangular perimeter and the third point is \"Orkas\", presumably the main island of the Orkney Islands.\nThe tin trade.\nThe inhabitants of Cornwall were involved in the manufacture of tin ingots. They mined the ore, smelted it and then worked it into pieces in the shape of knuckle-bones, after which it was transported to the island of Ictis by wagon, which could be done at low tide. Merchants that purchased it there packed it on horses for 30 days to the river Rh\u00f4ne, where it was carried down to the mouth. Diodorus said that the inhabitants of Cornwall were civilized in manner and especially hospitable to strangers because of their dealings with foreign merchants.\nScotland.\nThe first written reference to Scotland was in 320 BC by Pytheas, who called the northern tip of Britain \"Orcas\", the source of the name of the Orkney islands.\nThule.\nStrabo, taking his text from Polybius, related that \"Pytheas asserts that he explored in person the whole northern region of Europe as far as the ends of the world.\" Strabo did not believe it but he explained what Pytheas meant by the ends of the world. \"Thoul\u0113\", he said (now spelled Thule; Pliny the Elder uses \"Tyle\"; Vergil references \"ultima Thule\" in Georgic I, Line 30, where the \"ultima\" refer to the end of the world) is the most northerly of the British Isles. There the circle of the summer tropic is the same as the Arctic Circle (see below on Arctic Circle). Moreover, said Strabo, none of the other authors mention Thule, a fact which he used to discredit Pytheas, but which to moderns indicates Pytheas was the first explorer to arrive there and tell of it.\nThule was described as an island six days' sailing north of Britain, near the frozen sea (\"pep\u0113guia thalatta\", \"solidified sea\"). Pliny added that it had no nights at midsummer when the sun was passing through the sign of the Crab (at the summer solstice), a reaffirmation that it is on the Arctic Circle. He added that the crossing to Thule started at the island of \"Berrice\", \"the largest of all\", which may be Lewis in the outer Hebrides. If \"Berrice\" was in the outer Hebrides, the crossing would have brought Pytheas to the coast of M\u00f8re og Romsdal or Tr\u00f8ndelag, Norway, explaining how he managed to miss the Skagerrak. If this is his route, in all likelihood he did not actually circumnavigate Britain, but returned along the coast of Germany, accounting for his somewhat larger perimeter.\nConcerning the location of Thule, a discrepancy in data caused subsequent geographers some problems, and may be responsible for Ptolemy's distortion of Scotland. Strabo reported that Eratosthenes places Thule at a parallel 11500\u00a0stadia (1305\u00a0miles, or 16.4\u00b0) north of the mouth of the Borysthenes. The parallel running through that mouth also passes through Celtica and is Pytheas' base line. Using 3700 or 3800 stadia (approximately 420\u2013430\u00a0miles or 5.3\u00b0\u20135.4\u00b0) north of Marseille for a base line obtains a latitude of 64.8\u00b0 or 64.9\u00b0 for Thule, well short of the Arctic Circle. It is in fact the latitude of Trondheim, where Pytheas may have reached land.\nA statement by Geminus of Rhodes quotes \"On the Ocean\" as saying:\n... the Barbarians showed us the place where the sun goes to rest. For it was the case that in these parts the nights were very short, in some places two, in others three hours long, so that the sun rose again a short time after it had set.\nNansen claimed that according to this statement, Pytheas was there in person and that the 21- and 22-hour days must be the customary statement of latitude by length of longest day. He calculates the latitudes to be 64\u00b0\u00a032\u2032 and 65\u00b0\u00a031\u2032, partially confirming Hipparchus' statement of the latitude of Thule. And yet Strabo said: \nPytheas of Massalia tells us that Thule\u00a0... is farthest north, and that there the circle of the summer tropic is the same as the Arctic Circle.\nEratosthenes extended the latitudinal distance from Massalia to Celtica to 5000 stadia (7.1\u00b0), placing the base line in Normandy. The northernmost location cited in Britain at the Firth of Clyde is now northern Scotland. To get this country south of Britain to conform to Strabo's interpretation of Pytheas, Ptolemy has to rotate Scotland by 90\u00b0.\nThe 5000 stadia must be discounted: it crosses the Borysthenes upriver near Kyiv rather than at the mouth. It does place Pytheas on the Arctic Circle, which in Norway is south of the Lofoten islands. It seems that Eratosthenes altered the base line to pass through the northern extreme of Celtica. Pytheas, as related by Hipparchus, probably cited the place in Celtica where he first made land. If he used the same practice in Norway, Thule is at least somewhere on the entire northwest coast of Norway from M\u00f8re og Romsdal to the Lofoten Islands.\nIn his study of Thule, the explorer Richard Francis Burton stated that it had had many definitions over the centuries. Many more authors have written about it than remembered Pytheas. The question of the location of Pytheas' Thule remains. The latitudes given by the ancient authors can be reconciled. The missing datum required to fix the location is longitude: \"Manifestly we cannot rely upon the longitude.\"\nPytheas crossed the waters northward from Berrice, in the north of the British Isles, but whether to starboard, port, or straight ahead is not known. From the time of the Roman Empire all the possibilities were suggested repeatedly by each generation of writers: Iceland, Shetland, the Faroe Islands, Norway and later Greenland. A manuscript variant of a name in Pliny has abetted the Iceland theory: \"Nerigon\" instead of \"Berrice\", which sounds like Norway. If one sails west from Norway one encounters Iceland. Burton himself espoused this theory.\nThe standard texts have \"Berrice\" presently, as well as \"Bergos\" for \"Vergos\" in the same list of islands. The \"Scandiae\" islands are more of a problem, as they could be Scandinavia, but other islands had that name as well. Moreover, Procopius says (\"De Bello Gothico\", Chapter 15) that the earlier name of Scandinavia was Thule and that it was the home of the Goths. The fact that Pytheas returned from the vicinity of the Baltic favors Procopius's opinion. The fact that Pytheas lived centuries before the colonization of Iceland and Greenland by European agriculturalists makes them less likely candidates, as he stated that Thule was populated and its soil was tilled.\nConcerning the people of Thule Strabo says of Pytheas, but grudgingly:\n... he might possibly seem to have made adequate use of the facts as regards the people who live close to the frozen zone, when he says that,\u00a0... the people live on millet and other herbs, and on fruits and roots; and where there are grain and honey, the people get their beverage, also, from them. As for the grain, he says,\u00a0\u2013 since they have no pure sunshine\u00a0\u2013 they pound it out in large storehouses, after first gathering in the ears thither; for the threshing floors become useless because of this lack of sunshine and because of the rains.\nWhat he seems to be describing is an agricultural country that used barns for threshing grain rather than the Mediterranean outside floor of sun-baked mud and manufactured a drink, possibly mead.\nEncounter with drift ice.\nAfter mentioning the crossing (\"navigatio\") from \"Berrice\" to \"Tyle\", Pliny made a brief statement that:\n\"A Tyle unius diei navigatione mare concretum a nonnullis Cronium appellatur\" . [One day's sail from Thule is the frozen ocean, called by some the Cronian Sea.]\nThe \"mare concretum\" appears to match Strabo's \"pep\u0113guia thalatta\" and is probably the same as the \"topoi\" (\"places\") mentioned in Strabo's apparent description of spring drift ice, which would have stopped his voyage further north and was for him the ultimate limit of the world. Strabo says:\nPytheas also spoke of the waters around Thule and of those places where land properly speaking no longer exists, nor sea nor air, but a mixture of these things, like a \"marine lung\", in which it was said that earth and water and all things are in suspension as if this something was a link between all these elements, on which one can neither walk nor sail.\nThe term used for \"marine lung\" (\"pleum\u014dn thalattios\") appears to refer to jellyfish of the type the ancients called sea-lung. The latter are mentioned by Aristotle in \"On the Parts of Animals\" as being free-floating and insensate. They are not further identifiable from what Aristotle says but some \"pulmones\" appear in Pliny as a class of insensate sea animal; specifically the \"halipleumon\" (\"salt-water lung\"). William Ogle, a major translator and annotator of Aristotle, attributes the name sea-lung to the lung-like expansion and contraction of the Medusae, a kind of Cnidaria, during locomotion. The ice resembled floating circles in the water. The modern English term for this phenomenon is pancake ice.\nThe association of Pytheas' observations with drift ice has long been standard in navigational literature, including Nathaniel Bowditch's \"American Practical Navigator\", which begins Chapter 33, \"Ice Navigation\", with Pytheas. At its edge, sea, slush, and ice mix, surrounded by fog.\nDiscovery of the Baltic.\nStrabo said that Pytheas gave an account of \"what is beyond the Rhine as far as Scythia\", which he, Strabo, thought was false. In the geographers of the late Roman Republic and early Roman Empire, such as Ptolemy, Scythia stretched eastward from the mouth of the river Vistula; thus Pytheas must have described the Germanic coast of the Baltic Sea; if the statement is true, there are no other possibilities. As to whether he explored it in person, he said that he explored the entire north in person (see under Thule above). As the periplus was a sort of ship's log, he probably did reach the Vistula.\nAccording to \"The Natural History\" by Pliny the Elder:Pytheas* speaks of an estuary of the Ocean named Metuonis and extending for 750 miles, the shores of which are inhabited by a German tribe, the Guiones. From here it is a day's sail to the Isle of Abalus, to which, he states, amber is carried in spring by currents, being an excretion consisting of solidified brine. He adds that the inhabitants of the region use it as fuel instead of wood and sell it to the neighbouring Teutones. His belief is shared by Timaeus, who, [c. 356-260] however, calls the island Basilia. Philemon denies the suggestion that amber gives off a flame.\nThe \"Guiones\" who Pliny places in Germania (and not Scythia), are sometimes reinterpreted by modern editors to be Gutones, who are in turn generally seen as predecessors of the later Goths. An alternative interpretation is that Pliny was referring to the Inguaeones, as he does in a related geographical passage about the Germanic part of the northern Oceanic coasts. \"Mentonomon\" is unambiguously stated to be an \"aestuarium\" or \"estuary\" of 6000 stadia, which using the Herodotean standard of per stadium is . Although it is most often considered to be on the Baltic coast, it has also been argued that Pliny is referring to the North Sea coast, west of present day Denmark. \nIn the passage about the northern Ocean coasts Pliny also mentioned that Xenophon of Lampsacus and Pytheas described a very large island which lay three days' sail from the Scythian coast called Balcia by Xenophon and Basilia by Pytheas. Modern scholars note that Pytheas gives this Scythian island the same name that Timaeus later gave to Pytheas's Abalus which Pliny placed in Germania. This raises doubts about the reliability of Pliny's interpretation of older geographers of this region, but it also makes it clear that Pytheas distinguished two large islands.\nVoyage to the Don.\nPytheas claimed to have explored the entire north; however, he turned back at the mouth of the Vistula, the border with Scythia. If he had gone on he would have discovered the ancestral Balts. They occupied the lands to the east of the Vistula. In the west they began with the people living around Frisches Haff, Lithuanian Aismar\u0117s, \"sea of the Aistians\", who in that vicinity became the Baltic Prussians. On the east Herodotus called them the \"Neuri\", a name related to Old Prussian \"narus\", \"the deep\", in the sense of water country. Later Lithuanians would be \"the people of the shore\". The Vistula was the traditional limit of Greater Germany. Place names featuring *\"ner\"- or *\"nar\"- are wide-ranging over the vast Proto-Baltic homeland, occupying western Russia before the Slavs.\nHerodotus said that the Neuri had Scythian customs, but they were at first not considered Scythian. During the war between the Scythians and the Persian Empire, the Scythians came to dominate the Neuri. Strabo denied that any knowledge of the shores of the eastern Baltic existed. He had heard of the Sauromatai, but had no idea where to place them.\nHerodotus had mentioned these Sauromatai as a distinct people living near the Neuri. Pliny the Elder, however, was much better informed. The island of Baunonia (Bornholm), he said lies a days' sail off Scythia, where amber is collected. To him the limit of Germany was the Vistula. In contrast to Strabo, he knew that the Goths live around the Vistula, but these were definitely Germans.\nBy the time of Tacitus, the Aestii had emerged. The former Scythia was now entirely Sarmatia. Evidently the Sarmatians conquered westward to the Vistula. The Goths moved to the south. That the Balts lived east of the Vistula from remote prehistoric times is unquestioned. The Baltic languages, however, are only known from the 2nd millennium AD. They are known to have developed in tribal contexts, as they were originally tribal. The first mention of any tribes is in Ptolemy's description of European Sarmatia, where the main Prussian tribes are mentioned for the first time.\nIn Tacitus, only the language of the Aestii is mentioned. Strabo distinguished the Venedi, who were likely Slavs. From these few references, which are the only surviving evidence apart from glottochronology and place name analysis, it would seem that the Balts of Pytheas' time were well past the Common Balto-Slavic stage, and likely spoke a number of related dialects. By turning back at what he thought was the limit of Germany, he not only missed the Balts, but did not discover that more Germans, the Goths, had moved into the Baltic area.\nPolybius related: \"... on his return thence (from the north), he traversed the whole of the coast of Europe from Gades to the Tanais.\" Some authors consider this leg a second voyage, as it does not seem likely he would pass by Marseille without refitting and refreshing the crew. It is striking that he encountered the border of Scythia, turned around, and went around Europe counter-clockwise until he came to the southern side of Scythia on the Black Sea. It is possible to speculate that he may have hoped to circumnavigate Europe, but the sources do not say. In other, even more speculative interpretations, Pytheas returned north and the Tanais is not the Don but is a northern river, such as the Elbe.\nMeasurements of latitude.\nLatitude by the altitude of the Sun.\nIn discussing the work of Pytheas, Strabo typically used direct discourse: \"Pytheas says\u00a0...\" In presenting his astronomical observations, he changed to indirect discourse: \"Hipparchus said that Pytheas says\u00a0...\" either because he never read Pytheas' manuscript (because it was not available to him) or in deference to Hipparchus, who appears to have been the first to apply the Babylonian system of representing the sphere of the Earth by 360\u00b0.\nStrabo used the degrees, based on Hipparchus. Neither say that Pytheas did. Nevertheless, Pytheas did obtain latitudes, which, according to Strabo, he expressed in proportions of the gn\u014dm\u014dn (\"index\"), or trigonometric tangents of angles of elevation to celestial bodies. They were measured on the gn\u014dm\u014dn, the vertical leg of a right triangle, and the flat leg of the triangle. The imaginary hypotenuse looked along the line of sight to the celestial body or marked the edge of a shadow cast by the vertical leg on the horizontal leg.\nPytheas took the altitude of the Sun at Massalia at noon on the longest day of the year and found that the tangent was the proportion of 120 (the length of the gn\u014dm\u014dn) to 1/5 less than 42 (the length of the shadow). Hipparchus, relying on the authority of Pytheas (says Strabo), states that the ratio is the same as for Byzantium and that the two therefore are on the same parallel. Nansen and others prefer to give the cotangent 209/600, which is the inverse of the tangent, but the angle is greater than 45\u00b0 and it is the tangent that Strabo states. His number system did not permit him to express it as a decimal but the tangent is about\u00a02.87.\nIt is unlikely that any of the geographers could compute the arctangent, or angle of that tangent. Moderns look it up in a table. Hipparchos is said to have had a table of some angles. The altitude, or angle of elevation, is 70\u00b0\u00a047\u2032\u00a050\u2033 but that is not the latitude.\nAt noon on the longest day the plane of longitude passing through Marseille is exactly on edge to the Sun. If the Earth's axis were not tilted toward the Sun, a vertical rod at the equator would have no shadow. A\u00a0rod further north would have a north\u2013south shadow, and as an elevation of 90\u00b0 would be a zero latitude, the complement of the elevation gives the latitude. The Sun is even higher in the sky due to the tilt. The angle added to the elevation by the tilt is known as the obliquity of the ecliptic and at that time was 23\u00b0\u00a044\u2032\u00a040\u2033. The complement of the elevation less the obliquity is 43\u00b0\u00a013\u2032, only 5\u2032 in error from Marseille's latitude, 43\u00b0\u00a018\u2032.\nLatitude by the elevation of the north pole.\nA second method of determining the latitude of the observer measures the angle of elevation of a celestial pole, north in the northern hemisphere. Seen from zero latitude the north pole's elevation is zero; that is, it is a point on the horizon. The declination of the observer's zenith also is zero and therefore so is their latitude.\nAs the observer's latitude increases (traveling north) so does the declination. The pole rises over the horizon by an angle of the same amount. The elevation at the terrestrial North Pole is 90\u00b0 (straight up) and the celestial pole has a declination of the same value. The latitude also is 90.\nModerns have Polaris to mark the approximate location of the North celestial pole, which it does nearly exactly. This was not the case in Pytheas' time, due to the precession of the equinoxes. Pytheas reported that the pole was an empty space at the corner of a quadrangle, the other three sides of which were marked by stars. Their identity has not survived but based on calculations these are believed to have been \u03b1 and \u03ba in Draco and \u03b2 in Ursa Minor.\nPytheas sailed northward with the intent of locating the Arctic Circle and exploring the \"frigid zone\" to the north of it at the extreme of the Earth. He did not know the latitude of the circle in degrees. All he had to go by was the definition of the frigid zone as the latitudes north of the line where the celestial arctic circle was equal to the celestial Tropic of Cancer, the \"tropikos kuklos\" (refer to the next subsection). Strabo's angular report of this line as being at 24\u00b0 may well be based on a tangent known to Pytheas, but he did not say that. In whatever mathematical form Pytheas knew the location, he could only have determined when he was there by taking periodic readings of the elevation of the pole (\"eksarma tou polou\" in Strabo and others).\nToday the elevation can be obtained easily on ship with a quadrant. Electronic navigational systems have made even this simple measure unnecessary. Longitude was beyond Pytheas and his peers, but it was not of as great a consequence, because ships seldom strayed out of sight of land. East\u2013west distance was a matter of contention to the geographers; they are one of Strabo's most frequent topics. Because of the gn\u014dm\u014dn north\u2013south distances were accurate often to within a degree.\nIt is unlikely that any gn\u014dm\u014dn could be read accurately on the pitching deck of a small vessel at night. Pytheas must have made frequent overnight stops to use his gn\u014dm\u014dn and talk to the natives, which would have required interpreters, probably acquired along the way. The few fragments that have survived indicate that this material was a significant part of the \"periplus\", possibly kept as the ship's log. There is little hint of native hostility; the Celts and the Germans appear to have helped him, which suggests that the expedition was put forward as purely scientific. In any case all voyages required stops for food, water and repairs; the treatment of voyagers fell under the special \"guest\" ethic for visitors.\nLocation of the Arctic Circle.\nThe ancient Greek view of the heavenly bodies on which their navigation was based was imported from Babylonia by the Ionian Greeks, who used it to become a seafaring nation of merchants and colonists during the Archaic period in Greece. Massalia was an Ionian colony. The first Ionian philosopher, Thales, was known for his ability to measure the distance of a ship at sea from a cliff by the very method Pytheas used to determine the latitude of Massalia, the trigonometric ratios.\nThe astronomic model on which ancient Greek navigation was based, which is still in place today, was already extant in the time of Pytheas, the concept of the degrees only being missing. The model divided the universe into a celestial and an earthly sphere pierced by the same poles. Each of the spheres were divided into zones (\"zonai\") by circles (\"kukloi\") in planes at right angles to the poles. The zones of the celestial sphere repeated on a larger scale those of the terrestrial sphere.\nThe basis for division into zones was the two distinct paths of the heavenly bodies: that of the stars and that of the Sun and Moon. Astronomers know today that the Earth revolving around the Sun is tilted on its axis, bringing each hemisphere now closer to the Sun, now further away. The Greeks had the opposite model, that the stars and the Sun rotated around the Earth. The stars moved in fixed circles around the poles. The Sun moved at an oblique angle to the circles, which obliquity brought it now to the north, now to the south. The circle of the Sun was the ecliptic. It was the center of a band called the zodiac on which various constellations were located.\nThe shadow cast by a vertical rod at noon was the basis for defining zonation. The intersection of the northernmost or southernmost points of the ecliptic defined the axial circles passing through those points as the two tropics (\"tropikoi kukloi\", \"circles at the turning points\") later named for the zodiacal constellations found there, Cancer and Capricorn. During noon of the summer solstice (therin\u0113 trop\u0113) rods there cast no shadow. The latitudes between the tropics were called the torrid zone (\"diakekaumen\u0113\", \"burned up\").\nBased on their experience of the Torrid Zone south of Egypt and Libya, the Greek geographers judged it uninhabitable. Symmetry requires that there be an uninhabitable Frigid Zone (\"katepsugmen\u0113\", \"frozen\") to the north and reports from there since the time of Homer seemed to confirm it. The edge of the Frigid Zone ought to be as far south from the North Pole in latitude as the Summer Tropic is from the Equator. Strabo gives it as 24\u00b0, which may be based on a previous tangent of Pytheas, but he does not say. The Arctic Circle would then be at 66\u00b0, accurate to within a degree.\nSeen from the equator the celestial North Pole (\"boreios polos\") is a point on the horizon. As the observer moves northward the pole rises and the circumpolar stars appear, now unblocked by the Earth. At the Tropic of Cancer the radius of the circumpolar stars reaches 24\u00b0. The edge stands on the horizon. The constellation of \"mikra arktos\" (Ursa Minor, \"little bear\") was entirely contained within the circumpolar region. The latitude was therefore called the \"arktikos kuklos\", \"circle of the bear\". The terrestrial Arctic Circle was regarded as fixed at this latitude. The celestial Arctic Circle was regarded as identical to the circumference of the circumpolar stars and therefore a variable.\nWhen the observer is on the terrestrial Arctic Circle and the radius of the circumpolar stars is 66\u00b0 the celestial Arctic Circle is identical to the celestial Tropic of Cancer. That is what Pytheas means when he says that Thule is located at the place where the Arctic Circle is identical to the Tropic of Cancer. At that point, on the day of the Summer Solstice, the vertical rod of the gn\u014dm\u014dn casts a shadow extending in theory to the horizon over 360\u00b0 as the Sun does not set. Under the pole the Arctic Circle is identical to the Equator and the Sun never sets but rises and falls on the horizon. The shadow of the gn\u014dm\u014dn winds perpetually around it.\nLatitude by length of longest day, and by Sun's elevation on shortest day.\nStrabo used the astronomical cubit (\"p\u0113chus\", the length of the forearm from the elbow to the tip of the little finger) as a measure of the elevation of the Sun. The term \"cubit\" in this context is obscure; it has nothing to do with distance along either a straight line or an arc, does not apply to celestial distances, and has nothing to do with the gn\u014dm\u014dn. Hipparchus borrowed this term from Babylonia, where it meant 2\u00b0. They in turn took it from ancient Sumer so long ago that if the connection between cubits and degrees was known in either Babylonia or Ionia it did not survive. Strabo stated degrees in either cubits or as a proportion of a great circle. The Greeks also used the length of day at the summer solstice as a measure of latitude. It is stated in equinoctial hours (\"h\u014drai is\u0113merinai\"), one being 1/12 of the time between sunrise and sunset on an equinox.\nBased partly on data taken from Pytheas, Hipparchus correlated cubits of the Sun's elevation at noon on the winter solstice, latitudes in hours of a day on the summer solstice, and distances between latitudes in stadia for some locations. Pytheas had proved that Marseille and Byzantium were on the same parallel (see above). Hipparchus, through Strabo, added that Byzantium and the mouth of the Borysthenes, today's Dnieper, were on the same meridian and were separated by 3700 stadia, 5.3\u00b0 at Strabo's 700\u00a0stadia per a degree of meridian arc. As the parallel through the river-mouth also crossed the coast of \"Celtica\", the distance due north from Marseille to Celtica was 3700 stadia, a baseline from which Pytheas seems to have calculated latitude and distance.\nStrabo said that Ierne (written \u1f38\u03ad\u03c1\u03bd\u03b7, meaning Ireland) is under 5000 stadia (7.1\u00b0) north of this line. These figures place Celtica around the mouth of the Loire, an emporium for the trading of British tin. The part of Ireland referenced is the vicinity of Belfast. Pytheas then would either have crossed the Bay of Biscay from the coast of Spain to the mouth of the Loire, or reached it along the coast, crossed the English Channel from the vicinity of Brest, France to Cornwall, and traversed the Irish Sea to reach the Orkney Islands. A statement of Eratosthenes attributed by Strabo to Pytheas, that the north of the Iberian Peninsula was an easier passage to Celtica than across the Ocean, is somewhat ambiguous: apparently he knew or knew of both routes, but he does not say which he took.\nAt noon on the winter solstice the Sun stands at 9 cubits and the longest day on the summer solstice is 16 hours at the baseline through Celtica. At 2500\u00a0stadia, approximately 283 miles, or 3.6\u00b0, north of Celtica, are a people Hipparchus called Celtic, but whom Strabo thought were the British, a discrepancy he might not have noted if he had known that the British were also Celtic. The location is Cornwall. The Sun stands at 6\u00a0cubits and the longest day is 17\u00a0hours. At 9100\u00a0stadia, approximately 1032\u00a0miles, north of Marseille, 5400 or 7.7\u00b0 north of Celtica, the elevation is 4\u00a0cubits and the longest day is 18\u00a0hours. This location is in the vicinity of the Firth of Clyde.\nHere Strabo launched another quibble. Hipparchus, relying on Pytheas, according to Strabo, placed this area south of Britain, but he, Strabo, calculated that it was north of Ireland (Ierne/\u1f38\u03ad\u03c1\u03bd\u03b7). Pytheas, however, rightly knew what is now Scotland as part of Britain, land of the Picts, even though north of Ireland/Ierne. North of southern Scotland the longest day is 19 hours. Strabo, based on theory alone, states that Ierne is so cold that any lands north of it must be uninhabited. In the hindsight given to moderns Pytheas, in relying on observation in the field, appears more scientific than Strabo, who discounted the findings of others merely because of their strangeness to him. The ultimate cause of his skepticism is simply that he did not believe Scandinavia could exist. This disbelief may also be the cause of alteration of Pytheas' data.\nOn the tides.\nPliny reported that \"Pytheas of Massalia informs us, that in Britain the tide rises 80\u00a0cubits.\" The passage does not give enough information to determine which cubit Pliny meant; however, any cubit gives the same general result. If he was reading an early source, the cubit may have been the Cyrenaic cubit, an early Greek cubit, of 463.1\u00a0mm, in which case the distance was . This number far exceeds any modern known tides. The National Oceanography Centre, which records tides at tidal gauges placed in about 55\u00a0ports of the UK Tide Gauge Network on an ongoing basis, records the highest mean tidal change between 1987 and 2007 at Avonmouth in the Severn Estuary of .\nThe highest spring tide between 2008 and 2026 at that location would be on 29 September 2015. Even allowing for geologic and climate change, Pytheas' 80 cubits far exceeds any known tides around Britain. One well-circulated but unevidenced answer to the paradox is that Pytheas was referring to a storm surge. Despite the modern arguments, the fact remains that Pytheas experienced tides that exceeded by far the usual tides in the Mediterranean, and particularly those at Massilia.\nMatching fragments of A\u00ebtius in pseudo-Plutarch and Stobaeus attribute the flood tides ( \"pl\u0113mmurai\") to the \"filling of the moon\" ( \"pl\u0113r\u014dsis t\u0113s s\u0113l\u0113n\u0113s\") and the ebb tides ( \"amp\u014dtides\") to the \"lessening\" ( \"mei\u014dsis\"). The words are too ambiguous to make an exact determination of Pytheas' meaning, whether diurnal or are meant, or whether full and new moons or the half-cycles in which they occur. Different translators take different views.\nThat daily tides should be caused by full moons and new moons is manifestly wrong, which would be a surprising view in a Greek astronomer and mathematician of the times. He could have meant that spring and neap tides were caused by new and full moons, which is partially correct in that spring tides occur at those times. A gravitational theory (objects fall to the center) existed at the time but Pytheas appears to have meant that the phases themselves were the causes (\u03b1\u1f30\u03c4\u03af\u03b1\u03b9 \"aitiai\"). However imperfect or imperfectly related the viewpoint, Pytheas was the first to associate the tides to the phases of the moon.\nLiterary influence.\nPytheas was a central source of information on the North Sea and the subarctic regions of western Europe to later periods, and possibly the only source. The only ancient authors we know by name who certainly saw Pytheas' original text were Dicaearchus, Timaeus, Eratosthenes, Crates of Mallus, Hipparchus, Polybius, Artemidorus and Posidonius. Notably the list does not include Strabo or Tacitus, though Strabo discussed him and Tacitus may likely have known about his work. Either of the two could have known him through other writers or could have read his work in the original.\nStrabo, citing Polybius, accused Pytheas of promulgating a fictitious journey he could never have funded, as he was a private individual (\"idi\u014dt\u0113s\") and a poor man (\"pen\u0113s\"). Markham proposes a possible answer to the funding question: seeing that Pytheas was known as a professional geographer and that north Europe was as yet a question mark to Massalian merchants, he suggests that \"the enterprise was a government expedition of which Pytheas was placed in command.\" In another suggestion the merchants of Marseille sent him out to find northern markets. These theories are speculative but perhaps less so than Strabo's contention that Pytheas was a charlatan just because a professional geographer doubted him.\nStrabo did explain his reasons for doubting Pytheas' veracity. Citing numerous instances of Pytheas apparently being far off the mark on details concerning known regions, he said: \"however, any man who has told such great falsehoods about the known regions would hardly, I imagine, be able to tell the truth about places that are not known to anybody.\" As an example he mentioned that Pytheas says Kent is several days' sail from Celtica when it is visible from Gaul across the channel. If Pytheas had visited the place he should have verified it personally.\nThe objection although partially true is itself flawed. Strabo interjected his own view of the location of Celtica, that it was opposite to Britain, end to end. Pytheas, however, places it further south, around the mouth of the Loire (see above), from which it might justifiably be several days' sail. The people across from Britain in Caesar's time were the Germani in the north and the Belgae in the south. Still, some of the Celtic lands were on the channel and were visible from it, which Pytheas should have mentioned but Strabo implies he did not.\nStrabo's other objections are similarly flawed or else completely wrong. He simply did not believe the earth was inhabited north of Ierne. Pytheas however could not then answer for himself, or protect his own work from loss or alteration, so most of the questions concerning his voyage remain unresolved, to be worked over by every generation. To some he was a daring adventurer and discoverer; to others, a semi-legendary blunderer or prevaricator.\nThe logical outcome of this tendency is the historical novel with Pytheas as the main character and the celebration of Pytheas in poetry, beginning as far back as Virgil. The process continues into modern times; for example, Pytheas is a key theme in Charles Olson's \"Maximus Poems\". Details of Pytheas' voyage also serve as the backdrop for Chapter I of Poul Anderson's science fiction novel, \"The Boat of a Million Years\". The Stone Stories trilogy by Mandy Haggith (\"The Walrus Mutterer\", 2018; \"The Amber Seeker\", 2019; \"The Lyre Dancers\", 2020) revolve around Pytheas of Massalia's journeys.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23350", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23350", "title": "Portugal/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "23359", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23359", "title": "Polygonales", "text": "Polygonales was an order of flowering plants recognized by several older systems such as the Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, the Engler system, in its update of 1964, and the Cronquist system, 1981. Its circumscription was typically:\nIn these systems the order is placed close to the order Caryophyllales (or its predecessor Centrospermae). Cronquist placed this order in his subclass Caryophyllidae of three orders. Dahlgren placed the order Polygonales within the superorder Polygoniflorae, alternatively Polygonanae.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23361", "revid": "43579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23361", "title": "Polygonaceae", "text": "Knotweed family of flowering plants\nThe Polygonaceae are a family of flowering plants known informally as the knotweed family or smartweed\u2014buckwheat family in the United States. The name is based on the genus \"Polygonum\", and was first used by Antoine Laurent de Jussieu in 1789 in his book, \"Genera Plantarum\". The name may refer to the many swollen nodes the stems of some species have, being derived from Greek ( meaning 'many' and meaning 'knee' or 'joint'). Alternatively, it may have a different origin, meaning 'many seeds'.\nThe Polygonaceae comprise about 1200 species distributed into about 48 genera. The largest genera are \"Eriogonum\" (240 species), \"Rumex\" (200 species), \"Coccoloba\" (120 species), \"Persicaria\" (100 species) and \"Calligonum\" (80 species). The family is present worldwide, but is most diverse in the North Temperate Zone.\nSeveral species are cultivated as ornamentals. A few species of \"Triplaris\" provide lumber. The fruit of the sea grape (\"Coccoloba uvifera\") is eaten, and in Florida, jelly is made from it and sold commercially. The seeds of two species of \"Fagopyrum\", known as buckwheat, are eaten in the form of groats or used to make flour. The petioles of rhubarb (\"Rheum rhabarbarum\" and hybrids) are a food item. The leaves of the common sorrel (\"Rumex acetosa\") are eaten in salads or as a leaf vegetable.\nPolygonaceae contain some of the most prolific weeds, including species of \"Persicaria, Rumex\" and \"Polygonum\", as well as Japanese knotweed.\nTaxonomy.\nPolygonaceae are very well-defined and have long been universally recognized. In the APG III system, the family is placed in the order Caryophyllales. Within the order, it lies outside of the large clade known as the core Caryophyllales. It is a sister to the family Plumbaginaceae, which it does not resemble morphologically.\nThe last comprehensive revision of the family was published in 1993 by John Brandbyge as part of \"The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants\". Brandbyge followed earlier systems of plant classification in dividing Polygonaceae into two subfamilies, Eriogonoideae and Polygonoideae. Since 1993, the circumscriptions of these two subfamilies have been changed in light of phylogenetic studies of DNA sequences. Genera related to \"Coccoloba\" and \"Triplaris\" were moved from Polygonoideae to Eriogonoideae. The genus \"Symmeria\" does not belong to either of these subfamilies because it is a sister to the rest of the family. \"Afrobrunnichia\" might constitute a new subfamily as well.\nBrandbyge wrote descriptions for 43 genera of Polygonaceae in 1993. Since then, a few more genera have been erected, and some segregates of \"Brunnichia\", \"Eriogonum\", and \"Persicaria\" have been given generic status in major works. Some of the genera were found not to be monophyletic and their limits have been revised. These include \"Ruprechtia\", \"Eriogonum\", \"Chorizanthe\", \"Persicaria\", \"Aconogonon\", \"Polygonum\", \"Fallopia\", and \"Muehlenbeckia\".\nDescription.\nMost Polygonaceae are perennial herbaceous plants with swollen nodes, but trees, shrubs and vines are also present. The leaves of Polygonaceae are simple, and arranged alternately on the stems. Each leaf has a peculiar pair of fused, sheathing stipules, known as an ochrea. Those species that do not have the nodal ochrea can be identified by their possession of involucrate flower heads. The flowers are normally bisexual, small, and actinomorphic, with a perianth of three to six sepals. After flowering, the sepals often become thickened and enlarged around the developing fruit. Flowers lack a corolla and in some, the sepals are petal-like and colorful. The androecium is composed of three to eight stamens that are normally free or united at the base. The ovary consists of three united carpels that form a single locule, which produces only one ovule. The ovary is superior with basal or free-central placentation. The gynoecium terminates in 1 to 3 styles, each of which ends in a single stigma.\nGenera.\nAs of October\u00a02025[ [update]], Plants of the World Online accepted 57 genera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhylogeny.\nThe following phylogenetic tree is based on two papers on the molecular phylogenetics of Polygonaceae.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
