{"id": "28272", "revid": "766861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28272", "title": "Shinto", "text": "Japanese religion\n, also called Shintoism, is a religion originating in Japan. Classified as an East Asian religion by scholars of religion, it is often regarded by its practitioners as Japan's indigenous religion and as a nature religion. Scholars sometimes call its practitioners \"Shintoists\", although adherents rarely use that term themselves. With no unifying doctrine or central authority in control of Shinto, there is much diversity of belief and practice evident among practitioners.\nA polytheistic and animistic religion, Shinto revolves around supernatural entities called the (\u795e). The are believed to inhabit all things, including forces of nature, prominent landscape locations, and even notable historical figures. The are worshipped at household shrines, family shrines, and \"jinja\" public shrines. The latter are staffed by priests, known as , who oversee offerings of food and drink to the specific enshrined at that location. This is done to cultivate harmony between humans and and to solicit the latter's blessing. Other common rituals include the dances, rites of passage, and \"kami\" festivals. Public shrines facilitate forms of divination and supply religious objects, such as amulets, to the religion's adherents. Shinto places a major conceptual focus on ensuring purity, largely by cleaning practices such as ritual washing and bathing, especially before worship. Little emphasis is placed on specific moral codes or particular afterlife beliefs, although the dead are deemed capable of becoming . With the \"kami\" of the dead, there is the common worship of ancestral \"kami,\" whose presence is only in your clan, and \"Arahitogami\", who can have their purification rituals performed by anyone whose life has been impacted by them. The religion has no single creator or specific doctrine, and instead exists in a diverse range of local and regional forms.\nAlthough historians debate at what point it is suitable to refer to Shinto as a distinct religion, veneration has been traced back to Japan's Yayoi period (300 BC to 300 AD). Buddhism entered Japan at the end of the Kofun period (300 to 538 AD) and spread rapidly. Religious syncretization made worship and Buddhism functionally inseparable, a process called \"shinbutsu-sh\u016bg\u014d\". The came to be viewed as part of Buddhist cosmology and were increasingly depicted anthropomorphically. The earliest written tradition regarding worship was recorded in the 8th-century and . In ensuing centuries, was adopted by Japan's Imperial household. During the Meiji era (1868 to 1912), Japan's nationalist leadership expelled Buddhist influence from worship and formed State Shinto, which some historians regard as the origin of Shinto as a distinct religion. Shrines came under growing government influence, and citizens were encouraged to worship the emperor as a . With the formation of the Empire of Japan in the early 20th century, Shinto was exported to other areas of East Asia. Following Japan's defeat in World War II, Shinto was formally separated from the state.\nShinto is primarily found in Japan, where there are around 100,000 public shrines, although practitioners are also found abroad. Numerically, it is Japan's largest religion, the second being Buddhism. Most of the country's population takes part in both Shinto and Buddhist activities, especially festivals, reflecting a common view in Japanese culture that the beliefs and practices of different religions do not need to be exclusive. Aspects of Shinto have been incorporated into various Japanese new religious movements.\nDefinition.\nThere is no universally agreed definition of Shinto. According to Joseph Cali and John Dougill, if there was \"one single, broad definition of Shinto\" that could be put forward, it would be that \"Shinto is a belief in \", the supernatural entities at the centre of the religion. The Japanologist Helen Hardacre wrote that \"Shinto encompasses doctrines, institutions, ritual, and communal life based on worship\", while the scholar of religion Inoue Nobutaka observed that the term \"Shinto\" was \"often used\" in \"reference to worship and related theologies, rituals and practices\". Various scholars have referred to practitioners of Shinto as \"Shintoists\", although this term has no direct translation in the Japanese language.\nScholars have debated at what point in history it is legitimate to start talking about Shinto as a specific phenomenon. The scholar of religion Ninian Smart suggested that one could \"speak of the religion of Japan, which lived symbiotically with organized Buddhism, and only later was institutionalized as Shinto.\" While several institutions and practices now associated with Shinto existed in Japan by the 8th century, various scholars have argued that Shinto as a distinct religion was essentially \"invented\" during the 19th century, in Japan's Meiji era. The scholar of religion Brian Bocking stressed that, especially when dealing with periods before the Meiji era, the term \"Shinto\" should \"be approached with caution\". Inoue Nobutaka stated that \"Shinto cannot be considered as a single religious system that existed from the ancient to the modern period\", while the historian Kuroda Toshio noted that \"before modern times Shinto did not exist as an independent religion\".\nCategorisation.\nMany scholars describe Shinto as a religion, a term first translated into Japanese as \"sh\u016bky\u014d\" around the time of the Meiji Restoration. Some practitioners instead view Shinto as a \"way\", thus characterising it more as custom or tradition, partly as an attempt to circumvent the modern separation of religion and state and restore Shinto's historical links with the Japanese state. Moreover, many of the categories of religion and religiosity defined in Western culture \"do not readily apply\" to Shinto. Unlike religions familiar in Western countries, such as Christianity and Islam, Shinto has no single founder, nor any single canonical text. Western religions tend to stress exclusivity, but in Japan, it has long been considered acceptable to practice different religious traditions simultaneously. Japanese religion is therefore highly pluralistic. Shinto is often cited alongside Buddhism as one of Japan's two main religions, and the two often differ in focus, with Buddhism emphasising the idea of the cessation of suffering, while Shinto focuses on adapting to life's pragmatic requirements. Shinto has integrated elements from religions imported from mainland Asia, such as Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, and Chinese divination practices, and shares features like its polytheism with other East Asian religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome scholars suggest we talk about types of Shint\u014d such as popular Shint\u014d, folk Shint\u014d, domestic Shint\u014d, sectarian Shint\u014d, imperial house Shint\u014d, shrine Shint\u014d, state Shint\u014d, new Shint\u014d religions, etc. rather than regard Shint\u014d as a single entity. This approach can be helpful but begs the question of what is meant by 'Shint\u014d' in each case, particularly since each category incorporates or has incorporated Buddhist, Confucian, Taoist, folk religious and other elements.\n\u2014 Scholar of religion Brian Bocking\nScholars of religion have debated how to classify Shinto. Inoue considered it part of \"the family of East-Asian religions\". The philosopher Stuart D. B. Picken suggested that Shinto be classed as a world religion, while the historian H. Byron Earhart called it a \"major religion\". Shinto is also often described as an indigenous religion, although this generates debates over the different definitions of \"indigenous\" in the Japanese context. The notion of Shinto as Japan's \"indigenous religion\" stemmed from the growth of modern nationalism between the Edo and Meiji periods; this view promoted the idea that Shinto's origins were prehistoric and that it represented something like the \"underlying will of Japanese culture\". The prominent Shinto theologian Sokyo Ono, for instance, said worship was \"an expression\" of the Japanese \"native racial faith which arose in the mystic days of remote antiquity\" and that it was \"as indigenous as the people that brought the Japanese nation into existence\". Many scholars regard this classification as inaccurate. Earhart noted that Shinto, in having absorbed much Chinese and Buddhist influence, was \"too complex to be labelled simply [as an] indigenous religion\". In the early 21st century it became increasingly common for practitioners to call Shinto a nature religion, which critics saw as a strategy to disassociate the tradition from controversial issues surrounding militarism and imperialism.\nShinto displays substantial local variation; the anthropologist John K. Nelson noted it was \"not a unified, monolithic entity\". Different types of Shinto have been identified. \"Shrine Shinto\" refers to practices centred around shrines, and \"Domestic Shinto\" to the veneration of in the home. Some scholars have used the term \"Folk Shinto\" to designate localised Shinto practices, or practices outside of an institutionalised setting. In various past eras, there was also a \"State Shinto\", in which Shinto beliefs and practices were closely interlinked with the Japanese state. In representing \"a portmanteau term\" for many varied traditions across Japan, the term \"Shinto\" is similar to the term \"Hinduism\", used to describe varied traditions across South Asia.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Shinto\" is often broadly translated into English as \"the way of the \", although its meaning has varied throughout Japanese history. Other terms are sometimes used synonymously with \"Shinto\"; these include ' (, \"the way of the \"), ' (, also written or , \"the way of the from time immemorial\"), ' (, \"the ancient way\"), ' (, \"the great way\"), and \"\" (, \"the imperial way\").\nThe term \"Shinto\" derives from the combination of two Chinese characters: \"shin\" (\u795e), which means \"spirit\" or \"god\", and \"t\u014d\" (\u9053), which means \"way\", \"road\" or \"path\". \"Shint\u014d\" (\u795e\u9053, \"the Way of the Gods\") was a term already used in the \"Book of Changes\" referring to the divine order of nature. Around the time of the spread of Buddhism in the Han dynasty (206 BCE \u2013 220 CE), it was used to distinguish indigenous Chinese religions from the imported religion. Ge Hong used it in his \"Baopuzi\" as a synonym for Taoism.\nThe Chinese term \u795e\u9053 (MC \"zyin dawX\") was originally adopted into Japanese as \"Jind\u014d\"; this was possibly first used as a Buddhist term to refer to non-Buddhist deities. Among the earliest known appearances of the term \"Shinto\" in Japan is in the 8th-century text, . Here, it may be a generic term for popular belief, or alternatively reference Taoism, as many Taoist practices had recently been imported from mainland Asia. In these early Japanese uses, the word \"Shinto\" did not apply to a distinct religious tradition nor to anything uniquely Japanese; the 11th century \"Konjaku monogatarishui\" for instance refers to a woman in China practicing \"Shinto\", and also to people in India worshipping , indicating these terms were being used to describe religions outside Japan itself.\nIn medieval Japan, -worship was generally seen as being part of Japanese Buddhism, with the themselves often interpreted as Buddhas. At this point, the term \"Shinto\" increasingly referred to \"the authority, power, or activity of a , being a , or, in short, the state or attributes of a .\" It appears in this form in texts such as \"\" and \"Shint\u014dsh\u016b\" tales. In the \"Japanese Portuguese Dictionary\" of 1603, \"Shinto\" is defined as referring to \" or matters pertaining to .\" The term \"Shinto\" became common in the 15th century. During the late Edo period, the scholars began using the term \"Shinto\" to describe what they believed was an ancient, enduring and indigenous Japanese tradition that predated Buddhism; they argued that \"Shinto\" should be used to distinguish worship from traditions like Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism. This use of the term \"Shinto\" became increasingly popular from the 18th century. The term \"Shinto\" has been commonly used only since the early 20th century, when it superseded the term ('great religion') as the name for the Japanese state religion. In English, the religion is also called \"Shintoism\", although some scholars have argued against the inclusion of the suffix \"-ism\" due to Shinto's lack of codified doctrine.\nBeliefs.\nShinto is polytheistic, involving the veneration of many deities known as , or sometimes as (\u795e\u7947). In Japanese, no distinction is made here between singular and plural, and hence the term refers both to individual and the collective group of . Although lacking a direct English translation, the term has sometimes been rendered as \"god\" or \"spirit\". The historian of religion Joseph Kitagawa deemed these English translations \"quite unsatisfactory and misleading\", and various scholars urge against translating into English. In Japanese, it is often said that there are eight million , a term which connotes an infinite number, and Shinto practitioners believe that they are present everywhere. They are not regarded as omnipotent, omniscient, or necessarily immortal.\nThe term is \"conceptually fluid\", being \"vague and imprecise\". In Japanese it is often applied to the power of phenomena that inspire a sense of wonder and awe in the beholder. Kitagawa referred to this as \"the nature\", stating that he thought it \"somewhat analogous\" to the Western ideas of the numinous and the sacred. are seen to inhabit both the living and the dead, organic and inorganic matter, and natural disasters like earthquakes, droughts, and plagues; their presence is seen in natural forces such as the wind, rain, fire, and sunshine. Accordingly, Nelson commented that Shinto regards \"the \"actual phenomena\" of the world itself\" as being \"divine\". This perspective has been characterised as being animistic.\nIn Japan, have been venerated since prehistory. During the Yayoi period they were regarded as being formless and invisible, later coming to be depicted anthropomorphically under Buddhist influence. Now, statues of the are known as . are usually associated with a specific place, often a prominent landscape feature such as a waterfall, mountain, large rock, or distinctive tree. Physical objects or places in which the are believed to have a presence are termed ; objects inhabited by the that are placed in the shrine are known as . Objects commonly chosen for this purpose include mirrors, swords, stones, beads, and inscribed tablets. These are concealed from the view of visitors, and may be hidden inside boxes so that even the priests do not know what they look like.\n are deemed capable of both benevolent and destructive deeds; if warnings about good conduct are ignored, the can mete out punishment, often illness or sudden death, called . Some , referred to as the or , are regarded as malevolent and destructive. Offerings and prayers are given to the to gain their blessings and to dissuade them from destructive actions. Shinto seeks to cultivate and ensure a harmonious relationship between humans and the and thus with the natural world. More localised may be subject to feelings of intimacy and familiarity from members of the local community that are not directed towards more widespread like Amaterasu. The of a particular community is referred to it as their , while that of a particular house is the .\n are not considered metaphysically different from humanity, with it being possible for humans to become . Ancestors and other dead humans are sometimes venerated as , being regarded as protectors. For example, Emperor \u014cjin was posthumously enshrined as the Hachiman, believed to be a protector of Japan and a of war. In Western Japan, the term is used to describe the enshrined of a village founder. In some cases, living human beings were also viewed as ; these were called or . In the State Shinto system of the Meiji era, the emperor of Japan was declared to be a , while several Shinto sects have also viewed their leaders as living .\nAlthough some are venerated only in a single location, others have shrines across many areas. Hachiman for instance has around 25,000 shrines dedicated to him, while Inari has 40,000. The act of establishing a new shrine to a who already has one is called (\"dividing the spirit\"). As part of this, the is invited to enter a new place, with the instalment ceremony known as a . The new, subsidiary shrine is known as a . Individual are not believed to have their power diminished by their residence in multiple locations, and there is no limit on the number of places a can be enshrined. In some periods, fees were charged for the right to enshrine a particular in a new place. Shrines are not necessarily always designed as permanent structures.\nMany have messengers, known as or , that generally take animal forms. Inari's messenger, for example, is a fox (\"kitsune\"), while Hachiman's is a dove.\nShinto cosmology also includes spirits who cause malevolent acts, , a category including , , , , and . Japanese folklore also incorporates belief in the or , unquiet or vengeful spirits, particularly of those who died violently and without appropriate funerary rites. These are believed to inflict suffering on the living, meaning that they must be pacified, usually through Buddhist rites but sometimes through enshrining them as a . Other Japanese supernatural figures include the , animal-like creatures who can take human form.\nCosmogony.\nAlthough the narratives differ in detail, the origin of the and of Japan itself are recounted in two 8th-century texts, and . Drawing heavily on Chinese influence, these texts were commissioned by ruling elites to legitimize and consolidate their rule. Although never of great importance to Japanese religious life, in the early 20th century the government proclaimed that their accounts were factual.\nThe recounts that the universe started with , the separation of light and pure elements (, \"heaven\") from heavy elements (, \"earth\"). Three then appeared: Amenominakanushi, Takamimusuhi no Mikoto, and Kamimusuhi no Mikoto. Other followed, including a brother and sister, Izanagi and Izanami. The instructed Izanagi and Izanami to create land on earth. To this end, the siblings stirred the briny sea with a jewelled spear, from which Onogoro Island was formed. Izanagi and Izanami then descended to Earth, where the latter gave birth to further . One of these was a fire , whose birth killed Izanami. Izanagi descended to to retrieve his sister, but there he saw her body putrefying. Embarrassed to be seen in this state, she chased him out of , and he closed its entrance with a boulder.\nIzanagi bathed in the sea to rid himself from the pollution brought about by witnessing Izanami's putrefaction. Through this act, further emerged from his body: Amaterasu (the sun ) was born from his left eye, Tsukuyomi (the moon ) from his right eye, and Susanoo (the storm ) from his nose. Susanoo behaved in a destructive manner, to escape him Amaterasu hid herself within a cave, plunging the earth into darkness. The other eventually succeeded in coaxing her out. Susanoo was then banished to earth, where he married and had children. According to the , Amaterasu then sent her grandson, Ninigi, to rule Japan, giving him curved beads, a mirror, and a sword: the symbols of Japanese imperial authority. Amaterasu remains probably Japan's most venerated .\nCosmology and afterlife.\nIn Shinto, the creative principle permeating all life is known as , and is associated with its own . Within traditional Japanese thought, there is no concept of an overarching duality between good and evil. The concept of encompasses misfortune, unhappiness, and disaster, although it does not correspond precisely with the Western concept of evil. There is no eschatology in Shinto. Texts such as the and portray multiple realms in Shinto cosmology. These present a universe divided into three parts: the Plane of High Heaven (), where the live; the Phenomenal or Manifested World (), where humans dwell; and the Nether World (), where unclean spirits reside. The mythological texts nevertheless do not draw firm demarcations between these realms.\nModern Shinto places greater emphasis on this life than on any afterlife, although it does espouse belief in a human spirit or soul, the or , which contains four aspects. While indigenous ideas about an afterlife were probably well-developed prior to Buddhism's arrival, contemporary Japanese people often adopt Buddhist afterlife beliefs.\nMythological stories like the describe or as a realm of the dead, although this plays no role in modern Shinto. Modern Shinto ideas about the afterlife largely revolve around the idea that the spirit survives bodily death and continues to assist the living. After 33 years, it then becomes part of the family . These ancestral spirits are sometimes thought to reside in the mountains, from where they descend to take part in agricultural events. Shinto's afterlife beliefs also include the , restless spirits who died in bad circumstances and often seek revenge.\nPurity and impurity.\nA key theme in Shinto is the avoidance of (\"pollution\" or \"impurity\"), while ensuring (\"purity\"). In Japanese thought, humans are seen as fundamentally pure. is therefore seen as being a temporary condition that can be corrected through achieving . Rites of purification are conducted so as to restore an individual to \"spiritual\" health and render them useful to society.\nThis notion of purity is present in many facets of Japanese culture, such as the focus it places on bathing. Purification is for instance regarded as important in preparation for the planting season, while performers of theatre undergo a purification rite before they carry out their performances. Among the things regarded as particular pollutants in Shinto are death, disease, witchcraft, the flaying alive of an animal, incest, bestiality, excrement, and blood associated with either menstruation or childbirth. To avoid , priests and other practitioners may engage in abstinence and avoid various activities prior to a festival or ritual.\nVarious words, termed , are also regarded as taboo, and people avoid speaking them when at a shrine; these include (death), (illness), and (meat).\nA purification ceremony known as involves the use of fresh water, salt water, or salt to remove . Full immersion in the sea is often regarded as the most ancient and efficacious form of purification. This act links with the mythological tale in which Izanagi immersed himself in the sea to purify himself after discovering his deceased wife; it was from this act that other sprang from his body. An alternative is immersion beneath a waterfall. Salt is often regarded as a purifying substance; some Shinto practitioners will for instance sprinkle salt on themselves after a funeral, while those running restaurants may put a small pile of salt outside before business commences each day. Fire, also, is perceived as a source of purification. The is a form of harae designed to prevent misfortune, while the , or \"ceremony of great purification\", is often used for end-of-year purification rites, and is conducted twice a year at many shrines. Before the Meiji period, rites of purification were generally performed by , a type of diviner whose practices derived from the Chinese yin and yang philosophy.\n\"Kannagara\", morality, and ethics.\nShinto incorporates morality tales and myths but no codified ethical doctrine, and thus no \"unified, systematized code of behaviour\". An ethical system nevertheless arises from its practice, with emphasis placed on sincerity (), honesty (), hard work (), and thanksgiving () directed towards the . is regarded as a virtue, encompassing honesty, uprightness, veracity, and frankness. Shinto sometimes includes reference to four virtues known as the or , meaning \"purity and cheerfulness of heart\", which are linked to the state of . Attitudes to sex and fertility tend to be forthright in Shinto. Shinto's flexibility regarding morality and ethics has been a source of frequent criticism, especially from those arguing that the religion can readily become a pawn for those wishing to use it to legitimise their authority and power.\nIn Shinto, (\"way of the \") is the law of the natural order, with (\"benign harmony\") being inherent in all things. Disrupting is deemed bad, while contributing to it is thought good; as such, subordination of the individual to the larger social unit has long been a characteristic of the religion. Throughout Japanese history, the notion of , or the union of religious authority and political authority, has long been prominent. In the modern world, Shinto has tended toward conservatism, as well as nationalism, an association that results in various Japanese civil liberties groups and neighboring countries regarding Shinto suspiciously. Particularly controversial has been the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo, devoted to Japan's war dead. In 1979 it enshrined 14 men who had been declared Class-A defendants at the 1946 Tokyo War Crimes Trials, generating domestic and international condemnation, particularly from China and Korea.\nShinto priests face ethical conundrums. In the 1980s, for instance, priests at the Suwa Shrine in Nagasaki debated whether to invite the crew of a U.S. Navy vessel docked at the port city to their festival celebrations given the sensitivities surrounding the 1945 U.S. use of the atomic bomb on the city. In other cases, priests have opposed construction projects on shrine-owned land; at Kaminoseki in the early 2000s, a priest was pressured to resign after opposing the sale of shrine lands to build a nuclear power plant. \nIn the 21st century, Shinto has increasingly been portrayed as a nature-centred spirituality with environmentalist credentials; several shrines have collaborated with local environmentalist campaigns, while an international interfaith conference on environmental sustainability was held at the Ise shrine in 2014. Critical commentators have characterised the presentation of Shinto as an environmentalist movement as a rhetorical ploy rather than a concerted effort by Shinto institutions to become environmentally sustainable.\nPractices.\nShinto focuses on ritual behavior rather than doctrine. The philosophers James W. Boyd and Ron G. Williams stated that Shinto is \"first and foremost a ritual tradition\", while Picken observed that \"Shinto is interested not in \"credenda\" but in \"agenda\", not in things that should be believed but in things that should be done.\" The scholar of religion Clark B. Offner stated that Shinto's focus was on \"maintaining communal, ceremonial traditions for the purpose of human (communal) well-being\".\nIt is often difficult to distinguish Shinto practices from Japanese customs more broadly, with Picken observing that the \"worldview of Shinto\" provided the \"principal source of self-understanding within the Japanese way of life\". Nelson stated that \"Shinto-based orientations and values\u00a0[...] lie at the core of Japanese culture, society, and character\".\n\"Jinja\" shrines.\nPublic spaces in which the are worshipped are often known under the generic term (\"-place\"); this term applies to the location rather than to a specific building. is usually translated as \"shrine\" in English, although in earlier literature was sometimes translated as \"temple\", a term now more commonly reserved for Japan's Buddhist structures. There are around 100,000 public shrines in Japan; about 80,000 are affiliated with the Association of Shinto Shrines, with another 20,000 being unaffiliated. They are found all over the country, from isolated rural areas to dense metropolitan ones. More specific terms are sometimes used for certain shrines depending on their function; some of the grand shrines with imperial associations are termed , those devoted to the war dead are termed , and those linked to mountains deemed to be inhabited by are .\nJinja typically consist of complexes of multiple buildings, with the architectural styles of shrines having largely developed by the Heian period. The inner sanctuary in which the lives is the . Inside the may be stored material belonging to the ; known as , this can include artworks, clothing, weapons, musical instruments, bells, and mirrors. Typically, worshippers carry out their acts outside of the . Near the can sometimes be found a subsidiary shrine, the , to another ; the inhabiting this shrine is not necessarily perceived as being inferior to that in the . At some places, halls of worship have been erected, termed . On a lower level can be found the hall of offerings, known as a . Together, the building housing the , , and is called a . In some shrines, there is a separate building in which to conduct additional ceremonies, such as weddings, known as a , or a specific building in which the dance is performed, known as the . Collectively, the central buildings of a shrine are known as the , while its precincts are known as the or . This precinct is surrounded by the fence, with entry via a gate, which can be closed at night.\nShrine entrances are marked by a two-post gateway with either one or two crossbeams atop it, known as . The exact details of these varies and there are at least twenty different styles. These are regarded as demarcating the area where the resides; passing under them is often viewed as a form of purification. More broadly, are internationally recognised symbols of Japan. Their architectural form is distinctly Japanese, although the decision to paint most of them in vermillion reflects a Chinese influence dating from the Nara period. Also set at the entrances to many shrines are , statues of lion or dog like animals perceived to scare off malevolent spirits; typically these will come as a pair, one with its mouth open, the other with its mouth closed.\nShrines are often set within gardens or wooded groves called (\"forest of the tutelary\" ), which vary in size from just a few trees to sizeable areas of woodland. Large lanterns, known as , are often found within these precincts. Shrines often have an office, known as a , a where priests undergo forms of abstinence and purification prior to conducting rituals, and other buildings such as a priests' quarters and a storehouse. Various kiosks often sell amulets to visitors. Since the late 1940s, shrines have had to be financially self-sufficient, relying on the donations of worshippers and visitors. These funds are used to pay the wages of the priests, to finance the upkeep of the buildings, to cover the shrine's membership fees of various regional and national Shinto groups, and to contribute to disaster relief funds.\nIn Shinto, it is seen as important that the places in which are venerated be kept clean and not neglected. Through to the Edo period, it was common for shrines to be demolished and rebuilt at a nearby location in order to remove any pollutants and ensure purity. This has continued into recent times at certain sites, such as the Ise Grand Shrine, which is moved to an adjacent site every two decades. Separate shrines can also be merged in a process known as , while the act of transferring the from one building to another is called . Shrines may have legends about their foundation, which are known as . These sometimes also record miracles associated with the shrine. From the Heian period on, the were often retold on picture scrolls known as .\nPriesthood and.\nShrines may be cared for by priests, by local communities, or by families on whose property the shrine is found. Shinto priests are known in Japanese as , meaning \"proprietor of \", or alternatively as or . Many take on the role in a line of hereditary succession traced down specific families. In contemporary Japan, there are two main training universities for those wishing to become , at Kokugakuin University in Tokyo and at Kogakkan University in Mie Prefecture. Priests can rise through the ranks over the course of their careers. The number of priests at a particular shrine can vary; some shrines can have dozens, and others have none, instead being administered by local lay volunteers. Some priests administer to multiple small shrines, sometimes over ten.\nPriestly regalia is largely based on the clothes worn at the imperial court during the Heian period. It includes a tall, rounded hat known as an , and black lacquered wooden clogs known as . The outer garment worn by a priest, usually colored black, red, or light blue, is the , or the . A white silk version of the , used for formal occasions, is known as the . Another priestly robe is the , which is modelled on Heian-style hunting garments. Also part of standard priestly attire is a fan, while during rituals, priests carry a flat piece of wood known as a . This regalia is generally more ornate than the sombre garments worn by Japanese Buddhist monks.\nThe chief priest at a shrine is the . Larger shrines may also have an assistant head priest, the . As with teachers, instructors, and Buddhist clergy, Shinto priests are often referred to as by lay practitioners. Historically, there were female priests although they were largely pushed out of their positions in 1868. During the Second World War, women were again allowed to become priests to fill the void caused by large numbers of men being enlisted in the military. By the late 1990s, around 90% of priests were male, 10% female, contributing to accusations that Shinto discriminates against women. Priests are free to marry and have children. At smaller shrines, priests often have other full-time jobs, and serve only as priests during special occasions.\nBefore certain major festivals, priests may undergo a period of abstinence from sexual relations. Some of those involved in festivals also abstain from a range of other things, such as consuming tea, coffee, or alcohol, immediately prior to the events.\nThe priests are assisted by , sometimes referred to as \"shrine-maidens\" in English. These are typically unmarried, although not necessarily virgins. In many cases they are the daughters of a priest or a practitioner. They are subordinate to the priests in the shrine hierarchy. Their most important role is in the dance, known as . receive only a small salary but gain respect from members of the local community and learn skills such as cooking, calligraphy, painting, and etiquette which can benefit them when later searching for employment or a marriage partner. They generally do not live at the shrines. Sometimes they fill other roles, such as being secretaries in the shrine offices or clerks at the information desks, or as waitresses at the feasts. They also assist in ceremonial rites.\nVisits to shrines.\nVisits to the shrine are termed , or . Some individuals visit the shrines daily, often on their morning route to work; they typically take only a few minutes. Usually, a worshipper will approach the honden, placing a monetary offering in a box and then ringing a bell to call the 's attention. Then, they bow, clap, and stand while silently offering a prayer. The clapping is known as or ; the prayers or supplications as . This individual worship is known as . More broadly, ritual prayers to the are called , while the coins offered are . At the shrine, individuals offering prayers are not necessarily praying to a specific . A worshipper may not know the name of a residing at the shrine nor how many are believed to dwell there. Unlike in certain other religions, Shinto shrines do not have weekly services that practitioners are expected to attend.\nSome Shinto practitioners do not offer their prayers to the directly, but rather request that a priest offer them on their behalf; these prayers are known as . Many individuals approach the asking for pragmatic requests. Requests for rain, known as (\"rain-soliciting\") have been found across Japan, with Inari a popular choice for such requests.\nOther prayers reflect more contemporary concerns. For instance, people may ask that the priest approaches the so as to purify their car in the hope that this will prevent it from being involved in an accident; the (\"purification for road safety\"). Similarly, transport companies often request purification rites for new buses or airplanes which are about to go into service. Before a building is constructed, it is common for either private individuals or the construction company to employ a Shinto priest to come to the land being developed and perform the , or earth sanctification ritual. This purifies the site and asks the to bless it.\nPeople often ask the to help offset inauspicious events that may affect them. For instance, in Japanese culture, the age 33 is seen as being unlucky for women and the age 42 for men, and thus people can ask the to offset any ill-fortune associated with being this age. Certain directions can also be seen as being inauspicious for certain people at certain times and thus people can approach the asking them to offset this problem if they have to travel in one of these unlucky directions.\nPilgrimage has long been important in Japanese religion, with pilgrimages to Shinto shrines called . A round of pilgrimages, whereby individuals visit a series of shrines and other sacred sites that are part of an established circuit, is known as a . An individual leading these pilgrims, is sometimes termed a . For many centuries, people have also visited the shrines for primarily cultural and recreational reasons, as opposed to spiritual ones. Many of the shrines are recognised as sites of historical importance and some are classified as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Shrines such as Shimogamo Jinja and Fushimi Inari Taisha in Kyoto, Meiji Jing\u016b in Tokyo, and Atsuta Jing\u016b in Nagoya are among Japan's most popular tourist sites. Many shrines have a unique rubber-stamp seal which visitors can get printed into their stamp book, demonstrating the different shrines they have visited.\nand.\nShinto rituals begin with a process of purification, or . Using fresh water or salt water, this is known as . At shrines, this entails sprinkling this water onto the face and hands, a procedure known as , using a font known as a . Another form of purification at the start of a Shinto rite entails waving a white paper streamer or wand known as the . When not in use, the is usually kept in a stand. The priest waves the horizontally over a person or object being purified in a movement known as (\"left-right-left\"). Sometimes, instead of a , the purification is carried out with an , a branch of evergreen to which strips of paper have been attached. The waving of the is often followed by an additional act of purification, the , in which the priest sprinkles water, salt, or brine over those assembled from a wooden box called the or .\nThe acts of purification accomplished, petitions known as are spoken to the . This is followed by an appearance by the , who commence in a slow circular motion before the main altar. Offerings are then presented to the by being placed on a table. This act is known as ; the offerings themselves as or . Historically, the offerings given the included food, cloth, swords, and horses. In the contemporary period, lay worshippers usually give gifts of money to the while priests generally offer them food, drink, and sprigs of the sacred tree. Animal sacrifices are not considered appropriate offerings, as the shedding of blood is seen as a polluting act that necessitates purification. The offerings presented are sometimes simple and sometimes more elaborate; at the Grand Shrine of Ise, for instance, 100 styles of food are laid out as offerings. The choice of offerings will often be tailored to the specific and occasion.\nOfferings of food and drink are specifically termed .\nSake, or rice wine, is a very common offering to the . After the offerings have been given, people often sip rice wine known as . Drinking the wine is seen as a form of communion with the . On important occasions, a feast is then held, known as , inside a banquet hall attached to the shrine complex.\nThe are believed to enjoy music. One style of music performed at shrines is . Instruments used include three reeds (, , and ), the , and the \"three drums\" (, , and ). Other musical styles performed at shrines can have a more limited focus. At shrines such as \u014charano Shrine in Kyoto, (\"eastern entertainment\") music is performed on 8 April. Also in Kyoto, various festivals make use of the style of music and dance, which originated from rice-planting songs. During rituals, people visiting the shrine are expected to sit in the style, with their legs tucked beneath their bottom. To avoid cramps, individuals who hold this position for a lengthy period of time may periodically move their legs and flex their heels.\nHome shrines.\nHaving seen their popularity increase in the Meiji era, many Shinto practitioners also have a family shrine, or (\" shelf\"), in their home. These usually consist of shelves placed at an elevated position in the living room. can also be found in workplaces, restaurants, shops, and ocean-going ships. Some public shrines sell entire .\nAlong with the , many Japanese households also have , Buddhist altars enshrining the ancestors of the family; ancestral reverence remains an important aspect of Japanese religious tradition. In the rare instances where Japanese individuals are given a Shinto funeral rather than a Buddhist one, a , , or shrine may be erected in the home in place of a . This will be typically placed below the and include symbols of the resident ancestral spirit, for instance a mirror or a scroll.\n often enshrine the of a nearby public shrine as well as a tutelary associated with the house's occupants or their profession. They can be decorated with miniature and and include amulets obtained from public shrines. They often contain a stand on which to place offerings; daily offerings of rice, salt, and water are placed there, with sake and other items also offered on special days. These domestic rituals often take place early in the morning, and prior to conducting them, practitioners often bathe, rinse their mouth, or wash their hands as a form of purification.\nHousehold Shinto can focus attention on the , who are perceived to be ancestral to the or extended kinship group. A small shrine for the ancestors of a household are known as . Small village shrines containing the tutelary of an extended family are known as . In addition to the shrines and the household shrines, Shinto also features small wayside shrines known as . Other open spaces used for the worship of are , an area surrounded by sacred rocks.\n, divination, and amulets.\nA common feature of Shinto shrines is the provision of , small wooden plaques onto which practitioners will write a wish or desire that they would like to see fulfilled. The practitioner's message is written on one side of the plaque, while on the other is usually a printed picture or pattern related to the shrine itself. are provided both at Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples in Japan; unlike most amulets, which are taken away from the shrine, the are typically left there as a message for the resident . Those administering the shrine will then often burn all of the collected at new year.\nDivination is the focus of many Shinto rituals, with various forms of divination used by its practitioners, some introduced from China. Among the ancient forms of divination found in Japan are and . Several forms of divination entailing archery are also practiced in Shint\u014d, known as , , and . Kitagawa stated that there could be \"no doubt\" that various types of \"shamanic diviners\" played a role in early Japanese religion. A form of divination previously common in Japan was or , which often used tortoise shells; it is still used in some places.\nA form of divination that is popular at Shinto shrines are the . These are small slips of paper which are obtained from the shrine (for a donation) and which are then read to reveal a prediction for the future. Those who receive a bad prediction often then tie the to a nearby tree or frame set up for the purpose. This act is seen as rejecting the prediction, a process called , and thus avoiding the misfortune it predicted.\nThe use of amulets are widely sanctioned and popular in Japan. These may be made of paper, wood, cloth, metal, or plastic.\n act as amulets to keep off misfortune and also serve as talismans to bring benefits and good luck. They typically comprise a tapering piece of wood onto which the name of the shrine and its enshrined are written or printed. The is then wrapped inside white paper and tied up with a colored thread. are provided both at Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples. Another type of amulet provided at shrines and temples are the , which are traditionally small, brightly colored drawstring bags with the name of the shrine written on it. and are sometimes placed within a charm bag known as a , typically worn by small children.\nAt new year, many shrines sell (an \"evil-destroying arrows\"), which people can purchase and keep in their home over the coming year to bring good luck.\nA is a round, paper doll of the Indian monk, Bodhidharma. The recipient makes a wish and paints one eye; when the goal is accomplished, the recipient paints the other eye. While this is a Buddhist practice, darumas can be found at shrines, as well. These dolls are very common.\nOther protective items include , which are earthenware bells that are used to pray for good fortune. These bells are usually in the shapes of the zodiacal animals. are paper dogs that are used to induce and to bless good births. Collectively, these talismans through which home to manipulate events and influence spirits, as well as related mantras and rites for the same purpose, are known as .\n\"Kagura\".\n describes the music and dance performed for the ; the term may have originally derived from (\"seat of the \"). Throughout Japanese history, dance has played an important culture role and in Shinto it is regarded as having the capacity to pacify . There is a mythological tale of how dance came into existence. According to the and the , Ame-no-Uzume performed a dance to entice Amaterasu out of the cave in which she had hidden herself.\nThere are two broad types of kagura. One is Imperial kagura, also known as . This style was developed in the imperial court and is still performed on imperial grounds every December. It is also performed at the Imperial harvest festival and at major shrines such as Ise, Kamo, and Iwashimizu Hachiman-g\u016b. It is performed by singers and musicians using wooden clappers, a , a flute, and a six-stringed zither. The other main type is , descended from and performed at shrines across Japan. Depending on the style, it is performed by or by actors wearing masks to portray various mythological figures. These actors are accompanied by a band using flutes and drums. There are also other, regional types of kagura.\nFestivals.\nPublic festivals are commonly termed , although this term has varied meanings\u2014\"festival\", \"worship\", \"celebration\", \"rite\", or \"prayer\"\u2014and no direct translation into English. Picken suggested that the festival was \"the central act of Shinto worship\" because Shinto was a \"community- and family-based\" religion. Most mark the seasons of the agricultural year and involve offerings being directed to the in thanks. According to a traditional lunar calendar, Shinto shrines should hold their festival celebrations on or \"clear days\", the days of the new, full, and half moons. Other days, known as , were generally avoided for festivities. However, since the late 20th century, many shrines have held their festival celebrations on the Saturday or Sunday closest to the date so that fewer individuals will be working and will be able to attend. Each town or village often has its own festival, centred on a local shrine. For instance, the Aoi Matsuri festival, held on 15 May to pray for an abundant grain harvest, takes place at shrines in Kyoto, while the Chichibu Night Festival takes place on 2\u20133 December in Chichibu.\nSpring festivals are called and often incorporate prayers for a good harvest. They sometimes involve ceremonies, in which rice is ritually planted. Summer festivals are termed and are usually focused on protecting the crops against pests and other threats. Autumn festivals are known as and primarily focus on thanking the for the rice or other harvest. The , or festival of new rice, is held across many Shinto shrines on 23 November. The emperor also conducts a ceremony to mark this festival, at which he presents the first fruits of the harvest to the at midnight. Winter festivals, called often feature on welcoming in the spring, expelling evil, and calling in good influences for the future. There is little difference between winter festivals and specific new year festivals.\nThe season of the new year is called . On the last day of the year (31 December), , practitioners usually clean their household shrines in preparation for New Year's Day (1 January), . Many people visit public shrines to celebrate new year; this \"first visit\" of the year is known as or . There, they buy amulets and talismans to bring them good fortune over the coming year. To celebrate this festival, many Japanese put up rope known as on their homes and places of business. Some also put up (\"gateway pine\"), an arrangement of pine branches, plum tree, and bamboo sticks. Also displayed are , which are smaller and more colourful; their purpose is to keep away misfortune and attract good fortune. In many places, new year celebrations incorporate (\"naked festivals\") in which men dressed only in a loincloth engage in a particular activity, such as fighting over a specific object or immersing themselves in a river.\nA common feature of festivals are processions or parades known as . These can be raucous, with many participants being drunk; Breen and Teeuwen characterised them as having a \"carnivalesque atmosphere\". They are often understood as having a regenerative effect on both the participants and the community. During these processions, the travel in portable shrines known as . In various cases the undergo (\"going down to the beach\"), a process by which they are carried to the sea shore and sometimes into the sea, either by bearers or a boat. For instance, in the Okunchi festival held in the southwestern city of Nagasaki, the of the Suwa Shrine are paraded down to Ohato, where they are placed in a shrine there for several days before being paraded back to Suwa. These sorts of celebrations are often organized largely by members of the local community rather than by the priests themselves.\nRites of passage.\nThe formal recognition of events is given great importance in Japanese culture. A common ritual, the , entails a child's first visit to a Shinto shrine. A tradition holds that, if a boy he should be brought to the shrine on the thirty-second day after birth, and if a girl she should be brought on the thirty-third day. Historically, the child was commonly brought to the shrine not by the mother, who was considered impure after birth, but by another female relative; since the late 20th century it has been more common for the mother to do so. Another rite of passage, the or , is a coming of age ritual marking the transition to adulthood and occurs when an individual is around twenty. Wedding ceremonies are often carried out at Shinto shrines; these are called (\"a wedding before the \"). Prior to the Meiji era, weddings were commonly performed in the home, although shrines now regard them as an important source of income.\nIn Japan, funerals tend to take place at Buddhist temples and involve cremation, with Shinto funerals being rare. Bocking noted that most Japanese people are \"still 'born Shinto' yet 'die Buddhist'.\" In Shinto thought, contact with death is seen as imparting impurity (); the period following this contact is known as and is associated with various taboos. In cases when dead humans are enshrined as , the physical remains of the dead are not stored at the shrine. Although not common, there have been examples of funerals conducted through Shinto rites. The earliest examples are known from the mid-17th century; these occurred in certain areas of Japan and had the support of the local authorities.\nFollowing the Meiji Restoration, in 1868 the government recognised specifically Shinto funerals for Shinto priests. Five years later, this was extended to cover the entire Japanese population. Despite this Meiji promotion of Shinto funerals, the majority of the population continued to have Buddhist funeral rites. In recent decades, Shinto funerals have usually been reserved for Shinto priests and for members of certain Shinto sects. After cremation, the normal funerary process in Japan, the ashes of a priest may be interred near to the shrine, but not inside its precincts.\nAncestral reverence remains an important part of Japanese religious custom. The invocation of the dead, and especially the war dead, is known as . Various rites reference this. For instance, at the largely Buddhist festival of Bon, the souls of the ancestors are believed to visit the living, and are then sent away in a ritual called , by which lanterns are inserted into small boats, often made of paper, and placed in a river to float downstream.\nSpirit mediumship and healing.\nShinto practitioners believe that the can possess a human being and then speak through them, a process known as . Several new religious movements drawing upon Shinto, such as Tenrikyo and Oomoto, were founded by individuals claiming to be guided by a possessing . The is an oracle that is passed from the via the medium.\nThe and are blind women who train to become spiritual mediums, traditionally in Japan's northern Tohoku region. train under other from childhood, memorialising sacred texts and prayers, fasting, and undertaking acts of severe asceticism, through which they are believed to cultivate supernatural powers. In an initiation ceremony, a is believed to possess the young woman, and the two are then ritually \"married\". After this, the becomes her tutelary spirit and she will henceforth be able to call upon it, and a range of other spirits, in the future. Through contacting these spirits, she is able to convey their messages to the living. usually carry out their rituals independent of the shrine system. Japanese culture also includes spiritual healers known as whose work involves invoking both and Buddhas.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nEarhart commented that Shinto ultimately \"emerged from the beliefs and practices of prehistoric Japan\", although Kitagawa noted that it was questionable whether prehistoric Japanese religions could be accurately termed \"early Shinto\". It was the Yayoi period of Japanese prehistory which first left traces of material and iconography prefiguring that later included in Shinto. were worshipped at various landscape features during this period; at this point, their worship consisted largely of beseeching and placating them, with little evidence that they were viewed as compassionate entities. Archaeological evidence suggests that bronze bells, bronze weapons, and metal mirrors played an important role in -based ritual during the Yayoi period.\nIn this early period, Japan was not a unified state; by the Kofun period it was divided among (clans), each with their own tutelary , the . Korean migration during the Kofun period brought Confucianism and Buddhism to Japan. Buddhism had a particular impact on the cults. Migrant groups and Japanese who increasingly aligned with these foreign influences built Buddhist temples in various parts of the Japanese islands. Several rival clans who were more hostile to these foreign influences began adapting the shrines of their to more closely resemble the new Buddhist structures. In the late 5th century, the imperial dynasty leader Y\u016bryaku declared himself \"dai\u014d\" (\"great king\") and established hegemony over much of Japan. From the early 6th century CE, the style of ritual favored by the Yamato began spreading to other shrines around Japan as the Yamato extended their territorial influence. Buddhism was also growing. According to the , in 587 Emperor Y\u014dmei converted to Buddhism and under his sponsorship Buddhism spread.\nIn the mid-7th century, a legal code called was adopted to establish a Chinese-style centralised government. As part of this, the Jingikan (\"Council of \") was created to conduct rites of state and coordinate provincial ritual with that in the capital. This was done according to a code of law called the \"Jingiry\u014d\", itself modelled on the Chinese \"Book of Rites\". The Jingikan was located in the palace precincts and maintained a register of shrines and priests. An annual calendar of state rites were introduced to help unify Japan through worship. These legally mandated rites were outlined in the Y\u014dr\u014d Code of 718, and expanded in the \"Jogan Gishiki\" of circa 872 and the \"Engi Shiki\" of 927. Under the Jingikan, some shrines were designated as (\"official shrines\") and given specific privileges and responsibilities. Hardacre saw the Jingikan as \"the institutional origin of Shinto\".\nIn the early 8th century, the Emperor Tenmu commissioned a compilation of the legends and genealogies of Japan's clans, resulting in the completion of the in 712. Designed to legitimate the ruling dynasty, this text created a fixed version of various stories previously circulating in oral tradition. The omits any reference to Buddhism, in part because it sought to ignore foreign influences and emphasise a narrative stressing indigenous elements of Japanese culture. Several years later, the \"Nihon shoki\" was written. Unlike the , this made various references to Buddhism, and was aimed at a foreign audience. Both of these texts sought to establish the imperial clan's descent from the sun Amaterasu, although there were many differences in the cosmogonic narrative they provided. Quickly, the \"Nihon shoki\" eclipsed the in terms of its influence. Other texts written at this time also drew on oral traditions regarding the . The \"Sendari kuji hongi\" for example was probably composed by the Mononobe clan while the \"Kogoshui\" was probably put together for the Imbe clan, and in both cases they were designed to highlight the divine origins of these respective lineages. A government order in 713 called on each region to produce , records of local geography, products, and stories, with the latter revealing more traditions about the which were present at this time.\nFrom the 8th century, worship and Buddhism were thoroughly intertwined in Japanese society. While the emperor and court performed Buddhist rites, they also performed others to honor the . Tenmu for example appointed a virginal imperial princess to serve as the , a form of priestess, at the Ise Shrine on his behalf, a tradition continued by subsequent emperors. From the 8th century onward up until the Meiji era, the were incorporated into a Buddhist cosmology in various ways. One view is that the realised that like all other life-forms, they too were trapped in the cycle of samsara (rebirth) and that to escape this they had to follow Buddhist teachings. Alternative approaches viewed the as benevolent entities who protected Buddhism, or that the were themselves Buddhas, or beings who had achieved enlightenment. In this, they could be either , the pure spirits of the Buddhas, or , transformations of the Buddhas in their attempt to help all sentient beings.\nNara period.\nThis period hosted many changes to the country, government, and religion. The capital is moved again to Heij\u014d-ky\u014d (modern-day Nara), in AD 710 by Empress Genmei due to the death of the emperor. This practice was necessary due to the Shinto belief in the impurity of death and the need to avoid this pollution. However, this practice of moving the capital due to \"death impurity\" is then abolished by the Taih\u014d Code and rise in Buddhist influence. The establishment of the imperial city in partnership with Taih\u014d Code is important to Shinto as the office of the Shinto rites becomes more powerful in assimilating local clan shrines into the imperial fold. New shrines are built and assimilated each time the city is moved. All of the grand shrines are regulated under Taih\u014d and are required to account for incomes, priests, and practices due to their national contributions.\nMeiji era and the Empire of Japan.\nBreen and Teeuwen characterise the period between 1868 and 1915, during the Meiji era, as being the \"formative years\" of modern Shinto. It is in this period that various scholars have argued that Shinto was essentially \"invented\".\nFridell argues that scholars call the period from 1868 to 1945 the \"State Shinto period\" because, \"during these decades, Shinto elements came under a great deal of overt state influence and control as the Japanese government systematically utilized shrine worship as a major force for mobilizing imperial loyalties on behalf of modern nation-building.\" However, the government had already been treating shrines as an extension of government before Meiji; see for example the Tenp\u014d Reforms. Moreover, according to the scholar Jason \u0100nanda Josephson, It is inaccurate to describe shrines as constituting a \"state religion\" or a \"theocracy\" during this period since they had neither organization, nor doctrine, and were uninterested in conversion.\nThe Meiji Restoration of 1868 was fuelled by a renewal of Confucian ethics and imperial patriotism among Japan's ruling class. Among these reformers, Buddhism was seen as a corrupting influence that had undermined what they envisioned as Japan's original purity and greatness. They wanted to place a renewed emphasis on worship as an indigenous form of ritual, an attitude that was also fuelled by anxieties about Western expansionism and fear that Christianity would take hold in Japan.\nIn 1868, all shrine priests were placed under the authority of the new Jingikan, or Council of Kami Affairs. A project of forcibly separating worship from Buddhism was implemented, with Buddhist monks, deities, buildings, and rituals banned from shrines. Much Buddhist material was destroyed. In 1871, a new hierarchy of shrines was introduced, with imperial and national shrines at the top. Hereditary priesthoods were abolished and a new state-sanctioned system for appointing priests was introduced.\nIn 1872, the Jingikan was replaced with the Kyobusho, or Ministry of Edification. This coordinated a campaign whereby (\"national evangelists\") were sent through the country to promote Japan's \"Great Teaching\", which included respect for the and obedience to the emperor. This campaign was discontinued in 1884. In 1906, thousands of village shrines were merged so that most small communities had only a single shrine, where rites in honor of the emperor could be held. Shinto effectively became the state cult, one promoted with growing zeal in the build-up to the Second World War.\nIn 1882, the Meiji government designated 13 religious movements that were neither Buddhist nor Christian to be forms of \"Sect Shinto\". The number and name of the sects given this formal designation varied; often they merged ideas with Shinto from Buddhism, Christian, Confucian, Daoist, and Western esoteric traditions. In the Meiji period, many local traditions died out and were replaced by nationally standardised practices encouraged from Tokyo.\nPost-war.\nDuring the U.S. occupation, a new Japanese constitution was drawn up. This enshrined freedom of religion and separated religion from the state, a measure designed to eradicate State Shinto. The emperor declared that he was not a ; Shinto rituals performed by the imperial family became their own private affair. This disestablishment ended government subsidies to shrines and gave them renewed freedom to organise their own affairs. In 1946 many shrines formed a voluntary organisation, the Association of Shinto Shrines (). In 1956 the association issued a creedal statement, the (\"general characteristics of a life lived in reverence of the \"), to summarise what they regarded as Shinto's principles. By the late 1990s around 80% of Japan's Shinto shrines were part of this association.\nIn the post-war decades, many Japanese blamed Shinto for encouraging the militarism which had led to defeat and occupation. Others remained nostalgic for State Shinto, and concerns were repeatedly expressed that sectors of Japanese society were conspiring to restore it. Various legal debates revolved around the involvement of public officials in Shinto. In 1965, for instance, the city of Tsu, Mie Prefecture, paid four Shinto priests to purify the site where the municipal athletic hall was to be built. Critics brought the case to court, claiming it contravened the constitutional separation of religion and state; in 1971 the high court ruled that the city administration's act had been unconstitutional, although this was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1977.\nDuring the post-war period, Shinto themes often blended into Japanese new religious movements. Of the Sect Shinto groups, Tenrikyo was probably the most successful, although in 1970 it repudiated its Shinto identity. Shinto perspectives also influenced popular culture. The film director Hayao Miyazaki of Studio Ghibli for instance acknowledged Shinto influences on his films such as \"Spirited Away\". Shinto also spread abroad through both emigration and conversion by non-Japanese. The Tsubaki Grand Shrine in Suzuka, Mie Prefecture, was the first to establish a branch abroad: the Tsubaki Grand Shrine of America, initially located in California and then moved to Granite Falls, Washington.\nDuring the 20th century, most academic research on Shinto was conducted by Shinto theologians, often priests, bringing accusations that it often blurred theology with historical analysis. From the 1980s onward, there was a renewed academic interest in Shinto both in Japan and abroad.\nDemographics.\nMost Japanese participate in several religious traditions, with Breen and Teeuwen noting that, \"with few exceptions\", it is not possible to differentiate between Shintoists and Buddhists in Japan. The main exceptions are members of minority religious groups, including Christianity, which promote exclusive worldviews. Determining the proportions of the country's population who engage in Shinto activity is hindered by the fact that, if asked, Japanese people will often say \"I have no religion\". Many Japanese avoid the term \"religion\", in part because they dislike the connotations of the word which most closely matches it in the Japanese language, . The latter term derives from (\"sect\") and (\"doctrine\").\nOfficial statistics show Shinto to be Japan's largest religion, with over 80 per cent of its population engaging in Shinto activities. Conversely, in questionnaires only a small minority of Japanese describe themselves as \"Shintoists\". This indicates that a far larger number of people engage in Shinto activities than cite Shinto as their religious identity. There are no formal rituals to become a practitioner of \"folk Shinto\". Thus, \"Shinto membership\" is often estimated counting only those who do join organized Shinto sects. Shinto has about 81,000 shrines and about 85,000 priests in the country. According to surveys carried out in 2006 and 2008, less than 40% of the population of Japan identifies with an organised religion: around 35% are Buddhists, 30% to 40% are members of Shinto sects and derived religions. In 2008, 26% of the participants reported often visiting Shinto shrines, while only 16.2% expressed belief in the existence of in general.\nShinto outside Japan.\nThe end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries were marked by the expansion of the Empire of Japan, which also led to the spread of Shinto in the colonized territories. In total, from 1868 to 1945, 1,640 shrines were built in territories under Japanese control. In addition, starting in 1885, Japanese began to move to Hawaii, most of whom left Japan for economic reasons; Since 1908, emigration to Brazil also began, where the Japanese worked on coffee plantations. The emigrants built shrines to preserve their culture and worship traditional deities.\n outside Japan are termed (\"overseas shrines\"), a term coined by Ogasawara Shozo. When the Empire of Japan collapsed in the 1940s, there were over 600 within its conquered territories, many of which were later disbanded. Japanese migrants have also established in countries like Brazil, while Shinto's lack of doctrinal focus has attracted interest from non-Japanese; in the United States, for example, European Americans have played a significant role in introducing Shinto.\nIn popular culture.\nShinto features in popular culture as folk Shinto or \"Minkan Shinto\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28273", "revid": "50123565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28273", "title": "Shell", "text": "Shell or Shells may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28274", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28274", "title": "Sed programming language", "text": ""}
{"id": "28276", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28276", "title": "Sh", "text": ""}
{"id": "28277", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28277", "title": "Sexuology", "text": ""}
{"id": "28278", "revid": "40843939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28278", "title": "Scottish Rite", "text": "Rite of Freemasonry\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry is a rite within the broader context of Freemasonry. It is the most widely practiced Rite in the world. In some parts of the world, and in the Droit Humain, it is a concordant body and oversees all degrees from the 1st to 33rd degrees, while in other areas it is deemed an appendant body with a Supreme Council that oversees the 4th to 33rd degrees.\nIt is most commonly referred to as the Scottish Rite. Sometimes, as in England and Australia, it is called the Rose Croix, though this is just one of its degrees, and is not to be confused with other Masonic related Rosicrucian societies such as the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia. Its name may vary slightly in various jurisdictions and constitutions. For example, the English and Irish Constitutions omit the word \"Scottish\".\nMaster Masons from other rites may, in some countries, join the Scottish Rite's upper degrees starting from the 4th degree due to its popularity. This Rite builds upon the ethical teachings and philosophy offered in the Craft (or Blue) Lodge through dramatic presentations of its individual degrees. The term \"Blue Lodge\" refers to the first three degrees of Masonry, regardless of the Rite being practiced. In the Scottish Rite system, the first three degrees are considered Blue Lodge degrees rather than \"Red Lodge\".\nHistory.\nScots Master Degree.\nThere are records of lodges conferring the degree of \"Scots Master\" or \"Scotch Master\" as early as 1733. A lodge at the Devil (Tavern), Temple Bar in London is the earliest such lodge on record. Other lodges include a lodge at Bath in 1735, and the French lodge, St. George de l'Observance No. 49 at Covent Garden in 1736. The references to these few occasions indicate that these were special meetings held for the purpose of performing unusual ceremonies, probably by visiting Freemasons. The Copiale cipher, dating from the 1740s to 1760s says, \"The rank of a Scottish master is an entirely new invention...\"\nMyth of Jacobite origins.\nFrench writers Jean-Marie Ragon (1781\u20131862) and Emmanuel Rebold, in their Masonic histories, first claimed that the high degrees were created and practiced in Lodge Canongate Kilwinning at Edinburgh, which is entirely false.\nEstienne Morin.\nA French trader, by the name of Estienne Morin, had been involved in high-degree Masonry in Bordeaux since 1744 and, in 1747, founded an \"\u00c9cossais\" lodge (Scottish Lodge) in the city of Le Cap Fran\u00e7ais, on the north coast of the French colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti. Over the next decade, high-degree Freemasonry was carried by French men to other cities in the Western hemisphere. The high-degree lodge at Bordeaux warranted or recognized seven \u00c9cossais lodges there.\nIn Paris in the year 1761, a patent was issued to Estienne Morin, dated 27 August, creating him \"Grand Inspector for all parts of the New World\". This Patent was signed by officials of the Grand Lodge at Paris and appears to have originally granted him power over the craft lodges only, and not over the high, or \"\u00c9cossais\", degree lodges. Later copies of this Patent appear to have been embellished, probably by Morin, to improve his position over the high-degree lodges in the West Indies.\nMorin returned to the West Indies in 1762 or 1763, to Saint-Domingue. Based on his new Patent, he assumed powers to constitute lodges of all degrees, spreading the high degrees throughout the West Indies and North America. Morin stayed in Saint-Domingue until 1766, when he moved to Jamaica. At Kingston, Jamaica, in 1770, Morin created a \"Grand Chapter\" of his new Rite, the Grand Council of Jamaica. Morin died in 1771 and was buried in Kingston.\nRite of 25 Degrees.\nEarly writers long believed that a \"Rite of Perfection\" consisting of 25 degrees, itself the predecessor of the Scottish Rite, had been formed in Paris by a high-degree council calling itself \"The Council of Emperors of the East and West\". The title \"Rite of Perfection\" first appeared in the Preface to the \"Grand Constitutions of 1786\", the authority for which is now known to be faulty. The highest degree in this rite was the \"Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret\".\nIt is now generally accepted that this Rite of twenty-five degrees was compiled by Estienne Morin and is more properly called \"The Rite of the Royal Secret\", or \"Morin's Rite\".\nHowever, it was known as \"The Order of Prince of the Royal Secret\" by the founders of the Scottish Rite, who mentioned it in their \"Circular throughout the two Hemispheres\" or \"Manifesto\", issued on December 4, 1802.\nHenry Andrew Francken and his manuscripts.\nHenry Andrew Francken, a naturalized French subject born as \"Hendrick Andriese Franken\" of Dutch origin, was most important in assisting Morin in spreading the degrees in the New World. Morin appointed him Deputy Grand Inspector General (DGIG) as one of his first acts after returning to the West Indies. Francken worked closely with Morin and, in 1771, produced a manuscript book giving the rituals for the 15th through the 25th degrees. Francken produced at least four such manuscripts. In addition to the 1771 manuscript, there is a second which can be dated to 1783; a third manuscript, of uncertain date, written in Francken's handwriting, with the rituals 4\u201325\u00b0, which was found in the archives of the Provincial Grand Lodge of Lancashire in Liverpool in approximately 1984; and a fourth, again of uncertain date, with rituals 4\u201324\u00b0, which was known to have been given by H. J. Whymper to the District Grand Lodge of the Punjab and rediscovered about 2010. Additionally, there is a French manuscript dating from 1790 to 1800 which contains the 25 degrees of the Order of the Royal Secret with additional detail, as well as three other \"Hauts Grades\" rituals; its literary structure suggests it is derived from a common source as the Francken Manuscripts.\nScottish Perfection Lodges.\nA Loge de Parfaits d' \u00c9cosse was formed on 12 April 1764 at New Orleans, becoming the first high-degree lodge on the North American continent. Its life, however, was short, as the Treaty of Paris (1763) ceded New Orleans to Spain, and the Catholic Spanish crown had been historically hostile to Freemasonry. Documented Masonic activity ceased for a time. It did not return to New Orleans until the late 1790s, when French refugees from the revolution in Saint-Domingue settled in the city.\nFrancken traveled to New York in 1767 where he granted a Patent, dated 26 December 1767, for the formation of a Lodge of Perfection at Albany, which was called \"Ineffable Lodge of Perfection\". This marked the first time the Degrees of Perfection (the 4th through the 14th) were conferred in one of the Thirteen British colonies in North America. This Patent, and the early minutes of the Lodge, are extant and are in the archives of Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction. The minutes of Ineffable Lodge of Perfection reveal that it ceased activity on December 5, 1774. It was revived by Giles Fonda Yates about 1820 or 1821, and came under authority of the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction until 1827. That year it was transferred to the Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction.\nWhile in New York City, Francken also communicated the degrees to Moses Michael Hays, a Jewish businessman, and appointed him as a Deputy Inspector General. In 1781, Hays made eight Deputy Inspectors General, four of whom were later important in the establishment of Scottish Rite Freemasonry in South Carolina:\nDa Costa returned to Charleston, South Carolina, where he established the \"Sublime Grand Lodge of Perfection\" in February 1783. After Da Costa's death in November 1783, Hays appointed Myers as Da Costa's successor. Joined by Forst and Spitzer, Myers created additional high-degree bodies in Charleston.\nPhysician Hyman Isaac Long from the island of Jamaica, who settled in New York City, went to Charleston in 1796 to appoint eight French men; he had received his authority through Spitzer. These men had arrived as refugees from Saint-Domingue, where the slave revolution was underway that would establish Haiti as an independent republic in 1804. They organized a Consistory of the 25th Degree, or \"Princes of the Royal Secret,\" which Masonic historian Brigadier ACF Jackson says became the first Supreme Council of the Scottish Rite. According to Fox, by 1801, the Charleston bodies were the only extant bodies of the Rite in North America.\nBirth of the Scottish Rite \u2013 1801.\nAlthough most of the thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite existed in parts of previous degree systems, the Scottish Rite did not come into being until the formation of the Mother Supreme Council at Charleston, South Carolina, in May 1801 at Shepheard's Tavern at the corner of Broad and Church Streets (the tavern had been the location of the founding of Freemasonry in South Carolina in 1754). The Founding Fathers of the Scottish Rite who attended became known as \"The Eleven Gentlemen of Charleston\" and included, John Mitchell, first Grand Commander of the Supreme Council, Frederick Dalcho, Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse, Jean-Baptiste Marie de La Hogue, Thomas Bartholemew Bowen, Abraham Alexander, Emanuel de la Motta, Isaac Auld, Israel de Lieben, Moses Clava Levy, James Moultrie and Isaac Da Costa.\nDa Costa in particular had been commissioned to establish Morin's Rite of the Royal Secret in other countries; he formed the constituent bodies of the Rite in South Carolina in 1783, which in 1801, became the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction. All regular Scottish Rite bodies today derive their heritage from this body. Subsequently, other Supreme Councils were formed in Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) in 1802, in France in 1804, in Italy in 1805, and in Spain in 1811.\nOn May 1, 1813, an officer from the Supreme Council at Charleston initiated several New York Masons into the Thirty-third Degree and organized a Supreme Council for the \"Northern Masonic District and Jurisdiction\". On May 21, 1814, this Supreme Council reopened and proceeded to \"nominate, elect, appoint, install and proclaim in due, legal and ample form\" the elected officers \"as forming the \"second\" Grand and Supreme Council...\". Finally, the charter of this organization (written January 7, 1815) added, \u201cWe think the \"Ratification\" ought to be dated 21st day May 5815.\"\nOfficially, the Supreme Council, 33\u00b0, N.M.J. dates itself from May 15, 1867. This was the date of the \"Union of 1867\", when it merged with the competing Cerneau \"Supreme Council\" in New York. The current Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction of the United States, was thus formed.\nAlbert Pike.\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts on December 29, 1809, Albert Pike is asserted within the Southern Jurisdiction as the man most responsible for the growth and success of the Scottish Rite from an obscure Masonic Rite in the mid-19th century to the international fraternity that it became. Pike received the 4th through the 32nd Degrees in March 1853 from Albert Mackey, in Charleston, South Carolina, and was appointed Deputy Inspector for Arkansas that same year.\nIn 1857 Pike completed his first revision of the 4\u00b0-32\u00b0 ritual and printed 100 copies. This revision, which Mackey dubbed the \"Magnum Opus\", was never adopted by the Supreme Council. According to Arturo de Hoyos, 33\u00b0, the Scottish Rite's Grand Historian, the Magnum Opus became the basis for future ritual revisions.\nIn March 1858, Pike was elected a member of the Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, and in January 1859 he became its Grand Commander. The American Civil War interrupted his work on the Scottish Rite rituals. Around 1870, he, and the Supreme Council, moved to Washington, DC. In 1884 his revision of the rituals was complete.\nScottish Rite Grand Archivist and Grand Historian de Hoyos created the following chart of Pike's ritual revisions:\nPike also wrote lectures about all the degrees, which were published in 1871 under the title \"Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry\".\nGeneral organization and degree structure.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a rite comprising 33 degrees. The first three degrees are administered by \"blue lodges\" or \"symbolic lodges.\" They are called \"Blue degree\" and not \"Red degrees\". The Scottish rite is by far the most practiced rite worldwide. The next thirty degrees (from the 4th to the 33rd), the high or side degrees - a further development and complement to the first three - are administered by the \"Supreme Councils of the 33rd and final degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.\" However, the name can slightly vary depending on the jurisdictions.\nThere is no international governing body aside from Le Droit Humain, which is an international order; all of the other Supreme Councils in each country are sovereign unto themselves in their own jurisdictions. The thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite are conferred by several controlling bodies. The first of these is the Craft Blue Lodge, which confers the Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason degrees. Craft Blue lodges operate under the authority of national (or in the US, state) Grand Lodges, not the Supreme Council.\nThe highest degree is that of Master Mason. That is why the degrees with a number higher than the third must be considered as \u201cside\u201d degrees, (even when called High degrees), they are seen as degrees of instruction or improvement, and not as \u201chigher\u201d degrees, that is, implying a particular power that a Master Mason could claim to be above the others. The hierarchical structure of Freemasonry can be likened to a three-tiered edifice, with the third tier, the Master Mason, being the highest. Attaining this level grants a Freemason access to the corridors of the third tier, where he can delve deeper into his Masonic education and broaden his understanding of the craft. They represent a lateral movement in Masonic education rather than an upward movement and are degrees of instruction rather than rank.\nDegree progression in the Scottish Rite.\nInspired by the Solomonic Tradition and centered on the construction of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Scottish Rite closely combines the criterion of duration, as characteristic of the initiatory process, with the criterion of construction, which commits the adept to the path laid out by the Rite. Building oneself in the AASR system is seen as a long process which is accomplished on the path of truth, justice and wisdom.\nThis long and lengthy process to obtain the degrees can be found within the foundational documents of the AASR, the Constitution and Regulation of 1762, that is present on the altar of every Lodge in the Southern Jurisdiction. The foundational document proscribes the following minimum time allowed to receive the degrees: \"\"All these degrees, into which one can only be initiated in a mysterious number of months, to arrive at each degree in due succession, make the number, in all, of 81 months.\"\nThus, almost seven years was the minimum allowed time to obtain the 25 degrees, in the foundational document of the AASR.\nThe process cannot be a solitary, silent quest for self-fulfillment; the collective project must always prevail over individual pretensions in the AASR system.\nThe Motto of the Scottish Rite: Ordo ab Chao.\nThis motto is probably found for the first time in the patent of February 1, 1802 issued by the brother, Alexandre, Auguste comte De Grasse, marquis de Tilly.\nThe motto \"ordo ab chao\" implies the action of a principle of order, the chaos from which each of us comes symbolizing the suffering and disarray of the human spirit that precedes the path to a spiritual life of peace and brotherhood.\nIt is explained as denoting the mission as Masons is to bring order out of chaos. It becomes a source of hope for those in darkness, who aspire to the Light.\nThe Craft Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a full Masonic Rite and has its own distinctive versions of the Craft or Blue Lodge rituals which includes the Entered Apprentice, Fellow Craft, and Master Mason degrees. It is the most practiced Rite in the world thus most Master Masons are made thought the Scottish Rite system with the exception of the United States of America where most Lodges do not work the first three degrees in the Scottish Rite but rather join after the attainment of the third degree in their own systems.\nHowever, some U.S. Lodges do practice the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite blue degrees, and, in recent years, they have grown in number. There are 11 lodges in New Orleans (Historically all located in the district 16 they recently approved a new one district 20), 16 in New York City as well as Washington DC, Hawaii and California, that work in the Scottish Rite Craft degrees. \nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite blue degrees are more common in Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin-American jurisdictions. All lodges in the International Order of Freemasonry for Men &amp; Women, Le Droit Humain, work \"seamlessly from the first to the thirty-third degree and practice only the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. These two characteristics define it as an Order and not as an Obedience\". Most lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grande Loge de France use these degrees, as do a few of the lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grande Loge Nationale Fran\u00e7aise. It is also a dominant ritual, out of the other rituals in use, in the Grand Lodge of Spain. There are two Lodges in Australia that practice the AASR Craft degrees, The Zetland Lodge of Australia No. 9 and Lodge France 1021, both of which are under the United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory.\nAn hypothesis from Masonic historian Alain Bernheim, Belgian Masonic scholar Pierre No\u00ebl hypothesized in a 2002 paper that the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite Craft degrees might be derived from a French translation of the Masonic expos\u00e9 \"Three Distinct Knocks\", issued in London in 1760. But this theory is heavily debated among Masonic Scholars.\nDegree names.\nIn 2000, the Southern Jurisdiction in the United States completed a revision of its ritual scripts. The current ritual is based upon Pike's, but with some differences. Generally, the current titles of the degrees and their arrangement in the Southern Jurisdiction remains substantially unchanged since the time of Pike.\nIn 2004, the Northern Jurisdiction in the United States rewrote and reorganized its degrees. Further changes have occurred in 2006. During those two revisions, the names of 21 out of the 33 degrees were changed.\nThe list of degrees for the Supreme Councils of Australia, England and Wales, and most other jurisdictions largely agrees with that of the Southern Jurisdiction of the U.S. However, the list of degrees for the Northern Jurisdiction of the United States is now somewhat different and is given in the table below. The list of degrees of the Supreme Council of Canada reflects a mixture of the two, with some unique titles as well:\nExceptions, specificities, and disagreements.\nIn many jurisdictions, there are also specificities, generally minor but sometimes more significant. These mainly concern which degrees are actually practiced, with other degrees being transmitted through \"communication,\" following the common 18th-century practice, meaning that the ritual for the degree is not actually performed. Today, in some jurisdictions, it is common to have only the 4th, 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th performed by the Lodge of perfection (Green degrees),17th and 18th performed by the Chapters (Red degrees), 22nd, 26th, 28th and 30th on the Areopagus or (Black degrees) and the 31st, 32nd, 33rd degrees on a Consistory (White degree) level. Although some valleys or jurisdictions confers many more, while some other jurisdictions confer all of the degrees insisting on communicating none.\nMoreover, the U.S. and Canadian system progresses much more rapidly than in other countries, allowing one to reach the 32nd degree in a relatively short span, whereas in Europe and South America, such progression requires diligent practice over more than two decades. For this reason, several European and South American jurisdictions do not automatically recognize the high degrees received by their members during their stay in the United States and will sometime bar U.S. 32nd degree members from attending their meetings.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite by country.\nGeneral practices.\nIn most parts of the world the Scottish Rite is practiced as a full Rite, starting with the Blue Lodge degrees, under the jurisdiction of a Grand Lodge, then becomes an invitation only body for \"upper\" degrees divided in groups; the candidate must then wait a period of time after being made a Master Mason of three to five years depending on the jurisdiction (sometimes must be past-master), then may be honored with an invitation to the Green Lodges (4th\u201314th); if the brother shows diligence and hard work he may then become invited to the Red Lodges (15th\u201318th) and receive the degree; again after hard work and dedication he may be invited to the Black Lodges (19th\u201330th) and receive the degrees, then be invited to the White Lodges (31st\u201333rd). This process takes an average of 25 years to accomplish if the brother is invited to every group and only a very small fraction can make it all the way to 33rd degree. It is worth noting that in the United States of America, the Scottish Rite process is a lot different than the rest of the world and tend to be a lot faster (only a few days or weeks), and the Master Mason can petition to receive the upper degrees, although a new observant movement is developing, and the idea of forming an \"observant Valley\" that would take more time and be more selective is being explored to curb falling membership numbers.\nThe Droit Humain does not make a jurisdictional distinction between Blue degrees to upper degrees and holds an international jurisdiction over its Scottish Rite system.\nScottish Rite Masonic Calendar.\nThe Scottish Rite Masonic calendar celebrates the creation of the world (Anno Mundi), 3760/3761 years before the beginning of the Common Era (C.E.) and is based upon the older, Hebraic (Hebrew) calendar, which begins the civil year in September rather than the Gregorian calendar which begins the new year in January (current date +3760), thus after September of the current year, add 1 year more (date +3760 +1), as by example displayed in \"'The book of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry\"' (revised and enlarged edition, 1899, chapter: Hebrew Calendar, page 612), written by Charles T. Mcclenachan, 33\u00b0, Grand Master General of Ceremonies of the Supreme Council, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, U.S.A.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nGrowth and challenge in the 19th century.\nIn the aftermath of the ratification of Scottish Rite bodies, the Rite experienced steady growth in Austria during the late 1700s and early 1800s. However, anti-Masonic sentiments arose in the mid-19th century, as occurred in other European countries, constraining Masonic activity. The Catholic Church exerted political pressure on Masonic organizations, associating the Scottish Rite with anti-religious conspiracy theories. In 1894, these pressures resulted in the Emperor Franz Joseph officially suspending all Masonic lodges in Austria, forcing the Scottish Rite underground until 1918.\nResilience and reemergence in the 20th century.\nAfter the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Scottish Rite swiftly reestablished itself under the new Republic of German-Austria. Bick (2016) explains how the Scottish Rite provided a philosophical beacon during volatile social circumstances in the interwar period in Vienna and Austria in the early 20th century. Moreover, the Scottish Rite upheld ideals of religious unity, morality, and service as Austria rebuilt.\nWhile antisemitism and nationalism eventually permeated Austria in World War II, the Scottish Rite lodges centered humanism. After the war, the Supreme Council based in Vienna continued operating, despite Communist pressures in Eastern bloc countries. From the post-war period until present day, the Scottish Rite persevered as a bastion of moral enlightenment in Austria even given wider sociocultural trends.\nThe Austrian Scottish Rite in the 21st century.\nPresently, the Scottish Rite tradition remains intact in Austria with approximately 3,000 Freemasons participating in lodges across the country. The Supreme Council serves as an international representation of the Scottish Rite by upholding universal values articulated across 33 degrees of initiation. Through moral education and philanthropy, Austrian Scottish Rite bodies perpetuate esoteric knowledge to endorse peace, community improvement, and individual actualization.\nCurrent situation.\nAustria contends with persistent fragmentation within its Freemasonry landscape, hindering a revival of a tradition that once flourished. In Scandinavia, a distinct Masonic tradition prevails, setting it apart from the broader Scottish Rite family.\nFrance.\nHistory.\nWhen Comte de Grasse-Tilly returned to France in 1804, he worked to establish the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite there. He founded the first Supreme Council in France that same year.\nThe Grand Orient of France signed a treaty of union in December 1804 with the Supreme Council of the 33rd Degree in France; the treaty declared that \"the Grand Orient united to itself\" the Supreme Council in France. This accord was applied until 1814. Thanks to this treaty, the Grand Orient of France took ownership, as it were, of the Scottish Rite.\nFrom 1805 to 1814, the Grand Orient of France administered the first 18 degrees of the Rite, leaving the Supreme Council of France to administer the last 15. In 1815, five of the leaders of the Supreme Council founded the \"Supr\u00eame Conseil des Rites\" within the Grand Orient of France. The original Supreme Council of France fell dormant from 1815 to 1821.\nThe \"Supr\u00eame Conseil des Isles d'Am\u00e9rique\" (founded in 1802 by Grasse-Tilly and revived around 1810 by his father-in-law Delahogue, who had also returned from the United States) breathed new life into the Supreme Council for the 33rd Degree in France. They merged into a single organization: the Supreme Council of France. This developed as an independent and sovereign Masonic power. It created symbolic lodges (those composed of the first three degrees, which otherwise would be federated around a Grand Lodge or a Grand Orient).\nThe Supr\u00eame Conseil de France (emerging from the Supreme Council of 1804 and restored in 1821 by the Supreme Council of the \"Isles d'Am\u00e9rique\" founded in 1802 in Saint-Domingue, the modern Haiti)\nIn 1894, the Supreme Council of France created the Grand Lodge of France. It became fully independent in 1904, when the Supreme Council of France ceased chartering new lodges. The Supreme Council of France still considers itself the overseer of all 33 degrees of the Rite. Relations between the two structures remain close, as shown by their organizing two joint meetings a year.\nFrance has two additional Supreme Councils:\nThe distinction between the symbolic degrees (1st-3rd) and the high/side degrees (4th-33rd) has not always been as clearly defined as it is today, especially in France, where symbolic lodges practice the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite from the first degree onward. Nowadays, some of the rituals for certain high degrees still make reference to \"prerogatives\" dating back to their origins, predating the establishment of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.\nIn 2004, a noteworthy milestone was achieved when the AASR officially commemorated its establishment in France, marked by the founding of the Supreme Council under the leadership of de Grasse-Tilly. This momentous occasion marked the beginning of a developmental trajectory intricately linked with the activities of Masonic obediences in the country, resulting in a richly diverse and multifaceted network.\nThe year 2015 witnessed a pivotal commemoration, namely the AASR's historic alignment with the Grand Orient de France (GODF) in 1815. This event provided historians with a valuable opportunity to engage in a comprehensive and scholarly examination of the AASR's evolution in France, tracing its roots back to 1804. International symposiums, notably hosted by the Supreme Council and the Grand College of the REAA-GODF in cities such as Lyon and Paris, featured distinguished speakers who represented both the Southern Jurisdiction and the Supreme Council for France. These symposia were conceived with the overarching objective of transcending partisan debates and fostering a platform for erudite discourse within the Masonic community.\nBeyond France, this distinctive pattern is observed in Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Switzerland, where the AASR demonstrates relative vitality, albeit in proportionate terms.\nPractices.\nIn France and Belgium, depending on the jurisdictions, the degrees typically practiced and initiated include the 4th, 9th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 17th, 18th, 22nd, 26th, 28th, 30th, 31st, 32nd, and 33rd degrees. In some Belgian jurisdictions, initiation into the 5th and 29th degrees are also conducted. Differences in the number of degrees practiced exist from one jurisdiction and country to another. Generally, French jurisdictions practice fewer Areopagus degrees than Belgian jurisdictions and prioritize capitular degrees.\nIn present-day the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite has been growing rapidly in France, which prompted some changes to make it more difficult to be invited, in 2023, the G.N.L.F. changed the requirement from three years as a Master Mason to being a Past-Master to be invited into the Scottish Rite's upper degrees (4th onwards).\nIreland.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Rite for Ireland was established in Ireland in 1824 by the Southern Jurisdiction of the USA, following dramatic American expansion. Its Supreme Council operates from the Freemasons' Hall in Dublin, which also serves as the headquarters for the Grand Lodge of Ireland. In Ireland, membership of the Ancient and Accepted Rite is strictly by invitation only. Canvassing for, or requesting, membership results in automatic disqualification.\nA number of prominent Irish freemasons have served as Sovereign and Commander of the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Rite for Ireland, including Sir Charles Cameron and Gerald FitzGibbon.\nItaly.\nThe Scottish Rite in Italy dates to 1805.\nRomania.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite was established in Romania in 1881, a year after the National Grand Lodge of Romania was founded. On 27 December 1922, the Supreme Council of Scottish Rite of Romania, received the recognition of the Supreme Council of France in 1922, and recognition from the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction of the United States in 1925.\nBetween 1948 and 1989 all of Romanian Freemasonry, including the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Romania, was banned by the Communist regime.\nThe Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Romania was reconsecrated in 1993.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn England and Wales, whose Supreme Council was warranted by that of the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction of the USA (in 1845), the Rite is known colloquially as the \"Rose Croix\" although this is just one of the degrees. More formally, it is known as \"The Ancient and Accepted Rite for England and Wales and its Districts and Chapters Overseas\". In England and Wales, the adjective \"Scottish\" is generally left out, although in continental European jurisdictions, they retain the \"\u00c9cossais\".\nThere are 25,000 members of the Supreme Council out of the 160,000 members of the United Grand Lodge of England. England and Wales are divided into Districts, which administer the Rose Croix Chapters within their District. There are also some eighteen Districts overseas, as well as some 'unattached' Chapters in a further nine countries. All candidates for membership must have been Master masons for at least six months.\nMany degrees are conferred in name only, and degrees beyond the 18\u00b0 are conferred only by the Supreme Council itself. In England and Wales, the candidate is perfected in the 18th degree with the preceding degrees awarded in name only. Continuing to the 30th degree is restricted to those who have served in the chair of the Chapter. Degrees beyond the 30th are conferred only upon a very small number of individuals.\nIn Scotland, the 18th and 30th degree are practised. A minimum of a two-year interval is required before continuing to the 30th degree, again with the intervening degrees awarded by name only. Elevation beyond that is by invitation only, and numbers are severely restricted.\nThe Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is also practiced from the 1st to the 33rd degree by the British Federation of Le Droit Humain, and from the 1st to the 3rd degree by the all-male lodge The White Swan, No. 1348, of the Grande Loge de France in London, as well as by the mixed lodge Marco Polo of the Gran Loggia d'Italia.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the Supreme Council is called \"Supreme Council 33\u00b0 Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of Canada\" and was warranted in 1874 by that of England and Wales. Canada's Supreme Council office is located at 4 Queen Street South in Hamilton, Ontario. There are 45 local units or \"Valleys\" across Canada.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States of America there are five Supreme Councils: the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction, in Washington, D.C., the Supreme Council, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction in Lexington, Massachusetts, the Supreme Council of Louisiana, United Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Northern Jurisdiction, located in Philadelphia, and the United Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Southern Jurisdiction, located in Memphis, Tennessee. \nThey each have particular characteristics and degree structure that make them different. In the United States, members of the various Scottish Rite bodies can be elected to receive the 33\u00b0 by their respective Supreme Council which is conferred on members who have made major contributions to society or to Masonry in general. Only four of the Supreme Councils are seen as regular or legitimate freemasonry. The Supreme Council of Louisiana is branch of Freemasonry known as \"Cerneauism,\" which refers to its founder Joseph Cerneau, and is considered irregular by the other four Supreme Councils. The two United Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, were not seen as regular by the other two Supreme Councils for almost two centuries. This began to change in the mid-1900s and was officially ratified on September 7, 2022 with the Statement of Unity signed by all four Sovereign Grand Commanders.\nSupreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction.\nBased in Washington, D.C., the Southern Jurisdiction (often referred to as the \"Mother Supreme Council of the World\") was founded in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1801. It oversees the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite in 35 states, which are referred to as \"Orients\", which are divided into regions called \"Valleys\", each containing individual bodies.\nIn the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 33 members, called Active members, and is presided over by a Sovereign Grand Commander, and since 2019, Illustrious Brother James D. Cole, 33\u00b0. Other members of the Supreme Council are called \"Sovereign Grand Inspectors General\" (S.G.I.G.), and each is the head of the AASR bodies in his respective Orient (or state). Other heads of the various Orients who are not members of the Supreme Council are called \"Deputies of the Supreme Council.\" The Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction meets every odd year during the month of August at the House of the Temple, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters, in Washington, D.C. During this conference, the Valley of Washington D.C. confers the 33\u00b0 for those elected to receive it or others of the degree who desire to watch it. There are closed meetings between the Grand Commander and the S.G.I.G.s, and many members of the fraternity from all over the world attend the open ceremony on the 5th of 6 council meeting days.\nUnited Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Southern Jurisdiction.\nBased in Memphis, Tennessee, the United Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Southern Jurisdiction, oversees the states in the bottom half of the United States. African Americans were barred from the Southern and Northern Jurisdictions of the Scottish Rite and so formed their own organizations. Originally, there were five Supreme Councils, but they merged into two official United Supreme Councils in 1881. Currently, nine men serve as elected officers of the United Supreme Council with Illustrious Brother Corey D. Hawkins, Sr., 33\u00b0, serving as Sovereign Grand Commander.\nNorthern Jurisdiction.\nThe Lexington, Massachusetts-based Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, formed in 1813, and inactive from 1832 to 1845, oversees the bodies in fifteen states: Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Wisconsin and Vermont. The Northern Jurisdiction is only divided into \"Valleys\", not Orients. Each Valley has up to four Scottish Rite bodies, and each body confers a set of degrees.\nIn the Northern Jurisdiction, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 66 members, led by the Sovereign Grand Commander, currently Ill. Walter F. Wheeler, 33\u00b0, who was elected to the position in 2023. Those who are elected to membership on the Supreme Council are then designated \"Active.\" In the Northern Jurisdiction all recipients of the 33rd Degree are honorary members of the Supreme Council, and all members are referred to as a \"Sovereign Grand Inspectors General.\" The head of the Rite in each State of the Northern Jurisdiction is called a \"Deputy of the Supreme Council.\" Thus, the highest-ranking Scottish Rite officer in Ohio, is titled, \"Deputy for Ohio\", and so forth for each state. Additionally, each Deputy has one or more \"Actives\" to assist him in the administration of the state. Active members of the Supreme Council who have served faithfully for ten years, or reach the age of 75, may be designated \"Active, Emeritus\". The Northern Jurisdiction Supreme Council meets yearly, in the even years by an executive session, and in the odd years, with the full membership invited. The 33rd Degree is conferred on the odd years at the Annual Meeting.\nIn the Northern Jurisdiction, there is a 46-month requirement for eligibility to receive the 33rd degree, and while there is a Meritorious Service Award (as well as a Distinguished Service Award), they are not required intermediate steps towards the 33\u00b0.\nUnited Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Northern Jurisdiction.\nBased in Philadelphia, the United Supreme Council, Prince Hall Affiliation, Northern Jurisdiction, oversees the states in the top half of the United States. In the 1800s and early 1900s, African Americans were barred from the Southern and Northern Jurisdictions of the Scottish Rite and so formed their own organizations. Originally, there were five Supreme Councils, but they merged into two official United Supreme Councils in 1881. Currently, there are seven elected officers of the United Supreme Council with Illustrious Brother, Melvin J. Blazemore, 33\u00b0, serving as Sovereign Grand Commander.\nSupreme Council of Louisiana.\nThe Supreme Council of Louisiana was founded in New Orleans in 1839 in the aftermath of the Morgan Affair. During this time, the Northern Jurisdiction consisted of John James Joseph Gourgas and Giles Fonda Yates who were \"effectively a Supreme Council of two people.\" Likewise, the Grand Commander of the Southern Jurisdiction, Moses Holbrook longed to \"relinquish his responsibilities as Sovereign Grand Commander\" moving to the rural frontier of Florida to serve as a doctor.\nIt was during this period that the Supreme Council of Louisiana emerged, which claimed its authority via \"Cerneauism\" \u2013 a type of Scottish Rite Masonry without ties to the either the Northern or Southern Jurisdictions. After the Civil War, the Grand Orient of France recognized the Supreme Council of Louisiana.New Orleans educator and Civil Rights activist George Longe was the head of this council for nearly five decades, from 1938 to 1985. Under his watch the Supreme Council of Louisiana tripled in size and expanded to other states. His papers are held at the Amistad Research Center of Tulane University. As of 2023, the Most Powerful Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of Louisiana is Ill. Bro. Eddie L. Gabriel Sr. 33\u00b0.\nCriticism of the American System.\nTraditionally, in most international jurisdictions, the Scottish Rite degrees are conferred gradually over many years, with candidates being individually invited to progress based on their demonstrated understanding and mastery of each degree's teachings.\nThe original constitutions of the Scottish Rite, which formed the basis for both the Northern and Southern Jurisdictions in the United States, prescribed a minimum interval between degrees and required approximately 81 months (seven years) to complete the original 25 degrees. However, many U.S. jurisdictions now confer degrees from the 4th to the 32nd in concentrated one or two-day sessions. Some international jurisdictions reportedly decline to recognize American Scottish Rite Masons in their upper bodies, citing concerns about adequate mastery of the degree material.\nIn response to these criticisms and as an attempt to save the U.S. Scottish Rite from disappearing, some American Scottish Rite Masons have advocated for a return to more traditional, observant practices aligned with international standards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28279", "revid": "49823109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28279", "title": "Sandman (disambiguation)", "text": "The Sandman is a figure in folklore who brings good sleep and dreams.\nSandman may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28281", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28281", "title": "St Louis Cardinals", "text": ""}
{"id": "28284", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28284", "title": "Switch", "text": "Electrical component that can break an electrical circuit\nIn electrical engineering, a switch is an electrical component that can disconnect or connect the conducting path in an electrical circuit, interrupting the electric current or diverting it from one conductor to another. The most common type of switch is an electromechanical device consisting of one or more sets of movable electrical contacts connected to external circuits. When a pair of contacts is touching current can pass between them, while when the contacts are separated no current can flow.\nSwitches are made in many different configurations; they may have multiple sets of contacts controlled by the same knob or actuator, and the contacts may operate simultaneously, sequentially, or alternately. A switch may be operated manually, for example, a light switch or a keyboard button, or may function as a sensing element to sense the position of a machine part, liquid level, pressure, or temperature, such as a thermostat. Many specialized forms exist, such as the toggle switch, rotary switch, mercury switch, push-button switch, reversing switch, relay, and circuit breaker. A common use is control of lighting, where multiple switches may be wired into one circuit to allow convenient control of light fixtures. Switches in high-powered circuits must have special construction to prevent destructive arcing when they are opened.\nDescription.\nThe most familiar form of switch is a manually operated electromechanical device with one or more sets of electrical contacts, which are connected to external circuits. Each set of contacts can be in one of two states: either \"closed\" meaning the contacts are touching and electricity can flow between them, or \"open\", meaning the contacts are separated and the switch is nonconducting. The mechanism actuating the transition between these two states (open or closed) is usually (there are other types of actions) either an \"alternate action\" (flip the switch for continuous \"on\" or \"off\") or \"momentary\" (push for \"on\" and release for \"off\") type.\nA switch may be directly manipulated by a human as a control signal to a system, such as a computer keyboard button, or to control power flow in a circuit, such as a light switch. Automatically operated switches can be used to control the motions of machines, for example, to indicate that a garage door has reached its full open position or that a machine tool is in a position to accept another workpiece. Switches may be operated by process variables such as pressure, temperature, flow, current, voltage, and force, acting as sensors in a process and used to automatically control a system. For example, a thermostat is a temperature-operated switch used to control a heating process. A switch that is operated by another electrical circuit is called a relay. Large switches may be remotely operated by a motor drive mechanism. Some switches are used to isolate electric power from a system, providing a visible point of isolation that can be padlocked if necessary to prevent accidental operation of a machine during maintenance, or to prevent electric shock.\nAn ideal switch would have no voltage drop when closed, and would have no limits on voltage or current rating. It would have zero rise time and fall time during state changes, and would change state without \"bouncing\" between on and off positions.\nPractical switches fall short of this ideal; as the result of roughness and oxide films, they exhibit contact resistance, limits on the current and voltage they can handle, finite switching time, etc. The ideal switch is often used in circuit analysis as it greatly simplifies the system of equations to be solved, but this can lead to a less accurate solution. Theoretical treatment of the effects of non-ideal properties is required in the design of large networks of switches, as for example used in telephone exchanges.\nContacts.\nIn the simplest case, a switch has two conductive pieces, often metal, called \"contacts\", connected to an external circuit, that touch to complete (make) the circuit, and separate to open (break) the circuit. The contact material is chosen for its resistance to corrosion, because most metals form insulating oxides that would prevent the switch from working. Contact materials are also chosen on the basis of electrical conductivity, hardness (resistance to abrasive wear), mechanical strength, low cost and low toxicity. The formation of oxide layers at contact surface, as well as surface roughness and contact pressure, determine the contact resistance, and wetting current of a mechanical switch. Sometimes the contacts are plated with noble metals, for their excellent conductivity and resistance to corrosion. They may be designed to wipe against each other to clean off any contamination. Nonmetallic conductors, such as conductive plastic, are sometimes used. To prevent the formation of insulating oxides, a minimum wetting current may be specified for a given switch design.\nContact terminology.\nIn electronics, switches are classified according to the arrangement of their contacts. A pair of contacts is said to be \"\"closed\" when current can flow from one to the other. When the contacts are separated by an insulating air gap, they are said to be \"open\", and no current can flow between them at normal voltages. The terms \"make\" for closure of contacts and \"break\" for opening of contacts are also widely used.\nThe terms pole and throw are also used to describe switch contact variations. The number of \"poles\" is the number of electrically separate switches which are controlled by a single physical actuator. For example, a \"2-pole\" switch has two separate, parallel sets of contacts that open and close in unison via the same mechanism. The number of \"throws\"\" is the number of separate wiring path choices other than \"open\" that the switch can adopt for each pole. A single-throw switch has one pair of contacts that can either be closed or open. A double-throw switch has a contact that can be connected to either of two other contacts, a triple-throw has a contact which can be connected to one of three other contacts, etc.\nIn a switch where the contacts remain in one state unless actuated, such as a push-button switch, the contacts can either be normally open (abbreviated \"n.o.\" or \"no\" or NO) until closed by operation of the switch, or normally closed (\"n.c.\" or \"nc\" or NC) and opened by the switch action. A switch with both types of contact is called a \"changeover switch\" or \"double-throw switch\". These may be \"make-before-break\" (\"MBB\" or shorting) which momentarily connects both circuits, or may be \"break-before-make\" (\"BBM\" or non-shorting) which interrupts one circuit before closing the other.\nThese terms have given rise to abbreviations for the types of switch which are used in the electronics industry such as \"single-pole, single-throw\" (SPST) (the simplest type, \"on or off\") or \"single-pole, double-throw\" (SPDT), connecting either of two terminals to the common terminal. In electrical power wiring (i.e.,\u00a0house and building wiring by electricians), names generally involve the suffix \"-way\"; however, these terms differ between British English and American English (i.e., the terms \"two\u00a0way\" and \"three\u00a0way\" are used with different meanings).\nSwitches with larger numbers of poles or throws can be described by replacing the \"S\" or \"D\" with a number (e.g. 3PST, SP4T, etc.) or in some cases the letter \"T\" (for \"triple\") or \"Q\" (for \"quadruple\"). In the rest of this article the terms \"SPST\", \"SPDT\" and \"intermediate\" will be used to avoid the ambiguity.\nContact bounce.\nBounce.\nContact bounce (also called \"chatter\") is a common problem with mechanical switches, relays and battery contacts, which arises as the result of electrical contact resistance (ECR) phenomena at interfaces. Switch and relay contacts are usually made of springy metals. When the contacts strike together, their momentum and elasticity act together to cause them to bounce apart one or more times before making steady contact. The result is a rapidly pulsed electric current instead of a clean transition from zero to full current. The effect is usually unimportant in power circuits, but causes problems in some analogue and logic circuits that respond fast enough to misinterpret the on\u2011off pulses as a data stream. In the design of micro-contacts, controlling surface structure (surface roughness) and minimizing the formation of passivated layers on metallic surfaces are instrumental in inhibiting chatter.\nIn the Hammond organ, multiple wires are pressed together under the piano keys of the manuals. Their bouncing and non-synchronous closing of the switches is known as \"Hammond Click\" and compositions exist that use and emphasize this feature. Some electronic organs have a switchable replica of this sound effect.\nDebouncing.\nThe effects of contact bounce can be eliminated by:\nAll of these methods are referred to as 'debouncing'.\nArcs and quenching.\nWhen the power being switched is sufficiently large, the electron flow across opening switch contacts is sufficient to ionize the air molecules across the tiny gap between the contacts as the switch is opened, forming a gas plasma, also known as an electric arc. The plasma is of low resistance and is able to sustain power flow, even with the separation distance between the switch contacts steadily increasing. The plasma is also very hot and is capable of eroding the metal surfaces of the switch contacts (the same true for vacuum switches). Electric current arcing causes significant degradation of the contacts and also significant electromagnetic interference (EMI), requiring the use of arc suppression methods.\nWhere the voltage is sufficiently high, an arc can also form as the switch is closed and the contacts approach. If the voltage potential is sufficient to exceed the breakdown voltage of the air separating the contacts, an arc forms which is sustained until the switch closes completely and the switch surfaces make contact.\nIn either case, the standard method for minimizing arc formation and preventing contact damage is to use a fast-moving switch mechanism, typically using a spring-operated tipping-point mechanism to assure quick motion of switch contacts, regardless of the speed at which the switch control is operated by the user. Movement of the switch control lever applies tension to a spring until a tipping point is reached, and the contacts suddenly snap open or closed as the spring tension is released.\nAs the power being switched increases, other methods are used to minimize or prevent arc formation. A plasma is hot and will rise due to convection air currents. The arc can be quenched with a series of non-conductive blades spanning the distance between switch contacts, and as the arc rises, its length increases as it forms ridges rising into the spaces between the blades, until the arc is too long to stay sustained and is extinguished. A \"puffer\" may be used to blow a sudden high velocity burst of gas across the switch contacts, which rapidly extends the length of the arc to extinguish it quickly.\nExtremely large switches often have switch contacts surrounded by something other than air to more rapidly extinguish the arc. For example, the switch contacts may operate in a vacuum, immersed in mineral oil, or in sulfur hexafluoride.\nIn AC power service, the current periodically passes through zero; this effect makes it harder to sustain an arc on opening. Manufacturers may rate switches with lower voltage or current rating when used in DC\u00a0circuits.\nPower switching.\nWhen a switch is designed to switch significant power, the transitional state of the switch as well as the ability to withstand continuous operating currents must be considered. When a switch is in the on state, its resistance is near zero and very little power is dropped in the contacts; when a switch is in the off state, its resistance is extremely high and even less power is dropped in the contacts. However, when the switch is flicked, the resistance must pass through a state where a quarter of the load's rated power (or worse if the load is not purely resistive) is briefly dropped in the switch.\nFor this reason, power switches intended to interrupt a load current have spring mechanisms to make sure the transition between on and off is as short as possible regardless of the speed at which the user moves the rocker.\nPower switches usually come in two types. A momentary on\u2011off switch (such as on a laser pointer) usually takes the form of a button and only closes the circuit when the button is depressed. A regular on\u2011off switch (such as on a flashlight) has a constant on-off feature. Dual-action switches incorporate both of these features.\nInductive loads.\nWhen a strongly inductive load such as an electric motor is switched off, the current cannot drop instantaneously to zero; a spark will jump across the opening contacts. Switches for inductive loads must be rated to handle these cases. The spark will cause electromagnetic interference if not suppressed; a snubber network of a resistor and capacitor in series will quell the spark.\nIncandescent loads.\nWhen turned on, an incandescent lamp draws a large inrush current of about ten times the steady-state current; as the filament heats up, its resistance rises and the current decreases to a steady-state value. A switch designed for an incandescent lamp load can withstand this inrush current.\nWetting current.\n\"Wetting current\" is the minimum current needing to flow through a mechanical switch while it is operated to break through any film of oxidation that may have been deposited on the switch contacts. The film of oxidation occurs often in areas with high humidity. Providing a sufficient amount of wetting current is a crucial step in designing systems that use delicate switches with small contact pressure as sensor inputs. Failing to do this might result in switches remaining electrically \"open\" due to contact oxidation.\nActuator.\nThe moving part that applies the operating force to the contacts is called the \"actuator\", and may be a toggle or \"dolly\", a rocker, a push-button or any type of mechanical linkage \"(see photo).\"\nBiased switches.\nA switch normally maintains its set position once operated. A biased switch contains a mechanism that springs it into another position when released by an operator. The momentary push-button switch is a type of biased switch. The most common type is a \"push-to-make\" (or normally-open or NO) switch, which makes contact when the button is pressed and breaks when the button is released. Each key of a computer keyboard, for example, is a normally-open \"push-to-make\" switch. A \"push-to-break\" (or normally closed or NC) switch, on the other hand, breaks contact when the button is pressed and makes contact when it is released. An example of a push-to-break switch is a button used to release a door held closed by an electromagnet. The interior lamp of a household refrigerator is controlled by a switch that is held open when the door is closed.\nRotary switch.\nA rotary switch operates with a twisting motion of the operating handle with at least two positions. One or more positions of the switch may be momentary (biased with a spring), requiring the operator to hold the switch in the position. Other positions may have a detent to hold the position when released. A rotary switch may have multiple levels or \"decks\" in order to allow it to control multiple circuits.\nOne form of rotary switch consists of a spindle or \"rotor\" that has a contact arm or \"spoke\" which projects from its surface like a cam. It has an array of terminals, arranged in a circle around the rotor, each of which serves as a contact for the \"spoke\" through which any one of a number of different electrical circuits can be connected to the rotor. The switch is layered to allow the use of multiple poles, each layer is equivalent to one pole. Usually such a switch has a detent mechanism so it \"clicks\" from one active position to another rather than stalls in an intermediate position. Thus a rotary switch provides greater pole and throw capabilities than simpler switches do.\nOther types use a cam mechanism to operate multiple independent sets of contacts.\nRotary switches were used as channel selectors on television receivers until the early 1970s, as range selectors on electrical metering equipment, as band selectors on multi-band radios and other similar purposes. In industry, rotary switches are used for control of measuring instruments, switchgear, or in control circuits. For example, a radio controlled overhead crane may have a large multi-circuit rotary switch to transfer hard-wired control signals from the local manual controls in the cab to the outputs of the remote control receiver.\nToggle switch.\nA toggle switch or tumbler switch is a class of electrical switches that are manually actuated by a mechanical lever, handle, or rocking mechanism.\nToggle switches are available in many different styles and sizes, and are used in numerous applications. Many are designed to provide the simultaneous actuation of multiple sets of electrical contacts, or the control of large amounts of electric current or mains voltages.\nThe word \"toggle\" is a reference to a kind of mechanism or joint consisting of two arms, which are almost in line with each other, connected with an elbow-like pivot. However, the phrase \"toggle switch\" is applied to a switch with a short handle and a positive snap-action, whether it actually contains a toggle mechanism or not. Similarly, a switch where a definitive click is heard, is called a \"positive on-off switch\". A very common use of this type of switch is to switch lights or other electrical equipment on or off. Multiple toggle switches may be mechanically interlocked to prevent forbidden combinations.\nIn some contexts, particularly computing, a toggle switch, or the action of toggling, is understood in the different sense of a mechanical or software switch that alternates between two states each time it is activated, regardless of mechanical construction. For example, the caps lock key on a computer causes all letters to be generated in capitals after it is pressed once; pressing it again reverts to lower-case letters.\nSpecial types.\nSwitches can be designed to respond to any type of mechanical stimulus: for example, vibration (the trembler switch), tilt, air pressure, fluid level (a float switch), the turning of a key (key switch), linear or rotary movement (a limit switch or microswitch), or presence of a magnetic field (the reed switch). Many switches are operated automatically by changes in some environmental condition or by motion of machinery. A limit switch is used, for example, in machine tools to interlock operation with the proper position of tools. In heating or cooling systems a sail switch ensures that air flow is adequate in a duct. Pressure switches respond to fluid pressure.\nMercury tilt switch.\nThe mercury switch consists of a drop of mercury inside a glass bulb with two or more contacts. The two contacts pass through the glass, and are connected by the mercury when the bulb is tilted to make the mercury roll on to them.\nThis type of switch performs much better than the ball tilt switch, as the liquid metal connection is unaffected by dirt, debris and oxidation, it wets the contacts ensuring a very low resistance bounce-free connection, and movement and vibration do not produce a poor contact. These types can be used for precision works.\nIt can also be used where arcing is dangerous (such as in the presence of explosive vapour) as the entire unit is sealed.\nKnife switch.\nKnife switches consist of a flat metal blade, hinged at one end, with an insulating handle for operation, and a fixed contact. When the switch is closed, current flows through the hinged pivot and blade and through the fixed contact. Such switches are usually not enclosed. The knife and contacts are typically formed of copper, steel, or brass, depending on the application. Fixed contacts may be backed up with a spring. Several parallel blades can be operated at the same time by one handle. The parts may be mounted on an insulating base with terminals for wiring, or may be directly bolted to an insulated switch board in a large assembly. Since the electrical contacts are exposed, the switch is used only where people cannot accidentally come in contact with the switch or where the voltage is so low as to not present a hazard.\nKnife switches are made in many sizes from miniature switches to large devices used to carry thousands of amperes. In electrical transmission and distribution, gang-operated switches are used in circuits up to the highest voltages.\nThe disadvantages of the knife switch are the slow opening speed and the proximity of the operator to exposed live parts. Metal-enclosed safety disconnect switches are used for isolation of circuits in industrial power distribution. Sometimes spring-loaded auxiliary blades are fitted which momentarily carry the full current during opening, then quickly part to rapidly extinguish the arc.\nReversing switch.\nA DPDT switch has six connections, but since polarity reversal is a very common usage of DPDT switches, some variations of the DPDT switch are internally wired specifically for polarity reversal. These crossover switches only have four terminals rather than six. Two of the terminals are inputs and two are outputs. When connected to a battery or other DC source, the 4-way switch selects from either normal or reversed polarity. Such switches can also be used as intermediate switches in a multiway switching system for control of lamps by more than two switches. \nSlide switches.\nSlide switches are mechanical switches using a slider that moves (slides) from the open (off) position to the closed (on) position.\nElectronic switches.\nThe term \"switch\" has since spread to a variety of solid state electronics that perform a switching function, but which are controlled electronically by active devices rather than purely mechanically. These are categorized in the article electronic switch. Electromechanical switches (such as the traditional relay, electromechanical crossbar, and Strowger switch) bridge the categorization.\nOther switches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28285", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28285", "title": "Stable sort", "text": ""}
{"id": "28287", "revid": "1309888170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28287", "title": "Sutra", "text": "Text in Hinduism, Buddhism or Jainism, often a collection of aphorisms\nSutra () in Indian literary traditions refers to an aphorism or a collection of aphorisms in the form of a manual or, more broadly, a condensed manual or text. Sutras are a genre of ancient and medieval Indian texts found in Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism.\nIn Hinduism, sutras are a distinct type of literary composition, a compilation of short aphoristic statements. Each sutra is any short rule, like a theorem distilled into few words or syllables, around which teachings of ritual, philosophy, grammar, or any field of knowledge can be woven. The oldest sutras of Hinduism are found in the Brahmana and Aranyaka layers of the Vedas. Every school of Hindu philosophy, Vedic guides for rites of passage, various fields of arts, law, and social ethics developed respective sutras, which help teach and transmit ideas from one generation to the next.\nIn Buddhism, sutras, also known as \"suttas\", are canonical scriptures, many of which are regarded as records of the oral teachings of Gautama Buddha. They are not aphoristic, but are quite detailed, sometimes with repetition. This may reflect a derivation from Vedic or Sanskrit \"s\u016bkta\" (well spoken), rather than from \"s\u016btra\" (thread).\nIn Jainism, sutras, also known as \"suyas\", are canonical sermons of Mahavira contained in the Jain Agamas as well as some later (post-canonical) normative texts.\nEtymology.\nThe Sanskrit word \"S\u016btra\" (Sanskrit: \u0938\u0942\u0924\u094d\u0930, Pali: \"sutta\", Ardha Magadhi: \"s\u016bya\") means \"string, thread\". The root of the word is \"siv\", \"that which sews and holds things together\". The word is related to \"s\u016bci\" (Sanskrit: \u0938\u0942\u091a\u093f) meaning \"needle, list\", and \"s\u016bn\u0101\" (Sanskrit: \u0938\u0942\u0928\u093e) meaning \"woven\".\nIn the context of literature, \"s\u016btra\" means a distilled collection of syllables and words, any form or manual of \"aphorism, rule, direction\" hanging together like threads with which the teachings of ritual, philosophy, grammar, or any field of knowledge can be woven.\nA \"s\u016btra\" is any short rule, states Moriz Winternitz, in Indian literature; it is \"a theorem condensed in few words\". A collection of \"s\u016btras\" becomes a text, and this is also called \"s\u016btra\" (often capitalized in Western literature).\nA \"s\u016btra\" is different from other components such as \"Shlokas\", \"Anuvyakhayas\" and \"Vyakhyas\" found in ancient Indian literature. A \"s\u016btra\" is a condensed rule which succinctly states the message, while a \"Shloka\" is a verse that conveys the complete message and is structured to certain rules of musical meter, an \"Anuvyakhaya\" is an explanation of the reviewed text, while a \"Vyakhya\" is a comment by the reviewer.\nHistory.\nSutras first appear in the Brahmana and Aranyaka layer of Vedic literature. They grow in number in the Vedangas, such as the Shrauta Sutras and Kalpa Sutras. These were designed so that they can be easily communicated from a teacher to student, memorized by the recipient for discussion or self-study or as reference.\nA sutra by itself is condensed shorthand, and the threads of syllable are difficult to decipher or understand without associated scholarly Bhasya or deciphering commentary that fills in the \"weft\".\nThe oldest manuscripts that have survived into the modern era that contain extensive sutras are part of the Vedas, dated from the late 2nd millennium BCE through to the mid 1st millennium BCE. The Aitareya Aranyaka, for example, states Winternitz, is primarily a collection of \"sutras\". Their use and ancient roots are attested by sutras being mentioned in larger genre of ancient non-Vedic Hindu literature called \"Gatha\", \"Narashansi\", \"Itihasa\", and \"Akhyana\" (songs, legends, epics, and stories).\nIn the history of Indian literature, large compilations of sutras, in diverse fields of knowledge, have been traced to the period from 600 BCE to 200 BCE (mostly after Buddha and Mahavira), and this has been called the \"sutras period\". This period followed the more ancient \"Chhandas period\", \"Mantra period\" and \"Brahmana period\".\nHinduism.\nSome of the earliest surviving specimens of \"sutras\" of Hinduism are found in the \"Anupada Sutras\" and \"Nidana Sutras\". The former distills the epistemic debate whether Sruti or Smriti or neither must be considered the more reliable source of knowledge, while the latter distills the rules of musical meters for Samaveda chants and songs.\nA larger collection of ancient sutra literature in Hinduism corresponds to the six Vedangas, or six limbs of the Vedas. These are six subjects that said in the Vedas to be necessary for complete mastery of the Vedas. The six subjects with their own \"sutras\" were \"pronunciation (Shiksha), meter (Chandas), grammar (Vyakarana), explanation of words (Nirukta), time keeping through astronomy (Jyotisha), and ceremonial rituals (Kalpa). The first two, states Max Muller, were considered in the Vedic era to be necessary for reading the Veda, the second two for understanding it, and the last two for deploying the Vedic knowledge at yajnas (fire rituals). The \"sutras\" corresponding to these are embedded inside the Brahmana and Aranyaka layers of the Vedas. Taittiriya Aranyaka, for example in Book 7, embeds sutras for accurate pronunciation after the terse phrases \"On Letters\", \"On Accents\", \"On Quantity\", \"On Delivery\", and \"On Euphonic Laws\".\nThe fourth and often the last layer of philosophical, speculative text in the Vedas, the Upanishads, too have embedded sutras such as those found in the Taittiriya Upanishad.\nThe compendium of ancient Vedic sutra literature that has survived, in full or fragments, includes the Kalpa Sutras, Shulba Sutras, Srauta Sutras, Dharma Sutras, Grhya Sutras, and Smarta traditions . Other fields for which ancient sutras are known include etymology, phonetics, and grammar.\nPost-vedic sutras.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExample of sutras from Vedanta Sutra&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\u0905\u0925\u093e\u0924\u094b \u092c\u094d\u0930\u0939\u094d\u092e\u091c\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0938\u093e \u0965\u0967.\u0967.\u0967\u0965\n\u091c\u0928\u094d\u092e\u093e\u0926\u094d\u092f\u0938\u094d\u092f \u092f\u0924\u0903 \u0965 \u0967.\u0967.\u0968\u0965\n\u0936\u093e\u0938\u094d\u0924\u094d\u0930\u092f\u094b\u0928\u093f\u0924\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0924\u094d \u0965 \u0967.\u0967.\u0969\u0965\n\u0924\u0924\u094d\u0924\u0941\u0938\u092e\u0928\u094d\u0935\u092f\u093e\u0924\u094d \u0965 \u0967.\u0967.\u096a\u0965\n\u0908\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0924\u0947\u0930\u094d\u0928\u093e\u0936\u092c\u094d\u0926\u092e\u094d \u0965 \u0967.\u0967.\u096b\u0965\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 Brahma Sutra 1.1.1\u20131.1.5\nSome examples of sutra texts in various schools of Hindu philosophy include\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \n&lt;poem&gt;\nSutra, without commentary:\nSoul is, for there is no proof that it is not. (Sutra 1, Book 6) This different from body, because of heterogeneousness. (Sutra 2, Book 6) Also because it is expressed by means of the sixth case. (Sutra 3, Book 6)\nWith Vijnanabhiksu's commentary bhasya filled in:\nSoul is, for there is no proof that it is not, since we are aware of \"I think\", because there is no evidence to defeat this. Therefore all that is to be done is to discriminate it from things in general. (Sutra 1, Book 6) This soul is different from the body because of heterogeneousness or complete difference between the two. (Sutra 2, Book 6) Also because it, the Soul, is expressed by means of the sixth case, for the learned express it by the possessive case in such examples as 'this is my body', 'this my understanding'; for the possessive case would be unaccountable if there were absolute non-difference, between the body or the like, and the Soul to which it is thus attributed as a possession. (Sutra 3, Book 6)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2013 Kapila in \"Samkhya Sutra\"\n , Translated by James Robert Ballantyne\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nReality is truth (\"pr\u0101ma\", foundation of correct knowledge), and what is true is so, irrespective of whether we know it is, or are aware of that truth.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2013 Ak\u1e63apada Gautama in \"Nyaya Sutra\"\n , Translated by Jeaneane D Fowler\nBuddhism.\nIn Buddhism, a \"sutta\" or \"sutra\" constitutes a segment of the canonical literature. These early Buddhist sutras, unlike Hindu texts, are not aphoristic; rather, they tend to be quite lengthy. The Buddhist term \"sutta\" or \"sutra\" likely derives from Sanskrit \"s\u016bkta\" (\"su\" + \"ukta\"), meaning \"well spoken,\" reflecting the belief that \"all that was spoken by the Lord Buddha was well-spoken\". They embody the essence of sermons conveying \"well-spoken\" wisdom, akin to the Jain sutras.\nIn Chinese, these are known as \u7d93 (pinyin: \"j\u012bng\"). These teachings are organized as part of the Tripi\u1e6daka, specifically referred to as the \"Sutta Pitaka\". Numerous significant or influential Mahayana texts, such as the \"Platform Sutra\" and the \"Lotus Sutra\", are termed sutras despite being attributed to much later authors.\nIn Theravada Buddhism, suttas constitute the second \"basket\" (pitaka) of the P\u0101li Canon. Rewata Dhamma and Bhikkhu Bodhi describe the Sutta Pitaka as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Sutta Pitaka, the second collection, brings together the Buddha's discourses spoken by him on various occasions during his active ministry of forty-five years.\nJainism.\nIn the Jain tradition, sutras are an important genre of \"fixed text\", which used to be memorized.\nThe Kalpa S\u016btra is, for example, a Jain text that includes monastic rules, as well as biographies of the Jain Tirthankaras. Many sutras discuss all aspects of ascetic and lay life in Jainism. Various ancient sutras particularly from the early 1st millennium CE, for example, recommend devotional bhakti as an essential Jain practice.\nThe surviving scriptures of Jaina tradition, such as the Acaranga Sutra (Agamas), exist in sutra format, as is the Tattvartha Sutra, a Sanskrit text accepted by all four Jainism sects as the most authoritative philosophical text that completely summarizes the foundations of Jainism.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28288", "revid": "169132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28288", "title": "Samurai", "text": "Japanese warrior class\n were members of the warrior class who served as retainers to lords in Japan prior to the Meiji era. Samurai existed from the late 12th century until their abolition in the late 1870s during the Meiji era. They were originally provincial warriors who served the Kuge and imperial court in the late 12th century.\nIn 1853, the United States forced Japan to open its borders to foreign trade under the threat of military action. Fearing an eventual invasion, the Japanese abandoned feudalism for capitalism so that they could industrialize and build a modern army. The adoption of modern firearms rendered the traditional weapons of the samurai obsolete, and as firearms are easy enough for peasant conscripts to learn, Japan had no more need for a specialized warrior caste. By 1876 the special rights and privileges of the samurai had all been abolished.\nTerminology.\nThe proper Japanese term for a warrior is and the word meant \"warrior family\". \"Bushi\" was not applied to just any kind of fighter. For those who called themselves \"bushi\", war was their way of life and often a family tradition, as opposed to conscripts or militia. It was also a term for elite warriors, particularly those who fought on horseback as cavalry was the backbone of Japanese armies. During the early Edo period, a warrior was only considered a member of the \"bushi\" class if he was a public servant, which among other things entitled him to a stipend.\nIn the Japanese language, the word \"samurai\" was colloquial and its meaning varied over the centuries. The word \"samurai\" originally referred to domestic servants and did not have military connotations. As the term gained military connotations in the 12th century, it referred to landless footsoldiers who served the \"gokenin\". The \"gokenin\" were warrior vassals to the shogun. According to Michael Wert, \"a warrior of elite stature in pre-seventeenth-century Japan would have been insulted to be called a samurai\". According to Morillo, during the Sengoku period, the term \"marks social function and not class, It means a retainer of a lord - usually, in the sixteenth century, the retainer of a daimyo\", and was used to refer to \"all sorts of soldiers, including pikemen, bowmen, musketeers and horsemen\". In the Tokugawa period, the terms were roughly interchangeable, as the military class was legally limited to the retainers of the shogun or daimyo. However, strictly speaking samurai referred to higher ranking retainers, although the cutoff between samurai and other military retainers varied from domain to domain. Also usage varied by class, with commoners referring to all sword carrying men as samurai, regardless of rank.\nHistory.\nRise of the warrior clans (700 - 1180 AD).\nAt the start of the 8th century AD, Japan's government was highly centralized at the imperial court, whose bureaucracy was inspired by T'ang dynasty China. All land at first belonged to the emperor, i.e. in the public domain (\"kokugary\u014d\"), but in the middle of the 8th century, the government instituted a major reform which allowed individuals to claim private ownership of new farmland that they had reclaimed from the wilderness. This spurred wealthy people to start reclaiming farmland, which was necessary to feed Japan's growing population. During the 11th and 12th centuries, samurai became conspicuously involved in land reclamation, thereby becoming a landowning class.\nTaxation during the 8th century was high but temples, monasteries, shrines, and certain aristocrats obtained tax exemptions through their connections to the imperial court. To evade taxes, many landowners in the countryside donated their lands to these tax-exempt entities. The land would be registered in the name of said noble or temple and would become part of their tax-exempt estate (\"sh\u014den\") but would still be used by the same person who originally owned it. The former owner, now a steward on his lord's estate, had to pay his lord an annual tribute that was less than what he would have had to pay the emperor in tax had he been the landowner. There was usually an agreement that when the steward died, his children would inherit his position. If the temple or lord cheated the steward somehow, the farmer could retaliate by exposing the scheme, which might have cost the temple or noble its tax-exempt privilege. The growth of the \"sh\u014den\" led to a loss of tax revenue for the imperial court, and a heavier tax burden on those farmers who worked the remaining taxable land. These farmers often could not cope and abandoned their lands, which were bought up by the landowning magnates.\nUp until the late 8th century AD, Japan had a national conscript army. As peace settled in, the imperial court began dismantling the system, eventually ending it by 792 AD. Conscripts were seen as unreliable and poorly trained, to be used only in emergencies such as when the Mongols invaded. Conscript footsoldiers proved to be particularly ineffective in the Japanese' war with the Emishi, an ethnic minority in the north that relied on mounted warriors and were thus highly mobile. The deciding factor in most battles had been professional mounted archers who came from the wealthy families. The government didn't bother training conscripts in horsemanship as it required years to produce a good cavalryman. So it instead recruited men who already had these skills, acquired through private training funded by their families' wealth. Similarly, soldiers in the imperial army were expected to provide most of their own equipment. Wealthy men who could afford horses and archery training were promoted to elite units, whereas the poor were consigned to being footsoldiers. The poor disliked military service for this reason, and because their farms often fell into decay with their absence, so there was popular support for ending conscription.\nIn the Heian period it was the habit of emperors to keep harems, and consequently the imperial family got so large it burdened the treasury. In the early 9th century AD, Emperor Saga expelled several dozen members from the imperial family, who formed two new clans: the Minamoto clan (814 AD) and the Taira clan (825 AD). Many wealthy provincial families married into the Minamotos and Tairas in order to acquire aristocratic status, gaining prestige and often tax exemptions. And so the Tairas and Minamotos became big and wealthy clans with lots of warrior retainers.\nThus with the downsizing of the national army and the decline in tax revenue, the emperors delegated the matter of security in the countryside to the burgeoning class of landed warriors. They had a personal incentive to suppress lawlessness in their own lands as it directly impacted their revenue. War and law enforcement became increasingly privatized affairs.\nKamakura shogunate.\nTwo leading warrior clans, the Minamoto clan and the Taira clan, had both gained court positions and became rivals.\nIn 1156, the former emperor Sutoku attempted to take back the throne from his brother, Emperor Go-Shirakawa, in what is remembered as the H\u014dgen rebellion. It failed and Sutoku was exiled. Members of the Minamoto and Taira clans had fought on both sides of the rebellion, but the Minamoto loyalists received smaller rewards than the Taira loyalists, and the Minamoto rebels received worse punishments than the Taira rebels. All this angered the Minamotos, and consequently political factions in the imperial court began to reform around clan affiliations rather than personal allegiances. The next rebellion would be a direct Taira/Minamoto clash.\nThe Minamotos took part in the Heiji Rebellion of 1160 in the hopes that they could have the Taira leader Taira no Kiyomori banished. This rebellion also failed, and in the aftermath the Tairas ended up with even more influence in the imperial court. Their leader, Taira no Kiyomori, became the first samurai ever to be given a senior rank in the imperial court (chief minister in 1167).\nIn 1180, Taira no Kiyomori installed his two-year-old grandson (Emperor Antoku) on the throne, pushing aside older male heirs whose mothers were from the Minamoto family. This sparked a rebellion by the Minamotos, leading to the Gempei War (1180-1185). Minamoto no Yoritomo promised lands and administrative rights to warriors who swore allegiance to him. The Minamotos won the war and the Taira clan was effectively destroyed. In April 1185, the controversial child emperor was drowned by his own grandmother, who then committed suicide.\nThe new emperor, Emperor Go-Toba, was of Fujiwara lineage on his mother's side, which Minamoto no Yoritomo found acceptable. But Yoritomo took over most of his authority, reducing the emperor to a figurehead. Previous emperors had been figurehead rulers too, with the real power being wielded by a regent, often the previous emperor. But Yoritomo went further: he didn't take over the imperial bureaucracy, he instead established a parallel military government staffed by the warriors who had fought for him. That was the reward they were promised and due, lest they turn on him. So began the first shogunate. Whereas the imperial court was in Kyoto, Yorimoto chose to base the shogunate in Kamakura.\nJapan under the shogunate became a feudal state. The warrior clans were made vassals of the \"shogun\" and were called \"gokenin\". They were formally granted a great deal of autonomy, and the \"shogun\" was more of a mediator and coordinator than a true ruler. In the early 1190s, the \"shogun\" began appointing military governors (\"shugo\") to the provinces. Only warriors from the Kant\u014d region could become \"shugo\". These military governors eventually displaced the authority of the civilian governors (\"kokushi\") which had been appointed by the imperial court. A \"shugo's\" main duties were coordinating his area's \"gokenin\" in military matters, suppressing rebellions, and enforcing the law.\nDuring the Gempei War, many warriors had seized control of the private estates (\"sh\u014den\") of the courtiers in Kyoto. They presumptuously declared themselves the stewards of these estates. The shogunate now had a responsibility to restrain this lawlessness. It was decreed that all stewards had to be appointed by the \"shogun\". Most stewards were chosen from warrior families. Appointing warrior stewards undermined the authority of the courtiers in Kyoto who owned the \"sh\u014den\". Warrior stewards would surely be loyal to the \"shogun\", not the imperial court. The title of \"jit\u014d\" was heritable. A steward could not bequeath his office to someone outside his family. Under the Kamakura shogunate, a \"jit\u014d\" could not be punished for misconduct by his landlord. The landlord had to appeal to the shogunate for justice.\nThe title of \"shogun\" was supposed to be hereditary. In 1203, the \"shogun\" Minamoto no Yoriie died and his son was only 11 years old, so the leader of the H\u014dj\u014d clan, H\u014dj\u014d Tokimasa, declared himself regent (\"shikken\"). The H\u014dj\u014d clan refused to return power to the Minamotos when the young son came of age, but out of respect for the tradition of hereditary titles, they did not declare themselves \"shogun\" but kept the title of \"shikken\".\nMongol invasions.\nVarious samurai clans struggled for power during the Kamakura shogunate. Zen Buddhism spread among the samurai in the 13th century and helped shape their standards of conduct, particularly in overcoming the fear of death and killing. Among the general populace Pure Land Buddhism was favored however.\nIn 1274, the Mongol-founded Yuan dynasty in China sent a force of some 40,000 men and 900 ships to invade Japan in northern Ky\u016bsh\u016b. Japan mustered a mere 10,000 samurai to meet this threat. The invading army was harassed by major thunderstorms throughout the invasion, which aided the defenders by inflicting heavy casualties. The Yuan army was eventually recalled, and the invasion was called off. The Mongol invaders used small bombs, which was likely the first appearance of bombs and gunpowder in Japan.\nThe Japanese defenders recognized the possibility of a renewed invasion and began construction of a great stone barrier around Hakata Bay in 1276. Completed in 1277, this wall stretched for 20 kilometers around the bay. It later served as a strong defensive point against the Mongols. The Mongols attempted to settle matters in a diplomatic way from 1275 to 1279, but every envoy sent to Japan was executed.\nLeading up to the second Mongolian invasion, Kublai Khan continued to send emissaries to Japan, with five diplomats sent in September 1275 to Ky\u016bsh\u016b. H\u014dj\u014d Tokimune, the shikken of the Kamakura shogun, responded by having the Mongolian diplomats brought to Kamakura and then beheading them. The graves of the five executed Mongol emissaries exist to this day in Kamakura at Tatsunokuchi. On 29 July 1279, five more emissaries were sent by the Mongol empire, and again beheaded, this time in Hakata. This continued defiance of the Mongol emperor set the stage for one of the most famous engagements in Japanese history.\nIn 1281, a Yuan army of 140,000 men with 5,000 ships was mustered for another invasion of Japan. Northern Ky\u016bsh\u016b was defended by a Japanese army of 40,000 men. The Mongol army was still on its ships preparing for the landing operation when a typhoon hit north Ky\u016bsh\u016b island. The casualties and damage inflicted by the typhoon, followed by the Japanese defense of the Hakata Bay barrier, resulted in the Mongols again being defeated.\nThe thunderstorms of 1274 and the typhoon of 1281 helped the samurai defenders of Japan repel the Mongol invaders despite being vastly outnumbered. These winds became known as \"kami-no-Kaze\", which literally translates as \"wind of the gods\". This is often given a simplified translation as \"divine wind\". The \"kami-no-Kaze\" lent credence to the Japanese belief that their lands were indeed divine and under supernatural protection.\nNanboku-ch\u014d and Muromachi period.\nThe H\u014dj\u014d clan controlled the Kamakura shogunate as regents (\"shikken\") during the Mongol invasions. Many samurai who fought the Mongols felt that they had not been properly rewarded by the regent, who favored his own clan too much. Emperor Godaigo saw an opportunity to restore imperial power. In 1333, the emperor incited the disgruntled samurai to rebel against the shogunate and return power to the imperial court, leading to the Kenmu Restoration. But Godaigo's policies proved unpopular, and in 1336 his top general Ashikaga Takauji betrayed him and established a new shogunate, this time headquartered in Kyoto. This shogunate is known as the Ashikaga shogunate.\nThe southern court, descended from Emperor Godaigo, and the northern court, descended from Emperor K\u014dg\u014dn, were established side by side. This period of coexistence of the two dynasties is called the Nanboku-ch\u014d period, which corresponds to the beginning of the Muromachi period. The Northern Court, supported by the Ashikaga shogunate, had six emperors, and in 1392 the Imperial Court was reunited by absorbing the Southern Court, although the modern Imperial Household Agency considers the Southern Court to be the legitimate emperor. The rule of Japan by the Ashikaga shogunate lasted until the Onin War, which broke out in 1467.\nFrom 1346 to 1358 during the Nanboku-cho period, the Ashikaga shogunate gradually expanded the authority of the , the local military and police officials established by the Kamakura shogunate, giving the \"Shugo\" jurisdiction over land disputes between and allowing the \"Shugo\" to receive half of all taxes from the areas they controlled. The \"Shugo\" shared their newfound wealth with the local samurai, creating a hierarchical relationship between the \"Shugo\" and the samurai, and the first early , called , appeared.\nDuring the Nanboku-ch\u014d period, many lower-class foot soldiers called began to participate in battles, and the popularity of increased. During the Nanboku-ch\u014d and Muromachi periods, and became the norm, and senior samurai also began to wear by adding (helmet), (face armor), and gauntlet.\nIssues of inheritance caused family strife as primogeniture became common, in contrast to the division of succession designated by law before the 14th century. Invasions of neighboring samurai territories became common to avoid infighting, and bickering among samurai was a constant problem for the Kamakura and Ashikaga shogunates.\nSengoku period.\nThe outbreak of the Onin War, which began in 1467 and lasted about 10 years, devastated Kyoto and brought down the power of the Ashikaga shogunate. This plunged the country into the warring states period, in which \"daimyo\" (feudal lords) from different regions fought each other. This period corresponds to the late Muromachi period. There are about nine theories about the end of the Sengoku Period, the earliest being the year 1568, when Oda Nobunaga marched on Kyoto, and the latest being the suppression of the Shimabara Rebellion in 1638. Thus, the Sengoku Period overlaps with the Muromachi, Azuchi\u2013Momoyama, and Edo periods, depending on the theory. In any case, the Sengoku period was a time of large-scale civil wars throughout Japan.\n \n\"Daimyo\" who became more powerful as the shogunate's control weakened were called , and they often came from \"shugo daimyo\", , and . In other words, \"sengoku daimyo\" differed from \"shugo daimyo\" in that a \"sengoku daimyo\" was able to rule the region on his own, without being appointed by the shogun.\nDuring this period, the traditional master-servant relationship between the lord and his vassals broke down, with the vassals eliminating the lord, internal clan and vassal conflicts over leadership of the lord's family, and frequent rebellion and puppetry by branch families against the lord's family. These events sometimes led to the rise of samurai to the rank of \"sengoku daimyo\". For example, H\u014dj\u014d S\u014dun was the first samurai to rise to the rank of \"sengoku daimyo\" during this period. Uesugi Kenshin was an example of a \"Shugodai\" who became \"sengoku daimyo\" by weakening and eliminating the power of the lord.\nThis period was marked by the loosening of samurai culture, with people born into other social strata sometimes making a name for themselves as warriors and thus becoming \"de facto\" samurai. One such example is Toyotomi Hideyoshi, a well-known figure who rose from a peasant background to become a samurai, \"sengoku daimyo\", and \"kampaku\" (Imperial Regent).\nFrom this time on, infantrymen called , who were mobilized from the peasantry, were mobilized in even greater numbers than before, and the importance of the infantry, which had begun in the Nanboku-ch\u014d period, increased even more. When matchlocks were introduced from Portugal in 1543, Japanese swordsmiths immediately began to improve and mass-produce them. The Japanese matchlock was named after the Tanegashima island, which is believed to be the place where it was first introduced to Japan. By the end of the Sengoku Period, there were hundreds of thousands of arquebuses in Japan and a large army of nearly 100,000 men clashing with each other.\nOn the battlefield, began to fight in close formation, using (spear) and . As a result, , (bow), and became the primary weapons on the battlefield. The , which was difficult to maneuver in close formation, and the long, heavy fell into disuse and were replaced by the , which could be held short, and the short, light , which appeared in the Nanboku-cho period and gradually became more common. The was often cut off from the hilt and shortened to make a . The , which had become inconvenient for use on the battlefield, was transformed into a symbol of authority carried by high-ranking samurai. Although the had become even more obsolete, some \"sengoku daimyo\" dared to organize assault and kinsmen units composed entirely of large men equipped with to demonstrate the bravery of their armies.\nThese changes in the aspect of the battlefield during the Sengoku period led to the emergence of the style of armor, which improved the productivity and durability of armor. In the history of Japanese armor, this was the most significant change since the introduction of the and in the Heian period. In this style, the number of parts was reduced, and instead armor with eccentric designs became popular.\nBy the end of the Sengoku period, allegiances between warrior vassals, also known as military retainers, and lords were solidified. Vassals would serve lords in exchange for material and intangible advantages, in keeping with Confucian ideas imported from China between the seventh and ninth centuries.\nThese independent vassals who held land were subordinate to their superiors, who may be local lords or, in the Edo period, the shogun.\nA vassal or samurai could expect monetary benefits, including land or money, from lords in exchange for their military services.\nAzuchi\u2013Momoyama period.\nThe Azuchi-Momoyama period refers to the period when Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi were in power. The name \"Azuchi-Momoyama\" comes from the fact that Nobunaga's castle, Azuchi Castle, was located in Azuchi, Shiga, and Fushimi Castle, where Hideyoshi lived after his retirement, was located in Momoyama. There are several theories as to when the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period began: 1568, when Oda Nobunaga entered Kyoto in support of Ashikaga Yoshiaki; 1573, when Oda Nobunaga expelled Ashikaga Yoshiaki from Kyoto; and 1576, when the construction of Azuchi Castle began. In any case, the beginning of the Azuchii\u2013Momoyama period marked the complete end of the rule of the Ashikaga shogunate, which had been disrupted by the Onin War; in other words, it marked the end of the Muromachi period.\nOda, Toyotomi, and Tokugawa.\nOda Nobunaga was the well-known lord of the Nagoya area (once called Owari Province) and an exceptional example of a samurai of the Sengoku period. He came within a few years of, and laid down the path for his successors to follow, the reunification of Japan under a new \"bakufu\" (shogunate).\nOda Nobunaga made innovations in the fields of organization and war tactics, made heavy use of arquebuses, developed commerce and industry, and treasured innovation. Consecutive victories enabled him to end the Ashikaga Bakufu and disarm of the military powers of the Buddhist monks, which had inflamed futile struggles among the populace for centuries. Attacking from the \"sanctuary\" of Buddhist temples, they were constant headaches to any warlord and even the emperor, who tried to control their actions. He died in 1582 when one of his generals, Akechi Mitsuhide, turned upon him with his army.\nToyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu, who founded the Tokugawa shogunate, were loyal followers of Nobunaga. Hideyoshi began as a peasant and became one of Nobunaga's top generals, and Ieyasu had shared his childhood with Nobunaga. Hideyoshi defeated Mitsuhide within a month and was regarded as the rightful successor of Nobunaga by avenging the treachery of Mitsuhide. These two were able to use Nobunaga's previous achievements on which build a unified Japan and there was a saying: \"The reunification is a rice cake; Oda made it. Hashiba shaped it. In the end, only Ieyasu tastes it.\" (Hashiba is the family name that Toyotomi Hideyoshi used while he was a follower of Nobunaga.)\nToyotomi Hideyoshi, who became a grand minister in 1586, created a law that non-samurai were not allowed to carry weapons, which the samurai caste codified as permanent and hereditary, thereby ending the social mobility of Japan, which lasted until the dissolution of the Edo shogunate by the Meiji revolutionaries.\nThe distinction between samurai and non-samurai was so obscure that during the 16th century, most male adults in any social class (even small farmers) belonged to at least one military organization of their own and served in wars before and during Hideyoshi's rule. It can be said that an \"all against all\" situation continued for a century. The authorized samurai families after the 17th century were those that chose to follow Nobunaga, Hideyoshi and Ieyasu. Large battles occurred during the change between regimes, and a number of defeated samurai were destroyed, went \"r\u014dnin\" or were absorbed into the general populace.\nDuring the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period (late Sengoku period), \"samurai\" often referred to , the lowest-ranking \"bushi\", as exemplified by the provisions of the temporary law Separation Edict enacted by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1591. This law regulated the transfer of status classes:samurai (\"wakat\u014d\"), , , and . These four classes and the \"ashigaru\" were and peasants employed by the \"bushi\" and fell under the category of . In times of war, samurai (\"wakat\u014d\") and \"ashigaru\" were fighters, while the rest were porters. Generally, samurai (\"wakat\u014d\") could take family names, while some \"ashigaru\" could, and only samurai (\"wakat\u014d\") were considered samurai class. \"Wakat\u014d\", like samurai, had different definitions in different periods, meaning a young \"bushi\" in the Muromachi period and a rank below and above \"ashigaru\" in the Edo period.\nInvasions of Korea.\nIn 1592 and again in 1597, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, aiming to invade China through Korea, mobilized an army of 160,000 peasants and samurai and deployed them to Korea in one of the largest military endeavors in Eastern Asia until the late 19th century. Taking advantage of arquebus mastery and extensive wartime experience from the Sengoku period, Japanese samurai armies made major gains in most of Korea. A few of the famous samurai generals of this war were Kat\u014d Kiyomasa, Konishi Yukinaga, and Shimazu Yoshihiro. Kat\u014d Kiyomasa advanced to Orangkai territory (present-day Manchuria) bordering Korea to the northeast and crossed the border into northern China.\nKiyomasa withdrew back to Korea after retaliatory counterattacks from the Jurchens in the area, whose castles his forces had raided. Shimazu Yoshihiro led some 7,000 samurai into battle, and despite being heavily outnumbered, defeated a host of allied Ming and Korean forces at the Battle of Sacheon in 1598. Yoshihiro was feared as \"Oni-Shimazu\" (\"Shimazu ogre\") and his nickname spread across Korea and into China.\nIn spite of the superiority of Japanese land forces, the two expeditions ultimately failed after Hideyoshi's death, though the invasions did devastate the Korean peninsula. The causes of the failure included Korean naval superiority (which, led by Admiral Yi Sun-sin, harassed Japanese supply lines continuously throughout the wars, resulting in supply shortages on land), the commitment of sizable Ming forces to Korea, Korean guerrilla actions, wavering Japanese commitment to the campaigns as the wars dragged on, and the underestimation of resistance by Japanese commanders.\nIn the first campaign of 1592, Korean defenses on land were caught unprepared, under-trained, and under-armed. They were rapidly overrun, with only a limited number of successfully resistant engagements against the more experienced and battle-hardened Japanese forces. During the second campaign in 1597, Korean and Ming forces proved far more resilient and with the support of continued Korean naval superiority, managed to limit Japanese gains to parts of southeastern Korea. The final death blow to the Japanese campaigns in Korea came with Hideyoshi's death in late 1598 and the recall of all Japanese forces in Korea by the Council of Five Elders, established by Hideyoshi to oversee the transition from his regency to that of his son Hideyori.\nBattle of Sekigahara.\nBefore his death, Hideyoshi ordered that Japan be ruled by a council of the five most powerful \"sengoku daimyo\", , and Hideyoshi's five retainers, , until his only heir, the five-year-old Toyotomi Hideyori, reached the age of 16. However, having only the young Hideyori as Hideyoshi's successor weakened the Toyotomi regime. Today, the loss of all of Hideyoshi's adult heirs is considered the main reason for the downfall of the Toyotomi clan. Hideyoshi's younger brother, Toyotomi Hidenaga, who had supported Hideyoshi's rise to power as a leader and strategist, had already died of illness in 1591, and his nephew, Toyotomi Hidetsugu, who was Hideyoshi's only adult successor, was forced to commit seppuku in 1595 along with many other vassals on Hideyoshi's orders for suspected rebellion.\nIn this politically unstable situation, Maeda Toshiie, one of the \"Gotair\u014d\", died of illness, and Tokugawa Ieyasu, one of the \"Gotair\u014d\" who had been second in power to Hideyoshi but had not participated in the war, rose to power, and Ieyasu came into conflict with Ishida Mitsunari, one of the \"Go-Buky\u014d\" and others. This conflict eventually led to the Battle of Sekigahara, in which the led by Ieyasu defeated the led by Mitsunari, and Ieyasu nearly gained control of Japan.\nSocial mobility was high, as the ancient regime collapsed and emerging samurai needed to maintain a large military and administrative organizations in their areas of influence. Most of the samurai families that survived to the 19th century originated in this era, declaring themselves to be the blood of one of the four ancient noble clans: Minamoto, Taira, Fujiwara, and Tachibana. In most cases, however, it is difficult to prove these claims.\nTokugawa shogunate.\nAfter the Battle of Sekigahara, Tokugawa Ieyasu consolidated power and was declared shogun in 1603. After the siege of Osaka in 1615, there was a period of peace for 250 years. During the Tokugawa shogunate, samurai underwent many changes, and first became a truly hereditary class. Although this process was begun by Hideyoshi with the combination of the Sword Hunt of 1588 and the Separation Edict of 1591. Most samurai moved from the land to the castle towns, with one town in each domain. With no warfare since the early 17th century, samurai gradually lost their military function during the Tokugawa era. Neo-Confucianism became very influential and the division of society into four classes was officially adopted by the shogunate. Landed samurai had to choose to either give up their lands to become stipend samurai, or to keep their lands and become peasants.\nFollowing the passing of a law in 1629, samurai on official duty were required to wear two swords. However, by the end of the Tokugawa era, samurai were aristocratic bureaucrats for their \"daish\u014d\", becoming more of a symbolic emblem of power than a weapon used in daily life. They still had the legal right to cut down any commoner who did not show proper respect (\"kiri-sute gomen\"), but to what extent this right was used is unknown. When the central government forced \"daimy\u014ds\" to cut the size of their armies, unemployed r\u014dnin became a social problem.\nTheoretical obligations between a samurai and his lord (usually a \"daimy\u014d\") increased from the Genpei era to the Edo era, strongly emphasized by the teachings of Confucius and Mencius, required reading for the educated samurai class. The leading figures who introduced Confucianism in Japan in the early Tokugawa period were Fujiwara Seika (1561\u20131619), Hayashi Razan (1583\u20131657), and Matsunaga Sekigo (1592\u20131657).\nPederasty permeated the culture of samurai in the early seventeenth century. The relentless condemnation of pederasty by Jesuit missionaries also hindered attempts to convert Japan's governing elite to Christianity. Pederasty had become deeply institutionalized among the daimyo and samurai, prompting comparisons to ancient Athens and Sparta. The Jesuits' strong condemnation of the practice alienated many of Japan's ruling class, creating further barriers to their acceptance of Christianity. Tokugawa Iemitsu, the third shogun, was known for his interest in pederasty.\nFrom the mid-Edo period, wealthy and farmers could join the samurai class by giving a large sum of money to an impoverished to be adopted into a samurai family and inherit the samurai's position and stipend. The amount of money given to a \"gokenin\" varied according to his position: 1,000 \"ryo\" for a and 500 \"ryo\" for an Some of their descendants were promoted to and held important positions in the shogunate. Some of the peasants' children were promoted to the samurai class by serving in the office. \"Kachi\" could change jobs and move into the lower classes, such as \"ch\u014dnin\". For example, Takizawa Bakin became a \"ch\u014dnin\" by working for Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d.\nSamurai in Southeast Asia.\nIn the late 1500s, trade between Japan and Southeast Asia accelerated and increased exponentially when the Tokugawa shogunate was established in the early 1600s. The destinations of the trading ships, the red seal ships, were Thailand, the Philippines, Vietnam, Cambodia, etc. Many Japanese moved to Southeast Asia and established Japanese towns there. Many samurai, or r\u014dnin, who had lost their masters after the Battle of Sekigahara, lived in the Japanese towns. The Spaniards in the Philippines, the Dutch of the Dutch East India Company, and the Thais of the Ayutthaya Kingdom saw the value of these samurai as mercenaries and recruited them. The most famous of these mercenaries was Yamada Nagamasa. He was originally a palanquin bearer who belonged to the lowest end of the samurai class, but he rose to prominence in the Ayutthaya Kingdom, now in southern Thailand, and became governor of the Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom. When the policy of national isolation (\"sakoku\") was established in 1639, trade between Japan and Southeast Asia ceased, and records of Japanese activities in Southeast Asia were lost for many years after 1688.\nSamurai as diplomatic ambassadors.\nIn 1582, three \"Kirishitan\" \"daimy\u014d\", \u014ctomo S\u014drin, \u014cmura Sumitada, and Arima Harunobu, sent a group of boys, their own blood relatives and retainers, to Europe as Japan's first diplomatic mission to Europe. They had audiences with King Philip II of Spain, Pope Gregory XIII, and Pope Sixtus V. The mission returned to Japan in 1590, but its members were forced to renounce, be exiled, or be executed, due to the Tokugawa shogunate's suppression of Christianity.\nIn 1612, Hasekura Tsunenaga, a vassal of the \"daimyo\" Date Masamune, led a diplomatic mission and had an audience with King Philip III of Spain, presenting him with a letter requesting trade, and he also had an audience with Pope Paul V in Rome. He returned to Japan in 1620, but news of the Tokugawa shogunate's suppression of Christianity had already reached Europe, and trade did not take place due to the Tokugawa shogunate's policy of \"sakoku\". In the town of Coria del Rio in Spain, where the diplomatic mission stopped, there were 600 people with the surnames Japon or Xapon as of 2021, and they have passed on the folk tale that they are the descendants of the samurai who remained in the town.\nAt the end of the Edo period (Bakumatsu era), when Matthew C. Perry came to Japan in 1853 and the \"sakoku\" policy was abolished, six diplomatic missions were sent to the United States and European countries for diplomatic negotiations. The most famous were the US mission in 1860 and the European missions in 1862 and 1864. Fukuzawa Yukichi, who participated in these missions, is most famous as a leading figure in the modernization of Japan, and his portrait was selected for the 10,000 yen note.\nDissolution.\nIn 1853, the United States sent a fleet of warships under the command of Commodore Matthew C. Perry to force the rulers of Japan to open their borders to foreign trade. The shogun had no choice but to comply. His samurai were no match for Perry's marines and as a pre-industrial society, Japan was no match for the United States. The Japanese were aware of how European imperialists defeated and humiliated the Chinese and they feared an invasion of Japan was soon to come. Japan had to modernize if it was to maintain its honor and independence.\nThe Japanese began importing large quantities of European and American weapons and hiring European and American veterans to train their armies. The new weapons included modern rifles with caplock and breech-loading mechanisms. These new firearms were more versatile and deadly than the matchlock muskets the Japanese had been using for three centuries. Their rifled barrels gave them better accuracy and range, their mechanisms were less fiddly and worked even in wet weather, and they could be fitted with bayonets to double as spears. Whereas the matchlock musket was used alongside spears and bows on the battlefield, the new rifles became the standard infantry weapon. Revolvers and derringers became the self-defense weapons of choice, supplanting knives and swords. These firearms were also much easier to use than the traditional weapons of the samurai, requiring only two or so weeks of practice to master as opposed to years. Peasant gunmen could be trained on an as-needed basis and were just as effective as samurai gunmen. This rendered the samurai obsolete as a specialist warrior caste.\nEven before the Meiji Restoration, the shogun and other feudal lords put a stronger emphasis on commoners when they set about rebuilding their armies. There were political advantages. Commoners tended to be more submissive as they came from humbler backgrounds, did not inherit any military tradition, and were easier to replace. They were less resistant to social reform because they had little to lose and a lot to gain. They typically came without any political baggage or conflicting loyalties, which became especially important later on when the Meiji government sought to create a national army that cut across feudal domains. During the Meiji era, conscription into the national army exposed men across Japan to nationalist indoctrination, a way to build unity and national identity.\nThe Japanese realized that in order to match the industrial and military might of the Western imperial powers, Japan had to abandon feudalism for a capitalist economy with a strong central government. In November 1867, the unpopular shogun relinquished his authority to the emperor, who was seen as a unifying figure by the Japanese. Thus began the Meiji Restoration. Between 1869 and 1871, the \"daimyo\" (Japan's feudal lords) were stripped of their lands and titles. Their domains became prefectures subject to the authority of the imperial government. Some former \"daimyo\" were given government jobs, but most retired with lavish pensions.\nThe dissolution of the \"daimyo\" class made the samurai defunct as a feudal retainer caste, so the Meiji government began repealing their special rights and privileges. In 1869, the government reclassified high-ranking samurai as \"shizoku\" (warriors) and lower status samurai as \"sotsuzoku\" (foot soldiers). In 1872, the \"sotsu\" rank was abolished and the \"sotsuzoku\" were reclassified as \"shizoku\". In 1871, the government banned the samurai topknot (the \"chonmage\"). From 1873 to 1879, the government started taxing the stipends and transformed them into interest-bearing government bonds. The main goal was to provide enough financial liquidity to enable former samurai to invest in land and industry. In 1876, the government forbade anyone outside the military to wear swords even if they were of samurai lineage, and repealed the right of a samurai to strike an insolent commoner with potentially lethal force (\"kiri-sute gomen\").\nMost samurai accepted these reforms. In fact the Meiji leadership was composed mostly of samurai. Although they were no longer entitled to rule, many former samurai were offered positions in the new civilian government because they were typically well-educated. Others were offered teaching positions in the new public education system.\nBut some samurai could not be placated, leading to sporadic samurai rebellions. The largest of these was the Satsuma Rebellion of 1877. Many disgruntled samurai flocked to Satsuma where the radical samurai Saigo Takamori had set up academies where he taught samurai the ways of modern war and his militant right-wing beliefs. The Meiji reforms of 1873 gave farmers ownership rights so that the government could tax them directly. This eliminated the traditional feudal role of the samurai landowners, of which Satsuma had an exceptionally high number. Saigo therefore found a lot of sympathetic samurai in Satsuma. The imperial government feared an insurrection and sent a task force to disarm Takamori's growing paramilitary force. In response, Takamori marched his army on Tokyo. The rebel samurai were defeated by the imperial army, which was composed mostly of commoners. Both armies were equipped with modern weapons. After this rebellion was quashed, the Meiji government faced no further challenges to its authority.\nIn 1947, the \"shizoku\" class was abolished.\nMartial traditions.\nDuring the Heian period (794 - 1185), distinctive weapons such as the \"tachi\" and \"naginata\", commonly associated with the samurai, came into use. This era also saw the development of armor styles such as the \"\u014d-yoroi\" and \"d\u014d-maru\". High-ranking samurai, who fought primarily on horseback using archery (\"yumi\"), typically wore the heavy and expensive \"\u014d-yoroi\", which was well-suited for mounted combat. In contrast, lower-ranking samurai fought on foot, wielding \"naginata\" and wearing the lighter and more affordable \"d\u014d-maru\". The \"warabite-t\u014d\" swords used by the Emishi influenced the evolution of Japanese swordsmithing techniques, eventually leading to the development of the curved \"tachi\". As a result, straight swords were gradually replaced by curved ones better suited for slashing in combat\nSamurai ranks.\nThe samurai class was highly stratified. Rank was determined by a variety of factors such as the rank of one's lord and the size of one's stipend. Individual domains also made their own distinctions. The domain of Choshu had forty strata for the military class. The highest ranking Tokugawa vassals were the daimyo, who had at least 10,000 koku. Next came the hatamoto, who were distinguished by the right of audience with the shogun, followed by the gokenin. Samurai with a large enough stipend had their own retainers who were also samurai, called baishin. Each daimyo had his own retainers that were divided into many ranks. They were roughly divided into shi and sotsu. The highest ranking shi could have a larger stipend than some daimyo. These were usually cadet branch of the domain's ruler or kar\u014d families. Most samurai were hizamurai (ordinary samurai) who had an average stipend of 100 koku, and typically were mounted. Under them were the kachi who were on foot and were sometimes not considered samurai. Ashigaru were the lowest ranking members of the military class. While they carried two swords they are often not considered samurai, although they are sometimes listed as lower samurai.\nBushido.\nIn the 13th century, H\u014dj\u014d Shigetoki wrote: \"When one is serving officially or in the master's court, he should not think of a hundred or a thousand people, but should consider only the importance of the master.\" Carl Steenstrup notes that 13th- and 14th-century warrior writings (\"gunki\") \"portrayed the \"bushi\" in their natural element, war, eulogizing such virtues as reckless bravery, fierce family pride, and selfless, at times senseless devotion of master and man\".\nThe translator of \"Hagakure\", William Scott Wilson, observed examples of warrior emphasis on death in clans other than Yamamoto's: \"he (Takeda Shingen) was a strict disciplinarian as a warrior, and there is an exemplary story in the \"Hagakure\" relating his execution of two brawlers, not because they had fought, but because they had not fought to the death\".\nReligion.\nThe philosophies of Confucianism, Buddhism and Zen, and to a lesser extent Shinto, influenced the samurai culture. Zen meditation became an important teaching because it offered a process to calm one's mind. The Buddhist concept of reincarnation and rebirth led samurai to abandon torture and needless killing, while some samurai even gave up violence altogether and became Buddhist monks after coming to believe that their killings were fruitless. Some were killed as they came to terms with these conclusions in the battlefield. The most defining role that Confucianism played in samurai philosophy was to stress the importance of the lord-retainer relationship\u2014the loyalty that a samurai was required to show his lord.\nLiterature on the subject of \"bushido\" such as \"Hagakure\" (\"Hidden in Leaves\") by Yamamoto Tsunetomo and \"Gorin no Sho\" (\"Book of the Five Rings\") by Miyamoto Musashi, both written in the Edo period, contributed to the development of \"bushid\u014d\" and Zen philosophy.\nAccording to Robert Sharf, \"The notion that Zen is somehow related to Japanese culture in general, and bushid\u014d in particular, is familiar to Western students of Zen through the writings of D.\u00a0T. Suzuki, no doubt the single most important figure in the spread of Zen in the West.\"\nCulture.\n, , , tea ceremony, and were some of the cultural pursuits enjoyed by the aristocratic samurai in the Sengoku Period.\n\"Waka\" poems were also used as . Hosokawa Gracia, Asano Naganori, and Takasugi Shinsaku are famous for their \"jisei no ku\".\n\"Noh\" and \"kemari\" were promoted by the Ashikaga shogunate and became popular among and samurai. During the Sengoku period, the appreciation of \"noh\" and the practice of tea ceremonies were valued for socializing and exchanging information, and were essential cultural pursuits for \"daimyo\" and samurai. The view of life and death expressed in \"noh\" plays was something the samurai of the time could relate to. Owning tea utensils used in the tea ceremony was a matter of prestige for \"daimyo\" and samurai, and in some cases tea utensils were given in exchange for land as a reward for military service. The was also used as a place for political meetings, as it was suitable for secret talks, and the tea ceremony sometimes brought together samurai and townspeople who did not normally interact.\nEducation.\nIn general, samurai, aristocrats, and priests had a very high literacy rate in kanji. Recent studies have shown that literacy in kanji among other groups in society was somewhat higher than previously understood. For example, court documents, birth and death records and marriage records from the Kamakura period, submitted by farmers, were prepared in Kanji. Both the kanji literacy rate and skills in math improved toward the end of Kamakura period.\nSome samurai had \"buke bunko\", or \"warrior library\", a personal library that held texts on strategy, the science of warfare, and other documents that would have proved useful during the warring era of feudal Japan. One such library held 20,000 volumes. The upper class had \"Kuge bunko\", or \"family libraries\", that held classics, Buddhist sacred texts, and family histories, as well as genealogical records.\nThere were to Lord Eirin's character many high points difficult to measure, but according to the elders the foremost of these was the way he governed the province by his civility. It goes without saying that he acted this way toward those in the samurai class, but he was also polite in writing letters to the farmers and townspeople, and even in addressing these letters he was gracious beyond normal practice. In this way, all were willing to sacrifice their lives for him and become his allies.\nIn a letter dated 29 January 1552, St Francis Xavier observed the ease of which the Japanese understood prayers due to the high level of literacy in Japan at that time:\nIn a letter to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, Xavier further noted the education of the upper classes:\nThe Nobles send their sons to monasteries to be educated as soon as they are 8 years old, and they remain there until they are 19 or 20, learning reading, writing and religion; as soon as they come out, they marry and apply themselves to politics.\nNames.\nA samurai was usually named by combining one kanji from his father or grandfather and one new kanji. Samurai normally used only a small part of their total name.\nFor example, the full name of Oda Nobunaga was \"Oda Kazusanosuke Saburo Nobunaga\" (), in which \"Oda\" is a clan or family name, \"Kazusanosuke\" is a title of vice-governor of Kazusa province, \"Saburo\" is a formal nickname (\"yobina\"), and \"Nobunaga\" is an adult name (\"nanori\") given at genpuku, the coming of age ceremony. A man was addressed by his family name and his title, or by his \"yobina\" if he did not have a title. However, the \"nanori\" was a private name that could be used by only a very few, including the emperor. Samurai could choose their own \"nanori\" and frequently changed their names to reflect their allegiances.\nSamurai were given the privilege of carrying two swords and using 'samurai surnames' to identify themselves from the common people.\nMarriage.\nSamurai had arranged marriages, which were arranged by a go-between of the same or higher rank. While for those samurai in the upper ranks this was a necessity (as most had few opportunities to meet women), this was a formality for lower-ranked samurai. Most samurai married women from a samurai family, but for lower-ranked samurai, marriages with commoners were permitted. In these marriages a dowry was brought by the woman and was used to set up the couple's new household.\nA samurai could take concubines, but their backgrounds were checked by higher-ranked samurai. In many cases, taking a concubine was akin to a marriage. Kidnapping a concubine, although common in fiction, would have been shameful, if not criminal. If the concubine was a commoner, a messenger was sent with betrothal money or a note for exemption of tax to ask for her parents' acceptance. Even though the woman would not be a legal wife, a situation normally considered a demotion, many wealthy merchants believed that being the concubine of a samurai was superior to being the legal wife of a commoner. When a merchant's daughter married a samurai, her family's money erased the samurai's debts, and the samurai's social status improved the standing of the merchant family. If a samurai's commoner concubine gave birth to a son, the son could inherit his father's social status.\nA samurai could divorce his wife for a variety of reasons with approval from a superior, but divorce was, while not entirely nonexistent, a rare event. A wife's failure to produce a son was cause for divorce, but adoption of a male heir was considered an acceptable alternative to divorce. A samurai could divorce for personal reasons, even if he simply did not like his wife, but this was generally avoided as it would embarrass the person who had arranged the marriage. A woman could also arrange a divorce, although it would generally take the form of the samurai divorcing her. After a divorce, samurai had to return the betrothal money, which often prevented divorces.\nWomen.\nMaintaining the household was the main duty of women of the samurai class. This was especially crucial during early feudal Japan, when warrior husbands were often traveling abroad or engaged in clan battles. The wife, or \"okugatasama\" (meaning: one who remains in the home), was left to manage all household affairs, care for the children, and perhaps even defend the home forcibly. For this reason, many women of the samurai class were trained in wielding a polearm called a \"naginata\" or a special knife called the \"kaiken\" in an art called \"tantojutsu\" (lit. the skill of the knife), which they could use to protect their household, family, and honor if the need arose. There were women who actively engaged in battles alongside male samurai in Japan, although most of these female warriors were not formal samurai.\nA samurai's daughter's greatest duty was political marriage. These women married members of enemy clans of their families to form diplomatic relationships. These alliances were stages for many intrigues, wars and tragedies throughout Japanese history. A woman could divorce her husband if he did not treat her well and also if he was a traitor to his wife's family. A famous case was that of Oda Tokuhime (daughter of Oda Nobunaga); irritated by the antics of her mother-in-law, Lady Tsukiyama (the wife of Tokugawa Ieyasu), she was able to get Lady Tsukiyama arrested on suspicion of communicating with the Takeda clan (then a great enemy of Nobunaga and the Oda clan). Ieyasu also arrested his own son, Matsudaira Nobuyasu, who was Tokuhime's husband, because Nobuyasu was close to his mother Lady Tsukiyama. To assuage his ally Nobunaga, Ieyasu had Lady Tsukiyama executed in 1579 and that same year ordered his son to commit seppuku to prevent him from seeking revenge for the death of his mother.\nThough women of wealthier samurai families enjoyed perks of their elevated position in society, such as avoiding the physical labor that those of lower classes often engaged in, they were still viewed as far beneath men. Women were prohibited from engaging in any political affairs and were usually not the heads of their household. This does not mean that women in the samurai class were always powerless. Samurai women wielded power at various occasions. Throughout history, several women of the samurai class have acquired political power and influence, even though they have not received these privileges \"de jure\".\nAfter Ashikaga Yoshimasa, 8th \"sh\u014dgun\" of the Muromachi shogunate, lost interest in politics, his wife Hino Tomiko largely ruled in his place. Nene, wife of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, was known to overrule her husband's decisions at times, and Yodo-dono, his concubine, became the \"de facto\" master of Osaka castle and the Toyotomi clan after Hideyoshi's death. Tachibana Ginchiyo was chosen to lead the Tachibana clan after her father's death. Yamauchi Chiyo, wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo, has long been considered the ideal samurai wife. According to legend, she made her kimono out of a quilted patchwork of bits of old cloth and saved pennies to buy her husband a magnificent horse, on which he rode to many victories. The fact that Chiyo (though she is better known as \"Wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo\") is held in such high esteem for her economic sense is illuminating in the light of the fact that she never produced an heir and the Yamauchi clan was succeeded by Kazutoyo's younger brother. The source of power for women might have been that samurai left their finances to their wives. Several women ascended the Chrysanthemum Throne as a female imperial ruler (\u5973\u6027\u5929\u7687, josei tenn\u014d)\nAs the Tokugawa period progressed more value became placed on education, and the education of females beginning at a young age became important to families and society as a whole. Marriage criteria began to weigh intelligence and education as desirable attributes in a wife, right along with physical attractiveness. Though many of the texts written for women during the Tokugawa period only pertained to how a woman could become a successful wife and household manager, there were those that undertook the challenge of learning to read, and also tackled philosophical and literary classics. Nearly all women of the samurai class were literate by the end of the Tokugawa period.\nIn popular culture.\nMuch of \"everything we think we know about Japan's warrior elite\" has been challenged; many ideas about the samurai myth, including the word \"samurai\" itself, evolved in mass media and pop culture long after the heyday of the warriors. Samurai women, for example, although not part of the legend, were educated, governed and even fought; and there was a balance between the military, and the literary and artistic. A major exhibition at the British Museum, \"Samurai\", in early 2026 a world beyond armour-clad warriors and epic duels.\nSamurai figures have been the subject for legends, folk tales, dramatic stories (i.e. \"gunki monogatari\"), theatre productions in kabuki and noh, in literature, movies, animated and anime films, television shows, manga, video games, and in various musical pieces in genre that range from \"enka\" to J-Pop songs.\n\"Jidaigeki\" (literally historical drama) has always been a staple program on Japanese movies and television. The programs typically feature a samurai. Samurai films and westerns share a number of similarities, and the two have influenced each other over the years. One of Japan's most renowned directors, Akira Kurosawa, greatly influenced western film-making. George Lucas' \"Star Wars\" series incorporated many stylistic traits pioneered by Kurosawa, and \"Star Wars: A New Hope\" takes the core story of a rescued princess being transported to a secret base from Kurosawa's \"The Hidden Fortress\". Kurosawa was inspired by the works of director John Ford, and in turn Kurosawa's works have been remade into westerns such as \"Seven Samurai\" into \"The Magnificent Seven\" and \"Yojimbo\" into \"A Fistful of Dollars\". There is also a 26-episode anime adaptation (\"Samurai 7\") of \"Seven Samurai\". Along with film, literature containing samurai influences are seen as well. As well as influence from American Westerns, Kurosawa also adapted two of Shakespeare's plays as sources for samurai movies: \"Throne of Blood\" was based on \"Macbeth,\" and \"Ran\" was based on \"King Lear\".\nMost common are historical works where the protagonist is either a samurai or former samurai (or another rank or position) who possesses considerable martial skill. Eiji Yoshikawa is one of the most famous Japanese historical novelists. His retellings of popular works, including Taiko, Musashi and \"The Tale of the Heike\", are popular among readers for their epic narratives and rich realism in depicting samurai and warrior culture. The samurai have also appeared frequently in Japanese comics (manga) and animation (anime). Examples are \"Samurai Champloo\", \"Shigurui\", \"Requiem from the Darkness\", \"\", and \"Afro Samurai\". Samurai-like characters are not just restricted to historical settings, and a number of works set in the modern age, and even the future, include characters who live, train and fight like samurai. Some of these works have made their way to the west, where it has been increasing in popularity with America.\nIn the 21st century, samurai have become more popular in America. Through various media, producers and writers have been capitalizing on the notion that Americans admire the samurai lifestyle. The animated series, \"Afro Samurai\", became well-liked in American popular culture because of its blend of hack-and-slash animation and gritty urban music. Created by Takashi Okazaki, \"Afro Samurai\" was initially a \"d\u014djinshi\", or manga series, which was then made into an animated series by Studio Gonzo. In 2007, the animated series debuted on American cable television on the Spike TV channel. The series was produced for American viewers which \"embodies the trend... comparing hip-hop artists to samurai warriors, an image some rappers claim for themselves\". The story line keeps in tone with the perception of a samurai finding vengeance against someone who has wronged him. Because of its popularity, \"Afro Samurai\" was adopted into a full feature animated film and also became titles on gaming consoles such as the PlayStation 3 and Xbox. Not only has the samurai culture been adopted into animation and video games, it can also be seen in comic books.\nThe tokusatsu television series \"Samurai Sentai Shinkenger\" is inspired by the way of the samurai.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28290", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28290", "title": "Slackware", "text": "Linux distribution\nSlackware is a Linux distribution created by Patrick Volkerding in 1993. Originally based on Softlanding Linux System (SLS), Slackware has been the basis for many other Linux distributions, most notably the first versions of SUSE Linux distributions, and is the oldest distribution that is still maintained.\nSlackware aims for design stability and simplicity and to be the most \"Unix-like\" Linux distribution. It makes as few modifications as possible to software packages from upstream and tries not to anticipate use cases or preclude user decisions. In contrast to most modern Linux distributions, Slackware provides no graphical installation procedure and no automatic dependency resolution of software packages. It uses plain text files and only a small set of shell scripts for configuration and administration. Without further modification, it boots into a command-line interface environment. Because of its many conservative and simplistic features, Slackware is often considered to be most suitable for advanced and technically inclined Linux users.\nSlackware is available for the IA-32 and x86_64 architectures, with a port to the ARM architecture. While Slackware is mostly free and open-source software, it does not have a formal bug-tracking facility or public code repository, with releases periodically announced by Volkerding. No formal membership procedure exists for developers, and Volkerding is the primary contributor to releases.\nName.\nThe name \"Slackware\" stems from the fact that the distribution started as a private side project with no intended commitment. To prevent it from being taken too seriously at first, Volkerding gave it a humorous name, which stuck even after Slackware became a serious project.\nSlackware refers to the \"pursuit of Slack\", a tenet of the Church of the SubGenius, a parody religion. Certain aspects of Slackware graphics reflect this, e.g. the pipe that Tux is smoking, as influenced by the image of J. R. \"Bob\" Dobbs' head.\nA humorous reference to the Church of the SubGenius can be found in many versions of the \"install.end\" text files, which indicate the end of a software series to the setup program. In recent versions, including Slackware release 14.1, the text is ROT13 obfuscated.\nHistory.\nBirth.\nSlackware was originally derived from the Softlanding Linux System (SLS), the most popular of the original Linux distributions and the first to offer a comprehensive software collection that comprised more than just the kernel and basic utilities, including an X11 graphical interface, TCP/IP, UUCP networking, and GNU Emacs.\nPatrick Volkerding started with SLS after needing a LISP interpreter for a school project at the then-named Moorhead State University (MSU). He found CLISP was available for Linux and downloaded SLS to run it. A few weeks later, Volkerding was asked by his artificial intelligence professor at MSU to show him how to install Linux at home and on some of the computers at school. Volkerding had made notes describing fixes to issues he found after installing SLS, and his professor and he went through and applied those changes to a new installation. This took almost as long as it took to just install SLS, though, so the professor asked if the install disks could be adjusted so the fixes could be applied during installation. This was the start of Slackware. Volkerding continued making improvements to SLS - fixing bugs, upgrading software, automatic installation of shared libraries and the kernel image, fixing file permissions, and more. In a short time, Volkerding had upgraded around half the packages beyond what SLS had available.\nVolkerding had no intentions to provide his modified SLS version for the public. His friends at MSU urged him to put his SLS modifications onto an FTP server, but Volkerding assumed that \"SLS would be putting out a new version that included these things soon enough\", so he held off for a few weeks. During that time, many SLS users on the internet were asking SLS for a new release, so eventually Volkerding made a post titled \"Anyone want an SLS-like 0.99pl11A system?\", to which he received many positive responses. After a discussion with the local system administrator at MSU, Volkerding obtained permission to upload Slackware to the university's FTP server. This first Slackware release, version 1.00, was distributed on July 17, 1993, at 00:16:36 (UTC), and was supplied as twenty-four &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442\" floppy disk images. After the announcement was made, Volkerding watched as the flood of FTP connections continually crashed the server. Soon afterwards, Walnut Creek CDROM offered additional archive space on their FTP servers.\nDevelopment.\nThe size of Slackware quickly increased with the addition of included software, and by version 2.1, released October 1994, it had more than tripled to comprise 73 1.44\u00a0MB floppy disk images.\nIn 1999, Slackware had its version jump from 4 to 7. Slackware version numbers were lagging behind other distributions, and this led many users to believe it was out of date, though the bundled software versions were similar. Volkerding made the decision to bump the version as a marketing effort to show that Slackware was as up-to-date as other Linux distributions, many of which had release numbers of 6 at the time. He chose 7, estimating that most other distributions would soon be at this release number.\nIn April 2004, Patrick Volkerding added X.Org Server packages into the testing/ directory of -current as a replacement for the XFree86 packages currently being used, with a request for comments on what the future of the X Window System in Slackware should be. A month later, he switched from XFree86 to X.Org Server after stating that the opinions were more than four to one in favor of using the X.org release as the default version of X. He stated the decision was primarily a technical one, as XFree86 was proving to cause compatibility problems. Slackware 10.0 was the first release with X.Org Server.\nIn March 2005, Patrick Volkerding announced the removal of the GNOME desktop environment in the development ChangeLog. He stated this had been under consideration for more than four years, and that other projects already provided a more complete version of GNOME for Slackware than what Slackware itself provided. Volkerding stated future GNOME support would rely on the community. The community responded and as of October 2016, several active GNOME (and GNOME fork) projects were available for Slackware, including Cinnamon, Dlackware, Dropline GNOME, MATE, and SlackMATE. The removal was deemed significant by some in the Linux community due to the prevalence of GNOME in many distributions.\nIn May 2009, Patrick Volkerding announced the public (development) release of an official x86_64 variant, called Slackware64, maintained in parallel with the IA-32 distribution. Slackware64 is a pure 64-bit distribution in that it does not support running or compiling 32-bit programs, but it was designed as \"multilib-ready\". Eric Hameleers, one of the core Slackware team members, maintains a multilib repository that contains the necessary packages to convert Slackware64 to multilib to enable running of 32-bit software. Hameleers started the 64-bit port as a diversion from the pain of recovering from surgery in September 2008. Volkerding tested the port in December 2008, and was impressed when he saw speed increases between 20 and 40% for some benchmarks compared to the 32-bit version. To minimize the extra effort of maintaining both versions in parallel, Slackware's build scripts, called SlackBuilds, were slowly transitioned to supporting either architecture, allowing for one set of sources for both versions. Slackware64 saw its first stable release with version 13.0.\nBetween the November 2013 release of 14.1 and June 2016, Slackware had a 31-month gap between releases, marking the longest span in release history. During this time, the development branch went without updates for 47 days. On April 21, 2015, though, Patrick Volkerding apologized on the ChangeLog for the absence of updates and stated that the development team used the time to get \"some good work done\". Over 700 program changes were listed on that ChangeLog entry, including many major library upgrades. In January 2016, Volkerding announced the reluctant addition of PulseAudio, primarily due to BlueZ dropping direct ALSA support in v5.x. while various other projects were, in turn, dropping support for BlueZ v4.x. Knowing some users would not be happy with the change, he stated, \"Bug reports, complaints, and threats can go to me.\" These changes culminated in the release of Slackware 14.2 in June 2016.\nHistorical documentation.\nDavid Cantrell worked as a core member of the Slackware team between 1999 and 2001, and described that period on the Slackware ARM Vlog. Patrick Volkerding provided further information about the time period in two interviews.\nDesign philosophy.\nThe design philosophy of Slackware is oriented toward simplicity, software purity, and a core design that emphasizes lack of change to upstream sources. Many design choices in Slackware can be seen as a heritage of the simplicity of traditional Unix systems and as examples of the KISS principle. In this context, \"simple\" refers to the simplicity in system design, rather than system usage. Thus, ease of use may vary between users; those lacking knowledge of command-line interfaces and classic Unix tools may experience a steep learning curve using Slackware, whereas users with a Unix background may benefit from a less-abstract system environment. In keeping with Slackware's design philosophy and its spirit of purity, most software in Slackware uses the original configuration mechanisms supplied by the software's authors; for some administrative tasks, though, distribution-specific configuration tools are delivered.\nDevelopment model.\nNo formal issue tracking system and no official procedure is needed to become a code contributor or developer. The project does not maintain a public code repository. Bug reports and contributions, while being essential to the project, are managed in an informal way. All the final decisions about what is going to be included in a Slackware release strictly remain with Slackware's benevolent dictator for life, Patrick Volkerding.\nThe first versions of Slackware were developed by Patrick Volkerding alone. Beginning with version 4.0, the official Slackware announce files list David Cantrell and Logan Johnson as part of the \"Slackware team\". Later announce statements, up to release version 8.1, include Chris Lumens. Lumens, Johnson and Cantrell are also the authors of the first edition of \"Slackware Linux Essentials\", the official guide to Slackware Linux. The Slackware website mentions Chris Lumens and David Cantrell as being \"Slackware Alumni\", who \"worked full-time on the Slackware project for several years.\" In his release notes for Slackware 10.0 and 10.1 Volkerding thanks Eric Hameleers for \"his work on supporting USB, PCI, and Cardbus wireless cards\". Starting with version 12.0 there is, for a second time, a team building around Volkerding. According to the release notes of 12.2, the development team consists of seven people. Future versions added people. Since version 13.0, the Slackware team seems to have core members. Eric Hameleers gives an insight into the core team with his essay on the \"History of Slackware Development\", written on October 3\u20134, 2009 (shortly after the release of version 13.0).\nPackages.\nManagement.\nSlackware's package management system, collectively known as pkgtools, can administer (pkgtool), install (installpkg), upgrade (upgradepkg), and remove (removepkg) packages from local sources. It can also uncompress (explodepkg) and create (makepkg) packages. The official tool to update Slackware over a network or the internet is slackpkg. It was originally developed by Piter Punk as an unofficial way to keep Slackware up-to-date. It was officially included in the main tree in Slackware 12.2, having been included in extras/ since Slackware 9.1. When a package is upgraded, it will install the new package over the old one and then remove any files that no longer exist in the new package. Once a package has been installed with slackpkg it can be managed with pkgtool or other package management commands. When running upgradepkg, it only confirms that the version numbers are :different\", thus allowing downgrading the package if desired.\nSlackware packages are tarballs compressed using various methods. Starting with 13.0, most packages are compressed using xz (based on the LZMA compression algorithm), using the .txz filename extension. Prior to 13.0, packages were compressed using gzip (based on the DEFLATE compression algorithm), using the .tgz extension. Support for bzip2 and lzip compression was also added, using the filename extensions .tbz and .tlz, respectively, although these are not commonly used.\nPackages contain all the files for that program, as well as additional metadata files used by the package manager. The package tarball contains the full directory structure of the files and is meant to be extracted in the system's root directory during installation. The additional metadata files, located under the special install/ directory within the tarball, usually include a slack-desc file, which is a specifically formatted text file that is read by the package manager to provide users with a description of the packaged software, as well as a doinst.sh file, which is a post-unpacking shell script allowing creation of symbolic links, preserving permissions on startup files, proper handling of new configuration files, and any other aspects of installation that can not be implemented via the package's directory structure. During the development of 15.0, Volkerding introduced support for a douninst.sh uninstall script that can be launched when removing or upgrading a package. This allows package maintainers to run commands when a package is uninstalled.\nThe package manager maintains a local database on the computer, stored in multiple folders. On 14.2 and older systems, the main database of installed packages was maintained in /var/log/, however, during the development of 15.0, Volkerding moved two of the directories to a dedicated location under /var/lib/pkgtools/ to prevent accidental deletion when clearing system logs. Each Slackware installation will contain a packages/ and scripts/ directory in the main database location. The former is where each package installed will have a corresponding install log file (based on the package name, version, arch, and build) that contains the package size, both compressed and uncompressed, the software description, and the full path of all files that were installed. If the package contained an optional doinst.sh post-installation script, the contents of that script will be added to a file in the scripts/ directory matching the filename of the corresponding package in the packages/ directory, allowing the administrator to view the post-installation script at a future point. When a package is removed or upgraded, the old install logs and scripts found under packages/ and scripts/ are moved to removed_packages/ and removed_scripts/, making it possible to review any previous packages and see when they were removed. These directories can be found in /var/log/ on 14.2 and earlier, but were moved to /var/log/pkgtools/ during the development of 15.0. On systems supporting the douninst.sh uninstall script, those scripts will be stored in the /var/lib/pkgtools/douninst.sh/ directory while the package is installed. Once removed, the douninst.sh script will be moved to /var/log/pkgtools/removed_uninstall_scripts/.\nDependency resolution.\nThe package management system does not track or manage \"dependencies\"; however, when performing the recommended full install, all dependencies of the stock packages are met. For custom installations or 3rd-party packages, Slackware relies on the user to ensure that the system has all the supporting system libraries and programs required by the program. Since no official lists of dependencies for stock packages are provided, if users decide to install a custom installation or install 3rd-party software, they will need to work through any possible missing dependencies themselves. Since the package manager doesn't manage dependencies, it will install any and all packages, whether or not dependencies are met. A user may find out that dependencies are missing only when attempting to use the software.\nWhile Slackware itself does not incorporate official tools to resolve dependencies, some unofficial, community-supported software tools do provide this function, similar to the way APT does for Debian-based distributions and yum does for Red Hat-based distributions. They include\nRepositories.\nThere are no official repositories for Slackware. The only official packages Slackware provides are available on the installation media. However, there are many third-party repositories for Slackware; some are standalone repositories and others are for distributions that are Slackware-based but retain package compatibility with Slackware. Many of these can be searched at once using pkgs.org, which is a Linux package search engine. However, mixing and matching dependencies from multiple repositories can lead to two or more packages that require different versions of the same dependency, which is a form of dependency hell. Slackware itself won't provide any dependency resolution for these packages, however some projects will provide a list of dependencies that are not included with Slackware with the files for the package, commonly with a .dep extension.\nDue to the possibility of dependency issues, many users choose to compile their own programs using community-provided SlackBuilds. SlackBuilds are shell scripts that will create an installable Slackware package from a provided software tarball. Since SlackBuilds are scripts, they aren't limited to just compiling a program's source; they can also be used to repackage pre-compiled binaries provided by projects or other distributions' repositories into proper Slackware packages. SlackBuilds that compile sources have several advantages over pre-built packages: since they build from the original author's source code, the user does not have to trust a third-party packager; furthermore the local compilation process allows for machine-specific optimization. In comparison to manual compilation and installation of software, SlackBuilds provide cleaner integration to the system by utilizing Slackware's package manager. Some SlackBuilds will come with an additional file with metadata that allows automated tools to download the source, verify the source is not corrupt, and calculate additional dependencies that are not part of Slackware. Some repositories will include both SlackBuilds and the resulting Slackware packages, allowing users to either build their own or install a pre-built package.\nThe only officially endorsed SlackBuilds repository is SlackBuilds.org, commonly referred to as SBo. This is a community-supported project offering SlackBuilds for building software not included with Slackware. Users are able to submit new SlackBuilds for software to the site and, once approved, they become the \"package maintainer\". They are then responsible for providing updates to the SlackBuild, either to fix issues or to build newer versions provided by upstream. To ensure all programs can be compiled and used, any required dependencies of the software not included with Slackware are required to be documented and be available on the site. All submissions are tested by the site's administrators before being added to the repository. The administrators intend for the build process to be nearly identical to the way Slackware's official packages are built, mainly to ensure Volkerding was \"sympathetic of our cause\". This allows SlackBuilds that Volkerding deems worthy to be pulled into regular Slackware with minimal changes to the script. It also prevent users from suggesting Volkerding to change his scripts to match SBo's. SBo provides templates for SlackBuilds and the additional metadata files and they encourage package maintainers to not deviate unless necessary.\nTwo Slackware team members, Eric Hameleers and Robby Workman each have their own repository of pre-compiled packages along with the SlackBuilds and source files used to create the packages. While most packages are just additional software not included in Slackware that they felt was worth their time to maintain, some packages are used as a testbed for future upgrades to Slackware, most notably, Hameleers provides \"Ktown\" packages for newer versions of KDE. He also maintains Slackware's \"multilib\" repository, enabling Slackware64 to run and compile 32-bit packages.\nReleases.\nSlackware's release policy follows a feature and stability based release cycle, in contrast to the time-bound (e.g., Ubuntu) or rolling release (e.g., Gentoo Linux) schemes of other Linux distributions. This means there is no set time on when to expect a release. Volkerding will release the next version after he feels a suitable number of changes from the previous version have been made and those changes lead to a stable environment. As stated by Patrick Volkerding, \"It's usually our policy not to speculate on release dates, since that's what it is\u00a0\u2013 pure speculation. It's not always possible to know how long it will take to make the upgrades needed and tie up all the related loose ends. As things are built for the upcoming release, they'll be uploaded into the -current tree.\"\nThroughout Slackware's history, they generally tried to deliver up-to-date software on at least an annual basis. From its inception until 2014, Slackware had at least one release per year. Release activity peaked in 1994, 1995, 1997 and 1999, with three releases each year. Starting with version 7.1 (June 22, 2000) the release progression became more stable and typically occurred once per year. After that point, the only years with two releases were 2003, 2005 and 2008. However, since the release of Slackware 14.1 in 2013, new releases have slowed down drastically. There was a more than 2-year gap between 14.1 and 14.2 and over a 5-year gap to 15.0. Upon the release of 15.0, Volkerding stated that Slackware 15.1 will hopefully have a far shorter development cycle since the \"tricky parts\" were resolved during the development of 15.0.\nSlackware's latest 32-bit x86 and 64-bit x86_64 stable releases are at version 15.0 (released on February 2, 2022), which include support for Linux 5.15.19.\nVolkerding also maintains a testing/developmental version of Slackware called \"-current\" that can be used for a more bleeding edge configuration. This version will eventually become the next stable release, at which point Volkerding will start a new -current to start developing for the next release of Slackware. While this version is generally known to be stable, it is possible for things to break, so -current tends to not be recommended for production systems.\nSupport.\nCurrently, Slackware has no officially stated support term policy. However, on June 14, 2012, notices appeared in the changelogs for versions 8.1, 9.0, 9.1, 10.0, 10.1, 10.2, 11.0, and 12.0 stating that, effective August 1, 2012, security patches would no longer be provided for these versions. The oldest release, version 8.1, was released on June 18, 2002, and had over 10 years of support before reaching EOL. Later, on August 30, 2013, announcements were made on the changelogs of 12.1 and 12.2 stating their EOL on December 9, 2013. It was stated in the changelog entries that they had at least 5 years of support. On April 6, 2018, versions of 13.0, 13.1 and 13.37 were declared reaching their EOL on July 5, 2018. It was stated in the changelog entries that they had at least 7 years of support (13.0 had been supported almost 9 years). On October 9, 2023, the changelog for 14.2 stated that 14.0, 14.1 and 14.2 will be EOL effective January 1, 2024.\nWhile there have been no official announcements for versions prior to 8.1, they are no longer maintained and are effectively EOL.\nHardware architectures.\nHistorically, Slackware concentrated solely on the IA-32 architecture and releases were available as 32-bit only. However, starting with Slackware 13.0, a 64-bit x86_64 variant is available and officially supported in symmetrical development with the 32-bit platform. Prior to the release of Slackware64 users wanting 64-bit were required to use unofficial ports such as slamd64.\nSlackware is also available for the IBM S/390 architecture in the form of Slack/390 and for the ARM architecture under Slackware ARM (originally known as 'ARMedslack'). Both ports have been declared \"official\" by Patrick Volkerding. However, the S/390 port is still at version 10.0 for the stable version and 11.0 for the testing/developmental version, and has had no updates since 2009. Also, on May 7, 2016, the developer of Slackware ARM announced 14.1 will be EOL on September 1, 2016, and development of -current will cease with the release of 14.2, however support for 14.2 will be maintained for the foreseeable future. The EOL announcement for 14.1 was added to the changelog on June 25, 2016, and the EOL announcement for 14.2 was added to the changelog on December 21, 2022.\nIn July 2016, the developer of Slackware ARM announced that the development and build tools had been enhanced to reduce the manual effort involved in maintaining the ARM port, and proceeded to announce that a 32-bit hardware floating port was in development. The port was released in August 2016 in \"current\" form.\nOn 28 December 2020 work began on porting Slackware to the 64-bit ARM architecture (known as 'AArch64'), with the initial Hardware Model targets being the PINE64's RockPro64 and Pinebook Pro. It was functionally complete by May 2021, and has many improvements over the original design and implementation of the ARM port - particularly in regards to the management and enablement of new Hardware Models by the Slackware ARM community. Additionally, the boot and installation processes were improved significantly - making the installation process far easier and more streamlined.\nOn March 29, 2022 Slackware AArch64 was publicly released in -current (development) form with support for the RockPro64, Pinebook Pro and Raspberry Pi 3 &amp; 4, with online installation documentation and video installation guides. Also the unofficial \"slarm64\" project has a port for AArch64, and an additional port for riscv64 architecture.\nIn March 2022 official development of the ARM 32-bit port of Slackware ceased, with future development concentrated solely on the AArch64/ARM64 port. This was because the 32-bit hardware was unable to keep pace with the development of Slackware and was inhibiting development, and the limitations of the hardware became a blocker to the adoption of the latest technologies. Additionally since most of the other mainstream distributions ceased support for 32-bit ARM, some of the applications failed to build and were no longer supportable. There is however the unofficial Slackware port \"BonSlack\" that provide both soft (ARMv5) and hard float (ARMv7) ports for 32-bit ARM, with development and updates (from 14.2) aligned with official Slackware. This project also provides ports for Aarch64 (ARM64), Alpha, HPPA (PA-RISC 1.1), LoongArch (64 bit), MIPS (32/64-bit), OpenRISC, PowerPC (32/64-bit), RISC-V (64-bit), S/390x, SH-4, SPARC (32/64-bit), and x86 (32-bit with 64-bit time_t) architectures.\nOn December 21, 2022, Slackware ARM 14.2 had its EOL (End of Life) declared as 1 March 2023.\nSlackintosh is a port of Slackware Linux for the Macintosh New World ROM PowerPC architecture, used by Apple's Power Macintosh, PowerBook, iMac, iBook, and Xserve lines from 1994 until 2006. The last version of Slackintosh was 12.1, released on Jun 7, 2008. Slackintosh's website is still active and version 12.1 is available for download for those who have older PowerPC Macintosh computers. The project developers announced in February 2012 that development was frozen and 12.1 would be able to receive security patches for one month.\nThe next month, it was announced that the stable release is frozen and won't receive any further updates unless someone else decides to take over.\nThis never happened and Volkerding officially declared the project dead in July 2021.\nDistribution.\nSlackware 14.2 CD sets, single DVDs, and merchandise were available from the third-party-controlled Slackware store, but due to underpayment, Patrick Volkerding, \"told them to take it down or I'd suspend the DNS for the store\".\nSlackware ISO images (2.6 GB) for installation can be downloaded for free at the Slackware website via BitTorrent, FTP mirrors, and HTTP mirrors.\nSlackware port for IBM S/390 (EOL: 2009) can be downloaded, and installs from a DOS Partition or from floppy disk.\nSlackware port for ARM\narchitecture can be downloaded, and installed via a network, using Das U-Boot and a TFTP boot server or from a mini-root filesystem.\nSlackware ARM can also be installed on a PC running QEMU\nusing the same technique.\nSlackware AArch64 (ARM64) is installed directly from SD card images in a similar fashion to installing Slackware x86 off a DVD. It's also available as a generic bootable EFI ISO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28291", "revid": "6496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28291", "title": "Sequencer", "text": "Sequencer may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28292", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28292", "title": "Stalingrad (disambiguation)", "text": "Stalingrad is a former name of Volgograd, a city in Russia.\nStalingrad may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"(All set in the Battle of Stalingrad)\"\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28293", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28293", "title": "Sakyamuni", "text": ""}
{"id": "28296", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28296", "title": "Short story", "text": "Brief work of prose fiction\nA short story is a piece of prose fiction. It can typically be read in a single sitting and focuses on a self-contained incident or series of linked incidents, with the intent of evoking a single effect or mood. The short story is one of the oldest types of literature and has existed in the form of legends, mythic tales, folk tales, fairy tales, tall tales, fables, and anecdotes in various ancient communities around the world. The modern short story developed in the early 19th century.\nDefinition.\nThe short story is a crafted form in its own right. Short stories make use of plot, resonance and other dynamic components as in a novel, but typically to a lesser degree. While the short story is largely distinct from the novel or novella/short novel, authors generally draw from a common pool of literary techniques. The short story is sometimes referred to as a genre.\nDetermining what exactly defines a short story remains problematic. A classic definition of a short story is that one should be able to read it in one sitting, a point most notably made in Edgar Allan Poe's essay \"The Philosophy of Composition\" (1846). H.\u00a0G. Wells described the purpose of the short story as \"The jolly art, of making something very bright and moving; it may be horrible or pathetic or funny or profoundly illuminating, having only this essential, that it should take from fifteen to fifty minutes to read aloud.\" According to William Faulkner, a short story is character-driven and a writer's job is to \"...trot along behind him with a paper and pencil trying to keep up long enough to put down what he says and does.\"\nSome authors have argued that a short story must have a strict form. Somerset Maugham thought that the short story \"must have a definite design, which includes a point of departure, a climax and a point of test; in other words, it must have a plot\". Hugh Walpole had a similar view: \"A story should be a story; a record of things happening full of incidents, swift movements, unexpected development, leading through suspense to a climax and a satisfying denouement.\"\nThis view of the short story as a finished product of art is however opposed by Anton Chekhov, who thought that a story should have neither a beginning nor an end. It should just be a \"slice of life\", presented suggestively. In his stories, Chekhov does not round off the end but leaves it to the readers to draw their own conclusions.\nSukumar Azhikode defined a short story as \"a brief prose narrative with an intense episodic or anecdotal effect\". Flannery O'Connor emphasized the need to consider what is exactly meant by the descriptor short. Short story writers may define their works as part of the artistic and personal expression of the form. They may also attempt to resist categorization by genre and fixed formation.\nWilliam Boyd, a British author and short story writer, has said:\n[a short story] seem[s] to answer something very deep in our nature as if, for the duration of its telling, something special has been created, some essence of our experience extrapolated, some temporary sense has been made of our common, turbulent journey towards the grave and oblivion.\nIn the 1880s, the term \"short story\" acquired its modern meaning \u2013 having initially referred to children's tales. During the early to mid-20th century, the short story underwent expansive experimentation which further hindered attempts to comprehensively provide a definition. Longer stories that cannot be called novels are sometimes considered \"novellas\" or novelettes and, like short stories, may be collected into the more marketable form of \"collections\". Around the world, the modern short story is comparable to lyrics, dramas, novels and essays \u2013 although examination of it as a major literary form remains diminished.\nLength.\nIn terms of length, word count is typically anywhere from 1,000 to 4,000 for short stories; however, some works classified as short stories have up to 15,000 words. Stories of fewer than 1,000 words are sometimes referred to as \"short short stories\", or \"flash fiction\".\nShort stories have no set length. What constitutes a short story may differ between genres, countries, eras, and commentators. Like the novel, the short story's predominant shape reflects the demands of the available markets for publication, and the evolution of the form seems closely tied to the evolution of the publishing industry and the submission guidelines of its constituent houses.\nAs a point of reference for the genre writer, the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America define short story length in the Nebula Awards for science fiction submission guidelines as having fewer than 7,500 words.\nHistory.\nPrehistory \u2013 1790 CE.\nShort stories date back to oral storytelling traditions which originally produced epics such as the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, and Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\". Oral narratives were often told in the form of rhyming or rhythmic verse, often including recurring sections or, in the case of Homer, \"Homeric epithets\". Such stylistic devices often acted as mnemonics for easier recall, rendition, and adaptation of the story. While the overall arc of the tale was told over the course of several performances, short sections of verse could focus on individual narratives that were the duration of a single telling. It may be helpful to classify such sections as oral short stories.\nAnother ancient form of short story popular during the Roman Empire was the anecdote, a brief realistic narrative that embodies a point. Many surviving Roman anecdotes were collected in the 13th or 14th century as the \"Gesta Romanorum\". Anecdotes remained popular throughout Europe well into the 18th century with the publication of the fictional anecdotal letters of Sir Roger de Coverley.\n \"Canterbury Tales\", William Caxton edition\nIn Europe, the oral story-telling tradition began to develop into written form in the early 14th century, most notably with Giovanni Boccaccio's \"Decameron\" and Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". Both of these books are composed of individual short stories, which range from farce or humorous anecdotes to well-crafted literary fiction, set within a larger narrative story (a frame story), although the frame-tale device was not adopted by all writers. At the end of the 16th century, some of the most popular short stories in Europe were the darkly tragic \"novella\" of Italian author Matteo Bandello, especially in their French translation.\nThe mid 17th century in France saw the development of a refined short novel, the \"nouvelle\", by such authors as Madame de Lafayette. Traditional fairy tales began to be published in the late 17th century; one of the most famous collections was by Charles Perrault. The appearance of Antoine Galland's first modern translation of the 1001 Arabian Nights, a storehouse of Middle Eastern folk and fairy tales, is the \"Thousand and One Nights\" (or \"Arabian Nights\") (from 1704; another translation appeared in 1710\u201312). His translation would have an enormous influence on the 18th-century European short stories of Voltaire, Diderot and others.\nIn India, there is a rich heritage of ancient folktales as well as a compiled body of short fiction which shaped the sensibility of modern Indian short story. Some of the famous Sanskrit collections of legends, folktales, fairy tales, and fables are Panchatantra, Hitopadesha and Kathasaritsagara. Jataka tales, originally written in Pali, is a compilation of tales concerning the previous births of Lord Gautama Buddha. The Frame story, also known as the frame narrative or story within a story, is a narrative technique that probably originated in ancient Indian works such as Panchatantra.\nThe evolution of printing technologies and periodical editions were among the factors contributing to the increasing importance of short story publications. Pioneering the rules of the genre in the Western canon were, among others, Rudyard Kipling (United Kingdom), Anton Chekhov (Russia), Guy de Maupassant (France), Rabindranath Tagore (India and Bangladesh), Manuel Guti\u00e9rrez N\u00e1jera (Mexico) and Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo (Nicaragua).\n1790\u20131850.\nEarly examples of short stories were published separately between 1790 and 1810, but the first true collections of short stories appeared between 1810 and 1830 in several countries.\nThe first short stories in the United Kingdom were gothic tales like Richard Cumberland's \"remarkable narrative\", \"The Poisoner of Montremos\" (1791). Novelists such as Sir Walter Scott and Charles Dickens also wrote influential short stories during this time. Germany soon followed the United Kingdom's example by producing short stories; the first collection of short stories was by Heinrich von Kleist in 1810 and 1811. In the United States, Washington Irving was responsible for creating some of the first short stories of American origin, \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" and \"Rip Van Winkle\".\nEdgar Allan Poe became another early American short story writer. His concise technique, deemed the \"single effect\", has had tremendous influence on the formation of the modern short story.\nExamples include:\n1850\u20131900.\nIn the latter half of the 19th century, the growth of print magazines and journals created a strong demand for short fiction of between 3,000 and 15,000 words. In 1890s Britain, literary periodicals such as \"The Yellow Book\", \"Black &amp; White,\" and \"The Strand Magazine\" popularized the short story. Britain was not alone in the endeavor to strengthen the short story movement. French author Guy de Maupassant composed the short stories \"Boule de Suif\" (\"Ball of Fat\", 1880) and \"L'Inutile Beaut\u00e9\" (\"The Useless Beauty\", 1890), which are important examples of French realism. Russian author Anton Chekhov was also influential in the movement.\nIn the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in India, many writers created short stories centered on daily life and the social scene of the different socioeconomic groups. Rabindranath Tagore published more than 150 short stories on the lives of the poor and oppressed such as peasants, women, and villagers under colonial misrule and exploitation. Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay, Tagore's contemporary, was another pioneer in Bengali short stories. Chattopadhyay's stories focused on the social scenario of rural Bengal and the lives of common people, especially the oppressed classes. The prolific Indian author of short stories Munshi Premchand, pioneered the genre in the Hindustani language, writing over 200 short stories and many novels in a style characterized by realism and an unsentimental and authentic introspection into the complexities of Indian society.\nIn 1884, Brander Matthews, the first American professor of dramatic literature, published \"The Philosophy of the Short-Story\". During that same year, Matthews was the first one to name the emerging genre \"short story\". Another theorist of narrative fiction was Henry James, who produced some of the most influential short narratives of the time.\nThe spread of the short story movement continued into South America, specifically Brazil. The novelist Machado de Assis was an important short story writer from Brazil at the time, under the influences of Xavier de Maistre, Laurence Sterne, Guy de Maupassant, among others. At the end of the 19th century, the writer Jo\u00e3o do Rio became popular by short stories about the bohemianism. Lima Barreto wrote about the former slaves and nationalism in Brazil, with his most recognized work being \"Triste Fim de Policarpo Quaresma\".\nExamples include:\n1900\u20131945.\nIn the United Kingdom, periodicals like \"The Strand Magazine\" and \"The Story-Teller\" contributed to the popularity of the short story. Several authors during this time wrote short stories centered on the devices of satire and humor. One such author, Hector Hugh Munro (1870\u20131916), also known by his pen name of Saki, wrote satirical short stories about Edwardian England. P.\u00a0G. Wodehouse published his first collection of comical stories about the valet, Jeeves, in 1917. Other common genres of short stories during the early to mid 1900s in England were detective stories and thrillers. Many of these detective stories were written by authors such as G.\u00a0K. Chesterton, Agatha Christie, and Dorothy L. Sayers. Graham Greene wrote his collection of short stories, \"Twenty-One Stories\", between 1929 and 1954. Many of these short stories are classified in the genres of thriller, suspense, or even horror. The European short story movement during this time was not unique to England. In Ireland, James Joyce published his short story collection \"Dubliners\" in 1914. These stories, written in a more accessible style than his later novels, are based on careful observation of the inhabitants of his birth city.\nIn the first half of the 20th century, a number of high-profile American magazines such as \"The Atlantic Monthly\", \"Harper's Magazine\", \"The New Yorker\", \"Scribner's\", \"The Saturday Evening Post\", \"Esquire\", and \"The Bookman\" published short stories in each issue. The demand for quality short stories was so great and the money paid so well that F. Scott Fitzgerald repeatedly turned to short-story writing to pay his numerous debts. His first collection, \"Flappers and Philosophers,\" appeared in book form in 1920. Ernest Hemingway's concise writing style was perfectly suited for shorter fiction. Influenced by the short stories of Stephen Crane and Jack London, Hemingway's work \"marks a new phase in the history of the short story\". The creation and study of the short story as a medium began to emerge as an academic discipline due to Blanche Colton Williams's \"groundbreaking work on structure and analysis of the short story\" and her publication of \"A Handbook on Short Story Writing\" (1917), described as \"the first practical aid to growing young writers that was put on the market in this country.\"\u200a \u200a\nIn Uruguay, Horacio Quiroga became one of the most influential short story writers in the Spanish language. With a clear influence from Edgar Allan Poe, he had a great skill in using the supernatural and the bizarre to show the struggle of man and animal to survive. He also excelled in portraying mental illness and hallucinatory states.\nIn India, Saadat Hasan Manto, the master of the short story in the Urdu language, is revered for his exceptional depth, irony, and sardonic humor. The author of some 250 short stories, radio plays, essays, reminiscences, and a novel, Manto is widely admired for his analyses of violence, bigotry, prejudice, and the relationships between reason and unreason. Combining realism with surrealism and irony, Manto's works, such as the celebrated short story Toba Tek Singh, are aesthetic masterpieces that continue to give profound insight into the nature of human loss, violence, and devastation. Another famous Urdu writer is Ismat Chughtai, whose short story, \"Lihaaf\" (The Quilt), on a lesbian relationship between an upper-class Muslim woman and her maidservant created great controversy following its publication in 1942.\nNotable examples in the period up to World War II include:\nSince 1945.\nFollowing World War II, the artistic range and numbers of writers of short stories grew significantly. Due in part to frequent contributions from John O'Hara, \"The New Yorker\" would come to exercise substantial influence as a weekly short story publication for more than half a century. Shirley Jackson's story, \"The Lottery\" (1948), elicited the strongest response in the magazine's history to that time. Other frequent contributors during the 1940s included John Steinbeck, Jean Stafford, Eudora Welty, and John Cheever, who is best known for \"The Swimmer\" (1964), beautifully blending realism and surrealism.\nMany other American short story writers greatly influenced the evolving form of the short story. For example, J.\u00a0D. Salinger's \"Nine Stories\" (1953) experimented with point of view and voice, while Flannery O'Connor's well-known story, \"A Good Man Is Hard to Find\" (1955), reinvigorated the Southern Gothic style. Cultural and social identity played a considerable role in much of the short fiction of the 1960s. Philip Roth and Grace Paley cultivated distinctive Jewish-American voices. Tillie Olsen's \"I Stand Here Ironing\" (1961) adopted a consciously feminist perspective. James Baldwin's collection, \"Going to Meet the Man\" (1965), told stories of African-American life. Science fiction stories with a special poetic touch was a genre developed with great popular success by Ray Bradbury. Stephen King published many science fiction short stories in men's magazines in the 1960s and after. King's interest is in the supernatural and macabre. Donald Barthelme and John Barth produced works in the 1970s that demonstrate the rise of the postmodern short story. While traditionalism maintained a significant influence on the form of the short story, minimalism gained widespread influence in the 1980s, most notably in the work of Raymond Carver and Ann Beattie. Carver helped usher in an \"extreme minimalist aesthetic\" and expand the scope of the short story, as did Lydia Davis, through her idiosyncratic and laconic style.\nThe Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges is one of the best-known writers of short stories in the Spanish language. \"The Library of Babel\" (1941) and \"The Aleph\" (1945) handle difficult subjects like infinity. Borges won American fame with \"The Garden of Forking Paths\", published in the August 1948 issue of \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine\". Two of the most representative writers of the Magical realism genre are also widely known Argentine short story writers, Adolfo Bioy Casares and Julio Cort\u00e1zar. The Nobel laureate author Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez and the Uruguayan writer Juan Carlos Onetti are further significant magical realist short story writers from the Hispanic world. In Brazil, Jo\u00e3o Antonio made a name for himself by writing about poverty and the favelas. Detective literature there was led by Rubem Fonseca. Jo\u00e3o Guimar\u00e3es Rosa wrote short stories in the book \"Sagarana,\" using a complex, experimental language based on tales of oral tradition.\nThe role of the bi-monthly magazine \"Desh\" (first published in 1933) was key in development of the Bengali short story. Two of the most popular detective story writers of Bengali literature are Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay (the creator of Byomkesh Bakshi) and Satyajit Ray (the creator of Feluda).\nNotable examples in the post\u2013World War II period include:\nSales and profits.\nThe numbers of run into the thousands. Female short story writers have gained increased critical attention, with British authors, in particular, exploring modern feminist politics in their writings.\nSales of short-story fiction are strong. In the UK, sales jumped 45% in 2017, driven by collections from international names such as Alice Munro, a high number of new writers to the genre, including famous names like actor Tom Hanks (plus those who publish their work using readily accessible, digital tools), and the revival of short story salons such as those held by the short fiction company Pin Drop Studio.\nMore than 690,000 short stories and anthologies were sold in the UK in 2017, generating \u00a35.88 million, the genre's highest sales since 2010. Throughout the 2010s, there was frequent speculation about a potential \"renaissance\"; Sam Baker called it a \"perfect literary form for the 21st century\".\nCanadian short story writers include Alice Munro, Mavis Gallant and Lynn Coady. In 2013, Alice Munro became the first writer of nothing but short stories to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. Her award-winning short story collections include \"Dance of the Happy Shades, Lives of Girls and Women, Who Do You Think You Are?, The Progress of Love, The Love of a Good Woman\" and \"Runaway\".\nAwards.\nProminent short story awards such as the Sunday Times Short Story Award, the BBC National Short Story Award, the Royal Society of Literature's V.S. Pritchett Short Story Prize, The London Magazine Short Story Prize, the Pin Drop Studio Short Story Award and many others attract hundreds of entries each year. Published and non-published writers take part, sending in their stories from around the world.\nIn 2013, Alice Munro was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature \u2013 her citation read: \"master of the contemporary short story\". She said she hopes the award will bring readership for the short story, as well as recognising the short story for its own merit, rather than \"something that people do before they write their first novel\". Short stories were cited in the choice of other laureates as well: Paul Heyse in 1910 and Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez in 1982.\nAdaptations.\nShort stories are sometimes adapted for radio, TV or film:\nCharacteristics.\nAs a concentrated, concise form of narrative and descriptive prose fiction, the short story has been theorised about through the traditional elements of dramatic structure: exposition (the introduction of setting, situation, and main characters), complication (the event that introduces the conflict), rising action, crisis (the decisive moment for the protagonist and his commitment to a course of action), climax (the point of highest interest in terms of the conflict and the point with the most action) and resolution (the point when the conflict is resolved). Because of their length, short stories may or may not often follow this pattern. For example, modern short stories only occasionally have an exposition, more typically beginning in the middle of the action (\"in medias res\"). As with longer stories, plots of short stories also have a climax, crisis or turning point. In general, short stories feature endings which might be either conclusive or open-ended. Ambiguity is a recurrent trope in short stories; whether in their ending, characterisation or length. As with any art form, the exact characteristics of a short story will vary depending on who is its creator.\nCharacteristic of short story authors, according to professor of English, Clare Hanson, is that they are \"losers and loners, exiles, women, blacks \u2013 writers who for one reason or another have not been part of the ruling 'narrative' or epistemological/experiential framework of their society\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nStill often cited"}
{"id": "28297", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28297", "title": "Soul", "text": "Immaterial essence of a living being\nThe soul is the purported immaterial aspect or essence of a living being. It is typically believed to be immortal and to exist apart from the material world. The three main theories that describe the relationship between the soul and the body are interactionism, parallelism, and epiphenomenalism. Anthropologists and psychologists have found that most humans are naturally inclined to believe in the existence of the soul and that they have interculturally distinguished between souls and bodies.\nThe soul has been the central area of interest in philosophy since ancient times. Socrates envisioned the soul to possess a rational faculty, its practice being man's most godlike activity. Plato believed the soul to be the person's real self, an immaterial and immortal dweller of our lives that continues and thinks even after death. Aristotle sketched out the soul as the \"first actuality\" of a naturally organized body\u2014form and matter arrangement allowing natural beings to aspire to full actualization.\nMedieval philosophers expanded upon these classical foundations. Ibn Sina distinguished between the soul and the spirit, arguing that the soul's immortality follows from its nature rather than serving as a purpose to fulfill. Following Aristotelian principles, Thomas Aquinas understood the soul as the first actuality of the living body but maintained that it could exist without a body since it has operations independent of corporeal organs. During the Age of Enlightenment, Immanuel Kant defined the soul as the \"I\" in the most technical sense, holding that we can prove that \"all properties and actions of the soul cannot be recognized from materiality\".\nDifferent religions conceptualize souls in different ways. Buddhism generally teaches the non-existence of a permanent self (), contrasting with Christianity's belief in an eternal soul that experiences death as a transition to God's presence in heaven. Hinduism views the ('self', 'essence') as identical to \"Brahman\" in some traditions, while Islam uses two terms\u2014r\u016b\u1e25 and \u2014to distinguish between the divine spirit and a personal disposition. Jainism considers the soul () to be an eternal but changing form until liberation, while Judaism employs multiple terms such as and to refer to the soul. Sikhism regards the soul as part of God (), Shamanism often embraces soul dualism with \"body souls\" and \"free souls\", while Taoism recognizes dual soul types (and).\nEtymology.\nThe English noun \"soul\" stems from the Old English . The earliest attestations reported in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" are from the 8th century. In the Vespasian Psalter 77.50, it means 'self', 'life' or 'animate existence'. In King Alfred's translation of \"De Consolatione Philosophiae\", it is used to refer to the immaterial, spiritual, or thinking aspect of a person, as contrasted with the person's physical body. The Old English word is cognate with other historical Germanic terms for the same idea, including Old Frisian , (which could also mean 'salvation', or 'solemn oath'), Gothic , Old High German , , Old Saxon , and Old Norse . Present-day cognates include Dutch and German .\nReligion.\nBuddhism.\nThe concepts of (not-self) is fundamental to Buddhism. Early Buddhists were suspicious about the spiritual value of a soul. They wanted to clearly reject the notion of a mortal body and eternal soul dualism that Jainism posited and that lead to ascetics starving themselves to death to free the soul from the mortal prison. From a historical perspective, the doctrine of evolved out of two main philosophico-religious beliefs: eternalism (sassata-\"vada\") and annihilationism (\"anuyoga\"). The eternalists assert the eternity of the soul; ritual purity, celestial beings, heaven and hell, mortification of the body, etc. In contrast, the annihilationists deny the immortality of the soul and believe that the soul only exists as long as the body does. Since they believe that the soul dies with the body, they prescribe practising self-indulgence () in order to enjoy pleasures experienced through the senses. The Buddha rejects both views and identifies their origins to be caused by two cravings: Desire for immortality drags people to eternalism, when life is pleasurable, while unpleasant states lead to annihilation because of the craving for self-discontinuity. Buddha identifies both views as soul-theories, as both identify a self through craving.\nThe idea of an unchanging soul conflicts with the principles of dependent origination and cessation of all of the five aggregates. Due to their impermanence, they are considered \"empty\" or \"without essence\". Through the lens of impermanence, Buddhists recognize that all phenomena\u2014whether physical or mental\u2014are in a continuous cycle of arising and dissolving, with nothing being permanent, including the perception of a self or soul. In Buddhism, the only absolute is \"\u015a\u016bnyat\u0101\". The self is a retrospective evaluation of sensual experience. This sensory experience then leads to craving and the formation of the thought \"this is mine\", whereby creating the notion of a self. It is this continuity of craving to a self, which gives raise to a new birth. Buddhists regard the identification of an independent soul with perception as mistaken, since our perception of the world depends on the sense organs. In the Cetana-sutta, the flow of consciousness maintains the connection between one birth to another, and also determines the conditions of the conceptions into the mother's womb, where they forget about their previous lives. The mentions three modes of self-continuity: sensual self-continuity (), fine-material mode (), and immaterial self-continuity (), the latter two take place among those who practise absorption meditations () and become brahmas. \nHowever, even this transmission of consciousness cannot be identified with a soul, for the very possibility of losing consciousness would be inexplicable. Were there a soul, Buddhists would associate it with something entirely devoid of sensibility\u2014yet such an entity would lack any basis for being identified as \"me\". Another argument against an autonomous soul is that it could will itself to never die or get sick, however, death and sickness happen against the will of individuals. The final argument is that, within Buddhist thought, nothing has been identified as unchanging or permanent. Since consciousness too is impermanent, an unchanging soul cannot exist. Thus, every individual is a complex interplay of physical and mental phenomena, all dependent on countless conditions; once these phenomena and conditions are removed, no enduring self can be found.\nUnanswerable question.\nThe Buddha left ten questions unanswered, one of which concerned the existence of a soul (\"Is the soul one thing and the body another?\" and \"Who is it that is reborn?\"). This led some people to believe that the Buddha only rejected a soul defined through one (or more) of the five aggregates (\"Skandha\"). Another interpretation holds that he remained silent, because the Buddha considered the question irrelevant to the pursuit of enlightenment. Whether he knew the answer remains a matter of debate. Yet another view argues that the Buddha remained silent, because the question itself is invalid.\nThose who argue that the Buddha affirmed a self, independent from body and mind, as proposed by the eternalists or annihilists, argue that the soul is something transcending the five aggregates. Some Buddhists of the Mahayana tradition believe that the soul is not absolute, but immortal; the soul cannot die, although influenced by karma, since the soul is unborn and unconditioned. In support for that view, Christopher Gowan points at Buddhist texts possibly implying some sort of self, such as references to personal pronouns, and the need for a self who suffers in order to aim for release in nirvana. Due to the implicit references in the Buddhist doctrines, Gowan also rejects the view that they are merely conventions of speech, rather the best way to understand Buddha's teachings coherently would be to distinguishing between a substantial self and an ever changing self beyond the five aggregates. The Buddha would have rejected the former, but implicitly affirmed the latter.\nIn contrast, others hold that the Buddha remained silent on this matter, because they are invalid questions. When asked such a question (\"Who is reborn?\") the existence of a self is presupposed. However, if souls do not exist, no one can be reborn in the first place, and thus, there is no accurate answer to the question. This view also disapproves of later responses within traditional Buddhist schools, such as Theravada, who answered the question on identity in paradoxical terms, yet whereby implicitly affirming some sort of self or soul.\nTwo Truths.\nIn the early Buddhist text \"Milinda's Questions\", the nature of the enduring self is examined through a dialogue between the Greek king Milinda and the monk N\u0101gasena. When asked about his identity, N\u0101gasena explains that in truth, there is no N\u0101gasena, because his name is merely a label. To illustrate his point, he refers to Milinda's chariot and asks whether its essence lies in the axle, the wheels, or the framework. Milinda concedes that the chariot's essence is not found in any single part, but maintains that the term 'chariot' is still meaningful, as it refers to the combination of all its parts. N\u0101gasena agrees\u2014and adds that this is precisely his point: there is no N\u0101gasena beyond the five aggregates that constitute him. Like the chariot, the person is a conventional designation applied to a collection of interdependent components.\nThe example of Milinda's chariot relates to the Buddhist Two truths doctrine. Accordingly, the conventional truth refers to phenomenal truths of the perceptive world, including persons, but ultimately, they are devoid of essence and independent existence. Upon realization of the self as a mere convention, fear of death and attachment to self-permanence would cease, as there is no self to attach to in the first place. This interpretation of \"Milinda's Questions\" was often compared to David Hume's bundle theory.\nChristianity.\nThe Bible teaches that upon death, souls are immediately welcomed into heaven, having received forgiveness of sins through accepting Christ as Savior. Believers experience death as a transition where they depart their physical bodies to dwell in God's presence. While the soul is united with God at death, the physical body remains in the grave, awaiting resurrection. At the time of the resurrection, the body will be raised, perfected, and reunited with the soul. This fully restored, glorified unity of body and spirit will then exist eternally in the renewed creation described in Revelation 21\u201322.\nPaul the Apostle used \"psych\u0113\" (\u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae) and \"pneuma\" (\u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1) specifically to distinguish between the Jewish notions of \"nephesh\" (\u05e0\u05e4\u05e9), meaning soul, and \"ruah\" (\u05e8\u05d5\u05d7), meaning spirit (also in the Septuagint, e.g. Genesis 1:2 \u05e8\u05d5\u05bc\u05d7\u05b7 \u05d0\u05b1\u05dc\u05b9\u05d4\u05b4\u05d9\u05dd = \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1 \u03b8\u03b5\u03bf\u1fe6 = \"spiritus Dei\" = 'the Spirit of God'). This has led some Christians to espouse a trichotomic view of humans, which characterizes humans as consisting of a body (\"soma\"), soul (\"psyche\"), and spirit (\"pneuma\"). However, others believe that \"spirit\" and \"soul\" are used interchangeably in many biblical passages and so hold to dichotomy: the view that each human comprises a body and a soul. The author of Hebrews said, \"For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit.\"\nThe \"origin of the soul\" has proved a vexing question in Christianity. The major theories put forward include soul creationism, traducianism, and pre-existence. According to soul creationism, God creates each individual soul directly, either at the moment of conception or at some later time. According to traducianism, the soul comes from the parents by natural generation. According to the pre-existence theory, the soul exists before the moment of conception. There have been differing thoughts regarding whether human embryos have souls from conception, or whether there is a point between conception and birth where the fetus acquires a soul, consciousness, and personhood.\nCorruptionism is the view that following physical death, the human being ceases to exist (until resurrection) but their soul persists in the afterlife. Survivalism holds that both the human being and their soul persist in the afterlife, as distinct entities, with the soul constituting the human. Most Thomists hold to the corruptionist view, arguing that a human person is a composite of matter and soul. Survivalists argue that while a person is not identical to their soul, it is sufficient to constitute a person. In recent years, a middle view has been put forward: that the separated soul is an incomplete person. It argues that the soul meets most of the criteria of a person but that the survivalist view fails to capture the unnaturalness of a person surviving death.\nHinduism.\n is a Sanskrit word that means inner self or soul. In Hindu philosophy, especially in the Vedanta school of Hinduism, \"\u0100tman\" is the first principle, the true self of an individual beyond identification with phenomena, the essence of an individual. In order to attain liberation (\"moksha\"), a human being must acquire self-knowledge (\"\u0101tma j\u00f1\u0101na\"), which is to realize that one's true self (\"\u0100tman\") is identical with the transcendent self \"Brahman\" according to Advaita Vedanta. The six orthodox schools of Hinduism believe that there is \"\u0100tman\" ('self', 'essence') in every being.\nIn Hinduism and Jainism, a (, '; , ') is a living being, or any entity imbued with a life force. The concept of \"j\u012bva\" in Jainism is similar to \"\u0100tman\" in Hinduism; however, some Hindu traditions differentiate between the two concepts, with \"j\u012bva\" considered as an individual self, but with \"\u0100tman\" as that which is the universal unchanging self that is present in all living beings and everything else as the metaphysical \"Brahman\". The latter is sometimes referred to as \"j\u012bva-\u0101tman\" (a soul in a living body).\nIslam.\nIslam uses two words for the soul: \"r\u016b\u1e25\" (translated as 'spirit', 'consciousness', 'pneuma', or 'soul') and \"nafs\" (translated as 'self', 'ego', 'psyche', or 'soul'). The two terms are frequently used interchangeably, although \"r\u016b\u1e25\" is more often used to denote the divine spirit or \"the breath of life\", while \"nafs\" designates one's disposition or characteristics. The Taj al-'Arus min Jawahir al-Qamus lists several meanings of \"nafs\", including two from the Lis\u0101n al-\u02bfArab, including spirit, self, desire, evil eye, disdain, body. Lane's Lexicon notes that humans consist of \"nafs\" and \"r\u016b\u1e25\". The former applies to the mind and the latter to life. Attribution of \"nafs\" to God (Allah) is avoided. Al-Bag\u0332h\u0332d\u0101d\u012b also rejected that God has \"r\u016b\u1e25\" in order to have life, as Christian beliefs, and proposes that all spirits (\"arw\u0101\u1e25\") are created.\nIn the Quran, \"nafs\" (plurals: \"anfus\" and \"nuf\u016bs\") refers in most cases to the person or a self. It is used for both humans and djinn (but not to angels). When referring to the soul it is of three types: the commanding self (\"amm\u0101ra bi \u2019l s\u016b\u02be\"), remniscient of the Hebrew \"nefes\u0332h\u0332\" (physical appetite) and the Pauline idea of \"flesh\" (\u03c6\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae) and is always evil, its greed must be feared, and it must be restraint. The accusing self (\"laww\u0101ma\") is the soul of the deserters. Lastly, there is the tranquil soul (\"mu\u1e6dma\u02beinna\"). This typology of the soul is the foundation for later Muslim treatises on ethics and psychology.\nIslamic philosophy (\"falsafa\").\nMost Muslim philosophers (Arabic: ), aligned with their Greek predecessors, broadly accepted that the soul is composed of non-rational and rational elements. The non-rational dimension was subdivided into the vegetative and animal souls, while the rational aspect was split into the practical and theoretical intellects. While all agreed that the non-rational soul is tied to the body, opinions diverged on the rational part: some deemed it immaterial and naturally independent of the body, whereas others asserted the entirely material nature of all soul components. Ibn Hazm uses and interchangeably. He also rejected metempsychosis that all souls were already created then the angels were commanded to bow before Adam, waiting in Barzakh until the blown into the embryo.\nConsensus held that during its union with the body, the non-rational soul governs bodily functions, the practical intellect manages earthly and corporeal matters, and the theoretical intellect pursues knowledge of universal, eternal truths. These thinkers maintained that the soul's highest purpose or happiness lies in transcending bodily desires to contemplate timeless universal principles. All agreed the non-rational soul is mortal\u2014created and inevitably perishable. However, views on the rational soul's fate varied: al-Farabi suggested its eternal survival was uncertain; Ibn Sina claimed it was uncreated and immortal; and Ibn Rushd argued that the entire soul, including all its parts, is transient and ultimately ceases to exist.\nFor Ibn Arabi, the soul is human potential, and the purpose of life is the actualization of that potential. Human experience is whereby always between the body () and spirit (), and thus the individual experience is limited to imagination (). Wavering between its body and spirit, the soul can choose (free-will) between either ascending to realization or descending to the materialistic mind, which Ibn Arabi compares to Muhammad's Night Journey (). This allows the soul to determine its own tragectory in a karmic chain of causalities, towards paradisical or infernal levels, depending on the person's understanding, traits, and actions.\nTheology (\"kalam\").\nAl-Ghazali (fl.\u200911th century) reconciles the Sunni views on the soul with Avicennan philosophy (). Al-Ghazali defines human as a spiritual substance (), neither confined, nor joined, nor separated from the body. It possesses knowledge and perception. He identifies the immaterial self with the and of the Quran and for bodily desires which must be disciplined. He, however, refuses to elaborate on the deepest nature of the soul, as he claims it is forbidden by \"shar\u012b\u02bfah\", on grounds that it is beyond comprehension.\nAccording to al-Ghazali, consists of three elements: animals, devils, and angels. The term for the self or soul is heart (). The , in al-Ghazali's concept of the soul, is best be understood as psyche, a 'vehicle' () of the soul, but yet distinct. The animalistic parts of is concerned with bodily functions, such as eating and sleeping, the devilish part with deceit and lies, and the angelic part with contemplating the signs of God and preventing lust and anger. Accordingly, the inclinations towards following either or the intellect is associated with supernatural agents: the angels inspire to follow the intellect () and the devils tempt to give in into evil ().\nAl-Baydawi's psychology shows influence from the writings of al-Ghazali, whom he also mentions explicitly. His classification of souls is elaborated in his \"\", authored c.\u20091300. Like, al-Ghazali, he is in support of the existence of the soul as independent from the body and offers both rational as well as Quranic evidence. He further adds that is created when the body is completed, but is not embodied itself, and is connected with .\nWhen discussing the souls, al-Baydawi establishes a cosmological hierarchy of heavenly Intellects. Accordingly, God, in his unity (), first creates the Intellect (), which is neither body, nor form, but the cause of all other potentialities. From this Intellect, a third Intellect is produced up to the tenth Intellect, which in turn influences the elements and bring fourth the spirits (). Below these Intellects are the \"souls of the spheres\" () identified with the heavenly angels. Below them are the incorporeal earthly angels, both good and evil angels ( and ), angels in control of the elements and the \"souls of reasoning\" (), as well as djinn.\nIsmailism.\nIsmaili cosmology is largely described through Neo-Platonic and Gnostic ideas. Two influential Ismaili teachers are Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani during the 10th century and Nasir Khusraw during the 11th. One of Sijistani's key doctrines is the immateriality of the soul, which belongs to the spiritual domain but is captured in the body of the material world. In his soteriological teachings, the soul needs to discard sensual pleasures for the sake of intellectual gratification through spiritual ascension. One of Sijistani's arguments is, that sensual pleasure is finite, and thus cannot be part of the eternal soul. Although not made explicit by Sijistani himself, other Ismaili authors propose that a soul attached to material pleasure will be reborn in another sensual body on earth, first as a dark-skinned person, a Berber, or a Turk, then as an animals, an insects, or a plant, all believed to be progressively less likely to pursue spiritual or intellectual virtues.\nIn this context, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi identifies the earthly world with . The are identified with the nineteen evil forces that distract human being from heavenly truths and diverge them to material and sensual concerns, including distorted imagination (). The paradisical houris are conceptualized as items of knowledge from the spiritual world, the soul is united with in a form of metaphorical marriage, per Surah 44:54. This type of knowledge is inaccessible to those souls remaining in the earthly domain or hell.\nNasir Khusraw equates the rational soul of humans with a spirit potentially angel and demon. The soul is a potential angel or potential demon, depending on their obedience to God's law. The obedient soul is growing to a potential angel and becomes an actual angel upon death, while the soul seeking out sensual delights is a potential demon and turns into an actual demon in the next world.\nJainism.\nIn Jainism, every living being, from plant or bacterium to human, has a soul and the concept forms the very basis of Jainism. According to Jainism, there is no beginning or end to the existence of soul. It is eternal in nature and changes its form until it attains liberation. In Jainism, is the immortal essence or soul of a living organism, such as human, animal, fish, or plant, which survives physical death. The term in Jainism means 'not soul', and represents matter (including body), time, space, non-motion and motion. In Jainism, a is either (mundane, caught in cycle of rebirths) or ('liberated').\nAccording to this belief until the time the soul is liberated from the (cycle of repeated birth and death), it gets attached to one of these bodies based on the karma ('actions') of the individual soul. Irrespective of which state the soul is in, it has got the same attributes and qualities. The difference between the liberated and non-liberated souls is that the qualities and attributes are manifested completely in case of ('liberated soul') as they have overcome all karmic bondage, whereas in case of non-liberated souls they are partially exhibited. Souls who rise victorious over wicked emotions while still remaining within physical bodies are referred to as .\nConcerning the Jain view of the soul, Virchand Gandhi said that, \"the soul lives its own life, not for the purpose of the body, but the body lives for the purpose of the soul. If we believe that the soul is to be controlled by the body then soul misses its power.\"\nJudaism.\nThe Hebrew terms ('living being'), ('wind'), ('breath'), ('life') and ('singularity') are used to describe the soul or spirit.\nJewish beliefs concerning the concept and nature of the soul are complicated by a lack of singularly authoritative traditions and differing beliefs in an afterlife. The conception of an immortal soul separate from and capable of surviving a human being after death was not present in early Jewish belief, but became prevalent by the onset of the Common Era. This conception of the soul differed from that of the Greek, and later Christian, belief in that the soul was viewed an ontological substance which was intrinsically inseparable from the human body. At the same time, a burgeoning belief in an afterlife required some form of continued existence following the end of mortal life in order to partake in the world to come. This need for apparent dichotomy is reflected in the Talmud, where the biblical psychophysical unity of the soul remains, but the possibility of the soul's simultaneous existence on both a physical and a spiritual level is embraced. This essential paradox is only reinforced by subsequent Rabbinical works. Ultimately, the specific nature of the soul was of secondary concern to rabbinical authorities, and indeed remains as such in most modern traditions.\nAs spiritual and mystic traditions developed, the Jewish concept of the soul underwent a number of changes. Kabbalah and other mystic traditions go into greater detail into the nature of the soul. Kabbalah separates the soul into five elements, corresponding to the five worlds:\nKabbalah proposed a concept of reincarnation, the (, the 'animal soul'). Some Jewish traditions assert that the soul is housed in the bone, although traditions disagree as to whether it is the atlas at the top of the spine, or the sacrum at bottom of the spine.\nShamanism.\nSoul dualism, also called \"multiple souls\" or \"dualistic pluralism\", is a common belief in Shamanism, and is essential in the universal and central concept of \"soul flight\" (also called \"soul journey\", \"out-of-body experience\", \"ecstasy\", or \"astral projection\"). It involves the belief that humans have two or more souls, generally termed the \"body soul\" (or \"life soul\"), and the \"free soul\". The former is linked to bodily functions and awareness when awake, while the latter can freely wander during sleep or trance states. In some cases, there are a plethora of soul types with different functions. Soul dualism and multiple souls appear prominently in the traditional animistic beliefs of the Austronesian peoples, the Chinese people (\"hun\" and \"po\"), the Tibetan people, most African peoples, most Native North Americans, ancient South Asian peoples, Northern Eurasian peoples, and among Ancient Egyptians (the \"ka\" and \"ba\").\nBelief in soul dualism is found throughout most Austronesian shamanistic traditions. The reconstructed Proto-Austronesian word for the 'body soul' is \"*nawa\" ('breath', 'life', or 'vital spirit'). The body-soul is located somewhere in the abdominal cavity, often in the liver or the heart (Proto-Austronesian \"*qaCay\"). The \"free soul\" is located in the head. Its names are usually derived from Proto-Austronesian \"*qaNiCu\" ('ghost', 'spirit [of the dead]'), which also apply to other non-human nature spirits. The \"free soul\" is also referred to in names that literally mean 'twin' or 'double', from Proto-Austronesian \"*duSa\" ('two'). A virtuous person is said to be one whose souls are in harmony with each other, while an evil person is one whose souls are in conflict.\nThe \"free soul\" is said to leave the body and journey to the spirit world during sleep, trance-like states, delirium, insanity, and at death. The duality is also seen in the healing traditions of Austronesian shamans, where illnesses are regarded as a \"soul loss\"\u2014and thus to heal the sick, one must \"return\" the \"free soul\" (which may have been stolen by an evil spirit or got lost in the spirit world) into the body. If the \"free soul\" cannot be returned, the afflicted person dies or goes permanently insane. The shaman heals within the spiritual dimension by returning 'lost' parts of the human soul from wherever they have gone. The shaman also cleanses excess negative energies, which confuse or pollute the soul.\nIn some ethnic groups, there can be more than two souls. Among the Tagbanwa people of the Philippines a person is said to have six souls\u2014the \"free soul\" (which is regarded as the \"true\" soul) and five secondary souls with various functions. Several Inuit groups believe that a person has more than one type of soul. One is associated with respiration, the other can accompany the body as a shadow. In some cases, it is connected to shamanistic beliefs among the various Inuit groups. Caribou Inuit groups also believed in several types of souls.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism, the soul, referred to as the \"\u0100tman\", is understood as a pure consciousness without any content. The soul is considered to be eternal and inherently connected to the divine (\"Paramatman\"), although its journey is shaped by karma\u2014the cumulative effect of one's actions, thoughts, and deeds. According to Sikh teachings, the soul undergoes cycles of rebirth (transmigration) until it achieves liberation (\"mukti\") from this cycle, a process governed by the principles of divine order (hukam) and grace (\"nadar\").\nThe cycle of rebirth is influenced by the individual's attachment to worldly desires and ego (\"haumai\"), which obscures the soul's innate connection to the divine. Sikh scripture warns that preoccupation with material wealth, familial ties, or sensory pleasures at the moment of death can lead to rebirth in lower life forms, such as animals or spirits. Conversely, meditation on God's name (Nam Simran) and remembrance of the divine (\"Waheguru\") during life\u2014and especially at death\u2014enable the soul to merge with the eternal truth (Sach Khand), ending the cycle of reincarnation.\nCentral to Sikh doctrine is the belief that while karma determines the soul's trajectory, divine grace can transcend karmic limitations. The Guru Granth Sahib claims that liberation ultimately depends on God's will. Ethical living, including honest labor (Kirat Karo), sharing resources (Vand Chhako), and community service (\"seva\").\nTaoism.\nIn Taoism, the idea of the \"soul\" is not a single, unchanging entity like in many Western traditions. Instead, it is seen as a dynamic balance of energies. Two key parts are the \"hun\" and \"po\". The \"hun\" is the \"ethereal soul\", linked to light, spiritual awareness, and the mind. It is considered yang ('active, upward energy') and is said to depart the body after death. The \"po\" is the \"corporeal soul\", tied to the body, instincts, and physical senses. It is yin ('passive, earthly energy') and stays with the body after death, dissolving back into the earth over time.\nThere is significant scholarly debate about the Taoist understanding of death. The process of death itself is described as \"shijie\" or \"release from the corpse\", but what happens after is described variously as transformation, immortality or ascension of the soul to heaven. For example, the Yellow Emperor was said to have ascended directly to heaven in plain sight, while the thaumaturge Ye Fashan was said to have transformed into a sword and then into a column of smoke which rose to heaven.\nTaoist texts such as the Zhuangzi suggest the soul is not separate from the natural world but part of the flow of the Tao (the universal principle). One passage states, \"Heaven and earth were born at the same time I was, and the ten thousand things are one with me.\" Similarly, the \"Daodejing\" teaches that harmony with the Tao dissolves rigid boundaries between self and cosmos: \"Returning to one's roots is known as stillness. This is what is meant by returning to one's destiny.\"\nPhilosophy.\nGreek philosophers, such as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, understood that the soul (\u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae, \"psykh\u1e17\") must have a logical faculty, the exercise of which was the most divine of human actions. At his defense trial, Socrates even summarized his teachings as nothing other than an exhortation for his fellow Athenians to excel in matters of the psyche since all bodily goods are dependent on such excellence (\"Apology\" 30a\u2013b). Aristotle reasoned that a man's body and soul were his matter and form respectively: the body is a collection of elements and the soul is the essence. Soul or psyche (Ancient Greek: \u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae \"psykh\u1e17\", of \u03c8\u03cd\u03c7\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \"ps\u00fdkhein\", 'to breathe', cf. Latin \"anima\") comprises the mental abilities of a living being: reason, character, free will, feeling, consciousness, qualia, memory, perception, thinking, and so on. Depending on the philosophical system, a soul can either be mortal or immortal.\nThe ancient Greeks used the term \"ensouled\" to represent the concept of being alive, indicating that the earliest surviving Western philosophical view believed that the soul was that which gave the body life. The soul was considered the incorporeal or spiritual \"breath\" that animates (from the Latin \"anima\", cf. \"animal\") the living organism. Francis M. Cornford quotes Pindar by saying that the soul sleeps while the limbs are active, but when one is sleeping, the soul is active and reveals \"an award of joy or sorrow drawing near\" in dreams. Erwin Rohde writes that an early pre-Pythagorean belief presented the soul as lifeless when it departed the body, and that it retired into Hades with no hope of returning to a body. Plato was the first thinker in antiquity to combine the various functions of the soul into one coherent conception: the soul is that which moves things (i.e., that which gives life, on the view that life is self-motion) by means of its thoughts, requiring that it be both a mover and a thinker.\nSocrates and Plato.\nDrawing on the words of his teacher Socrates, Plato considered the psyche to be the essence of a person, being that which decides how humans behave. He considered this essence to be an incorporeal, eternal occupant of our being. Plato said that even after death, the soul exists and is able to think. He believed that as bodies die, the soul is continually reborn (metempsychosis) in subsequent bodies; however, Aristotle believed that only one part of the soul was immortal, namely the intellect (). The Platonic soul consists of three parts, which are located in different regions of the body:\nPlato compares the three parts of the soul or psyche to a societal caste system. According to Plato's theory, the three-part soul is essentially the same thing as a state's class system because, to function well, each part must contribute so that the whole functions well. \"Logos\" keeps the other functions of the soul regulated.\nThe soul is at the heart of Plato's philosophy. Francis Cornford described the twin pillars of Platonism as being the theory of forms on the one hand, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul on the other. Plato was the first person in the history of philosophy to believe that the soul was both the source of life and the mind. In Plato's dialogues, the soul plays many disparate roles. Among other things, Plato believes that the soul is what gives life to the body (which was articulated most of all in the \"Laws\" and \"Phaedrus\") in terms of self-motion: to be alive is to be capable of moving yourself, and the soul is a self-mover. He also thinks that the soul is the bearer of moral properties (i.e., when one is virtuous, it is their soul that is virtuous as opposed to, say, their body). The soul is also the mind: it is that which thinks in them. This casual oscillation between different roles of the soul in observed many dialogues, including the \"Republic:\"Is there any function of the soul that you could not accomplish with anything else, such as taking care of something (\"epimeleisthai\"), ruling, and deliberating, and other such things? Could we correctly assign these things to anything besides the soul, and say that they are characteristic (\"idia\") of it?\nNo, to nothing else.\nWhat about living? Will we deny that this is a function of the soul?\nThat absolutely is.The \"Phaedo\" most famously caused problems to scholars who were trying to make sense of this aspect of Plato's theory of the soul, such as Dorothea Frede and Sarah Broadie. 2020s scholarship overturned this accusation by arguing that part of the novelty of Plato's theory of the soul is that it was the first to unite the different features and powers of the soul that became commonplace in later ancient and medieval philosophy. For Plato, the soul moves things by means of its thoughts, as one scholar puts it, and accordingly the soul is both a mover (i.e., the principle of life, where life is conceived of as self-motion) and a thinker.\nAristotle.\nAristotle defined the soul, or \"Ps\u016bch\u00ea\" (\u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae), as the \"first actuality\" of a naturally organized body, and argued against its separate existence from the physical body. In Aristotle's view, the primary activity, or full actualization, of a living thing constitutes its soul. For example, the full actualization of an eye, as an independent organism, is to see (its purpose or final cause). Another example is that the full actualization of a human being would be living a fully functional human life in accordance with reason (which he considered to be a faculty unique to humanity). For Aristotle, the soul is the organization of the form and matter of a natural being which allows it to strive for its full actualization. This organization between form and matter is necessary for any activity, or functionality, to be possible in a natural being. Using an artifact (non-natural being) as an example, a house is a building for human habituation but for a house to be actualized requires the material, such as wood, nails, or bricks necessary for its actuality (i.e., being a fully functional house); however, this does not imply that a house has a soul. In regards to artifacts, the source of motion that is required for their full actualization is outside of themselves (for example, a builder builds a house). In natural beings, this source of motion is contained within the being itself.\nAristotle addressed the faculties of the soul. The various faculties of the soul, such as nutrition, movement (peculiar to animals), reason (peculiar to humans), sensation (special, common, and incidental), and so forth, when exercised, constitute the \"second actuality\", or fulfillment, of the capacity to be alive. For example, someone who falls asleep, as opposed to someone who falls dead, can wake up and live their life, while the latter can no longer do so. Aristotle identified three hierarchical levels of natural beings: plants, animals, and people, having three different degrees of soul: \"Bios\" ('life'), \"Zo\u00eb\" ('animate life'), and \"Psuch\u00eb\" ('self-conscious life'). For these groups, he identified three corresponding levels of soul, or biological activity: the nutritive activity of growth, sustenance and reproduction which all life shares (\"Bios\"); the self-willed motive activity and sensory faculties, which only animals and people have in common (\"Zo\u00eb\"); and finally \"reason\", of which humans alone are capable (\"Pseuch\u00eb\"). Aristotle's discussion of the soul is in his work, \"De Anima\" (\"On the Soul\").\nAlthough mostly seen as opposing Plato in regard to the immortality of the soul, a controversy can be found in relation to the fifth chapter of the third book: in this text both interpretations can be argued for, soul as a whole can be deemed mortal, and a part called \"active intellect\" or \"active mind\" is immortal and eternal. Advocates exist for both sides of the controversy; it is argued that there will be permanent disagreement about its final conclusions, as no other Aristotelian text contains this specific point, and this part of \"De Anima\" is obscure. Furthermore, Aristotle states that the soul helps humans find the truth, and understanding the true purpose or role of the soul is extremely difficult.\nAvicenna and Ibn al-Nafis.\nFollowing Aristotle, Avicenna (Ibn Sina) and Ibn al-Nafis, an Arab physician, further elaborated upon the Aristotelian understanding of the soul and developed their own theories on the soul. They both made a distinction between the soul and the spirit, and the Avicennian doctrine on the nature of the soul was influential among later Muslims. Some of Avicenna's views on the soul include the idea that the immortality of the soul is a consequence of its nature, and not a purpose for it to fulfill. In his theory of \"The Ten Intellects\", he viewed the human soul as the tenth and final intellect.\nWhile he was imprisoned, Avicenna wrote his famous \"Floating man\" thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantial nature of the soul. He told his readers to imagine themselves suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations, which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies. He argues that in this scenario one would still have self-consciousness. He thus concludes that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing, and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms but as a primary given, a substance. This argument was later refined and simplified by Ren\u00e9 Descartes in epistemic terms, when he stated, \"I can abstract from the supposition of all external things, but not from the supposition of my own consciousness.\"\nAvicenna generally supported Aristotle's idea of the soul originating from the heart, whereas Ibn al-Nafis rejected this idea and instead argued that the soul \"is related to the entirety and not to one or a few organs\". He further criticized Aristotle's idea whereby every unique soul requires the existence of a unique source, in this case the heart. Al-Nafis concluded that \"the soul is related primarily neither to the spirit nor to any organ, but rather to the entire matter whose temperament is prepared to receive that soul\", and he defined the soul as nothing other than \"what a human indicates by saying \"I\"\".\nThomas Aquinas.\nFollowing Aristotle and Avicenna, Thomas Aquinas understood the soul to be the first actuality of the living body. Consequent to this, he distinguished three orders of life: plants, which feed and grow; animals, which add sensation to the operations of plants; and humans, which add intellect to the operations of animals. Concerning the human soul, his epistemological theory required that, since \"the knower becomes what he knows\", the soul is definitely not corporeal\u2014if it is corporeal when it knows what some corporeal thing is, that thing would come to be within it. Therefore, the soul has an operation which does not rely on a body organ, and therefore the soul can exist without a body. Furthermore, since the rational soul of human beings is a subsistent form and not something made of matter and form, it cannot be destroyed in any natural process.\nThe full argument for the immortality of the soul and Aquinas' elaboration of Aristotelian theory is found in the \"Summa Theologica\". Aquinas affirmed in the doctrine of the divine effusion of the soul, the particular judgement of the soul after the separation from a dead body, and the final resurrection of the flesh. He recalled two canons of the 4th\u00a0century, for which \"the rational soul is not engendered by coition\", and \"is one and the same soul in man, that both gives life to the body by being united to it, and orders itself by its own reasoning\". Moreover, he believed in a unique and tripartite soul, within which are distinctively present a nutritive, a sensitive, and intellectual soul. The latter is created by God and is taken solely by human beings, includes the other two types of soul and makes the sensitive soul incorruptible.\nAccording to Thomas Aquinas, the soul is \"tota in toto corpore\". This means that the soul is entirely contained in every single part of the human body, and, therefore, ubiquitous and cannot be placed in a single organ, such as the heart or brain, nor is it separable from the body (except after the body's death). In the fourth book of \"De Trinitate\", Augustine of Hippo states that the soul is all in the whole body and all in any part of it.\nImmanuel Kant.\nIn his discussions of rational psychology, Immanuel Kant identified the soul as the \"I\" in the strictest sense, and argued that the existence of inner experience can neither be proved nor disproved. He said, \"We cannot prove a priori the immateriality of the soul, but rather only so much: that all properties and actions of the soul cannot be recognized from materiality.\" It is from the \"I\", or soul, that Kant proposes transcendental rationalization but cautions that such rationalization can only determine the limits of knowledge if it is to remain practical.\nKant critiques the metaphysics of the soul\u2014an investigation he calls \"rational psychology\"\u2014in the \"Paralogisms of Pure Reason\". Rational psychology, as he defines it, seeks to establish metaphysical claims about the soul's nature by analyzing the proposition \"I think\". Many of Kant's rationalist predecessors and contemporaries believed that reflecting on the \"I\" in \"I think\" could demonstrate that the self is necessarily a substance (implying the soul's existence), indivisible (to argue for the soul's immortality), self-identical (pertaining to personal identity), and separate from the external world (leading to skepticism about external reality). Kant, however, asserts that such conclusions stem from an error of reasoning.\nKant believes this error arises when the conceptual thought of the \"I\" in \"I think\" is conflated with genuine cognition of the \"I\" as an object. Cognition, for Kant, requires both intuition (sensory experience) and concepts, whereas the \"I\" here involves only abstract conceptual thought. For example, consider whether the self can be known as a substance. While the \"I\" is always the subject of thoughts (never a predicate of something else), recognizing something as a substance also requires intuiting it as a persistent object. Since a person lacks any intuition of the \"I\" itself, they cannot cognize it as a substance. Thus, in Kant's view, although a person will inevitably conceive of the \"I\" as a soul-like substance, true knowledge of the soul's existence or nature remains out of their reach.\nContemporary philosophy.\nThe notion of soul often relies on a theory called mind-body dualism, which posits that mental phenomena are non-physical. If body and soul (or mind) are of two distinct realms, the question remains how these two are related. Contemporary philosophy of mind distinguishes three major dualist theories about the relationship between mental properties and the body: interactionism, parallelism, and epiphenomenalism. Interactionism holds that physical events and mental events interact with each other. This view is often considered to be the most intuitive: one perceives the mind reacting upon physical stimulation and then thoughts and feelings act upon the physical body, such as by moving it. Thus, humans are naturally inclined in favor of interactionism. The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy states, \"[t]he critical feature of interactionism is its commitment to 'two-way' causation \u2013 mental-to-physical causation and physical-to-mental causation.\"\nParallelism sidesteps debates about mind-body interaction by proposing that both operate in parallel. Under this framework, mental and physical events do not causally influence one another; they merely coincide. When causation occurs, it is strictly confined within each domain: mental events only trigger or result from other mental events, and physical events exclusively cause or are caused by other physical events.\nEpiphenomenalism posits that physical events generate mental events, but mental events themselves lack causal power\u2014they cannot influence physical events or even other mental phenomena. This stance partially accommodates interactionism by permitting causation in a single direction (physical to mental), thereby rejecting parallelism, which denies any causal link between the two realms. In this framework, the mind is likened to a bodily shadow: while the body actively produces effects, the mind is merely a passive byproduct, incapable of driving outcomes or interactions.\nNon-dualist theories include physicalism, the view that everything is physical, and idealism, the conviction that \"a priori\" intelligence grounds all phenomena (science). George Howison put the question about (the necessity of logically prior) souls in context thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The question whether we have not some knowledge independent of any and all experience \u2013 whether there must not, unavoidably, be some knowledge \"a priori\", some knowledge which we come at simply by virtue of our nature \u2013 is really the paramount question, around which the whole conflict in philosophy concentrates, and on the decision of which the settlement of every other question hangs.\nPsychology.\n\"Seelenglaube\" or \"soul-belief\" is a prominent feature in Otto Rank's work. Rank explains the importance of immortality in the psychology of primitive, classical and modern interest in life and death. Rank's work directly opposed the scientific psychology that concedes the possibility of the soul's existence and postulates it as an object of research without really admitting that it exists. He says, \"Just as religion represents a psychological commentary on the social evolution of man, various psychologies represent our current attitudes toward spritual belief. In the animistic era, psychologizing was a \"creating\" of the soul; in the religious era, it was a \"representing\" of the soul to one's self; in our era of natural science it is a \"knowing\" of the individual soul.\" Rank's work had a significant influence on Ernest Becker's understanding of a universal interest in immortality. In \"The Denial of Death\", Becker describes \"soul\" in terms of S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard use of \"self\":\nKierkegaard's use of \"self\" may be a bit confusing. He uses it to include the symbolic self and the physical body. It is a synonym really for \"total personality\" that goes beyond the person to include what we would now call the \"soul\" or the \"ground of being\" out of which the created person sprang.\nAccording to Cognitive scientist Jesse Bering and psychologist Nicholas Humphrey, humans are initially inclined to believe in a soul and are born as soul-body dualists. As such, religious institutions did not need to invent or inherent the idea of the soul from previous traditions, rather the concept has always been present throughout human history. Echoing that sentiment, American philosopher Steward Goetz has claimed that according to anthropologists and psychologists, ordinary human beings are soul-body substance dualists, who, at all times and in all places, have believed in the existence of a distinction between the soul and the body.\nParapsychology.\nSome parapsychologists attempted to establish, by scientific experiment, whether a soul separate from the brain exists, as is more commonly defined in religion rather than as a synonym of psyche or mind.\nOne such attempt became known as the \"21 grams experiment\". In 1901, Duncan MacDougall, a physician from Haverhill, Massachusetts, who wished to scientifically determine if a soul had weight, identified six patients in nursing homes whose deaths were imminent. Four were suffering from tuberculosis, one from diabetes, and one from unspecified causes. MacDougall specifically chose people who were suffering from conditions that caused physical exhaustion, as he needed the patients to remain still when they died to measure them accurately. When the patients looked like they were close to death, their entire bed was placed on an industrial sized scale that was sensitive within two tenths of an ounce (5.6 grams). One of the patients lost \"three-fourths of an ounce\" (21.3 grams), coinciding with the time of death, which led MacDougall to the conclusion that the soul had weight.\nThe physicist Robert L. Park wrote that MacDougall's experiments \"are not regarded today as having any scientific merit\", and the psychologist Bruce Hood wrote that \"because the weight loss was not reliable or replicable, his findings were unscientific\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28298", "revid": "3250596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28298", "title": "The Strand (Band)", "text": ""}
{"id": "28299", "revid": "49721740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28299", "title": "Steradian", "text": "SI derived unit of solid angle\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe steradian (symbol: sr) or square radian is the unit of solid angle in the International System of Units (SI). It is used in three-dimensional geometry, and is analogous to the radian, which quantifies planar angles. A solid angle in the form of a circular cone can be projected onto a sphere from its centre, delineating a spherical cap where the cone intersects the sphere. The magnitude of the solid angle expressed in steradians is defined as the quotient of the surface area of the spherical cap and the square of the sphere's radius. This is analogous to the way a plane angle projected onto a circle delineates a circular arc on the circumference, whose length is proportional to the angle. Steradians can be used to measure a solid angle of any projected shape. The solid angle subtended is the same as that of a cone with the same projected area. A solid angle of one steradian subtends a cone aperture of approximately 1.144 radians or 65.54 degrees.\nIn the SI, solid angle is considered to be a dimensionless quantity, the ratio of the area projected onto a surrounding sphere and the square of the sphere's radius. This is the number of square radians in the solid angle. This means that the SI steradian is the number of square radians in a solid angle equal to one square radian, which of course is the number one. It is useful to distinguish between dimensionless quantities of a different kind, such as the radian (in the SI, a ratio of quantities of dimension length), so the symbol sr is used. For example, radiant intensity can be measured in watts per steradian (W\u22c5sr\u22121). The steradian was formerly an SI supplementary unit, but this category was abolished in 1995 and the steradian is now considered an SI derived unit.\nThe name \"steradian\" is derived from the Greek 'solid' + radian.\nDefinition.\nA steradian can be defined as the solid angle subtended at the centre of a unit sphere by a unit area (of any shape) on its surface. For a general sphere of radius \"r\", any portion of its surface with area \"A\" = \"r\"2 subtends one steradian at its centre.\nA solid angle in the form of a circular cone is related to the area it cuts out of a sphere:\n formula_1\nwhere\nBecause the surface area \"A\" of a sphere is 4\"\u03c0r\"2, the definition implies that a sphere subtends 4\"\u03c0\" steradians (\u2248\u00a012.56637\u00a0sr) at its centre, or that a steradian subtends 1/4\"\u03c0\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.07958 of a sphere. By the same argument, the maximum solid angle that can be subtended at any point is 4\"\u03c0\"\u00a0sr.\nOther properties.\nThe area of a spherical cap is \"A\" = 2\"\u03c0rh\", where h is the \"height\" of the cap. If \"A\" = \"r\"2, then =. From this, one can compute the cone aperture (a plane angle) 2\"\u03b8\" of the cross-section of a simple spherical cone whose solid angle equals one steradian:\n formula_2\ngiving \"\u03b8\" \u2248 0.572\u00a0rad \n 32.77\u00b0 and aperture 2\"\u03b8\" \u2248 1.144\u00a0rad \n 65.54\u00b0.\nThe solid angle of a spherical cone whose cross-section subtends the angle 2\"\u03b8\" is:\n formula_3\nA steradian is also equal to of a complete sphere (spat), to \u2248 3282.80635\u00a0square degrees, and to the spherical area of a polygon having an angle excess of 1\u00a0radian.\nSI multiples.\nMillisteradians (msr) and microsteradians (\u03bcsr) are occasionally used to describe light and particle beams. Other multiples are rarely used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28300", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28300", "title": "Sub-machine gun", "text": ""}
{"id": "28301", "revid": "1241554947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28301", "title": "Simulator", "text": ""}
{"id": "28302", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28302", "title": "Sodermanland", "text": ""}
{"id": "28303", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28303", "title": "Strangnas", "text": ""}
{"id": "28304", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28304", "title": "Saint Adalbert of Prague", "text": ""}
{"id": "28305", "revid": "160367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28305", "title": "String theory", "text": "Theory of subatomic structure\nIn physics, string theory is a theoretical framework in which the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how these strings propagate through space and interact with each other. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string acts like a particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries the gravitational force. Thus, string theory is a theory of quantum gravity.\nString theory is a broad and varied subject that attempts to address a number of deep questions of fundamental physics. String theory has contributed a number of advances to mathematical physics, which have been applied to a variety of problems in black hole physics, early universe cosmology, nuclear physics, and condensed matter physics, and it has stimulated a number of major developments in pure mathematics. Because string theory potentially provides a unified description of gravity and particle physics, it is a candidate for a theory of everything, a self-contained mathematical model that describes all fundamental forces and forms of matter. Despite much work on these problems, it is not known to what extent string theory describes the real world or how much freedom the theory allows in the choice of its details.\nString theory was first studied in the late 1960s as a theory of the strong nuclear force, before being abandoned in favor of quantum chromodynamics. Subsequently, it was realized that the very properties that made string theory unsuitable as a theory of nuclear physics made it a promising candidate for a quantum theory of gravity. The earliest version of string theory, bosonic string theory, incorporated only the class of particles known as bosons. It later developed into superstring theory, which posits a connection called supersymmetry between bosons and the class of particles called fermions. Five consistent versions of superstring theory were developed before it was conjectured in the mid-1990s that they were all different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven dimensions known as M-theory. In late 1997, theorists discovered an important relationship called the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence (AdS/CFT correspondence), which relates string theory to another type of physical theory called a quantum field theory.\nOne of the challenges of string theory is that the full theory does not have a satisfactory definition in all circumstances. Another issue is that the theory is thought to describe an enormous landscape of possible universes, which has complicated efforts to develop theories of particle physics based on string theory. These issues have led some in the community to criticize these approaches to physics, and to question the value of continued research on string theory unification.\nFundamentals.\nOverview.\nIn the 20th century, two theoretical frameworks emerged for formulating the laws of physics. The first is Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, a theory that explains the force of gravity and the structure of spacetime at the macro-level. The other is quantum mechanics, a completely different formulation, which uses known probability principles to describe physical phenomena at the micro-level. By the late 1970s, these two frameworks had proven to be sufficient to explain most of the observed features of the universe, from elementary particles to atoms to the evolution of stars and the universe as a whole.\nIn spite of these successes, there are still many problems that remain to be solved. One of the deepest problems in modern physics is the problem of quantum gravity. The general theory of relativity is formulated within the framework of classical physics, whereas the other fundamental forces are described within the framework of quantum mechanics. A quantum theory of gravity is needed in order to reconcile general relativity with the principles of quantum mechanics, but difficulties arise when one attempts to apply the usual prescriptions of quantum theory to the force of gravity.\nString theory is a theoretical framework that attempts to address these questions. \nThe starting point for string theory is the idea that the point-like particles of particle physics can also be modeled as one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how strings propagate through space and interact with each other. In a given version of string theory, there is only one kind of string, which may look like a small loop or segment of ordinary string, and it can vibrate in different ways. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string will look just like an ordinary particle consistent with non-string models of elementary particles, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. String theory's application as a form of quantum gravity proposes a vibrational state responsible for the graviton, a yet unproven quantum particle that is theorized to carry gravitational force.\nOne of the main developments of the past several decades in string theory was the discovery of certain 'dualities'\u2014mathematical transformations that identify one physical theory with another. Physicists studying string theory have discovered a number of these dualities between different versions of string theory, and this has led to the conjecture that all consistent versions of string theory are subsumed in a single framework known as M-theory.\nStudies of string theory have also yielded a number of results on the nature of black holes and the gravitational interaction. There are certain paradoxes that arise when one attempts to understand the quantum aspects of black holes, and work on string theory has attempted to clarify these issues. In late 1997 this line of work culminated in the discovery of the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence (AdS/CFT for short). This is a theoretical result that relates string theory to other physical theories which are better understood theoretically. The AdS/CFT correspondence has implications for the study of black holes and quantum gravity, and it has been applied to other subjects, including nuclear and condensed matter physics.\nSince string theory incorporates all of the fundamental interactions, including gravity, many physicists hope that it will eventually be developed to the point where it fully describes our universe, making it a theory of everything. One of the goals of current research in string theory is to find a solution of the theory that reproduces the observed spectrum of elementary particles, with a small cosmological constant, containing dark matter and a plausible mechanism for cosmic inflation. While there has been progress toward these goals, it is not known to what extent string theory describes the real world or how much freedom the theory allows in the choice of details.\nOne of the challenges of string theory is that the full theory does not have a satisfactory definition in all circumstances. The scattering of strings is most straightforwardly defined using the techniques of perturbation theory, but it is not known in general how to define string theory nonperturbatively. It is also not clear whether there is any principle by which string theory selects its vacuum state, the physical state that determines the properties of our universe. These problems have led some in the community to criticize these approaches to the unification of physics and question the value of continued research on these problems.\nStrings.\nThe application of quantum mechanics to physical objects such as the electromagnetic field, which are extended in space and time, is known as quantum field theory. In particle physics, quantum field theories form the basis for our understanding of elementary particles, which are modeled as excitations in the fundamental fields.\nIn quantum field theory, one typically computes the probabilities of various physical events using the techniques of perturbation theory. Developed by Richard Feynman and others in the first half of the twentieth century, perturbative quantum field theory uses special diagrams called Feynman diagrams to organize computations. One imagines that these diagrams depict the paths of point-like particles and their interactions.\nThe starting point for string theory is the idea that the point-like particles of quantum field theory can also be modeled as one-dimensional objects called strings. The interaction of strings is most straightforwardly defined by generalizing the perturbation theory used in ordinary quantum field theory. At the level of Feynman diagrams, this means replacing the one-dimensional diagram representing the path of a point particle by a two-dimensional (2D) surface representing the motion of a string. Unlike in quantum field theory, string theory does not have a full non-perturbative definition, so many of the theoretical questions that physicists would like to answer remain out of reach.\nIn theories of particle physics based on string theory, the characteristic length scale of strings is assumed to be on the order of the Planck length, or 10\u221235 meters, the scale at which the effects of quantum gravity are believed to become significant. On much larger length scales, such as the scales visible in physics laboratories, such objects would be indistinguishable from zero-dimensional point particles, and the vibrational state of the string would determine the type of particle. One of the vibrational states of a string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries the gravitational force.\nThe original version of string theory was bosonic string theory, but this version described only bosons, a class of particles that transmit forces between the matter particles, or fermions. Bosonic string theory was eventually superseded by theories called superstring theories. These theories describe both bosons and fermions, and they incorporate a theoretical idea called supersymmetry. In theories with supersymmetry, each boson has a counterpart which is a fermion, and vice versa.\nThere are several versions of superstring theory: type I, type IIA, type IIB, and two flavors of heterotic string theory (\"SO\"(32) and \"E\"8\u00d7\"E\"8). The different theories allow different types of strings, and the particles that arise at low energies exhibit different symmetries. For example, the type I theory includes both open strings (which are segments with endpoints) and closed strings (which form closed loops), while types IIA, IIB and heterotic include only closed strings.\nExtra dimensions.\nIn everyday life, there are three familiar dimensions (3D) of space: height, width and length. Einstein's general theory of relativity treats time as a dimension on par with the three spatial dimensions; in general relativity, space and time are not modeled as separate entities but are instead unified to a four-dimensional (4D) spacetime. In this framework, the phenomenon of gravity is viewed as a consequence of the geometry of spacetime.\nIn spite of the fact that the Universe is well described by 4D spacetime, there are several reasons why physicists consider theories in other dimensions. In some cases, by modeling spacetime in a different number of dimensions, a theory becomes more mathematically tractable, and one can perform calculations and gain general insights more easily. There are also situations where theories in two or three spacetime dimensions are useful for describing phenomena in condensed matter physics. Finally, there exist scenarios in which there could actually be more than 4D of spacetime which have nonetheless managed to escape detection.\nString theories require extra dimensions of spacetime for their mathematical consistency. In bosonic string theory, spacetime is 26-dimensional, while in superstring theory it is 10-dimensional, and in M-theory it is 11-dimensional. In order to describe real physical phenomena using string theory, one must therefore imagine scenarios in which these extra dimensions would not be observed in experiments.\nCompactification is one way of modifying the number of dimensions in a physical theory. In compactification, some of the extra dimensions are assumed to \"close up\" on themselves to form circles. In the limit where these curled up dimensions become very small, one obtains a theory in which spacetime has effectively a lower number of dimensions. A standard analogy for this is to consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose. If the hose is viewed from a sufficient distance, it appears to have only one dimension, its length. However, as one approaches the hose, one discovers that it contains a second dimension, its circumference. Thus, an ant crawling on the surface of the hose would move in two dimensions.\nCompactification can be used to construct models in which spacetime is effectively four-dimensional. However, not every way of compactifying the extra dimensions produces a model with the right properties to describe nature. In a viable model of particle physics, the compact extra dimensions must be shaped like a Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. A Calabi\u2013Yau manifold is a special space which is typically taken to be six-dimensional in applications to string theory. It is named after mathematicians Eugenio Calabi and Shing-Tung Yau.\nAnother approach to reducing the number of dimensions is the so-called brane-world scenario. In this approach, physicists assume that the observable universe is a four-dimensional subspace of a higher dimensional space. In such models, the force-carrying bosons of particle physics arise from open strings with endpoints attached to the four-dimensional subspace, while gravity arises from closed strings propagating through the larger ambient space. This idea plays an important role in attempts to develop models of real-world physics based on string theory, and it provides a natural explanation for the weakness of gravity compared to the other fundamental forces.\nDualities.\nA notable fact about string theory is that the different versions of the theory all turn out to be related in highly nontrivial ways. One of the relationships that can exist between different string theories is called S-duality. This is a relationship that says that a collection of strongly interacting particles in one theory can, in some cases, be viewed as a collection of weakly interacting particles in a completely different theory. Roughly speaking, a collection of particles is said to be strongly interacting if they combine and decay often and weakly interacting if they do so infrequently. Type I string theory turns out to be equivalent by S-duality to the \"SO\"(32) heterotic string theory. Similarly, type IIB string theory is related to itself in a nontrivial way by S-duality.\nAnother relationship between different string theories is T-duality. Here one considers strings propagating around a circular extra dimension. T-duality states that a string propagating around a circle of radius \"R\" is equivalent to a string propagating around a circle of radius 1/\"R\" in the sense that all observable quantities in one description are identified with quantities in the dual description. For example, a string has momentum as it propagates around a circle, and it can also wind around the circle one or more times. The number of times the string winds around a circle is called the winding number. If a string has momentum \"p\" and winding number \"n\" in one description, it will have momentum \"n\" and winding number \"p\" in the dual description. For example, type IIA string theory is equivalent to type IIB string theory via T-duality, and the two versions of heterotic string theory are also related by T-duality.\nIn general, the term \"duality\" refers to a situation where two seemingly different physical systems turn out to be equivalent in a nontrivial way. Two theories related by a duality need not be string theories. For example, Montonen\u2013Olive duality is an example of an S-duality relationship between quantum field theories. The AdS/CFT correspondence is an example of a duality that relates string theory to a quantum field theory. If two theories are related by a duality, it means that one theory can be transformed in some way so that it ends up looking just like the other theory. The two theories are then said to be \"dual\" to one another under the transformation. Put differently, the two theories are mathematically different descriptions of the same phenomena.\nBranes.\nIn string theory and other related theories, a brane is a physical object that generalizes the notion of a point particle to higher dimensions. For instance, a point particle can be viewed as a brane of dimension zero, while a string can be viewed as a brane of dimension one. It is also possible to consider higher-dimensional branes. In dimension \"p\", these are called \"p\"-branes. The word brane comes from the word \"membrane\" which refers to a two-dimensional brane.\nBranes are dynamical objects which can propagate through spacetime according to the rules of quantum mechanics. They have mass and can have other attributes such as charge. A \"p\"-brane sweeps out a (\"p\"+1)-dimensional volume in spacetime called its \"worldvolume\". Physicists often study fields analogous to the electromagnetic field which live on the worldvolume of a brane.\nIn string theory, D-branes are an important class of branes that arise when one considers open strings. As an open string propagates through spacetime, its endpoints are required to lie on a D-brane. The letter \"D\" in D-brane refers to a certain mathematical condition on the system known as the Dirichlet boundary condition. The study of D-branes in string theory has led to important results such as the AdS/CFT correspondence, which has shed light on many problems in quantum field theory.\nBranes are frequently studied from a purely mathematical point of view, and they are described as objects of certain categories, such as the derived category of coherent sheaves on a complex algebraic variety, or the Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold. The connection between the physical notion of a brane and the mathematical notion of a category has led to important mathematical insights in the fields of algebraic and symplectic geometry and representation theory.\nM-theory.\nPrior to 1995, theorists believed that there were five consistent versions of superstring theory (type I, type IIA, type IIB, and two versions of heterotic string theory). This understanding changed in 1995 when Edward Witten suggested that the five theories were just special limiting cases of an eleven-dimensional theory called M-theory. Witten's conjecture was based on the work of a number of other physicists, including Ashoke Sen, Chris Hull, Paul Townsend, and Michael Duff. His announcement led to a flurry of research activity now known as the second superstring revolution.\nUnification of superstring theories.\nIn the 1970s, many physicists became interested in supergravity theories, which combine general relativity with supersymmetry. Whereas general relativity makes sense in any number of dimensions, supergravity places an upper limit on the number of dimensions. In 1978, work by Werner Nahm showed that the maximum spacetime dimension in which one can formulate a consistent supersymmetric theory is eleven. In the same year, Eugene Cremmer, Bernard Julia, and Jo\u00ebl Scherk of the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure showed that supergravity not only permits up to eleven dimensions but is in fact most elegant in this maximal number of dimensions.\nInitially, many physicists hoped that by compactifying eleven-dimensional supergravity, it might be possible to construct realistic models of our four-dimensional world. The hope was that such models would provide a unified description of the four fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism, the strong and weak nuclear forces, and gravity. Interest in eleven-dimensional supergravity soon waned as various flaws in this scheme were discovered. One of the problems was that the laws of physics appear to distinguish between clockwise and counterclockwise, a phenomenon known as chirality. Edward Witten and others observed this chirality property cannot be readily derived by compactifying from eleven dimensions.\nIn the first superstring revolution in 1984, many physicists turned to string theory as a unified theory of particle physics and quantum gravity. Unlike supergravity theory, string theory was able to accommodate the chirality of the standard model, and it provided a theory of gravity consistent with quantum effects. Another feature of string theory that many physicists were drawn to in the 1980s and 1990s was its high degree of uniqueness. In ordinary particle theories, one can consider any collection of elementary particles whose classical behavior is described by an arbitrary Lagrangian. In string theory, the possibilities are much more constrained: by the 1990s, physicists had argued that there were only five consistent supersymmetric versions of the theory.\nAlthough there were only a handful of consistent superstring theories, it remained a mystery why there was not just one consistent formulation. However, as physicists began to examine string theory more closely, they realized that these theories are related in intricate and nontrivial ways. They found that a system of strongly interacting strings can, in some cases, be viewed as a system of weakly interacting strings. This phenomenon is known as S-duality. It was studied by Ashoke Sen in the context of heterotic strings in four dimensions and by Chris Hull and Paul Townsend in the context of the type IIB theory. Theorists also found that different string theories may be related by T-duality. This duality implies that strings propagating on completely different spacetime geometries may be physically equivalent.\nAt around the same time, as many physicists were studying the properties of strings, a small group of physicists were examining the possible applications of higher dimensional objects. In 1987, Eric Bergshoeff, Ergin Sezgin, and Paul Townsend showed that eleven-dimensional supergravity includes two-dimensional branes. Intuitively, these objects look like sheets or membranes propagating through the eleven-dimensional spacetime. Shortly after this discovery, Michael Duff, Paul Howe, Takeo Inami, and Kellogg Stelle considered a particular compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity with one of the dimensions curled up into a circle. In this setting, one can imagine the membrane wrapping around the circular dimension. If the radius of the circle is sufficiently small, then this membrane looks just like a string in ten-dimensional spacetime. Duff and his collaborators showed that this construction reproduces exactly the strings appearing in type IIA superstring theory.\nSpeaking at a string theory conference in 1995, Edward Witten made the surprising suggestion that all five superstring theories were in fact just different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven spacetime dimensions. Witten's announcement drew together all of the previous results on S- and T-duality and the appearance of higher-dimensional branes in string theory. In the months following Witten's announcement, hundreds of new papers appeared on the Internet confirming different parts of his proposal. Today this flurry of work is known as the second superstring revolution.\nInitially, some physicists suggested that the new theory was a fundamental theory of membranes, but Witten was skeptical of the role of membranes in the theory. In a paper from 1996, Ho\u0159ava and Witten wrote \"As it has been proposed that the eleven-dimensional theory is a supermembrane theory but there are some reasons to doubt that interpretation, we will non-committally call it the M-theory, leaving to the future the relation of M to membranes.\" In the absence of an understanding of the true meaning and structure of M-theory, Witten has suggested that the \"M\" should stand for \"magic\", \"mystery\", or \"membrane\" according to taste, and the true meaning of the title should be decided when a more fundamental formulation of the theory is known.\nMatrix theory.\nIn mathematics, a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers or other data. In physics, a matrix model is a particular kind of physical theory whose mathematical formulation involves the notion of a matrix in an important way. A matrix model describes the behavior of a set of matrices within the framework of quantum mechanics.\nOne important example of a matrix model is the BFSS matrix model proposed by Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, Stephen Shenker, and Leonard Susskind in 1997. This theory describes the behavior of a set of nine large matrices. In their original paper, these authors showed, among other things, that the low energy limit of this matrix model is described by eleven-dimensional supergravity. These calculations led them to propose that the BFSS matrix model is exactly equivalent to M-theory. The BFSS matrix model can therefore be used as a prototype for a correct formulation of M-theory and a tool for investigating the properties of M-theory in a relatively simple setting.\nThe development of the matrix model formulation of M-theory has led physicists to consider various connections between string theory and a branch of mathematics called noncommutative geometry. This subject is a generalization of ordinary geometry in which mathematicians define new geometric notions using tools from noncommutative algebra. In a paper from 1998, Alain Connes, Michael R. Douglas, and Albert Schwarz showed that some aspects of matrix models and M-theory are described by a noncommutative quantum field theory, a special kind of physical theory in which spacetime is described mathematically using noncommutative geometry. This established a link between matrix models and M-theory on the one hand, and noncommutative geometry on the other hand. It quickly led to the discovery of other important links between noncommutative geometry and various physical theories.\nBlack holes.\nIn general relativity, a black hole is defined as a region of spacetime in which the gravitational field is so strong that no particle or radiation can escape. In the currently accepted models of stellar evolution, black holes are thought to arise when massive stars undergo gravitational collapse, and many galaxies are thought to contain supermassive black holes at their centers. Black holes are also important for theoretical reasons, as they present profound challenges for theorists attempting to understand the quantum aspects of gravity. String theory has proved to be an important tool for investigating the theoretical properties of black holes because it provides a framework in which theorists can study their thermodynamics.\nBekenstein\u2013Hawking formula.\nIn the branch of physics called statistical mechanics, entropy is a measure of the randomness or disorder of a physical system. This concept was studied in the 1870s by the Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann, who showed that the thermodynamic properties of a gas could be derived from the combined properties of its many constituent molecules. Boltzmann argued that by averaging the behaviors of all the different molecules in a gas, one can understand macroscopic properties such as volume, temperature, and pressure. In addition, this perspective led him to give a precise definition of entropy as the natural logarithm of the number of different states of the molecules (also called \"microstates\") that give rise to the same macroscopic features.\nIn the twentieth century, physicists began to apply the same concepts to black holes. In most systems such as gases, the entropy scales with the volume. In the 1970s, the physicist Jacob Bekenstein suggested that the entropy of a black hole is instead proportional to the \"surface area\" of its event horizon, the boundary beyond which matter and radiation may escape its gravitational attraction. When combined with ideas of the physicist Stephen Hawking, Bekenstein's work yielded a precise formula for the entropy of a black hole. The Bekenstein\u2013Hawking formula expresses the entropy \"S\" as\n formula_1\nwhere \"c\" is the speed of light, \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant, \"\u0127\" is the reduced Planck constant, \"G\" is Newton's constant, and \"A\" is the surface area of the event horizon.\nLike any physical system, a black hole has an entropy defined in terms of the number of different microstates that lead to the same macroscopic features. The Bekenstein\u2013Hawking entropy formula gives the expected value of the entropy of a black hole, but by the 1990s, physicists still lacked a derivation of this formula by counting microstates in a theory of quantum gravity. Finding such a derivation of this formula was considered an important test of the viability of any theory of quantum gravity such as string theory.\nDerivation within string theory.\nIn a paper from 1996, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed how to derive the Bekenstein\u2013Hawking formula for certain black holes in string theory. Their calculation was based on the observation that D-branes\u2014which look like fluctuating membranes when they are weakly interacting\u2014become dense, massive objects with event horizons when the interactions are strong. In other words, a system of strongly interacting D-branes in string theory is indistinguishable from a black hole. Strominger and Vafa analyzed such D-brane systems and calculated the number of different ways of placing D-branes in spacetime so that their combined mass and charge is equal to a given mass and charge for the resulting black hole. Their calculation reproduced the Bekenstein\u2013Hawking formula exactly, including the factor of 1/4. Subsequent work by Strominger, Vafa, and others refined the original calculations and gave the precise values of the \"quantum corrections\" needed to describe very small black holes.\nThe black holes that Strominger and Vafa considered in their original work were quite different from real astrophysical black holes. One difference was that Strominger and Vafa considered only extremal black holes in order to make the calculation tractable. These are defined as black holes with the lowest possible mass compatible with a given charge. Strominger and Vafa also restricted attention to black holes in five-dimensional spacetime with unphysical supersymmetry.\nAlthough it was originally developed in this very particular and physically unrealistic context in string theory, the entropy calculation of Strominger and Vafa has led to a qualitative understanding of how black hole entropy can be accounted for in any theory of quantum gravity. Indeed, in 1998, Strominger argued that the original result could be generalized to an arbitrary consistent theory of quantum gravity without relying on strings or supersymmetry. In collaboration with several other authors in 2010, he showed that some results on black hole entropy could be extended to non-extremal astrophysical black holes.\nAdS/CFT correspondence.\nOne approach to formulating string theory and studying its properties is provided by the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence. This is a theoretical result that implies that string theory is in some cases equivalent to a quantum field theory. In addition to providing insights into the mathematical structure of string theory, the AdS/CFT correspondence has shed light on many aspects of quantum field theory in regimes where traditional calculational techniques are ineffective. The AdS/CFT correspondence was first proposed by Juan Maldacena in late 1997. Important aspects of the correspondence were elaborated in articles by Steven Gubser, Igor Klebanov, and Alexander Markovich Polyakov, and by Edward Witten. By 2010, Maldacena's article had over 7000 citations, becoming the most highly cited article in the field of high energy physics.\nOverview of the correspondence.\nIn the AdS/CFT correspondence, the geometry of spacetime is described in terms of a certain vacuum solution of Einstein's equation called anti-de Sitter space. In very elementary terms, anti-de Sitter space is a mathematical model of spacetime in which the notion of distance between points (the metric) is different from the notion of distance in ordinary Euclidean geometry. It is closely related to hyperbolic space, which can be viewed as a disk as illustrated on the left. This image shows a tessellation of a disk by triangles and squares. One can define the distance between points of this disk in such a way that all the triangles and squares are the same size and the circular outer boundary is infinitely far from any point in the interior.\nOne can imagine a stack of hyperbolic disks where each disk represents the state of the universe at a given time. The resulting geometric object is three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space. It looks like a solid cylinder in which any cross section is a copy of the hyperbolic disk. Time runs along the vertical direction in this picture. The surface of this cylinder plays an important role in the AdS/CFT correspondence. As with the hyperbolic plane, anti-de Sitter space is curved in such a way that any point in the interior is actually infinitely far from this boundary surface.\nThis construction describes a hypothetical universe with only two space dimensions and one time dimension, but it can be generalized to any number of dimensions. Indeed, hyperbolic space can have more than two dimensions and one can \"stack up\" copies of hyperbolic space to get higher-dimensional models of anti-de Sitter space.\nAn important feature of anti-de Sitter space is its boundary (which looks like a cylinder in the case of three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space). One property of this boundary is that, within a small region on the surface around any given point, it looks just like Minkowski space, the model of spacetime used in non-gravitational physics. One can therefore consider an auxiliary theory in which \"spacetime\" is given by the boundary of anti-de Sitter space. This observation is the starting point for AdS/CFT correspondence, which states that the boundary of anti-de Sitter space can be regarded as the \"spacetime\" for a quantum field theory. The claim is that this quantum field theory is equivalent to a gravitational theory, such as string theory, in the bulk anti-de Sitter space in the sense that there is a \"dictionary\" for translating entities and calculations in one theory into their counterparts in the other theory. For example, a single particle in the gravitational theory might correspond to some collection of particles in the boundary theory. In addition, the predictions in the two theories are quantitatively identical so that if two particles have a 40 percent chance of colliding in the gravitational theory, then the corresponding collections in the boundary theory would also have a 40 percent chance of colliding.\nApplications to quantum gravity.\nThe discovery of the AdS/CFT correspondence was a major advance in physicists' understanding of string theory and quantum gravity. One reason for this is that the correspondence provides a formulation of string theory in terms of quantum field theory, which is well understood by comparison. Another reason is that it provides a general framework in which physicists can study and attempt to resolve the paradoxes of black holes.\nIn 1975, Stephen Hawking published a calculation which suggested that black holes are not completely black but emit a dim radiation due to quantum effects near the event horizon. At first, Hawking's result posed a problem for theorists because it suggested that black holes destroy information. More precisely, Hawking's calculation seemed to conflict with one of the basic postulates of quantum mechanics, which states that physical systems evolve in time according to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. This property is usually referred to as unitarity of time evolution. The apparent contradiction between Hawking's calculation and the unitarity postulate of quantum mechanics came to be known as the black hole information paradox.\nThe AdS/CFT correspondence resolves the black hole information paradox, at least to some extent, because it shows how a black hole can evolve in a manner consistent with quantum mechanics in some contexts. Indeed, one can consider black holes in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, and any such black hole corresponds to a configuration of particles on the boundary of anti-de Sitter space. These particles obey the usual rules of quantum mechanics and in particular evolve in a unitary fashion, so the black hole must also evolve in a unitary fashion, respecting the principles of quantum mechanics. In 2005, Hawking announced that the paradox had been settled in favor of information conservation by the AdS/CFT correspondence, and he suggested a concrete mechanism by which black holes might preserve information.\nApplications to nuclear physics.\nIn addition to its applications to theoretical problems in quantum gravity, the AdS/CFT correspondence has been applied to a variety of problems in quantum field theory. One physical system that has been studied using the AdS/CFT correspondence is the quark\u2013gluon plasma, an exotic state of matter produced in particle accelerators. This state of matter arises for brief instants when heavy ions such as gold or lead nuclei are collided at high energies. Such collisions cause the quarks that make up atomic nuclei to deconfine at temperatures of approximately two trillion kelvin, conditions similar to those present at around 10\u221211 seconds after the Big Bang.\nThe physics of the quark\u2013gluon plasma is governed by a theory called quantum chromodynamics, but this theory is mathematically intractable in problems involving the quark\u2013gluon plasma. In an article appearing in 2005, \u0110\u00e0m Thanh S\u01a1n and his collaborators showed that the AdS/CFT correspondence could be used to understand some aspects of the quark-gluon plasma by describing it in the language of string theory. By applying the AdS/CFT correspondence, S\u01a1n and his collaborators were able to describe the quark-gluon plasma in terms of black holes in five-dimensional spacetime. The calculation showed that the ratio of two quantities associated with the quark-gluon plasma, the shear viscosity and volume density of entropy, should be approximately equal to a certain universal constant. In 2008, the predicted value of this ratio for the quark-gluon plasma was confirmed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory.\nApplications to condensed matter physics.\nThe AdS/CFT correspondence has also been used to study aspects of condensed matter physics. Over the decades, experimental condensed matter physicists have discovered a number of exotic states of matter, including superconductors and superfluids. These states are described using the formalism of quantum field theory, but some phenomena are difficult to explain using standard field theoretic techniques. Some condensed matter theorists including Subir Sachdev hope that the AdS/CFT correspondence will make it possible to describe these systems in the language of string theory and learn more about their behavior.\nSo far some success has been achieved in using string theory methods to describe the transition of a superfluid to an insulator. A superfluid is a system of electrically neutral atoms that flows without any friction. Such systems are often produced in the laboratory using liquid helium, but recently experimentalists have developed new ways of producing artificial superfluids by pouring trillions of cold atoms into a lattice of criss-crossing lasers. These atoms initially behave as a superfluid, but as experimentalists increase the intensity of the lasers, they become less mobile and then suddenly transition to an insulating state. During the transition, the atoms behave in an unusual way. For example, the atoms slow to a halt at a rate that depends on the temperature and on the Planck constant, the fundamental parameter of quantum mechanics, which does not enter into the description of the other phases. This behavior has recently been understood by considering a dual description where properties of the fluid are described in terms of a higher dimensional black hole.\nPhenomenology.\nIn addition to being an idea of considerable theoretical interest, string theory provides a framework for constructing models of real-world physics that combine general relativity and particle physics. Phenomenology is the branch of theoretical physics in which physicists construct realistic models of nature from more abstract theoretical ideas. String phenomenology is the part of string theory that attempts to construct realistic or semi-realistic models based on string theory.\nPartly because of theoretical and mathematical difficulties and partly because of the extremely high energies needed to test these theories experimentally, there is so far no experimental evidence that would unambiguously point to any of these models being a correct fundamental description of nature. This has led some in the community to criticize these approaches to unification and question the value of continued research on these problems.\nParticle physics.\nThe currently accepted theory describing elementary particles and their interactions is known as the standard model of particle physics. This theory provides a unified description of three of the fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism and the strong and weak nuclear forces. Despite its remarkable success in explaining a wide range of physical phenomena, the standard model cannot be a complete description of reality. This is because the standard model fails to incorporate the force of gravity and because of problems such as the hierarchy problem and the inability to explain the structure of fermion masses or dark matter.\nString theory has been used to construct a variety of models of particle physics going beyond the standard model. Typically, such models are based on the idea of compactification. Starting with the ten- or eleven-dimensional spacetime of string or M-theory, physicists postulate a shape for the extra dimensions. By choosing this shape appropriately, they can construct models roughly similar to the standard model of particle physics, together with additional undiscovered particles. One popular way of deriving realistic physics from string theory is to start with the heterotic theory in ten dimensions and assume that the six extra dimensions of spacetime are shaped like a six-dimensional Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. Such compactifications offer many ways of extracting realistic physics from string theory. Other similar methods can be used to construct realistic or semi-realistic models of our four-dimensional world based on M-theory.\nCosmology.\nThe Big Bang theory is the prevailing cosmological model for the universe from the earliest known periods through its subsequent large-scale evolution. Despite its success in explaining many observed features of the universe including galactic redshifts, the relative abundance of light elements such as hydrogen and helium, and the existence of a cosmic microwave background, there are several questions that remain unanswered. For example, the standard Big Bang model does not explain why the universe appears to be the same in all directions, why it appears flat on very large distance scales, or why certain hypothesized particles such as magnetic monopoles are not observed in experiments.\nCurrently, the leading candidate for a theory going beyond the Big Bang is the theory of cosmic inflation. Developed by Alan Guth and others in the 1980s, inflation postulates a period of extremely rapid accelerated expansion of the universe prior to the expansion described by the standard Big Bang theory. The theory of cosmic inflation preserves the successes of the Big Bang while providing a natural explanation for some of the mysterious features of the universe. The theory has also received striking support from observations of the cosmic microwave background, the radiation that has filled the sky since around 380,000 years after the Big Bang.\nIn the theory of inflation, the rapid initial expansion of the universe is caused by a hypothetical particle called the inflaton. The exact properties of this particle are not fixed by the theory but should ultimately be derived from a more fundamental theory such as string theory. Indeed, there have been a number of attempts to identify an inflaton within the spectrum of particles described by string theory and to study inflation using string theory. While these approaches might eventually find support in observational data such as measurements of the cosmic microwave background, the application of string theory to cosmology is still in its early stages.\nConnections to mathematics.\nIn addition to influencing research in theoretical physics, string theory has stimulated a number of major developments in pure mathematics. Like many developing ideas in theoretical physics, string theory does not at present have a mathematically rigorous formulation in which all of its concepts can be defined precisely. As a result, physicists who study string theory are often guided by physical intuition to conjecture relationships between the seemingly different mathematical structures that are used to formalize different parts of the theory. These conjectures are later proved by mathematicians, and in this way, string theory serves as a source of new ideas in pure mathematics.\nMirror symmetry.\nAfter Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds had entered physics as a way to compactify extra dimensions in string theory, many physicists began studying these manifolds. In the late 1980s, several physicists noticed that given such a compactification of string theory, it is not possible to reconstruct uniquely a corresponding Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. Instead, two different versions of string theory, type IIA and type IIB, can be compactified on completely different Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds giving rise to the same physics. In this situation, the manifolds are called mirror manifolds, and the relationship between the two physical theories is called mirror symmetry.\nRegardless of whether Calabi\u2013Yau compactifications of string theory provide a correct description of nature, the existence of the mirror duality between different string theories has significant mathematical consequences. The Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds used in string theory are of interest in pure mathematics, and mirror symmetry allows mathematicians to solve problems in enumerative geometry, a branch of mathematics concerned with counting the numbers of solutions to geometric questions.\nEnumerative geometry studies a class of geometric objects called algebraic varieties which are defined by the vanishing of polynomials. For example, the Clebsch cubic illustrated on the right is an algebraic variety defined using a certain polynomial of degree three in four variables. A celebrated result of nineteenth-century mathematicians Arthur Cayley and George Salmon states that there are exactly 27 straight lines that lie entirely on such a surface.\nGeneralizing this problem, one can ask how many lines can be drawn on a quintic Calabi\u2013Yau manifold, such as the one illustrated above, which is defined by a polynomial of degree five. This problem was solved by the nineteenth-century German mathematician Hermann Schubert, who found that there are exactly 2,875 such lines. In 1986, geometer Sheldon Katz proved that the number of curves, such as circles, that are defined by polynomials of degree two and lie entirely in the quintic is 609,250.\nBy the year 1991, most of the classical problems of enumerative geometry had been solved and interest in enumerative geometry had begun to diminish. The field was reinvigorated in May 1991 when physicists Philip Candelas, Xenia de la Ossa, Paul Green, and Linda Parkes showed that mirror symmetry could be used to translate difficult mathematical questions about one Calabi\u2013Yau manifold into easier questions about its mirror. In particular, they used mirror symmetry to show that a six-dimensional Calabi\u2013Yau manifold can contain exactly 317,206,375 curves of degree three. In addition to counting degree-three curves, Candelas and his collaborators obtained a number of more general results for counting rational curves which went far beyond the results obtained by mathematicians.\nOriginally, these results of Candelas were justified on physical grounds. However, mathematicians generally prefer rigorous proofs that do not require an appeal to physical intuition. Inspired by physicists' work on mirror symmetry, mathematicians have therefore constructed their own arguments proving the enumerative predictions of mirror symmetry. Today mirror symmetry is an active area of research in mathematics, and mathematicians are working to develop a more complete mathematical understanding of mirror symmetry based on physicists' intuition. Major approaches to mirror symmetry include the homological mirror symmetry program of Maxim Kontsevich and the SYZ conjecture of Andrew Strominger, Shing-Tung Yau, and Eric Zaslow.\nMonstrous moonshine.\nGroup theory is the branch of mathematics that studies the concept of symmetry. For example, one can consider a geometric shape such as an equilateral triangle. There are various operations that one can perform on this triangle without changing its shape. One can rotate it through 120\u00b0, 240\u00b0, or 360\u00b0, or one can reflect in any of the lines labeled \"S\"0, \"S\"1, or \"S\"2 in the picture. Each of these operations is called a \"symmetry\", and the collection of these symmetries satisfies certain technical properties making it into what mathematicians call a group. In this particular example, the group is known as the dihedral group of order 6 because it has six elements. A general group may describe finitely many or infinitely many symmetries; if there are only finitely many symmetries, it is called a finite group.\nMathematicians often strive for a classification (or list) of all mathematical objects of a given type. It is generally believed that finite groups are too diverse to admit a useful classification. A more modest but still challenging problem is to classify all finite \"simple\" groups. These are finite groups that may be used as building blocks for constructing arbitrary finite groups in the same way that prime numbers can be used to construct arbitrary whole numbers by taking products. One of the major achievements of contemporary group theory is the classification of finite simple groups, a mathematical theorem that provides a list of all possible finite simple groups.\nThis classification theorem identifies several infinite families of groups as well as 26 additional groups which do not fit into any family. The latter groups are called the \"sporadic\" groups, and each one owes its existence to a remarkable combination of circumstances. The largest sporadic group, the so-called monster group, has over 1053 elements, more than a thousand times the number of atoms in the Earth.\nA seemingly unrelated construction is the \"j\"-function of number theory. This object belongs to a special class of functions called modular functions, whose graphs form a certain kind of repeating pattern. Although this function appears in a branch of mathematics that seems very different from the theory of finite groups, the two subjects turn out to be intimately related. In the late 1970s, mathematicians John McKay and John Thompson noticed that certain numbers arising in the analysis of the monster group (namely, the dimensions of its irreducible representations) are related to numbers that appear in a formula for the \"j\"-function (namely, the coefficients of its Fourier series). This relationship was further developed by John Horton Conway and Simon Norton who called it monstrous moonshine because it seemed so far fetched.\nIn 1992, Richard Borcherds constructed a bridge between the theory of modular functions and finite groups and, in the process, explained the observations of McKay and Thompson. Borcherds' work used ideas from string theory in an essential way, extending earlier results of Igor Frenkel, James Lepowsky, and Arne Meurman, who had realized the monster group as the symmetries of a particular version of string theory. In 1998, Borcherds was awarded the Fields medal for his work.\nSince the 1990s, the connection between string theory and moonshine has led to further results in mathematics and physics. In 2010, physicists Tohru Eguchi, Hirosi Ooguri, and Yuji Tachikawa discovered connections between a different sporadic group, the Mathieu group \"M\"24, and a certain version of string theory. Miranda Cheng, John Duncan, and Jeffrey A. Harvey proposed a generalization of this moonshine phenomenon called umbral moonshine, and their conjecture was proved mathematically by Duncan, Michael Griffin, and Ken Ono. Witten has also speculated that the version of string theory appearing in monstrous moonshine might be related to a certain simplified model of gravity in three spacetime dimensions.\nHistory.\nEarly results.\nSome of the structures reintroduced by string theory arose for the first time much earlier as part of the program of classical unification started by Albert Einstein. The first person to add a fifth dimension to a theory of gravity was Gunnar Nordstr\u00f6m in 1914, who noted that gravity in five dimensions describes both gravity and electromagnetism in four. Nordstr\u00f6m attempted to unify electromagnetism with his theory of gravitation, which was however superseded by Einstein's general relativity in 1919. Thereafter, German mathematician Theodor Kaluza combined the fifth dimension with general relativity, and only Kaluza is usually credited with the idea. In 1926, the Swedish physicist Oskar Klein gave a physical interpretation of the unobservable extra dimension\u2014it is wrapped into a small circle. Einstein introduced a non-symmetric metric tensor, while much later Brans and Dicke added a scalar component to gravity. These ideas would be revived within string theory, where they are demanded by consistency conditions.\nString theory was originally developed during the late 1960s and early 1970s as a never completely successful theory of hadrons, the subatomic particles like the proton and neutron that feel the strong interaction. In the 1960s, Geoffrey Chew and Steven Frautschi discovered that the mesons make families called Regge trajectories with masses related to spins in a way that was later understood by Yoichiro Nambu, Holger Bech Nielsen and Leonard Susskind to be the relationship expected from rotating strings. Chew advocated making a theory for the interactions of these trajectories that did not presume that they were composed of any fundamental particles, but would construct their interactions from self-consistency conditions on the S-matrix. The S-matrix approach was started by Werner Heisenberg in the 1940s as a way of constructing a theory that did not rely on the local notions of space and time, which Heisenberg believed break down at the nuclear scale. While the scale was off by many orders of magnitude, the approach he advocated was ideally suited for a theory of quantum gravity.\nWorking with experimental data, R. Dolen, D. Horn and C. Schmid developed some sum rules for hadron exchange. When a particle and antiparticle scatter, virtual particles can be exchanged in two qualitatively different ways. In the s-channel, the two particles annihilate to make temporary intermediate states that fall apart into the final state particles. In the t-channel, the particles exchange intermediate states by emission and absorption. In field theory, the two contributions add together, one giving a continuous background contribution, the other giving peaks at certain energies. In the data, it was clear that the peaks were stealing from the background\u2014the authors interpreted this as saying that the t-channel contribution was dual to the s-channel one, meaning both described the whole amplitude and included the other.\nThe result was widely advertised by Murray Gell-Mann, leading Gabriele Veneziano to construct a scattering amplitude that had the property of Dolen\u2013Horn\u2013Schmid duality, later renamed world-sheet duality. The amplitude needed poles where the particles appear, on straight-line trajectories, and there is a special mathematical function whose poles are evenly spaced on half the real line\u2014the gamma function\u2014which was widely used in Regge theory. By manipulating combinations of gamma functions, Veneziano was able to find a consistent scattering amplitude with poles on straight lines, with mostly positive residues, which obeyed duality and had the appropriate Regge scaling at high energy. The amplitude could fit near-beam scattering data as well as other Regge type fits and had a suggestive integral representation that could be used for generalization.\nOver the next years, hundreds of physicists worked to complete the bootstrap program for this model, with many surprises. Veneziano himself discovered that for the scattering amplitude to describe the scattering of a particle that appears in the theory, an obvious self-consistency condition, the lightest particle must be a tachyon. Miguel Virasoro and Joel Shapiro found a different amplitude now understood to be that of closed strings, while Ziro Koba and Holger Nielsen generalized Veneziano's integral representation to multiparticle scattering. Veneziano and Sergio Fubini introduced an operator formalism for computing the scattering amplitudes that was a forerunner of world-sheet conformal theory, while Virasoro understood how to remove the poles with wrong-sign residues using a constraint on the states. Claud Lovelace calculated a loop amplitude, and noted that there is an inconsistency unless the dimension of the theory is 26. Charles Thorn, Peter Goddard and Richard Brower went on to prove that there are no wrong-sign propagating states in dimensions less than or equal to 26.\nIn 1969\u20131970, Yoichiro Nambu, Holger Bech Nielsen, and Leonard Susskind recognized that the theory could be given a description in space and time in terms of strings. The scattering amplitudes were derived systematically from the action principle by Peter Goddard, Jeffrey Goldstone, Claudio Rebbi, and Charles Thorn, giving a space-time picture to the vertex operators introduced by Veneziano and Fubini and a geometrical interpretation to the Virasoro conditions.\nIn 1971, Pierre Ramond added fermions to the model, which led him to formulate a two-dimensional supersymmetry to cancel the wrong-sign states. John Schwarz and Andr\u00e9 Neveu added another sector to the fermi theory a short time later. In the fermion theories, the critical dimension was 10. Stanley Mandelstam formulated a world sheet conformal theory for both the bose and fermi case, giving a two-dimensional field theoretic path-integral to generate the operator formalism. Michio Kaku and Keiji Kikkawa gave a different formulation of the bosonic string, as a string field theory, with infinitely many particle types and with fields taking values not on points, but on loops and curves.\nIn 1974, Tamiaki Yoneya discovered that all the known string theories included a massless spin-two particle that obeyed the correct Ward identities to be a graviton. John Schwarz and Jo\u00ebl Scherk came to the same conclusion and made the bold leap to suggest that string theory was a theory of gravity, not a theory of hadrons. They reintroduced Kaluza\u2013Klein theory as a way of making sense of the extra dimensions. At the same time, quantum chromodynamics was recognized as the correct theory of hadrons, shifting the attention of physicists and apparently leaving the bootstrap program in the dustbin of history.\nString theory eventually made it out of the dustbin, but for the following decade, all work on the theory was completely ignored. Still, the theory continued to develop at a steady pace thanks to the work of a handful of devotees. Ferdinando Gliozzi, Jo\u00ebl Scherk, and David Olive realized in 1977 that the original Ramond and Neveu Schwarz-strings were separately inconsistent and needed to be combined. The resulting theory did not have a tachyon and was proven to have space-time supersymmetry by John Schwarz and Michael Green in 1984. The same year, Alexander Polyakov gave the theory a modern path integral formulation, and went on to develop conformal field theory extensively. In 1979, Daniel Friedan showed that the equations of motions of string theory, which are generalizations of the Einstein equations of general relativity, emerge from the renormalization group equations for the two-dimensional field theory. Schwarz and Green discovered T-duality, and constructed two superstring theories\u2014IIA and IIB related by T-duality, and type I theories with open strings. The consistency conditions had been so strong, that the entire theory was nearly uniquely determined, with only a few discrete choices.\nFirst superstring revolution.\nIn the early 1980s, Edward Witten discovered that most theories of quantum gravity could not accommodate chiral fermions like the neutrino. This led him, in collaboration with Luis \u00c1lvarez-Gaum\u00e9, to study violations of the conservation laws in gravity theories with anomalies, concluding that type I string theories were inconsistent. Green and Schwarz discovered a contribution to the anomaly that Witten and Alvarez-Gaum\u00e9 had missed, which restricted the gauge group of the type I string theory to be SO(32). In coming to understand this calculation, Edward Witten became convinced that string theory was truly a consistent theory of gravity, and he became a high-profile advocate. Following Witten's lead, between 1984 and 1986, hundreds of physicists started to work in this field, and this is sometimes called the first superstring revolution.\nDuring this period, David Gross, Jeffrey Harvey, Emil Martinec, and Ryan Rohm discovered heterotic strings. The gauge group of these closed strings was two copies of E8, and either copy could easily and naturally include the standard model. Philip Candelas, Gary Horowitz, Andrew Strominger and Edward Witten found that the Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds are the compactifications that preserve a realistic amount of supersymmetry, while Lance Dixon and others worked out the physical properties of orbifolds, distinctive geometrical singularities allowed in string theory. Cumrun Vafa generalized T-duality from circles to arbitrary manifolds, creating the mathematical field of mirror symmetry. Daniel Friedan, Emil Martinec and Stephen Shenker further developed the covariant quantization of the superstring using conformal field theory techniques. David Gross and Vipul Periwal discovered that string perturbation theory was divergent. Stephen Shenker showed it diverged much faster than in field theory suggesting that new non-perturbative objects were missing.\nIn the 1990s, Joseph Polchinski discovered that the theory requires higher-dimensional objects, called D-branes and identified these with the black-hole solutions of supergravity. These were understood to be the new objects suggested by the perturbative divergences, and they opened up a new field with rich mathematical structure. It quickly became clear that D-branes and other p-branes, not just strings, formed the matter content of the string theories, and the physical interpretation of the strings and branes was revealed\u2014they are a type of black hole. Leonard Susskind had incorporated the holographic principle of Gerardus 't Hooft into string theory, identifying the long highly excited string states with ordinary thermal black hole states. As suggested by 't Hooft, the fluctuations of the black hole horizon, the world-sheet or world-volume theory, describes not only the degrees of freedom of the black hole, but all nearby objects too.\nSecond superstring revolution.\nIn 1995, at the annual conference of string theorists at the University of Southern California (USC), Edward Witten gave a speech on string theory that in essence united the five string theories that existed at the time, and giving birth to a new 11-dimensional theory called M-theory. M-theory was also foreshadowed in the work of Paul Townsend at approximately the same time. The flurry of activity that began at this time is sometimes called the second superstring revolution.\nDuring this period, Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, Stephen Shenker and Leonard Susskind formulated matrix theory, a full holographic description of M-theory using IIA D0 branes. This was the first definition of string theory that was fully non-perturbative and a concrete mathematical realization of the holographic principle. It is an example of a gauge-gravity duality and is now understood to be a special case of the AdS/CFT correspondence. Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa calculated the entropy of certain configurations of D-branes and found agreement with the semi-classical answer for extreme charged black holes. Petr Ho\u0159ava and Witten found the eleven-dimensional formulation of the heterotic string theories, showing that orbifolds solve the chirality problem. Witten noted that the effective description of the physics of D-branes at low energies is by a supersymmetric gauge theory, and found geometrical interpretations of mathematical structures in gauge theory that he and Nathan Seiberg had earlier discovered in terms of the location of the branes.\nIn 1997, Juan Maldacena noted that the low energy excitations of a theory near a black hole consist of objects close to the horizon, which for extreme charged black holes looks like an anti-de Sitter space. He noted that in this limit the gauge theory describes the string excitations near the branes. So he hypothesized that string theory on a near-horizon extreme-charged black-hole geometry, an anti-de Sitter space times a sphere with flux, is equally well described by the low-energy limiting gauge theory, the N = 4 supersymmetric Yang\u2013Mills theory. This hypothesis, which is called the AdS/CFT correspondence, was further developed by Steven Gubser, Igor Klebanov and Alexander Polyakov, and by Edward Witten, and it is now well-accepted. It is a concrete realization of the holographic principle, which has far-reaching implications for black holes, locality and information in physics, as well as the nature of the gravitational interaction. Through this relationship, string theory has been shown to be related to gauge theories like quantum chromodynamics and this has led to a more quantitative understanding of the behavior of hadrons, bringing string theory back to its roots.\nCriticism.\nNumber of solutions.\nTo construct models of particle physics based on string theory, physicists typically begin by specifying a shape for the extra dimensions of spacetime. Each of these different shapes corresponds to a different possible universe, or \"vacuum state\", with a different collection of particles and forces. String theory as it is currently understood has an enormous number of vacuum states, typically estimated to be around 10500, and these might be sufficiently diverse to accommodate almost any phenomenon that might be observed at low energies.\nMany critics of string theory have expressed concerns about the large number of possible universes described by string theory. In his book \"Not Even Wrong\", Peter Woit, a lecturer in the mathematics department at Columbia University, has argued that the large number of different physical scenarios renders string theory vacuous as a framework for constructing models of particle physics. According to Woit,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome physicists believe this large number of solutions is actually a virtue because it may allow a natural anthropic explanation of the observed values of physical constants, in particular the small value of the cosmological constant. The anthropic principle is the idea that some of the numbers appearing in the laws of physics are not fixed by any fundamental principle but must be compatible with the evolution of intelligent life. In 1987, Steven Weinberg published an article in which he argued that the cosmological constant could not have been too large, or else galaxies and intelligent life would not have been able to develop. Weinberg suggested that there might be a huge number of possible consistent universes, each with a different value of the cosmological constant, and observations indicate a small value of the cosmological constant only because humans happen to live in a universe that has allowed intelligent life, and hence observers, to exist.\nString theorist Leonard Susskind has argued that string theory provides a natural anthropic explanation of the small value of the cosmological constant. According to Susskind, the different vacuum states of string theory might be realized as different universes within a larger multiverse. The fact that the observed universe has a small cosmological constant is just a tautological consequence of the fact that a small value is required for life to exist. Many prominent theorists and critics have disagreed with Susskind's conclusions. According to Woit, \"in this case [anthropic reasoning] is nothing more than an excuse for failure. Speculative scientific ideas fail not just when they make incorrect predictions, but also when they turn out to be vacuous and incapable of predicting anything.\"\nCompatibility with dark energy.\nIt remains unknown whether string theory is compatible with a metastable, positive cosmological constant.\nSome putative examples of such solutions do exist, such as the model described by Kachru \"et al\". in 2003. In 2018, a group of four physicists advanced a controversial conjecture which would imply that no such universe exists. This is contrary to some popular models of dark energy such as \u039b-CDM, which requires a positive vacuum energy. However, string theory is likely compatible with certain types of quintessence, where dark energy is caused by a new field with exotic properties.\nBackground independence.\nOne of the fundamental properties of Einstein's general theory of relativity is that it is background independent, meaning that the formulation of the theory does not in any way privilege a particular spacetime geometry.\nOne of the main criticisms of string theory from early on is that it is not manifestly background-independent. In string theory, one must typically specify a fixed reference geometry for spacetime, and all other possible geometries are described as perturbations of this fixed one. In his book \"The Trouble With Physics\", physicist Lee Smolin of the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics claims that this is the principal weakness of string theory as a theory of quantum gravity, saying that string theory has failed to incorporate this important insight from general relativity.\nOthers have disagreed with Smolin's characterization of string theory. In a review of Smolin's book, string theorist Joseph Polchinski writes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolchinski notes that an important open problem in quantum gravity is to develop holographic descriptions of gravity which do not require the gravitational field to be asymptotically anti-de Sitter. Smolin has responded by saying that the AdS/CFT correspondence, as it is currently understood, may not be strong enough to resolve all concerns about background independence.\nSociology of science.\nSince the superstring revolutions of the 1980s and 1990s, string theory has been one of the dominant paradigms of high energy theoretical physics. Some string theorists have expressed the view that there does not exist an equally successful alternative theory addressing the deep questions of fundamental physics. In an interview from 1987, Nobel laureate David Gross made the following controversial comments about the reasons for the popularity of string theory:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most important [reason] is that there are no other good ideas around. That's what gets most people into it. When people started to get interested in string theory they didn't know anything about it. In fact, the first reaction of most people is that the theory is extremely ugly and unpleasant, at least that was the case a few years ago when the understanding of string theory was much less developed. It was difficult for people to learn about it and to be turned on. So I think the real reason why people have got attracted by it is because there is no other game in town. All other approaches of constructing grand unified theories, which were more conservative to begin with, and only gradually became more and more radical, have failed, and this game hasn't failed yet.\nSeveral other high-profile theorists and commentators have expressed similar views, suggesting that there are no viable alternatives to string theory.\nMany critics of string theory have commented on this state of affairs. In his book criticizing string theory, Peter Woit views the status of string theory research as unhealthy and detrimental to the future of fundamental physics. He argues that the extreme popularity of string theory among theoretical physicists is partly a consequence of the financial structure of academia and the fierce competition for scarce resources. In his book \"The Road to Reality\", mathematical physicist Roger Penrose expresses similar views, stating \"The often frantic competitiveness that this ease of communication engenders leads to bandwagon effects, where researchers fear to be left behind if they do not join in.\" Penrose also claims that the technical difficulty of modern physics forces young scientists to rely on the preferences of established researchers, rather than forging new paths of their own. Lee Smolin expresses a slightly different position in his critique, claiming that string theory grew out of a tradition of particle physics which discourages speculation about the foundations of physics, while his preferred approach, loop quantum gravity, encourages more radical thinking. According to Smolin,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;String theory is a powerful, well-motivated idea and deserves much of the work that has been devoted to it. If it has so far failed, the principal reason is that its intrinsic flaws are closely tied to its strengths\u2014and, of course, the story is unfinished, since string theory may well turn out to be part of the truth. The real question is not why we have expended so much energy on string theory but why we haven't expended nearly enough on alternative approaches.\nSmolin goes on to offer a number of prescriptions for how scientists might encourage a greater diversity of approaches to quantum gravity research.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28307", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28307", "title": "Sin", "text": "Transgression against divine law\nIn religious context, sin is a transgression against divine law or a law of the deities. Each culture has its own interpretation of what it means to commit a sin. While sins are generally considered actions, any thought, word, or act considered immoral, selfish, shameful, harmful, or alienating might be termed \"sinful\".\nThe concept of sin originates from the Old English \"synn\", tracing back to Proto-Germanic and Proto-Indo-European roots meaning \u201cbeing\u201d or \u201ctruly guilty,\u201d implying a judgment of wrongdoing. Over time, different religions and cultures developed distinct understandings of sin, often shaping moral frameworks and spiritual practices.\nIn Buddhism, sin as defiance against a deity does not exist; instead, actions naturally bring consequences through karma. While general \u201csin\u201d refers to transgressions against universal moral law, five acts \u2014 harming a Buddha, killing an Arhat, creating schism in the Sangha, matricide, and patricide \u2014 are considered so severe that they bring immediate karmic repercussions. In contrast, Shinto views sin (\"tsumi\") as impurity caused by external factors like evil spirits, not inherently by human actions, and emphasizes purification rituals (\"harae\") to restore harmony.\nIn Abrahamic religions, sin carries a stronger theological dimension. Christianity treats sin as an offense against God, rooted in disobedience, with doctrines like original sin and redemption through Christ\u2019s sacrifice; concepts like the seven deadly sins classify vices leading to moral corruption. Islam defines sin (\"khi\u1e6d\u02be\", \"ithm\") as violating God\u2019s commands, distinguishing between minor and grave sins. Judaism frames sin as \u201cmissing the mark\u201d of God\u2019s law, placing greater weight on wrongs against other people than against God, with atonement often requiring repentance and restitution.\nEtymology.\nFrom Middle English , , , , from Old English (\"sin\"), from Proto-West Germanic *sunnju, from Proto-Germanic *sunj\u014d ('truth', 'excuse') and *sund\u012b, *sundij\u014d (\"sin\"), from Proto-Indo-European *h\u2081s-\u00f3nt-ih\u2082, from *h\u2081s\u00f3nts (\"being, true\", implying a verdict of \"truly guilty\" against an accusation or charge), from *h\u2081es- (\"to be\"); compare Old English (\"true\"; see sooth). Doublet of suttee.\nBuddhism.\nThere are a few differing Buddhist views on sin. American Zen author Brad Warner states that in Buddhism there is no concept of sin at all. The Buddha Dharma Education Association also expressly states \"The idea of sin or original sin has no place in Buddhism.\"\nEthnologist Christoph von F\u00fcrer-Haimendorf explained, \"In Buddhist thinking the whole universe, men as well as gods, are subject to a reign of law. Every action, good or bad, has an inevitable and automatic effect in a long chain of causes, an effect that is independent of the will of any deity. Even though this may leave no room for the concept of 'sin' in the sense of an act of defiance against the authority of a personal god, Buddhists speak of 'sin' when referring to transgressions against the universal moral code.\"\nHowever, there are five heinous crimes in Buddhism that bring immediate disaster through karmic process. These five crimes are collectively referred to as Anantarika-karma in Theravada Buddhism and \"pa\u00f1c\u0101nantarya\" (P\u0101li) in the Mahayana \"Sutra Preached by the Buddha on the Total Extinction of the Dharma\", The five crimes or sins are:\nChristianity.\nHamartiology.\nThe doctrine of sin is central to Christianity, since its basic message is about redemption in Christ. Christian hamartiology describes sin as an act of offense against God by despising his persons and Christian biblical law, and by injuring others. According to the classical definition of St. Augustine of Hippo sin is \"a word, deed, or desire in opposition to the eternal law of God.\" Thus, sin requires redemption, a metaphor alluding to atonement, in which the death of Jesus is the price that is paid to release the faithful from the bondage of sin.\nAmong some scholars, sin is understood mostly as a legal infraction or contract violation of non-binding philosophical frameworks and perspectives of Christian ethics, and so salvation tends to be viewed in legal terms. Other Christian scholars understand sin to be fundamentally relational\u2014a loss of love for the Christian God and an elevation of self-love (\"concupiscence\", in this sense), as was later propounded by Augustine in his debate with the Pelagians. As with the legal definition of sin, this definition also affects the understanding of Christian grace and salvation, which are thus viewed in relational terms.\nThe concept of the seven deadly sins holds a significant place within Christian teaching as a classification of seven major vices that lead to further immoral behavior and other sins. These sins are pride, greed, wrath, envy, lust, gluttony, and sloth. They are considered \"deadly\" because they are the root causes of other sins and moral corruption, opposing the virtues that Christians are encouraged to cultivate such as humility, charity, and patience. The idea of the seven deadly sins originated in early Christian thought and was later formalized by figures such as Pope Gregory I and St. Thomas Aquinas. While not identical to mortal sins, the seven deadly sins are viewed as capital vices from which many other sins arise, thus emphasizing the need for redemption and moral vigilance in the Christian life.\nOriginal sin.\nThis condition has been characterized in many ways, from the desire to commit wrongful action, referred to as a \"sin nature\", to total depravity and \"utter helplessness even to exercise a good will toward God apart from God's supernatural, assisting grace\".\nThe concept of original sin was first alluded to in the 2nd century by Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyon in his controversy with certain dualist Gnostics. Other church fathers such as Augustine also shaped and developed the doctrine, seeing it as based on the New Testament teaching of Paul the Apostle (Romans 5:12\u201321 and 1 Corinthians 15:21\u201322) and the Old Testament verse of Psalms 51:5. Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose and Ambrosiaster considered that humanity shares in Adam's sin, transmitted by human generation. Augustine's formulation of original sin after 412 CE was popular among Protestant reformers, such as Martin Luther and John Calvin, who equated original sin with concupiscence (or \"hurtful desire\"), affirming that it persisted even after baptism and completely destroyed freedom to do good. Before 412 CE, Augustine said that free will was weakened but not destroyed by original sin. But after 412 CE this changed to a loss of free will except to sin. Calvinism holds the later Augustinian soteriology view. The Jansenist movement, which the Catholic Church declared to be heretical, also maintained that original sin destroyed freedom of will. Instead the Catholic Church declares that Baptism erases original sin. Methodist theology teaches that original sin is eradicated through entire sanctification.\nIslam.\nSin (khi\u1e6d\u02be) is an important concept in Islamic ethics. Muslims see sin as anything that goes against the commands of God (Allah), a breach of the laws and norms laid down by religion.\nIslamic terms for sin include \"dhanb\" and \"kha\u1e6d\u012b\u02bea\", which are synonymous and refer to intentional sins; \"khi\u1e6d\u02be\", which means simply a sin; and \"ithm\", which is used for grave sins.\nJudaism.\nJudaism regards the violation of any of the 613 commandments as a sin. Judaism teaches that sin is a part of life, since there is no perfect man and everyone has an inclination to do evil. Sin has many classifications and degrees, but the principal classification is that of \"missing the mark\" (cheit in Hebrew). Some sins are punishable with death by the court, others with death by heaven, others with lashes, and others without such punishment, but no sins committed with willful intentions go without consequence. Sins committed out of lack of knowledge are not considered sins, since sin cannot be a sin if the one who committed it did not know it was wrong. Unintentional sins are considered less severe sins.\nSins between people are considered much more serious in Judaism than sins between man and God. Yom Kippur, the main day of repentance in Judaism, can atone for sins between man and God, but not for sins between man and his fellow, that is until he has appeased his friend. Eleazar ben Azariah derived [this from the verse]: \"From all your sins before God you shall be cleansed\" (Book of Leviticus, 16:30) \u2013 for sins between man and God Yom Kippur atones, but for sins between man and his fellow Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases his fellow.\nWhen the Temple yet stood in Jerusalem, people would offer Korbanot (sacrifices) for their misdeeds. The atoning aspect of \"korbanot\" is carefully circumscribed. For the most part, \"korbanot\" only expiates unintentional sins, that is, sins committed because a person forgot that this thing was a sin or by mistake. No atonement is needed for violations committed under duress or through lack of knowledge, and for the most part, \"korbanot\" cannot atone for a malicious, deliberate sin. In addition, \"korbanot\" have no expiating effect unless the person making the offering sincerely repents of his or her actions before making the offering, and makes restitution to any person who was harmed by the violation.\nJudaism teaches that all willful sin has consequences. The completely righteous suffer for their sins (by humiliation, poverty, and suffering that God sends them) in this world and receive their reward in the world to come. The in-between (not completely righteous or completely wicked), suffer for and repent their sins after death and thereafter join the righteous. The very evil do not repent even at the gates of hell. Such people prosper in this world to receive their reward for any good deed, but cannot be cleansed by and hence cannot leave \"gehinnom\", because they do not or cannot repent. This world can therefore seem unjust where the righteous suffer, while the wicked prosper. Many great thinkers have contemplated this.\nShinto.\nThe Shinto concept of sin is inexorably linked to concepts of purity and pollution. Shinto does not have a concept of original sin and instead believes that all human beings are born pure. Sin, also called Tsumi, is anything that makes people impure (i.e. anything that separates them from the \"kami\"). However, Shinto does not believe this impurity is the result of human actions, but rather the result of evil spirits or other external factors.\nSin can have a variety of consequences in Japan, including disaster and disease. Therefore, purification rituals, or Harae, are viewed as important not just to the spiritual and physical health of the individual but also to the well-being of the nation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28309", "revid": "438923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28309", "title": "Sonic Youth", "text": "American rock band (1981\u20132011)\nSonic Youth was an American rock band formed in New York City in 1981. Founding members Kim Gordon (bass, vocals, guitar), Thurston Moore (lead guitar, vocals) and Lee Ranaldo (rhythm guitar, vocals) remained together for the entire history of the band, while Steve Shelley (drums) followed a series of short-term drummers in 1985, rounding out the core line-up. Jim O'Rourke (bass, guitar, keyboards) was also a member of the band from 1999 to 2005, and Mark Ibold (bass, guitar) was a member from 2006 to 2011.\nSonic Youth emerged from the experimental no wave art and music scene in New York before evolving into a more conventional rock band and becoming a prominent member of the American noise rock scene. Sonic Youth has been praised for having \"redefined what rock guitar could do\" using a wide variety of unorthodox guitar tunings while preparing guitars with objects like drumsticks and screwdrivers to alter the instruments' timbre. The band was a pivotal influence on the alternative and indie rock movements.\nAfter gaining a large underground following and critical praise through releases with SST Records in the late 1980s, the band experienced mainstream success throughout the 1990s and 2000s after signing to major label DGC in 1990 and headlining the 1995 Lollapalooza festival. The band disbanded in 2011 following the separation and subsequent divorce of Gordon and Moore, with their final live shows taking place in Brazil. The members have since asserted that the band is finished and will not reunite.\nHistory.\nFormation and early history: 1977\u20131981.\nShortly after guitarist Thurston Moore moved to New York City in early 1977, he formed the group Room Tone with his roommates; they later changed their name to the Coachmen. After the breakup of the Coachmen, Moore began jamming with Stanton Miranda, whose band, CKM, featured Kim Gordon. Moore and Gordon formed a band, appearing under names like Male Bonding, Red Milk, and the Arcadians before settling on Sonic Youth in mid-1981. The name came from combining the nickname of MC5's Fred \"Sonic\" Smith with reggae artist Big Youth. Gordon later recalled that \"as soon as Thurston came up with the name Sonic Youth, a certain sound that was more of what we wanted to do came about.\" The band played Noise Fest in June 1981 at New York's White Columns gallery, where Lee Ranaldo was playing as a member of Glenn Branca's electric guitar ensemble. Their performance impressed Moore, who described them as \"the most ferocious guitar band that I had ever seen in my life\", and he invited Ranaldo to join Sonic Youth. The new trio played three songs at the festival later in the week without a drummer. Each band member took turns playing the drums, until they met drummer Richard Edson. Anne DeMarinis was in Sonic Youth for a brief period in 1981 as a keyboardist when they performed for the first time at the Noise Fest at the White Columns art space. She contributed vocals, along with Gordon and Moore, on three (known) Sonic Youth songs performed once, and only live on June 18, 1981. The songs are entitled \"Noisefest #1\", \"Noisefest #2\", and \"Noisefest #3\". She also played guitar at that same show on the song entitled \"Noisefest #4\". DeMarinis left the band before their self-titled debut EP was recorded in December 1981.\nEarly releases: 1982\u20131985.\nBranca signed Sonic Youth as the first act on his record label Neutral Records. In December 1981, the group recorded five songs at New York's Radio City Music Hall. The material was released as the EP \"Sonic Youth\" which\",\" while largely ignored, was sent to a few key members of the American music press, who gave it uniformly favorable reviews. The album featured a relatively conventional post-punk style, in contrast to their later releases. Edson then quit the group for an acting career and was replaced by Bob Bert.\nDuring their early days as part of the New York music scene, Sonic Youth formed a friendship with fellow New York noise rock band Swans. The bands shared a rehearsal space, and Sonic Youth embarked on its first tour in November 1982 supporting Swans. During a second tour with Swans the following month, tensions ran high and Moore constantly criticized Bert's drumming, which he felt was not \"in the pocket\". Bert was fired afterwards and replaced by Jim Sclavunos, who played drums on the band's first studio album, 1983's \"Confusion Is Sex\", which featured a louder and more dissonant sound than their debut EP. Sonic Youth set up a tour of Europe for the summer of 1983. Sclavunos, however, quit the band after only a few months. The group asked Bert to rejoin, and he agreed on the condition that he would not be fired again after the tour's conclusion. Bert went on to play on the band's \"Kill Yr Idols\" EP later in 1983.\nSonic Youth were well received in Europe, but the New York press largely ignored the local noise rock scene. Eventually, as the press began to take notice of the genre, Sonic Youth was grouped with bands like Big Black, the Butthole Surfers, and Pussy Galore under the \"pigfucker\" label by \"Village Voice\" editor Robert Christgau. Another critic from \"The Village Voice\" panned a substandard September concert in New York. Gordon wrote a scornful letter to the newspaper, criticizing it for not supporting its local music scene, to which Christgau responded that the paper was not obligated to support them. Moore retaliated by renaming the song \"Kill Yr Idols\" to \"I Killed Christgau with My Big Fucking Dick\", before the two eventually sorted out their differences amicably.\nClosing a second European tour in late 1983, Sonic Youth's disastrous London debut saw the band's equipment malfunction and Moore destroying it onstage in frustration. When they returned to New York they were so popular that they were able to book local gigs regularly. The following year, Moore and Gordon were married, and Sonic Youth recorded \"Bad Moon Rising\", a self-described \"Americana\" album that served as a reaction to the state of the nation at the time. The album, recorded by Martin Bisi, was built around transitional pieces that Moore and Ranaldo had come up with in order to take up time onstage during tuning breaks; as a result, there are almost no gaps between the songs on the records. \"Bad Moon Rising\" featured an appearance by Lydia Lunch in \"Death Valley '69\", which was inspired by the Charles Manson Family murders.\nDue to a falling-out with Branca over disputed royalty payments from their Neutral releases, Sonic Youth signed with Homestead Records in the US and Blast First in the UK (which founder Paul Smith created simply so he could distribute the band's records in Europe). While the New York press ignored \"Bad Moon Rising\" upon its 1985 release, now viewing the band as too arty and pretentious, Sonic Youth gained critical acclaim in the United Kingdom, where the new album sold 5,000 copies.\nClaiming he was bored with playing \"Bad Moon Rising\" live in its entirety for over a year, Bert quit the group and was replaced by Steve Shelley, formerly of the punk group the Crucifucks. Sonic Youth was so impressed with Shelley's drumming after seeing him play live that they hired him without an audition. Bert and Shelley both appeared in the music video for \"Death Valley '69\", as Bert had performed the drums on the song, but Shelley was the group's drummer when the video was filmed.\nSST and Enigma: 1986\u20131989.\nSonic Youth had long appreciated SST Records; Ranaldo said, \"It was the first record company we were on that we really would have given anything to be on.\" Sonic Youth signed with the label in early 1986 and began recording \"EVOL\" with Martin Bisi. The band gained national attention when signing with SST, making them the first band from the New York underground to gain such notice. The mainstream music press subsequently began to take notice of the band. Robert Palmer of \"The New York Times\" declared that Sonic Youth was \"making the most startlingly original guitar-based music since Jimi Hendrix\" and even \"People\" reviewed \"EVOL\", describing the album as the \"aural equivalent of a toxic waste dump.\" The album was later called \"a classic\" by Neil Young.\nAround the same time, the band collaborated with Mike Watt under the alias Ciccone Youth, which was a play on the names Sonic Youth and Ciccone, the surname of pop singer Madonna. Sonic Youth released a single in 1986 and a studio album in 1988 under the Ciccone Youth name. The 1986 single, \"Into the Groove(y)\", was a cover of Madonna's \"Into the Groove\" and was preceded by \"Tuff Titty Rap\". The flip side of the record was Watt's cover of Madonna's \"Burning Up\" which had the altered title of \"Burnin' Up\". \"The Whitey Album\" included both Sonic Youth songs from the single plus a demo version of \"Burnin' Up\". The album also contained a cover of Robert Palmer's \"Addicted to Love\" which was recorded in a karaoke booth.\nThe 1987 Sonic Youth album \"Sister\" was a loose concept album partly inspired by the life and works of science fiction writer Philip K. Dick. The \"sister\" of the title was Dick's fraternal twin, who died shortly after her birth and whose memory haunted Dick his entire life. \"Sister\" sold 60,000 copies and received very positive reviews, becoming the first Sonic Youth album to crack the Top 20 of the \"Village Voice\"'s Pazz &amp; Jop critics poll.\nDespite their critical success, the band became dissatisfied with SST due to concerns about payments and other administrative practices. Sonic Youth decided to release their next record on Enigma Records, which was distributed by Capitol Records and partly owned by EMI. The 1988 double LP \"Daydream Nation\" was a critical success that earned Sonic Youth substantial acclaim. The album came in second on the \"Village Voice\" Pazz &amp; Jop poll and topped the year-end album lists at \"NME\", \"CMJ\", and \"Melody Maker\". In 2005, it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry. The lead single from the album, \"Teen Age Riot\", was their first song to receive significant airplay on modern rock and college rock stations, reaching number 20 on the \"Billboard\" Modern Rock Tracks chart. A number of prominent music periodicals including \"Rolling Stone\" hailed \"Daydream Nation\" as one of the best albums of the decade and named Sonic Youth as the \"Hot Band\" in its \"Hot\" issue. Unfortunately, distribution problems arose and \"Daydream Nation\" was often difficult to find in stores. Moore considered Enigma a \"cheap-jack Mafioso outfit\" and the band began looking for a major label deal.\nMajor label career and becoming alternative icons: 1990\u20131999.\nIn 1990, Sonic Youth released \"Goo\", their first album for Geffen. The album featured the single \"Kool Thing\" on which Public Enemy's Chuck D made a guest appearance. The record was considered much more accessible than their previous works and became the band's best-selling record to date.\nIn 1992, the band released \"Dirty\" on the DGC label. Their influence as tastemakers continued with their discovery of acclaimed skateboard video director Spike Jonze, who they recruited for the video for \"100%\", which also featured skateboarder turned actor Jason Lee. That song and \"JC\" discuss the murder of Joe Cole, a friend who worked with Black Flag as a roadie. The album features artwork by Los Angeles\u2013based artist Mike Kelley. \"Dirty\" features a guest appearance by Ian MacKaye on the track \"Youth Against Fascism\". In 1993, the band contributed the track \"Burning Spear\" to the AIDS benefit album \"No Alternative\", produced by the Red Hot Organization.\nIn 1994, the band released \"Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star\", their best-charting release in the United States to date at No. 34 on the \"Billboard\" 200. Moore and Gordon's daughter, Coco Hayley Moore, was born later that year, and many of the songs from the album were never played live because there was never a full tour to support the album due to Gordon's pregnancy. In 1994, the band released a cover of the Carpenters' 1971 hit \"Superstar\" for the tribute album \"If I Were a Carpenter\". The band headlined the 1995 Lollapalooza festival with Hole and Pavement. By that time, alternative rock had gained considerable mainstream attention, and the festival was parodied in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Homerpalooza\" in 1996, which featured voiceovers from the band. They also performed the final credits theme for that episode.\nThe album \"Washing Machine\" was released in 1995 and represented a shift in Sonic Youth's sound, away from their punk rock roots and toward experimental and longer jam-based arrangements. Starting in 1997 they released a series of improvisational albums grouped under the title \"SYR\" with song titles and liner notes in various languages. \",\" released in 1998, featured Jim O'Rourke who later became an official band member. Various songs from the \"SYR\" series were added to Sonic Youth's live performances, and others inspired tracks on the next proper Sonic Youth album, \"A Thousand Leaves\", released in 1998.\nLater DGC period: 2000\u20132006.\nOn July 4, 1999, Sonic Youth's instruments and stage equipment were stolen during a tour in Orange County, California. Almost 30 guitars and basses were stolen; some were recovered over the next 13 years. Forced to start from scratch with new instruments, they released the album \"NYC Ghosts &amp; Flowers\" in 2000 and opened for Pearl Jam during the east coast leg of that band's 2000 tour.\nIn 2001, Sonic Youth collaborated with French avant-garde singer and poet Brigitte Fontaine on her album \"K\u00e9k\u00e9land\". The following year, Sonic Youth participated in the first outing of the All Tomorrow's Parties music festival and curating the ensuing compilation album. The album \"Murray Street\" was released in 2002 and saw the addition of Jim O'Rourke as a full-time member on guitar, bass, and keyboards. During this period the band participated in the production of the documentary film \"Kill Your Idols\", directed and produced by Scott Crary and covering the history of punk rock in New York City. The film was released in 2004.\nIn 2003, Sonic Youth released a split 7-inch single with Erase Errata. The next Sonic Youth album, \"Sonic Nurse\", was also released in 2004. The band was slated to perform in the 2004 Lollapalooza tour along with acts such as the Pixies and the Flaming Lips, but the tour was canceled due to lackluster ticket sales. O'Rourke departed in 2006 and was replaced by bassist Mark Ibold for touring purposes, but Ibold later became a full-time member. He had earlier been part of Pavement and worked with Gordon in Free Kitten.\n\"Rather Ripped\" was released in 2006 and was noted as a return to the band's earlier sound, due both to the departure of O'Rourke and the recovery of some of the instruments that had been stolen in 1999. On May 9, 2006, Kim and Thurston made a special guest appearance on WB teen drama show \"Gilmore Girls\" (season 6, episode 22), performing an acoustic version of their new song, \"What a Waste\", alongside their daughter Coco. Sonic Youth played the Bonnaroo Festival later that year. In December 2006 they released \"\". The compilation featured tracks previously available only on vinyl, tracks from limited-release compilations, B-sides to international singles, and some material that had never before been released. This marked the band's final Geffen release.\nMatador period: 2007\u20132011.\nIn 2007, the band became one of the earliest big-name rock bands to play in China when they were brought in for a tour by the music company Split Works. In 2008 they released a compilation album on Starbucks Music, called \"Hits Are for Squares\", with the tracks selected by other celebrities. Later in 2008, Sonic Youth ended their relationship with Geffen, due to dissatisfaction with how the label had promoted their last several albums. They then signed with independent label Matador Records, which released the album \"The Eternal\" in 2009. During this period they collaborated with John Paul Jones on the soundtrack for a performance at Merce Cunningham Dance Company to honor the company's founder. In 2010 the band scored and composed the soundtrack of the French thriller-drama \"Simon Werner a Disparu\", which premiered at the Cannes International Film Festival. The soundtrack was released in 2011 as \"\", an entry in experimental \"SYR\" series.\nDisbandment: 2011\u20132013.\nOn October 14, 2011, Kim Gordon and Thurston Moore announced that they had separated after 27 years of marriage. Sonic Youth's label Matador explained that plans for the band remained \"uncertain\", despite previously hinting that they would record new material later in the year. Sonic Youth performed their final concert on November 14, 2011, at the SWU Music &amp; Arts Festival in Paul\u00ednia, S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil. The following week, Lee Ranaldo stated in an interview that Sonic Youth would be \"ending for a while\".\nPost-disbandment activities: 2013\u2013present.\nIn November 2013, Ranaldo said in response to the question of a possible reunion, \"I fear not. Everybody is busy with their own projects, besides that Thurston and Kim aren't getting along together very well since their split\u2026 Let [the band] rest in peace.\" Thurston Moore updated and clarified the matter in May 2014: \"Sonic Youth is on hiatus. The band is a democracy of sorts, and as long as Kim and I are working out our situation, the band can't really function reasonably.\" In her 2015 autobiography \"Girl in a Band\", Gordon refers several times to the band having \"split up\" for good.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Sonic Youth sold official face masks based on the artwork from the album \"Sonic Nurse\", with proceeds going to charities Brooklyn Community Bail Fund, Bed Stuy Strong, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's COVID-19 Relief Fund. The same year, an extensive archive of live recordings from throughout the band's history was released on Bandcamp.\nIn January 2022, a new single \"In &amp; Out\" was released ahead of the March release of the rarities EP \"In/out/In\". The five-track EP featured previously unissued outtakes recorded between 2000 and 2010.\nIn October 2023, \"\", a memoir written by Thurston Moore, was published by Doubleday.\nArtistry.\nMusical style and influences.\nSonic Youth is considered a pioneering band in the noise rock and alternative rock genres. Their music has also been labelled experimental rock, indie rock, post-punk and art rock. The band's releases have been described as \"genre-defying.\" Andrew Daly of \"Guitar World\" wrote, \"Lee Ranaldo and Thurston Moore sought to tear down the idea of guitar-driven music completely. [...] The pair's viewpoint on their instruments was fresh, vivid and untethered to all established norms.\"\nSonic Youth was heavily influenced by the Velvet Underground, the Stooges, MC5, Glenn Branca, Rhys Chatham, Ornette Coleman, John Coltrane, La Monte Young, Neil Young, Yoko Ono, French avant-gardist Brigitte Fontaine, Patti Smith, Wire, and Public Image Ltd.\nThe band was also influenced by 1980s hardcore punk; after seeing Minor Threat perform in May 1982, Moore declared them \"the greatest live band I have ever seen\". He also saw the Faith performing in 1981 and had a strong admiration towards their records. While recognizing that their own music was very different from hardcore, Moore and Gordon, especially, were impressed by hardcore's speed and intensity, and by the nationwide network of musicians and fans. \"It was great\", said Moore, \"the whole thing with slam dancing and stage diving, that was far more exciting than pogoing and spitting. [...] I thought hardcore was very musical and very radical.\"\nMoore and Ranaldo expressed on numerous occasions their admiration for the music of Joni Mitchell, such as this quote by Thurston Moore: \"Joni Mitchell! I've used elements of her songwriting and guitar playing, and no one would ever know about it.\" Additionally, as with Sonic Youth, Joni Mitchell has always used a number of alternative tunings. The band named a song after her, \"Hey Joni\". Members of the band have also maintained relationships with other avant-garde artists from other genres and even other media, drawing influence from the work of John Cage and Henry Cowell.\nAlternative tunings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTrying to summarize the music of Sonic Youth with just one tuning is an exercise in noisy futility. The pioneering art rock outfit took advantage of countless unconventional and angular tunings through their run, frequently blending multiple dissonant tunings from different guitarists within one track. [...] The sheer multiplicity of tunings that Sonic Youth used caused all sorts of logistical hurdles for the band. They used cheap guitars that could only function in certain detuned ways and famously used drumsticks and screwdrivers on their guitars to achieve even more adventurous sounds and effects.\nDan Orkin, \"Reverb.com\" \nSonic Youth's sound relied heavily on the use of alternative tunings. Scordatura on stringed instruments has been used for centuries and alternative guitar tunings had been used for decades in blues music, and to a limited degree in rock music (such as with Lou Reed's Ostrich guitar on \"The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico\"). Michael Azerrad writes that early in their career, \"[Sonic Youth] could only afford cheap guitars, and cheap guitars \"sounded\" like cheap guitars. But with weird tunings or something jammed under a particular fret, those humble instruments could sound rather amazing \u2013 bang a drum stick on a cheap Japanese Stratocaster copy in the right tuning, crank the amplifier to within an inch of its life and it will sound like church bells.\"\nThe tunings were painstakingly developed by Moore and Ranaldo during the band's rehearsals; Moore once reported that the odd tunings were an attempt to introduce new sounds: \"When you're playing in standard tuning all the time [...] things sound pretty standard.\" Rather than re-tune for every song, Sonic Youth generally used a particular guitar for one or two songs, and would take dozens of instruments on tour. This would be the source of much trouble for the band, as live performances of many songs relied on specific guitars that have been uniquely prepared or otherwise altered for those exact songs.\nLegacy and impact.\nSonic Youth's influence is widespread across the spectrum of alternative and underground music. The staff of \"Spin\" wrote, \"It's hard to imagine where we would be without Sonic Youth. It's unlikely another smart post-punk band founded around the same time\u2014Big Black, the Meat Puppets\u2014could have delivered us from hardcore's fury quite the same way. What would indie rock sound like if Sonic Youth's sublime din hadn't enchanted and derailed all the college rock bands of the mid-'80s? We would have only been left with a bunch of sanguine Feelies rip offs, never having the chance to divulge a crush via careful mixtape placement of 'Shadow of A Doubt'.\" Jeff Terich of \"Stereogum\" wrote, \"No artist did more for noise rock's reputation\u2014or for that matter noise's reputation\u2014than Sonic Youth. They brought it to a wider audience, made a handful of hit alt-rock singles out of it, crashed grunge as it was happening, and became a beloved institution, despite the fact that the bulk of their catalog features some pretty weird stuff... Their noise wasn't just unique\u2014no other band could replicate it.\" Heather Phares of AllMusic wrote, \"As they redefined what noise meant within rock &amp; roll\u2013 and what success meant for a band with experimental roots\u2013 Sonic Youth became one of the most influential, and popular, acts to emerge from the American underground. Their inventive use of alternate tunings, dissonance, and feedback, which they combined with the intensity of hardcore punk and the performance art aesthetic of New York's avant-garde, created a new sonic landscape with an impact that lasted for decades.\"\nStephen Malkmus, frontman of indie rock band Pavement, drew inspiration from Sonic Youth for his guitar technique, and has credited the band with giving him \"the idea and courage\" to explore alternate tunings. Sleater-Kinney have also cited Sonic Youth as an influence, particularly on their detuned guitar sound. Swervedriver have cited the band as an inspiration, with frontman Adam Franklin noting that he plays Fender Jazzmasters guitars in part because that model was favored by Sonic Youth. Other bands and artists who have cited Sonic Youth as an influence include Mauro Pezzente of Godspeed You! Black Emperor, Shane Embury of Napalm Death, Slowdive, Dinosaur Jr., Teenage Fanclub, Mogwai, Placebo frontman Brian Molko, Quicksand and Rival Schools frontman Walter Schreifels, Ride, Jawbreaker, ...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead, Polvo, Something for Kate, Superchunk, Metz, Jawbox, Pg. 99, and Treepeople.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28310", "revid": "1455149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28310", "title": "State church", "text": ""}
{"id": "28312", "revid": "45068091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28312", "title": "Spiritual being", "text": ""}
{"id": "28313", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28313", "title": "SCSI", "text": "Set of computer and peripheral connection standards\nSmall Computer System Interface (SCSI, ) is a set of standards for physically connecting and transferring data between computers and peripheral devices, best known for its use with storage devices such as hard disk drives. SCSI was introduced in the 1980s and has seen widespread use on servers and high-end workstations, with new SCSI standards being published as recently as SAS-4 in 2017.\nThe SCSI standards define commands, protocols, electrical, optical and logical interfaces. The SCSI standard defines command sets for specific peripheral device types; the presence of \"unknown\" as one of these types means that in theory it can be used as an interface to almost any device, but the standard is highly pragmatic and addressed toward commercial requirements. The initial Parallel SCSI was most commonly used for hard disk drives and tape drives, but it can connect a wide range of other devices, including scanners and optical disc drives, although not all controllers can handle all devices.\nThe first SCSI standard, X3.131-1986, generally referred to as SCSI-1, was published by the X3T9 technical committee of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986. SCSI-2 was published in August 1990 as X3.T9.2/86-109, with further revisions in 1994 and subsequent adoption of a multitude of interfaces. Further refinements have resulted in improvements in performance and support for ever-increasing data storage capacity.\nHistory.\nParallel interface.\nSCSI is derived from the Shugart Associates System Interface (SASI), developed beginning 1979 and publicly disclosed in 1981. Larry Boucher is considered to be the \"father\" of SASI and ultimately SCSI due to his pioneering work first at Shugart Associates and then at Adaptec, which he founded in 1981.\nA SASI controller provided a bridge between a hard disk drive's low-level interface and a host computer, which needed to read blocks of data. SASI controller boards were typically the size of a hard disk drive and were usually physically mounted to the drive's chassis. SASI, which was used in mini- and early microcomputers, defined the interface as using a 50-pin flat ribbon connector which was adopted as the SCSI-1 connector. SASI is a fully compliant subset of SCSI-1 so that many, if not all, of the then-existing SASI controllers were SCSI-1 compatible.\nIn around 1980, NCR Corporation had been developing a competing interface standard by the name of BYSE. In the summer of 1981, NCR abandoned their in-house efforts in favor of pursuing SASI and improving on its design for their own computer systems. Fearing that their extension of the SASI standard would induce market confusion, however, NCR briefly cancelled their contract with Shugart. NCR's proposed improvements to the design of SCSI piqued the interest of Optimem, a subsidiary of Shugart, who requested that NCR and Shugart collaborate on a unified standard. In October 1981, the two companies agreed to co-develop SASI and present their standard jointly with ANSI.\nUntil at least February 1982, ANSI developed the specification as \"SASI\" and \"Shugart Associates System Interface\". However, the committee documenting the standard would not allow it to be named after a company. Almost a full day was devoted to agreeing to name the standard \"Small Computer System Interface\", which Boucher intended to be pronounced \"sexy\", but ENDL's Dal Allan pronounced the new acronym as \"scuzzy\" and that stuck.\nThe NCR facility in Wichita, Kansas developed the industry's first SCSI controller chip, the NCR 5385, released in 1983. According to its developers, the chip worked the first time it was tested. A number of companies, such as Adaptec and Optimem, were early supporters of SCSI. By late 1990 at least 45 manufactures offered 251 models of parallel SCSI host adapters Today, such host adapters have largely been displaced by the faster serial SCSI (SAS) host adapters.\nThe \"small\" reference in \"small computer system interface\" is historical; since the mid-1990s, SCSI has been available on even the largest of computer systems.\nSince its standardization in 1986, SCSI has been commonly used in the Amiga, Atari, Apple Macintosh and Sun Microsystems computer lines and PC server systems. Apple started using the less-expensive parallel ATA (PATA, also known as \"IDE\") for its low-end machines with the Macintosh Quadra 630 in 1994, and added it to its high-end desktops starting with the Power Macintosh G3 in 1997. Apple dropped on-board SCSI completely in favor of IDE and FireWire with the (Blue &amp; White) Power Mac G3 in 1999, while still offering a PCI SCSI host adapter as an option on up to the Power Macintosh G4 (AGP Graphics) models. Sun switched its lower-end range to Parallel ATA (PATA) with introduction of their Ultra 5 and 10 low end workstations using CMD640 IDE controller and continued this trend with the later Blade 100 and 150 entry level systems and did not switch to contemporary SATA interface even with the introduction of the Blade 1500 in 2003 while the higher end Blade 2500 released at the same time used Ultra320 Parallel SCSI-3. Sun moved to SATA and SAS interfaces with their last UltraSPARC-III based workstations in 2006 with the entry level Ultra 25 and mid-range Ultra 45. Commodore included SCSI on the Amiga 3000/3000T systems and it was an add-on to previous Amiga 500/2000 models. Starting with the Amiga 600/1200/4000 systems Commodore switched to the IDE interface. Atari included SCSI as standard in its Atari MEGA STE, Atari TT and Atari Falcon computer models. SCSI has never been popular in the low-priced IBM PC world, owing to the lower cost and adequate performance of ATA hard disk standard. However, SCSI drives and even SCSI RAIDs became common in PC workstations for video or audio production.\nModern SCSI.\nRecent physical versions of SCSI\u200d\u2014\u200cSerial Attached SCSI (SAS), SCSI-over-Fibre Channel Protocol (FCP), and USB Attached SCSI (UAS)\u200d\u2014\u200cbreak from the traditional parallel SCSI bus and perform data transfer via serial communications using point-to-point links. Although much of the SCSI documentation talks about the parallel interface, all modern development efforts use serial interfaces. Serial interfaces have a number of advantages over parallel SCSI, including higher data rates, simplified cabling, longer reach, improved fault isolation and full-duplex capability. The primary reason for the shift to serial interfaces is the clock skew issue of high-speed parallel interfaces, which makes the faster variants of parallel SCSI susceptible to problems caused by cabling and termination.\nThe non-physical iSCSI preserves the basic SCSI paradigm, especially the command set, almost unchanged, through embedding of SCSI-3 over TCP/IP. Therefore, iSCSI uses \"logical connections\" instead of physical links and can run on top of any network supporting IP. The actual physical links are realized on lower network layers, independently from iSCSI. Predominantly, Ethernet is used which is also of serial nature.\nSCSI is popular on high-performance workstations, servers, and storage appliances. Almost all RAID subsystems on servers have used some kind of SCSI hard disk drives for decades (initially Parallel SCSI, interim Fibre Channel, recently SAS), though a number of manufacturers offer SATA-based RAID subsystems as a cheaper option. Moreover, SAS offers compatibility with SATA devices, creating a much broader range of options for RAID subsystems together with the existence of nearline SAS (NL-SAS) drives. Instead of SCSI, modern desktop computers and notebooks typically use SATA interfaces for internal hard disk drives, with NVMe over PCIe gaining popularity as SATA can bottleneck modern solid-state drives.\nInterfaces.\nSCSI is available in a variety of interfaces. The first was parallel SCSI (also called SCSI Parallel Interface or SPI), which uses a parallel bus design. Since 2005, SPI was gradually replaced by Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), which uses a serial design but retains other aspects of the technology. Many other interfaces which do not rely on complete SCSI standards still implement the SCSI command protocol; others drop physical implementation entirely while retaining the SCSI architectural model. iSCSI, for example, uses TCP/IP as a transport mechanism, which is most often transported over Gigabit Ethernet or faster network links.\nSCSI interfaces have often been included on computers from various manufacturers for use under Microsoft Windows, classic Mac OS, Unix, Amiga and Linux operating systems, either implemented on the motherboard or by the means of plug-in adaptors. With the advent of SAS and SATA drives, provision for parallel SCSI on motherboards was discontinued.\nParallel SCSI.\nInitially, the \"SCSI Parallel Interface\" (SPI) was the only interface using the SCSI protocol. Its standardization started as a single-ended 8-bit bus in 1986, transferring up to 5 MB/s, and evolved into a low-voltage differential 16-bit bus capable of up to 320 MB/s. The last SPI-5 standard from 2003 also defined a 640 MB/s speed which failed to be realized.\nParallel SCSI specifications include several synchronous transfer modes for the parallel cable, and an asynchronous mode. The asynchronous mode is a classic request/acknowledge protocol, which allows systems with a slow bus or simple systems to also use SCSI devices. Faster synchronous modes are used more frequently.\nCabling.\nSCSI Parallel Interface.\nInternal parallel SCSI cables are usually ribbons, with two or more 50\u2013, 68\u2013, or 80\u2013pin connectors attached. External cables are typically shielded (but may not be), with 50\u2013 or 68\u2013pin connectors at each end, depending upon the specific SCSI bus width supported. The 80\u2013pin Single Connector Attachment (SCA) is typically used for hot-pluggable devices\nFibre Channel.\nFibre Channel can be used to transport SCSI information units, as defined by the Fibre Channel Protocol for SCSI (FCP). These connections are hot-pluggable and are usually implemented with optical fiber.\nSerial attached SCSI.\nSerial attached SCSI (SAS) uses a modified Serial ATA data and power cable.\niSCSI.\niSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface) usually uses Ethernet connectors and cables as its physical transport, but can run over any physical transport capable of transporting IP.\nSRP.\nThe SCSI RDMA Protocol (SRP) is a protocol that specifies how to transport SCSI commands over a reliable RDMA connection. This protocol can run over any RDMA-capable physical transport, e.g. InfiniBand or Ethernet when using RoCE or iWARP.\nUSB Attached SCSI.\nUSB Attached SCSI allows SCSI devices to use the Universal Serial Bus.\nAutomation/Drive Interface.\nThe Automation/Drive Interface \u2212 Transport Protocol (ADT) is used to connect removable media devices, such as tape drives, with the controllers of the libraries (automation devices) in which they are installed. The ADI standard specifies the use of RS-422 for the physical connections. The second-generation ADT-2 standard defines iADT, use of the ADT protocol over IP (Internet Protocol) connections, such as over Ethernet. The Automation/Drive Interface \u2212 Commands standards (ADC, ADC-2, and ADC-3) define SCSI commands for these installations.\nSCSI command protocol.\nIn addition to many different hardware implementations, the SCSI standards also include an extensive set of command definitions. The SCSI command architecture was originally defined for parallel SCSI buses but has been carried forward with minimal change for use with iSCSI and serial SCSI. Other technologies which use the SCSI command set include the ATA Packet Interface, USB Mass Storage class and FireWire SBP-2.\nIn SCSI terminology, communication takes place between an initiator and a target. The initiator sends a command to the target, which then responds. SCSI commands are sent in a Command Descriptor Block (CDB). The CDB consists of a one byte operation code followed by five or more bytes containing command-specific parameters.\nAt the end of the command sequence, the target returns a status code byte, such as 00h for success, 02h for an error (called a Check Condition), or 08h for busy. When the target returns a Check Condition in response to a command, the initiator usually then issues a SCSI Request Sense command in order to obtain a key code qualifier (KCQ) from the target. The Check Condition and Request Sense sequence involves a special SCSI protocol called a Contingent Allegiance Condition.\nThere are four categories of SCSI commands: N (non-data), W (writing data from initiator to target), R (reading data), and B (bidirectional). There are about 60 different SCSI commands in total, with the most commonly used being:\nEach device on the SCSI bus is assigned a unique SCSI identification number or ID. Devices may encompass multiple logical units, which are addressed by logical unit number (LUN). Simple devices have just one LUN, more complex devices may have multiple LUNs.\nA \"direct access\" (i.e. disk type) storage device consists of a number of logical blocks, addressed by Logical Block Address (LBA). A typical LBA equates to 512 bytes of storage. The usage of LBAs has evolved over time and so four different command variants are provided for reading and writing data. The Read(6) and Write(6) commands contain a 21-bit LBA address. The Read(10), Read(12), Read Long, Write(10), Write(12), and Write Long commands all contain a 32-bit LBA address plus various other parameter options.\nThe capacity of a \"sequential access\" (i.e. tape-type) device is not specified because it depends, amongst other things, on the length of the tape, which is not identified in a machine-readable way. Read and write operations on a sequential access device begin at the current tape position, not at a specific LBA. The block size on sequential access devices can either be fixed or variable, depending on the specific device. Tape devices such as half-inch 9-track tape, DDS (4\u00a0mm tapes physically similar to DAT), Exabyte, etc., support variable block sizes.\nDevice identification.\nParallel interface.\nOn a parallel SCSI bus, a device (e.g. host adapter, disk drive) is identified by a \"SCSI ID\", which is a number in the range 0\u20137 on a narrow bus and in the range 0\u201315 on a wide bus. On earlier models a physical jumper or switch controls the SCSI ID of the initiator (host adapter). On modern host adapters (since about 1997), doing I/O to the adapter sets the SCSI ID; for example, the adapter often contains an Option ROM (SCSI BIOS) program that runs when the computer boots up and that program has menus that let the operator choose the SCSI ID of the host adapter. Alternatively, the host adapter may come with software that must be installed on the host computer to configure the SCSI ID. The traditional SCSI ID for a host adapter is 7, as that ID has the highest priority during bus arbitration (even on a 16-bit bus).\nThe SCSI ID of a device in a drive enclosure that has a back plane is set either by jumpers or by the slot in the enclosure the device is installed into, depending on the model of the enclosure. In the latter case, each slot on the enclosure's back plane delivers control signals to the drive to select a unique SCSI ID. A SCSI enclosure without a back plane often has a switch for each drive to choose the drive's SCSI ID. The enclosure is packaged with connectors that must be plugged into the drive where the jumpers are typically located; the switch emulates the necessary jumpers. While there is no standard that makes this work, drive designers typically set up their jumper headers in a consistent format that matches the way that these switches implement.\nSetting the bootable (or first) hard disk to SCSI ID 0 is an accepted IT community recommendation. SCSI ID 2 is usually set aside for the floppy disk drive while SCSI ID 3 is typically for a CD-ROM drive.\nGeneral.\nNote that a SCSI target device (which can be called a \"physical unit\") is sometimes divided into smaller \"logical units\". For example, a high-end disk subsystem may be a single SCSI device but contain dozens of individual disk drives, each of which is a logical unit. Further, a RAID array may be a single SCSI device, but may contain many logical units, each of which is a \"virtual\" disk\u2014a stripe set or mirror set constructed from portions of real disk drives. The SCSI ID, WWN, etc. in this case identifies the whole subsystem, and a second number, the logical unit number (LUN) identifies a disk device (real or virtual) within the subsystem.\nIt is quite common, though incorrect, to refer to the logical unit itself as a \"LUN\". Sometimes, redundantly, the actual LUN may be called a \"LUN number\" or \"LUN id\".\nIn modern SCSI transport protocols, there is an automated process for the \"discovery\" of the IDs. The SSA initiator (normally the host computer through the 'host adaptor') \"walk the loop\" to determine what devices are connected and then assigns each one a 7-bit \"hop-count\" value. Fibre Channel \u2013 Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL) initiators use the LIP (Loop Initialization Protocol) to interrogate each device port for its WWN (World Wide Name). For iSCSI, because of the unlimited scope of the (IP) network, the process is quite complicated. These discovery processes occur at power-on/initialization time and also if the bus topology changes later, for example if an extra device is added.\nSCSI has the CTL (Channel, Target or Physical Unit Number, Logical Unit Number) identification mechanism per host bus adapter, or the HCTL (HBA, Channel, PUN, LUN) identification mechanism, one host adapter may have more than one channels.\nDevice Type.\nWhile all SCSI controllers can work with read/write storage devices, i.e. disk and tape, some will not work with some other device types; older controllers are likely to be more limited, sometimes by their driver software, and more Device Types were added as SCSI evolved. Even CD-ROMs are not handled by all controllers. Device Type is a 5-bit field reported by a SCSI Inquiry Command; defined SCSI Peripheral Device Types include, in addition to many varieties of storage device, printer, scanner, communications device, and a catch-all \"processor\" type for devices not otherwise listed.\nSCSI enclosure services.\nIn larger SCSI servers, the disk-drive devices are housed in an intelligent enclosure that supports SCSI Enclosure Services (SES). The initiator can communicate with the enclosure using a specialized set of SCSI commands to access power, cooling, and other non-data characteristics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28314", "revid": "50142716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28314", "title": "Super Nintendo Entertainment System", "text": "Home video game console\nThe Super Nintendo Entertainment System, commonly shortened to Super Nintendo, Super NES or SNES, is a 16-bit home video game console developed by Nintendo that was released in 1990 in Japan, 1991 in North America, 1992 in Europe and Oceania and 1993 in South America. In Japan, it is called the In South Korea, it is called the Super Comboy and was distributed by Hyundai Electronics. The system was released in Brazil on August 30, 1993, by Playtronic. In Russia and CIS, the system was distributed by Steepler from 1994 until 1996. Although each version is essentially the same, several forms of regional lockout prevent cartridges for one version from being used in other versions.\nThe Super NES is Nintendo's second programmable home console, following the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). The console introduced advanced graphics and sound capabilities compared with other systems at the time. It was designed to accommodate the ongoing development of a variety of enhancement chips integrated into game cartridges to be more competitive into the next generation.\nThe Super NES received largely positive reviews and was a global success, becoming the best-selling console of the 16-bit era after launching relatively late and facing intense competition from Sega's Genesis/Mega Drive console in North America and Europe. Overlapping the NES's 61.9 million unit sales, the Super NES remained popular well into the 32-bit era, with 49.1 million units sold worldwide by the time it was discontinued in 2003. It continues to be popular among collectors and retro gamers, with new homebrew games and Nintendo's emulated rereleases, such as on the Virtual Console, the Super NES Classic Edition, Nintendo Classics; as well as several non-console emulators which operate on a desktop computer or mobile device, such as Snes9x.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nBackground.\nTo compete with the popular Family Computer in Japan, NEC Home Electronics launched the PC Engine in 1987, and Sega followed suit with the Mega Drive in 1988. The two platforms were later launched in North America in 1989 as the TurboGrafx-16 and the Sega Genesis respectively. Both systems were built on 16-bit architectures and offered improved graphics and sound over the 8-bit NES. It took several years for Sega's system to become successful.\nBill Mensch, the co-creator of the 8-bit MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor and founder of the Western Design Center (WDC), gave Ricoh the exclusive right to supply 8-bit and 16-bit WDC microprocessors for Nintendo's new system. Meanwhile, Sony engineer Ken Kutaragi reached an agreement with Nintendo to design the console's sound chip without notifying his supervisors, who were enraged when they discovered the project; although Kutaragi was nearly fired, then-CEO Norio Ohga intervened in support of the project and gave him permission to complete it.\nDevelopment.\nOn September 9, 1987, then-Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi revealed the development of the Super Famicom in the newspaper \"Kyoto Shimbun\". On August 30, 1988, in an interview with \"TOUCH Magazine\", Yamauchi announced the development of \"Super Mario Bros. 4\", \"Dragon Quest V\", three original games, and he projected sales of 3 million units of the upcoming console. In that same interview, Yamauchi pointed out that sales of the Famicom were slowing dropping ever since it hit its peak about two years earlier, and that if they continued supporting it, players would eventually \"get bored\" and move on in favor of better-quality games, which would be \"a dangerous situation\" for them. \"Famicom Hissyoubon\" magazine speculated that Yamauchi's early announcement was probably made to forestall Christmas shopping for the PC Engine, and relayed Enix's clarification that it was waiting on sales figures to select either PC Engine or Super Famicom for its next \"Dragon Quest\" game. The magazine and Enix both expressed a strong interest in networking as a standard platform feature. The console was demonstrated to the Japanese press on November 21, 1988, and again on July 28, 1989. During the second demonstration, Nintendo also announced that they were forced to delay the release of the Super Famicom to the fall of 1990, as a result of problems such as a distinct lack of software for third-party developers and a global chip shortage \u2013 due to a new generation of semiconductor and chip technology that forced manufacturers to split production capacity, which also drove prices up considerably.\nThe final design of the Super Famicom unveiled at the second Shoshinkai show, which was held between August 28\u201329, 1990. This included late prototypes of \"Super Mario World\" and \"F-Zero\". The demonstration garnered positive results by the public in terms of gameplay. It gained so much popularity that Nintendo received 1.5 million pre-orders for the Super Famicom from wholesalers, making them worried that launch day would get a little chaotic. To solve this, they encouraged retailers to install a reservation system when selling the console. On November 20, the day before launch, Nintendo loaded 100 trucks with boxes of Super Famicom consoles, alongside cartridges of \"F-Zero\" and \"Super Mario World\" early in the morning. In that same day, Nintendo executed \"Operation: Midnight Shipping\" by sending these orders late at night, in the hopes of warding off thieves.\nLaunch.\nDesigned by Masayuki Uemura, the designer of the original Famicom, the Super Famicom was released in Japan on Wednesday, November 21, 1990, for \u00a5. It was an instant success. Nintendo's initial shipment of 300,000 units sold out within hours. This gained the attention of the yakuza criminal organizations, so the devices were shipped at night to avoid robbery.\nWith the Super Famicom quickly outselling its rivals, Nintendo reasserted itself as the leader of the Japanese console market. Nintendo's success was partially due to the retention of most of its key third-party developers, including Capcom, Konami, Tecmo, Square, Koei, and Enix.\nNintendo released the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, a redesigned version of the Super Famicom, in North America for US$. It began shipping in limited quantities on August 23, 1991, with an official nationwide release date of September 9, 1991. The Super NES was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland in April 1992 for \u00a3.\nMost of the PAL region versions of the console use the Japanese Super Famicom design, except for labeling and the length of the joypad leads. The Playtronic Super NES in Brazil, although PAL-M, uses the North American design. Both the NES and Super NES were released in Brazil in 1993 by Playtronic, a joint venture between the toy company Estrela and consumer electronics company Gradiente.\nThe Super NES and Super Famicom launched with few games, but these games were well received. In Japan, only two games were initially available: \"Super Mario World\" and \"F-Zero\". \"Bombuzal\" was released during the launch week. In North America, \"Super Mario World\" was launched as a bundle with the console; other launch games include \"F-Zero\", \"Pilotwings\" (both of which demonstrate the console's Mode 7 pseudo-3D rendering), \"SimCity\", and \"Gradius III\".\nConsole wars.\nThe rivalry between Nintendo and Sega was described as one of the most notable console wars in video game history, in which Sega positioned the Genesis as the \"cool\" console, with games aimed at older audiences, and aggressive advertisements that occasionally attacked the competition. Nintendo scored an early public-relations advantage by securing the first console conversion of Capcom's arcade hit \"Street Fighter II\" for Super NES, which took more than a year to make the transition to the Genesis. Though the Genesis had a two-year lead to launch time, a much larger library of games, and a lower price point, it only represented an estimated 60% of the American 16-bit console market in June 1992, and neither console could maintain a definitive lead for several years. \"Donkey Kong Country\" is said to have helped establish the Super NES's market prominence in the latter years of the 16-bit generation, and for a time, maintain against the PlayStation and Saturn. According to Nintendo, the company had sold more than 20 million Super NES units in the U.S. According to a 2014 Wedbush Securities report based on NPD sales data, the Super NES outsold the Genesis in the U.S. market by 1.5 million units and gained its lead in the US/North American 16 bit market.\nChanges in policy.\nDuring the NES era, Nintendo maintained exclusive control over games released for the system \u2013 the company had to approve every game, each third-party developer could only release up to five games per year (but some third parties got around this by using different names, such as Konami's \"Ultra Games\" brand), those games could not be released on another console within two years, and Nintendo was the exclusive manufacturer and supplier of NES cartridges. Competition from Sega's console brought an end to this practice; in 1991, Acclaim Entertainment began releasing games for both platforms, with most of Nintendo's other licensees following suit over the next several years; Capcom (which licensed some games to Sega instead of producing them directly) and Square were the most notable holdouts.\nNintendo continued to carefully review submitted games, scoring them on a 40-point scale and allocating marketing resources accordingly. Each region performed separate evaluations. Nintendo of America also maintained a policy that, among other things, limited the amount of violence in the games on its systems. The surprise arcade hit \"Mortal Kombat\" (1992), a gory fighting game with huge splashes of blood and graphically violent fatality moves, was heavily censored by Nintendo. Because the Genesis version allowed for an uncensored version via cheat code, it outsold the censored Super NES version by a ratio of nearly three to one.\nU.S. Senators Herb Kohl and Joe Lieberman convened a Congressional hearing on December 9, 1993, to investigate the marketing of violent video games to children. Though Nintendo took the high ground with moderate success, the hearings led to the creation of the Interactive Digital Software Association and the Entertainment Software Rating Board and the inclusion of ratings on all video games. With these ratings in place, Nintendo decided its censorship policies were no longer needed.\n32-bit era and beyond.\nWhile other companies were moving on to 32-bit systems, Rare and Nintendo proved that the Super NES was still a strong contender in the market. In November 1994, Rare released \"Donkey Kong Country\", a platform game featuring 3D models and textures pre-rendered on Silicon Graphics workstations. With its detailed graphics, fluid animation, and high-quality music, \"Donkey Kong Country\" rivals the aesthetic quality of games that were being released on newer 32-bit CD-based consoles. In the last 45 days of 1994, 6.1 million copies were sold, making it the fastest-selling video game in history to that date. This game conveyed that early 32-bit systems had little to offer over the Super NES, and proved the market for the more advanced consoles of the near future. According to TRSTS reports, two of the top five bestselling games in the U.S. for December 1996 are Super NES games.\nIn October 1997, Nintendo released a redesigned model of the Super NES (the SNS-101 model referred to as \"New-Style Super NES\") in North America for US$, with some units including the pack-in game \"\". Like the earlier New-Style NES (model NES-101), this is slimmer and lighter than its predecessor, but it lacks S-Video and RGB output, and it is among the last major Super NES-related releases in the region. A similarly redesigned Super Famicom Jr. was released in Japan at around the same time. The redesign stayed out of Europe.\nNintendo ceased production of the Super NES in North America in 1999, about two years after releasing \"Kirby's Dream Land 3\" (its final second-party game in the US) on November 27, 1997, and one year after releasing \"Frogger\" (its final third-party game in the US) in 1998. In Japan, Nintendo continued production of both the Family Computer and the Super Famicom until September 25, 2003, and new games were produced until the year 2000, ending with the release of \"Metal Slader Glory Director's Cut\" on November 29, 2000.\nMany popular Super NES games were ported to the Game Boy Advance, which has similar video capabilities. In 2005, Nintendo announced that Super NES games would be made available for download via the Wii's Virtual Console service. On October 31, 2007, Nintendo Co., Ltd. announced that it would no longer repair Family Computer or Super Famicom systems due to an increasing shortage of the necessary parts. On March 3, 2016, Nintendo Co., Ltd. announced that it would bring Super NES games to the New Nintendo 3DS and New Nintendo 3DS XL (and later the New Nintendo 2DS XL) via its eShop download service. At the Nintendo Direct event on September 4, 2019, Nintendo announced that it would be bringing select Super NES games to the Nintendo Switch Online classic games library, later renamed Nintendo Classics.\nHardware.\nTechnical specifications.\nThe 16-bit design of the Super NES incorporates graphics and sound co-processors that perform tiling and simulated 3D effects, a palette of 32,768 colors, and 8-channel ADPCM audio. These base platform features, plus the ability to dramatically extend them all through substantial chip upgrades inside of each cartridge, represent a leap over the 8-bit NES generation and some significant advantages over 16-bit competitors such as the Genesis.\nCPU and RAM.\nThe CPU is a Ricoh 5A22, a derivative of the 16-bit WDC 65C816 microprocessor. In NTSC regions, its nominal clock speed of 3.58 MHz will slow to either 2.68\u00a0MHz or 1.79\u00a0MHz when accessing some slower peripherals.\nThis CPU has an 8-bit data bus and two address busses. The 24-bit \"Bus A\" is designated for general accesses, and the 8-bit \"Bus B\" can access support chip registers such as the video and audio co-processors.\nThe WDC 65C816 supports an 8-channel DMA unit, an 8-bit parallel I/O port, a controller port interface circuit allowing serial and parallel access to controller data, a 16-bit multiplication and division unit, and circuitry for generating non-maskable interrupts on V-blank and IRQ interrupts on calculated screen positions.\nEarly revisions of the 5A22 used in SHVC boards are prone to spontaneous failure which can produce a variety of symptoms including graphics glitches in Mode 7, a black screen on power-on, or improperly reading the controllers. The first revision 5A22 has a fatal bug in the DMA controller that can crash games; this was corrected in subsequent revisions.\nThe console contains 128KB of general-purpose \"work\" RAM, which is separate from the 64KB dedicated to the video subsystem and the 64KB dedicated to the audio subsystem.\nVideo.\nThe Picture Processing Unit (PPU) consists of two closely tied IC packages. It contains 64KB of SRAM for video data, 544 bytes of object attribute memory (OAM) for sprite data, and 256 \u00d7 15 bits of color generator RAM (CGRAM) for palette data. This CGRAM provisions up to 256 colors, chosen from the 15-bit RGB color space, from a palette of 32,768 colors. The PPU is clocked by the same signal as the CPU and generates a pixel every two or four cycles.\nAudio.\nThe S-SMP audio subsystem consisted of a 16-bit digital signal processor (DSP) to mix the sample sequences, an 8-bit SPC700 CPU to drive the DSP, and 64KB of dedicated PSRAM. It was designed by Ken Kutaragi and produced by Sony and is completely independent from the rest of the system. It is clocked at a nominal 24.576\u00a0MHz in both NTSC and PAL systems. It is capable of stereo sound, composed from eight voices generated using 16-bit audio samples compressed using BRR and capable of applying effects such as echo. On early revisions of the motherboard the S-SMP audio system was spread across four chips: the DSP, the CPU, and two RAM modules. On later revisions, the sound hardware consolidated to a single chip, the S-APU.\nRegional lockout.\nNintendo employed several types of regional lockout, including both physical and hardware incompatibilities.\nPhysically, the cartridges are shaped differently for different regions. North American cartridges have a rectangular bottom with inset grooves matching protruding tabs in the console, and other regions' cartridges are narrower with a smooth curve on the front and no grooves. The physical incompatibility can be overcome with the use of various adapters, or through modification of the console.\nInternally, a regional lockout chip (CIC) within the console and in each cartridge prevents the PAL region games from being played on Japanese or North American consoles and vice versa. The Japanese and North American machines have the same region chip. This can be overcome through the use of adapters, typically by inserting the imported cartridge in one slot and a cartridge with the correct region chip in a second slot. Alternatively, disconnecting one pin of the console's lockout chip will prevent it from locking the console; hardware in later games can detect this situation, so it became common to install a switch to reconnect the lockout chip as needed.\nPAL consoles face another incompatibility when playing out-of-region cartridges: the NTSC video standard specifies video at 60\u00a0Hz but PAL operates at 50\u00a0Hz, resulting in an approximately 16.7% slower framerate. PAL's higher resolution results in letterboxing of the output image. Some commercial PAL region releases exhibit this same problem and, therefore, can be played in NTSC systems without issue, but other games will face a 20% speedup if played in an NTSC console. To mostly correct this issue, a switch can be added to place the Super NES PPU into a 60\u00a0Hz mode supported by most newer PAL televisions. Later games will detect this setting and refuse to run, requiring the switch to be thrown only after the check completes.\nCasing.\nAll models of the Super NES control deck are predominantly gray, of slightly different shades. The North American version, designed by Nintendo of America industrial designer Lance Barr (who previously redesigned the Famicom to become the NES), has a boxy design with purple sliding switches and a dark gray eject lever. The loading bay surface is curved, both to invite interaction and to prevent food or drinks from being placed on the console and spilling as with the flat-surfaced NES. \nThe original Japanese version, which shares its design with the European version, is more rounded with darker gray accents and buttons.\nAll versions incorporate a top-loading slot for game cartridges, although the shape of the slot differs between regions to match the different shapes of the cartridges. The MULTI OUT connector (later used on the Nintendo 64 and GameCube) can output composite video, S-Video and RGB signals, as well as RF with an external RF modulator. Original versions additionally include a 28-pin expansion port under a small cover on the bottom of the unit and a standard RF output with channel selection switch on the back; the redesigned models output composite video only, requiring an external modulator for RF.\nThe Nintendo Super System (NSS) is an arcade system for retail preview of 11 particular Super NES games in the United States, similar to the PlayChoice-10 for NES games. It consists of slightly modified Super NES hardware with a menu interface and 25-inch monitor, that allows gameplay for a certain amount of time depending on game credits. Manufacturing of this model was discontinued in 1992.\nRedesigned model.\nA cost-reduced version of the console, referred to as the New-Style Super NES (model SNS-101) in North America and as the in Japan, was released late in the platform's lifespan; designed by Barr, it incorporates design elements from both the original North American and Japanese/European console models but in a smaller form factor. Unlike the original console models, the redesigned model is virtually identical across both regions save for the color palette (the North American model receiving purple buttons and the Japanese model receiving grey buttons). The redesign did not receive a release in Europe.\nExternally, the power and reset buttons were moved to the left-hand side of the console while the cartridge eject button and power LED indicator were omitted. Internally, the redesigned model consolidates the console's hardware into a system-on-chip (SoC) design. The redesigned console lacks the bottom expansion slot, rendering it incompatible with the Japan-exclusive Satellaview add-on.\nFor AV output, the redesigned console features the same multi-out port used on the original models. Unlike the latter models, the former's AV port only supports composite video output natively as support for RGB video and S-Video was disabled internally; however, they can be restored via a \"relatively simple\" modification. The internal RF modulator was also removed, requiring an external one for such output if needed. Due to the SoC design, it is highly sought after by Super NES/Famicom enthusiasts since its RGB video quality (if restored) is improved over earlier internal revisions of the console.\nThe redesigned console first released in October 1997 in North America, where it originally retailed for US$99.95 in a bundle with \"\";\nit was subsequently released in Japan on March 27, 1998, where it retailed for \u00a57,800. Nintendo marketed it as an entry-level gamer's system for consumers who were apprehensive about the higher price of newer systems such as the Nintendo 64. Nintendo also introduced a slightly altered controller for it, with the console's logo replaced by an embossed Nintendo logo.\nYellowing.\nThe acrylonitrile butadiene styrene plastic used in the casing of some older Super NES and Super Famicom consoles is particularly susceptible to oxidation with exposure to air. This, along with the particularly light color of the original plastic, causes affected consoles to quickly become yellow; if the sections of the casing came from different batches of plastic, a \"two-tone\" effect results. This issue may be reversed with a method called Retrobrighting, where a mixture of chemicals is applied to the case and exposed to UV light.\nGame cartridge.\nSuper NES games are distributed on ROM cartridges, officially referred to as Game Pak in most Western regions, and as in Japan and parts of Latin America. Though the Super NES can address 128 Mbit, only 117.75 Mbit are actually available for cartridge use. A fairly normal mapping could easily address up to 95 Mbit of ROM data (48 Mbit at FastROM speed) with 8 Mbit of battery-backed RAM. Most available memory access controllers only support mappings of up to 32 Mbit. The largest games released (\"Tales of Phantasia\" and \"Star Ocean\") contain 48 Mbit of ROM data, and the smallest games contain only 2 Mbit.\nCartridges may also contain battery-backed SRAM to save the game state, extra working RAM, custom coprocessors, or any other hardware that will not exceed the maximum current rating of the console.\nGames.\n1757 Super NES games were officially released: 717 in North America (plus 4 championship cartridges), 521 in Europe, 1,448 in Japan, 231 on Satellaview, and 13 on Sufami Turbo. Many Super NES games have been called some of the greatest video games of all time, such as \"Super Mario World\" (1990), \"\" (1991), \"Final Fantasy VI\" (1994), \"Donkey Kong Country\" (1994), \"EarthBound\" (1994), \"Super Metroid\" (1994), \"Chrono Trigger\" (1995) and \"Yoshi's Island\" (1995). Many Super NES games have been rereleased several times, including on the Virtual Console, Super NES Classic Edition, and the Nintendo Classics service on Nintendo Switch Online. All Game Boy games are playable with the Super Game Boy add-on.\nPeripherals.\nThe Super NES controller design expands on that of the NES, with A, B, X, and Y face buttons in a diamond arrangement, and two shoulder buttons. Lance Barr created its ergonomic design, and he later adapted it in 1993 for the NES-039 \"dogbone\" controller. The Japanese and PAL region versions incorporated the four colors of the face buttons into the system's logo. The North American version's buttons were colored to match the redesigned console; the X and Y buttons are lavender with concave faces, and the A and B buttons are purple with convex faces. Several later controller designs have elements from the Super NES controller, including the PlayStation, Dreamcast, Xbox, and Wii Classic Controller. This face button layout is on future Nintendo systems since the Nintendo DS.\nSeveral peripherals add to the functionality of the Super NES. Some are required by certain games, such as the Super Scope light gun, and the Super NES Mouse for a point and click interface. Hudson Soft released the Super Multitap in conjunction with \"Super Bomberman\", a multi-player adapter for the Super NES that allows up to four additional controllers to be connected into the control deck's second controller port for up to five possible simultaneous players in supported titles. Many other peripheral manufacturers would follow suit with their own multi-player adapters for the Super NES, both officially licensed and off-brand, such as the Super Links by Bulletproof Software (based on the Hori Multitap by Hori in Japan) and the Super 5-Play by Performance. All Super NES titles that support the Super Multitap or its compatible derivatives feature a \"Super NES Multi-Player Adapter\" logo on their packaging or cartridge label. Japanese Super Famicom titles used a logo instead, which was Nintendo's generic name for the Super Multitap and its compatible derivatives.\nVarious specialized joypad and joystick controllers were created by third-party companies such as Asciiware (the AsciiPad and the Super Advantage), Capcom (the Capcom Fighter Power Stick and the Capcom Pad Soldier), Hudson Soft (Super Joy Card), Hori (Super Commander and the SGB Commander) and Konami (the Hissatsu Command Controller), among others. Unusual controllers include the BatterUP baseball bat, the Life Fitness Entertainment System (an exercise bike controller with built-in monitoring software), the TeeV Golf golf club, and the Justifier (a revolver-shaped light gun made by Konami for \"Lethal Enforcers\").\nThough Nintendo never released an adapter for playing NES games on the Super NES, the Super Game Boy adapter cartridge allows games designed for Nintendo's portable Game Boy system to be played on the Super NES. The Super Game Boy touts several feature enhancements over the Game Boy, including palette substitution, custom screen borders, and access to the Super NES console's features by specially enhanced Game Boy games. Japan also saw the release of the Super Game Boy 2, which adds a communication port to enable a second Game Boy to connect for multiplayer games.\nLike the NES before it, the Super NES has unlicensed third-party peripherals, including a new version of the Game Genie cheat cartridge designed for use with Super NES games.\nSoon after the release of the Super NES, companies began marketing backup devices such as the Super Wildcard, Super Pro Fighter Q, and Game Doctor. These devices create a backup of a cartridge, and can be used to play illicit ROM images or to copy games, violating copyright laws in many jurisdictions.\nThe Japan-only Satellaview is a satellite modem attached to the Super Famicom's expansion port and connected to the St.GIGA satellite radio station from April 23, 1995, to June 30, 2000. Satellaview subscribers could download gaming news and specially designed games, which were frequently either remakes of or sequels to older Famicom games, and released in installments. In the United States, the relatively short-lived XBAND allowed users to connect to a network via a dial-up modem to compete against other players around the country.\nNintendo attempted partnerships with Sony and later Philips to develop CD-ROM-based peripherals, aiming to compete with add-ons like the TurboGrafx-CD and Sega CD. Sony's effort resulted in a prototype known as the PlayStation, a Super NES with a built-in CD-ROM drive, which never reached the market but laid the groundwork for Sony's later independently produced console. The Philips project was canceled before a prototype was produced. However, under the original development agreement, Nintendo had granted Philips the rights to use certain franchises for games intended for the planned peripheral. After the project's cancellation, Philips retained these rights and used them to develop Mario and Zelda titles for its CD-i multimedia system.\nEnhancement chips.\nAs part of the overall plan for the Super NES, rather than include an expensive CPU that would still become obsolete in a few years, the hardware designers made it easy to interface special coprocessor chips to the console, just like the MMC chips used for most NES games. This is most often characterized by 16 additional pins on the cartridge card edge.\nThe Super FX is a RISC CPU designed to perform functions that the main CPU can not feasibly do. The chip is primarily used to create 3D game worlds made with polygons, texture mapping and light source shading. The chip can also be used to enhance 2D games.\nThe Nintendo fixed-point digital signal processor (DSP) chip allowed fast vector-based calculations, bitmap conversions, both 2D and 3D coordinate transformations, and other functions. Four revisions of the chip exist, each physically identical but with different microcode. The DSP-1 version, including the later 1A and 1B bug fix revisions, is used most often; the DSP-2, DSP-3, and DSP-4 are used in only one game each.\nSimilar to the 5A22 CPU in the console, the SA-1 chip contains a 65C816 processor core clocked at 10.7\u00a0MHz, a memory mapper, DMA, decompression and bitplane conversion circuitry, several programmable timers, and CIC region lockout functionality.\nIn Japan, games could be downloaded cheaper than standard cartridges, from Nintendo Power kiosks onto special cartridges containing flash memory and a MegaChips MX15001TFC chip. The chip manages communication with the kiosks to download ROM images and has an initial menu to select a game. Some were published both in cartridge and download form, and others were download only. The service closed on February 8, 2007.\nMany cartridges contain other enhancement chips, most of which were created for use by a single company in a few games.\nReception and legacy.\nApproximately 49.1 million Super NES consoles were sold worldwide, with 23.35 million of those units sold in the Americas and 17.17 million in Japan. Although it could not quite repeat the success of the NES, which sold 61.91 million units worldwide, the Super NES was the best-selling console of its era.\nIn 2007, \"GameTrailers\" named the Super NES as the second-best console of all time (only behind the PlayStation 2) in their list of top ten consoles that \"left their mark on the history of gaming\", citing its graphics, sound, and library of top-quality games. In 2015, they also named it the best Nintendo console of all time, saying, \"The list of games we love from this console completely annihilates any other roster from the Big N.\" Technology columnist Don Reisinger proclaimed \"The SNES is the greatest console of all time\" in January 2008, citing the quality of the games and the console's dramatic improvement over its predecessor; fellow technology columnist Will Greenwald replied with a more nuanced view, giving the Super NES top marks with his heart, the NES with his head, and the PlayStation (for its controller) with his hands. GamingExcellence also gave the Super NES first place in 2008, declaring it \"simply the most timeless system ever created\" with many games that stand the test of time and citing its innovation in controller design, graphics capabilities, and game storytelling. At the same time, GameDaily rated it fifth of the ten greatest consoles for its graphics, audio, controllers, and games. In 2009, \"IGN\" named the Super NES the fourth-best video game console, complimenting its audio and number of AAA games.\nEmulation.\nSNES emulation began with VSMC in 1994, and Super Pasofami became the first working emulator in 1996. During that time, two competing emulation projects, Snes96 and Snes97, merged to form Snes9x. In 1997, ZSNES development began. In 2004, Bsnes development began with the goal of preservation through maximal accuracy and compatibility, and was later renamed to Higan.\nNintendo of America maintained its stance against the distribution of SNES ROM image files and the use of emulators, as it had with the NES before, saying they represent copyright infringement. Emulation proponents assert that the discontinued hardware production constitutes abandonware status, the owners' right to make a personal backup, space shifting for private use, the development of homebrew games, the frailty of ROM cartridges and consoles, and the lack of certain foreign imports. Nintendo designed a hobbyist development system for the SNES, but never released it.\nUnofficial SNES emulation is available on virtually all platforms, including Android, iOS, game consoles, and PDAs. Individual games have been bundled with official dedicated emulators on some GameCube discs, and Nintendo's Virtual Console service for the Wii introduced diverse and officially licensed SNES emulation.\nThe Super NES Classic Edition was released in September 2017 following the NES Classic Edition. This emulation-based mini-console, which is physically modeled after the North American and European versions of the SNES, is bundled with two SNES-style controllers and 21 games, including the unreleased \"Star Fox 2\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28315", "revid": "34067354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28315", "title": "SNES", "text": ""}
{"id": "28317", "revid": "27233032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28317", "title": "Sunni", "text": ""}
{"id": "28319", "revid": "2414009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28319", "title": "Smalltalk", "text": "Object-oriented programming language\nSmalltalk is a purely object-oriented programming language (OOP) that was originally created in the 1970s for educational use, specifically for constructionist learning, but later found use in business. It was created at Xerox PARC by Learning Research Group (LRG) scientists, including Alan Kay, Dan Ingalls, Adele Goldberg, Ted Kaehler, Diana Merry, and Scott Wallace.\nIn Smalltalk, executing programs are built of opaque, atomic \"objects\", which are instances of template code stored in classes. These objects intercommunicate by passing of messages, via an intermediary virtual machine environment (VM). A relatively small number of objects, called primitives, are not amenable to live redefinition, sometimes being defined independently of the Smalltalk programming environment.\nHaving undergone significant industry development toward other uses, including business and database functions, Smalltalk is still in use today. When first publicly released, Smalltalk-80 presented numerous foundational ideas for the nascent field of object-oriented programming (OOP).\nSince inception, the language provided interactive programming via an integrated development environment. This requires reflection and late binding in the language execution of code. Later development has led to at least one instance of Smalltalk execution environment which lacks such an integrated graphical user interface or front-end.\nSmalltalk-like languages are in active development and have gathered communities of users around them. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Smalltalk was ratified in 1998 and represents the standard version of Smalltalk.\nSmalltalk took second place for \"most loved programming language\" in the Stack Overflow Developer Survey in 2017, but it was not among the 26 most loved programming languages of the 2018 survey.\nHistory.\nThere are a large number of Smalltalk variants. The unqualified word \"Smalltalk\" is often used to indicate the Smalltalk-80 language and compatible VM, the first version to be made publicly available and created in 1980. The first hardware-environments which ran the Smalltalk VMs were Xerox Alto computers.\nSmalltalk was the product of research led by Alan Kay at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC); Alan Kay designed most of the early Smalltalk versions, Adele Goldberg wrote most of the documentation, and Dan Ingalls implemented most of the early versions. The first version, termed Smalltalk-71, was created by Kay in a few mornings on a bet that a programming language based on the idea of message passing inspired by Simula could be implemented in \"a page of code\". A later variant used for research work is now termed Smalltalk-72 and influenced the development of the Actor model. Its syntax and execution model were very different from modern Smalltalk variants.\nThe first Smalltalk interpreter actually implemented was for Smalltalk-72, and was written by Dan Ingalls in about 700 lines of BASIC in October 1972 for the Data General Nova. This version was demonstrated at the MIT AI Lab by Alan Kay in November that year. The first bitmap line drawing routines were implemented by Ted Kaehler in late December 1972. Smalltalk-72 was ported to the Xerox Alto in April 1973, the same month the first units began operation.\nAfter significant revisions which froze some aspects of execution semantics to gain performance (by adopting a Simula-like class inheritance model of execution), Smalltalk-76 was created. This system had a development environment featuring most of the now-familiar tools, including a class library code browser/editor. Smalltalk-80 added metaclasses, to help maintain the \"everything is an object\" (except variables) paradigm by associating properties and behavior with individual classes, and even primitives such as integer and Boolean values (for example, to support different ways to create instances).\nSmalltalk-80 was the first language variant made available outside of PARC. In 1981, it was shared with Tektronix, Hewlett-Packard, Apple Computer, and DEC for review and debugging on their platforms. The August 1981 issue of Byte Magazine was devoted to Smalltalk-80 and brought its ideas to a large audience. Several books on Smalltalk-80 were also published. Smalltalk-80 became the basis for all future commercial versions of Smalltalk. The final release of Smalltalk-80 Version 1 was in November 1981. Xerox only distributed Version 1 to Apple, DEC, HP, and Tektronix, but these companies were allowed unrestricted redistribution via any system they built. This encouraged the wide spread of Smalltalk. Later, in 1983, Xerox released Smalltalk-80 Version 2. This version was generally available to the public, although under a restrictive license. Versions 1 and 2 were fairly similar, although Version 2 did have some added features such as a spelling corrector. Each release consisted of a virtual image (platform-independent file with object definitions) and a virtual machine specification.\nANSI Smalltalk has been the standard language reference since 1998. Two currently popular Smalltalk implementation variants are descendants of those original Smalltalk-80 images. Squeak is an open source implementation derived from Smalltalk-80 Version 1 by way of Apple Smalltalk. VisualWorks is derived from Smalltalk-80 version 2 by way of Smalltalk-80 2.5 and ObjectWorks (both products of ParcPlace Systems, a Xerox PARC spin-off company formed to bring Smalltalk to the market). As an interesting link between generations, in 2001, Vassili Bykov implemented Hobbes, a virtual machine running Smalltalk-80 inside VisualWorks. (Dan Ingalls later ported Hobbes to Squeak.)\nDuring the late 1980s to mid-1990s, Smalltalk environments, including support, training and add-ons, were sold by two competing organizations: ParcPlace Systems and Digitalk, both California-based. ParcPlace Systems tended to focus on the Unix/Sun microsystems market, while Digitalk focused on Intel-based PCs running Microsoft Windows or IBM's OS/2. Both firms struggled to take Smalltalk mainstream due to Smalltalk's substantial memory needs, limited run-time performance, and initial lack of supported connectivity to SQL-based relational database servers. While the high price of ParcPlace Smalltalk limited its market penetration to mid-sized and large commercial organizations, the Digitalk products initially tried to reach a wider audience with a lower price. IBM initially supported the Digitalk product, but then entered the market with a Smalltalk product in 1995 named VisualAge/Smalltalk. Easel introduced Enfin at this time on Windows and OS/2. Enfin became far more popular in Europe, as IBM introduced it into IT shops before their development of IBM Smalltalk (later VisualAge). Enfin was later acquired by Cincom Systems, and is now sold under the name ObjectStudio, and is part of the Cincom Smalltalk product suite.\nIn 1995, ParcPlace and Digitalk merged into ParcPlace-Digitalk and then rebranded in 1997 as ObjectShare, located in Irvine, California. ObjectShare (NASDAQ: OBJS) was traded publicly until 1999, when it was delisted and dissolved. The merged firm never managed to find an effective response to Java as to market positioning, and by 1997 its owners were looking to sell the business. In 1999, Seagull Software acquired the ObjectShare Java development lab (including the original Smalltalk/V and Visual Smalltalk development team), and still owns VisualSmalltalk, although worldwide distribution rights for the Smalltalk product remained with ObjectShare who then sold them to Cincom. VisualWorks was sold to Cincom and is now part of Cincom Smalltalk. Cincom has backed Smalltalk strongly, releasing multiple new versions of VisualWorks and ObjectStudio each year since 1999.\nCincom, GemTalk, and Instantiations, continue to sell Smalltalk environments. IBM ended VisualAge Smalltalk, having in the late 1990s decided to back Java instead and, as of 2005[ [update]], is supported by Instantiations, Inc. Instantiations renamed the product VA Smalltalk (VAST Platform) and continue to release new versions yearly. The open Squeak implementation has an active community of developers, including many of the original Smalltalk community, and was used to provide the Etoys environment on the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) project, a toolkit for developing collaborative applications Croquet Project, and the Open Cobalt virtual world application. GNU Smalltalk is a free software implementation of a derivative of Smalltalk-80 from the GNU project. Pharo Smalltalk is a fork of Squeak oriented toward research and use in commercial environments.\nAs of 2016, a significant development that has spread across all Smalltalk environments is the increasing usage of two web frameworks, Seaside and AIDA/Web, to simplify the building of complex web applications. Seaside has seen considerable market interest with Cincom, Gemstone, and Instantiations incorporating and extending it.\nInfluences.\nSmalltalk was one of many object-oriented programming languages based on Simula. Smalltalk is also one of the most influential programming languages. Virtually all of the object-oriented languages that came after\u2014Flavors, CLOS, Objective-C, Java, Python, Ruby, and many others\u2014were influenced by Smalltalk. Smalltalk was also one of the most popular languages for agile software development methods, rapid application development (RAD) or prototyping, and software design patterns. The highly productive environment provided by Smalltalk platforms made them ideal for rapid, iterative development.\nSmalltalk emerged from a larger program of Advanced Research Projects Agency-funded research that in many ways defined the modern world of computing. In addition to Smalltalk, working prototypes of things such as hypertext, GUIs, multimedia, the mouse, telepresence, and the Internet were developed by ARPA researchers in the 1960s. Alan Kay (one of the inventors of Smalltalk) also described a tablet computer he named the Dynabook which resembles modern tablet computers.\nSmalltalk environments were often the first to develop what are now common object-oriented software design patterns. One of the most popular is the model\u2013view\u2013controller (MVC) pattern for user interface design. The MVC pattern enables developers to have multiple consistent views of the same underlying data. It's ideal for software development environments, where there are various views (e.g., entity-relation, dataflow, object model, etc.) of the same underlying specification. Also, for simulations or games where the underlying model may be viewed from various angles and levels of abstraction.\nIn addition to the MVC pattern, the Smalltalk language and environment were influential in the history of the graphical user interface (GUI) and the \"what you see is what you get\" (WYSIWYG) user interface, font editors, and desktop metaphors for UI design. The powerful built-in debugging and object inspection tools that came with Smalltalk environments set the standard for all the integrated development environments, starting with Lisp Machine environments, that came after.\nSmalltalk uses several collection filter operators that rhyme with the \"-ect\" suffix, collect:, select:, inject:into:, et al. This was inspired by a line from the 1967 Arlo Guthrie monologue \"Alice's Restaurant Massacree,\" in which Guthrie underwent a battery of being \"injected, inspected, detected, infected, neglected and selected.\"\nObject-oriented programming.\nAs in other object-oriented languages, the central concept in Smalltalk-80 (but not in Smalltalk-72) is that of an \"object\". An object is always an \"instance\" of a \"class\". Classes are \"blueprints\" that describe the properties and behavior of their instances. For example, a GUI's window class might declare that windows have properties such as the label, the position and whether the window is visible or not. The class might also declare that instances support operations such as opening, closing, moving and hiding. Each particular window object would have its own values of those properties, and each of them would be able to perform operations defined by its class.\nA Smalltalk object can do exactly three things:\nThe state an object holds is always private to that object. Other objects can query or change that state only by sending requests (messages) to the object to do so. Any message can be sent to any object: when a message is received, the receiver determines whether that message is appropriate. If the message is not understood by the object then the virtual machine sends the doesNotUnderstand: message with the original message as an argument, and the default implementation of doesNotUnderstand: raises an exception that if not caught opens the system's debugger. Alan Kay has commented that despite the attention given to objects, messaging is the most important concept in Smalltalk: \"The big idea is 'messaging'\u2014that is what the kernel of Smalltalk/Squeak is all about (and it's something that was never quite completed in our Xerox PARC phase).\"\nUnlike most other languages, Smalltalk code can be modified while the system is running. Live coding and applying fixes 'on-the-fly' is a dominant programming methodology for Smalltalk and is one of the main reasons for its productivity.\nSmalltalk is a \"pure\" object-oriented programming language, meaning that, unlike C++ and Java, there are no primitive types. All values are represented as objects and computation on integers uses message sending just like any other object. In Smalltalk, types such as integers, Booleans and characters are also objects, in the sense that they are instances of corresponding classes, and operations on them are invoked by sending messages. For efficiency and generality integers are implemented by four classes, Integer, the abstract superclass of all integers, SmallInteger, whose instances fit in a machine word, for example having a 61-bit signed range in a 64-bit implementation, LargePositiveInteger and LargeNegativeInteger, the last two being vectors of bytes. Consequently Smalltalk can evaluate 52 factorial to produce . The transition from small to large integers is transparent to the programmer; variables do not require type declarations. This makes the system both concise and flexible. A programmer can change or extend (through subclassing) the classes that implement what in other languages would be primitive values, so that new behavior can be defined for their instances\u2014for example, to implement new control structures\u2014or even so that their existing behavior will be changed. This fact is summarized in the commonly-heard phrase \"In Smalltalk everything is an object\", which may be more accurately expressed as \"all values are objects\", as variables are not.\nSince all values are objects, classes are also objects. Each class is an instance of the \"metaclass\" of that class. Metaclasses in turn are also objects, and are all instances of a class named Metaclass. Classes contain method dictionaries that map selectors (the equivalent of function procedure names in other languages) to method objects, objects that are executed to evaluate messages. Classes inherit from other classes, with either Object or ProtoObject at the root of the class hierarchy. Sending a message to an object at the most abstract involves fetching the class of the receiver (the object being sent the message) and looking up the message's selector in the class's method dictionary, followed by the superclass and so on until the method is found or doesNotUnderstand is sent. Smalltalk virtual machines use various techniques to speed up message lookup so the system provides both a simple consistent message binding mechanism and good efficiency. Code blocks\u2014Smalltalk's way of expressing anonymous functions\u2014are also objects. They have a very lightweight syntax and are used throughout the system to implement control structures, especially for the Collection hierarchy.\nReflection.\nReflection is a feature of having a meta-model as Smalltalk does. The meta-model is the part of the system that implements the programming system itself, and developers can use the meta-model to do things like walk through, examine, and modify code in the running system, or find all the instances of a certain kind of structure (e.g., all instances of the Method class in the meta-model).\nSmalltalk-80 is a totally reflective system. Smalltalk-80 provides both structural and computational reflection. Smalltalk is a structurally reflective system which structure is defined by Smalltalk-80 objects. The classes and methods that define the system are also objects and fully part of the system that they help define. The Smalltalk compiler, which is itself written in Smalltalk and exists alongside all the other code in the system, compiles textual source code into method objects, typically instances of codice_1. These get added to classes by storing them in a class' method dictionary. The part of the class hierarchy that defines classes can add new classes to the system. The system is extended by running Smalltalk-80 code that creates or defines classes and methods. In this way a Smalltalk-80 system is a \"living\" system, carrying around the ability to extend itself at run time. One can even extend the compiler at run-time; indeed this is how the compiler is developed and maintained.\nSince the classes are objects, they can be asked questions such as \"what methods do you implement?\" or \"what fields/slots/instance variables do you define?\". So objects can easily be inspected, copied, (de)serialized and so on with generic code that applies to any object in the system.\nSmalltalk-80 also provides computational reflection, the ability to observe the computational state of the system. In languages derived from the original Smalltalk-80 the current activation of a method is accessible as an object named via a pseudo-variable (one of the six reserved words), codice_2, which corresponds to a stack frame in conventional language implementations, and is called a \"context\". Sending a message is done within some context, and to evaluate the message another context is created, the first being the sender of the former. In this way the stack is a linked list of context objects, and the debugger is essentially an inspector of this spaghetti stack. By sending messages to codice_2 a method activation can ask questions like \"who sent this message to me\". These facilities make it possible to implement coroutines or Prolog-like back-tracking without modifying the virtual machine. The exception system is implemented using this facility. One of the more interesting uses of this is in the Seaside web framework which relieves the programmer of dealing with the complexity of a web browser's back button by storing continuations for each edited page and switching between them as the user navigates a web site. Programming the web server using Seaside can then be done using a more conventional programming style. As with message sending Smalltalk-80 virtual machines optimize away the expensive use of contexts internally, providing the illusion and flexibility of a spaghetti stack without most its costs. Essentially, context objects are created lazily as required, for example when a message is sent to the thisContext variable.\nAn example of how Smalltalk can use reflection is the mechanism for handling errors. When an object is sent a message that it does not implement, the virtual machine sends the object the codice_4 message with a reification of the message as an argument. The message (another object, an instance of codice_5) contains the selector of the message and an codice_6 of its arguments. In an interactive Smalltalk system the default implementation of codice_4 is one that opens an error window (a notifier) reporting the error to the user. Through this and the reflective facilities the user can examine the context in which the error occurred, redefine the offending code, and continue, all within the system, using Smalltalk-80's reflective facilities.\nBy creating a class that understands (implements) only doesNotUnderstand:, one can create an instance that can intercept any message sent to it via its doesNotUnderstand: method. Such instances are called transparent proxies. Such proxies can then be used to implement a number of facilities such as distributed Smalltalk where messages are exchanged between multiple Smalltalk systems, database interfaces where objects are transparently faulted out of a database, promises, etc. The design of distributed Smalltalk influenced such systems as CORBA.\nSyntax.\nSmalltalk-80 syntax is rather minimalist, based on only a handful of declarations. In fact, there are only five \"keywords\" in Smalltalk, names of pseudo-variables with a special meaning: codice_8, codice_9, codice_10, codice_11, and codice_12. These are properly termed \"pseudo-variables\", identifiers that follow the rules for variable identifiers but denote bindings that a programmer cannot change. The codice_8, codice_9, and codice_10 pseudo-variables are singleton instances. codice_11 and codice_12 refer to the receiver of a message within a method activated in response to that message, but sends to codice_12 are looked up in the superclass of the method's defining class rather than the class of the receiver, which allows methods in subclasses to invoke methods of the same name in superclasses. The only built-in language constructs are message sends, assignment, method return, literal syntax for some objects, including block literals (closures). From its origins as a language for children of all ages, standard Smalltalk syntax uses punctuation in a manner more like English than mainstream coding languages. The remainder of the language, including control structures for conditional evaluation and iteration, is implemented on top of the built-in constructs by the standard Smalltalk class library (for performance reasons, implementations may recognize and treat as special some of those messages; however, this is only an optimization and is not coded into the language syntax). The pseudo-variable codice_2 may have been added in some implementations, but is not mentioned in either Smalltalk-80 or the ANSI standard. Pseudo-variables in general realise arguments passed to messages or blocks, content of these variables is read-only and cannot be modified.\nThe adage that \"Smalltalk syntax fits on a postcard\" may have originated in Alan Kay's original conception of the language, as related by him in practically each of tens or hundreds of public lectures, op. cit., or perhaps it could refer to a code snippet by Ralph Johnson, demonstrating all the basic standard syntactic elements of methods:\nexampleWithNumber: x\n | y |\n true &amp; false not &amp; (nil isNil) ifFalse: [self halt].\n y := self size + super size.\n #($a #a 'a' 1 1.0)\n do: [ :each |\n Transcript show: (each class name);\n show: ' '].\n ^x &lt; y\nLiterals.\nThe following examples illustrate the most common objects which can be written as literal values in Smalltalk-80 methods.\nThe following list illustrates some of the possibilities for numbers.\n42\n-42\n123.45\n1.2345e2\n2r10010010\n16rA000\nThe last two entries are a binary and a hexadecimal number, respectively. The number before the 'r' is the radix or base. The base does not have to be a power of two; for example 36rSMALLTALK is a valid number equal to 80738163270632 decimal.\nCharacters are written by preceding them with a dollar sign:\n$A\nStrings are sequences of characters enclosed in single quotes:\n'Hello, world!'\nTo include a quote in a string, escape it using a second quote:\n'I said \"Hello, world!\" to them.'\nDouble quotes do not need escaping, since single quotes delimit a string:\n'I said \"Hello, world!\" to them.'\nTwo equal strings (strings are equal if they contain all the same characters) can be different objects residing in different places in memory. In addition to strings, Smalltalk has a class of character sequence objects named \"Symbol\". Symbols are guaranteed to be unique\u2014there can be no two equal symbols which are different objects. Because of that, symbols are very cheap to compare and are often used for language artifacts such as message selectors (see below).\nSymbols are written as # followed by a string literal. For example:\nIf the sequence does not include whitespace or punctuation characters,\nthis can also be written as:\nArrays:\ndefines an array of four integers.\ndefines a seven element array whose first element is a literal array, second element a byte array, third element the string 'four', and so on.\nMany implementations support the following literal syntax for ByteArrays:\ndefines a ByteArray of four integers.\nAnd last but not least, blocks (anonymous function literals)\n[... Some smalltalk code...] The following takes two arguments and compares any two objects which can understand \"less than\", for example numbers, and strings[:a :b| a &lt; b]\nBlocks are explained in detail further in the text.\nMany Smalltalk dialects implement additional syntaxes for other objects, but the ones above are the essentials supported by all.\nVariable declarations.\nThe two kinds of variables commonly used in Smalltalk are instance variables and temporary variables. Other variables and related terminology depend on the particular implementation. For example, VisualWorks has class shared variables and namespace shared variables, while Squeak and many other implementations have class variables, pool variables and global variables.\nTemporary variable declarations in Smalltalk are variables declared inside a method (see below). They are declared at the top of the method as names separated by spaces and enclosed by vertical bars. For example:\ndeclares a temporary variable named index which contains initially the value codice_10.\nMultiple variables may be declared within one set of bars:\ndeclares two variables: index and vowels. All variables are initialized. Variables are initialized to nil except the indexed variables of strings, which are initialized to the null character or ByteArrays which are initialized to 0.\nAssignment.\nA variable is assigned a value via the 'codice_21' syntax. So:\nvowels := 'aeiou'\nAssigns the string codice_22 to the formerly declared vowels variable. The string is an object (a sequence of characters between single quotes is the syntax for literal strings), created by the compiler at compile time.\nIn the original Parc Place image, the glyph of the underscore character \u27e8_\u27e9 appeared as a left-facing arrow \u27e8\u2190\u27e9 (like in the 1963 version of the ASCII code). Smalltalk originally accepted this left-arrow as the only assignment operator. Some modern code still contains what appear to be underscores acting as assignments, harkening back to this original usage. Most modern Smalltalk implementations accept either the underscore or the colon-equals syntax.\nMessages.\nThe message is the most fundamental language construct in Smalltalk. Even control structures are implemented as message sends. Smalltalk adopts by default a dynamic dispatch and single dispatch strategy (as opposed to multiple dispatch, used by some other object-oriented languages). There are three kinds of message sends, unary messages, which have a single keyword, such as class and size, binary messages, which for example are used for arithmetic, such as a &lt; b, a ~= b, and keyword messages where a keyword followed by a colon precedes each argument in the message, so that a between: b and: c sends the #between:and: message to codice_23 with arguments codice_24 and codice_25. Unary messages have higher precedence than binary messages, which have higher precedence than keyword messages, and evaluation is strictly left-to-right. There is no arithmetic precedence. 1 + 2 * 3 evaluates to 9, not to 7.\nThe following example sends the message 'factorial' to number 42:\n42 factorial\nIn this situation 42 is called the message \"receiver\", while 'factorial' is the message \"selector\". The receiver responds to the message by returning a value (presumably in this case the factorial of 42). Among other things, the result of the message can be assigned to a variable:\naRatherBigNumber := 42 factorial\n\"factorial\" above is what is called a \"unary message\" because only one object, the receiver, is involved. Messages can carry additional objects as \"arguments\", as follows:\n2 raisedTo: 4\nIn this expression two objects are involved: 2 as the receiver and 4 as the message argument. The message result, or in Smalltalk parlance, \"the answer\" is supposed to be 16. Such messages are called \"keyword messages\". A message can have more arguments, using the following syntax:\n'hello world' indexOf: $o startingAt: 6\nwhich answers the index of character 'o' in the receiver string, starting the search from index 6. The selector of this message is \"indexOf:startingAt:\", consisting of two pieces, or \"keywords\".\nSuch interleaving of keywords and arguments is meant to improve readability of code, since arguments are explained by their preceding keywords. For example, an expression to create a rectangle using a C++ or Java-like syntax might be written as:\nnew Rectangle(100, 200);\nIt's unclear which argument is which. By contrast, in Smalltalk, this code would be written as:\nRectangle width: 100 height: 200\nThe receiver in this case is \"Rectangle\", a class, and the answer will be a new instance of the class with the specified width and height.\nFinally, most of the special (non-alphabetic) characters can be used as what are called \"binary messages\". These allow mathematical and logical operators to be written in their traditional form:\n3 + 4\nwhich sends the message \"+\" to the receiver 3 with 4 passed as the argument (the answer of which will be 7). Similarly,\n3 &gt; 4\nis the message \"&gt;\" sent to 3 with argument 4 (the answer of which will be false). The programmer is free to define new binary selectors just as they are free to define novel unary and keyword messages.\nNotice that the Smalltalk-80 language itself does not imply the meaning of those operators. The outcome of the above is only defined by how the receiver of the message (in this case a Number instance) responds to messages \"+\" and \"&gt;\".\nA side effect of this mechanism is operator overloading. A message \"&gt;\" can also be understood by other objects, allowing the use of expressions of the form \"a &gt; b\" to compare them.\nExpressions.\nSmalltalk is an expression-based language. Every statement, including control constructs, has a value, which is some object. An expression can include multiple message sends. In this case expressions are parsed according to a simple order of precedence. Unary messages have the highest precedence, followed by binary messages, followed by keyword messages. For example:\n3 factorial + 4 factorial between: 10 and: 100\nis evaluated as follows:\nThe answer of the last message sent is the result of the entire expression.\nParentheses can alter the order of evaluation when needed. For example,\n(3 factorial + 4) factorial between: 10 and: 100\nwill change the meaning so that the expression first computes \"3 factorial + 4\" yielding 10. That 10 then receives the second \"factorial\" message, yielding 3628800. 3628800 then receives \"between:and:\", answering false.\nBecause the meaning of binary messages is not coded into Smalltalk-80 syntax, all of them are considered to have equal precedence and are evaluated simply from left to right. Because of this, the meaning of Smalltalk expressions using binary messages can be different from their \"traditional\" interpretation:\n3 + 4 * 5\nis evaluated as \"(3 + 4) * 5\", producing 35. To obtain the expected answer of 23, parentheses must be used to explicitly define the order of operations:\n3 + (4 * 5)\nUnary messages can be \"chained\" by writing them one after another:\n3 factorial factorial log\nwhich sends \"factorial\" to 3, then \"factorial\" to the result (6), then \"log\" to the result (720), producing the result 2.85733.\nA series of expressions can be written as in the following (hypothetical) example, each separated by a period (period is a statement separator, not a statement terminator). This example first creates a new instance of class Window, stores it in a variable, and then sends two messages to it.\n | window |\n window := Window new.\n window label: 'Hello'.\n window open\nIf a series of messages are sent to the same receiver as in the example above, they can also be written as a cascade with individual messages separated by semicolons:\n Window new\n label: 'Hello';\n open\nThis rewrite of the earlier example as a single expression avoids the need to store the new window in a temporary variable. According to the usual precedence rules, the unary message \"new\" is sent first, and then \"label:\" and \"open\" are sent to the receiver of \"new\".\nCode blocks.\nA block of code (an anonymous function) can be expressed as a literal value (which is an object, since all values are objects). This is achieved with square brackets:\n[ :params | &lt;message-expressions&gt; ]\nWhere \":params\" is the list of parameters the code can take. This means that the Smalltalk code:\n[:x | x + 1]\ncan be understood as:\nformula_1\nor expressed in lambda terms as:\nformula_2\nand\n[:x | x + 1] value: 3\ncan be evaluated as\nformula_3\nOr in lambda terms as:\nformula_4\nThe resulting block object can form a closure: it can access the variables of its enclosing lexical scopes at any time. Blocks are first-class objects.\nBlocks can be executed by sending them the \"value\" message. Compound variations exist to provide parameters to the block e.g., codice_26 and codice_27.\nThe literal representation of blocks was an innovation which on the one hand allowed certain code to be significantly more readable; it allowed algorithms involving iteration to be coded in a clear and concise way. Code that would typically be written with loops in some languages can be written concisely in Smalltalk using blocks, sometimes in a single line. But more importantly blocks allow control structure to be expressed using messages and polymorphism, since blocks defer computation and polymorphism can be used to select alternatives. So if-then-else in Smalltalk is written and implemented as\nexpr ifTrue: [statements to evaluate if expr] ifFalse: [statements to evaluate if not expr]\n\"True methods for evaluation\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"False methods for evaluation\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\npositiveAmounts := allAmounts select: [:anAmount | anAmount isPositive]\nThis is related to functional programming, wherein patterns of computation (here selection) are abstracted into higher-order functions. For example, the message \"select:\" on a Collection is equivalent to the higher-order function filter on an appropriate functor.\nControl structures.\nControl structures do not have special syntax in Smalltalk. They are instead implemented as messages sent to objects. For example, conditional execution is implemented by sending the message ifTrue: to a Boolean object, passing as an argument the block of code to be executed if and only if the Boolean receiver is true. The two subclasses of Boolean both implement ifTrue:, where the implementation in subclass True always evaluates the block and the implementation in subclass False never evaluates the block.\nThe following code demonstrates this:\nresult := a &gt; b\n ifTrue:[ 'greater' ]\n ifFalse:[ 'less or equal' ]\nBlocks are also used to implement user-defined control structures, enumerators, visitors, exception handling, pluggable behavior and many other patterns.\nFor example:\naString := 'This is a string'.\nvowels := aString select: [:aCharacter | aCharacter isVowel].\nIn the last line, the string is sent the message select: with an argument that is a code block literal. The code block literal will be used as a predicate function that should answer true if and only if an element of the String should be included in the Collection of characters that satisfy the test represented by the code block that is the argument to the \"select:\" message.\nA String object responds to the \"select:\" message by iterating through its members (by sending itself the message \"do:\"), evaluating the selection block (\"aBlock\") once with each character it contains as the argument. When evaluated (by being sent the message \"value: each\"), the selection block (referenced by the parameter \"aBlock\", and defined by the block literal \"[:aCharacter | aCharacter isVowel]\"), answers a Boolean, which is then sent \"ifTrue:\". If the Boolean is the object true, the character is added to a string to be returned.\nBecause the \"select:\" method is defined in the abstract class Collection, it can also be used like this:\nrectangles := OrderedCollection\n with: (Rectangle left: 0 right: 10 top: 100 bottom: 200)\n with: (Rectangle left: 10 right: 10 top: 110 bottom: 210).\naPoint := Point x: 20 y: 20.\ncollisions := rectangles select: [:aRect | aRect containsPoint: aPoint].\nThe exception handling mechanism uses blocks as handlers (similar to CLOS-style exception handling):\n some operation\n] on:Error do:[:ex |\n handler-code\n ex return\nThe exception handler's \"ex\" argument provides access to the state of the suspended operation (stack frame, line-number, receiver and arguments etc.) and is also used to control how the computation is to proceed (by sending one of \"ex proceed\", \"ex reject\", \"ex restart\" or \"ex return\").\nClasses.\nThis is a stock class definition:\nObject subclass: #MessagePublisher\n instanceVariableNames: \"\n classVariableNames: \"\n poolDictionaries: \"\n category: 'Smalltalk Examples'\nOften, most of this definition will be filled in by the environment. Notice that this is a message to the codice_28 class to create a subclass named codice_29. In other words: classes are first-class objects in Smalltalk which can receive messages just like any other object and can be created dynamically at execution time.\nMethods.\nWhen an object receives a message, a method matching the message name is invoked. The following code defines a method publish, and so defines what will happen when this object receives the 'publish' message.\npublish\n Transcript show: 'Hello World!'\nThe following method demonstrates receiving multiple arguments and returning a value:\nquadMultiply: i1 and: i2\n \"This method multiplies the given numbers by each other and the result by 4.\"\n | mul |\n mul := i1 * i2.\n ^mul * 4\nThe method's name is codice_30. The return value is specified with the codice_31 operator.\nObjects are responsible for determining dynamically at runtime which method to execute in response to a message\u2014while in many languages this may be (sometimes, or even always) determined statically at compile time.\nInstantiating classes.\nThe following code:\nMessagePublisher new\ncreates (and returns) a new instance of the MessagePublisher class. This is typically assigned to a variable:\npublisher := MessagePublisher new\nHowever, it is also possible to send a message to a temporary, anonymous object:\nMessagePublisher new publish\nIntegrated Development Environment.\nSmalltalk is one of the first systems to be based around an Integrated Development Environment. There are a rich variety of tools to support code development, and other activities, such as graphics, and music. Smalltalk was the first system in which the modern desktop paradigm of Windows, Icons, Menus, and Pointers (WIMP) was created. Although pointers had already been invented, Smalltalk was the first system to implement overlapping windows and pop-up menus. While there are several programming tools we shall describe the following five major tools. The images of the tools are from a 2024 Squeak system\nBrowser.\nSmalltalk-80 derived systems organize classes within \"system categories\", such as codice_32, codice_33, codice_34, codice_35, etc, and within classes methods are organized in named categories such as codice_36, codice_37, codice_38, etc. From this follows the classic five paned browser, with four panes in the upper half of the window containing from high to left the list of system categories, that when one is selected displays in the second window the list of classes in that category, that when one is selected displays the list of message categories in the selected class, that when one is selected displays in the last pane the selectors of the methods in the selected category in the selected class. When one of the selectors in the fourth pane is selected the source for that method is displayed in the fifth pane. If only a category is selected and not a method, the fifth pane shows a template for defining a new method. If a system category is selected but no class, a template for creating a class in the category is displayed. Various pop-up menus allow one to query the tool such as searching for a class by name, finding all senders of a selected message, or all implementors of the message, and so on. In this way the browser is both a code reading and system exploration tool and a code authoring tool.\nWorkspace.\nA Workspace is a simple text editor editing a single string. One can type arbitrary text in the workspace, including Smalltalk expressions. On the pop-up menu \"do it\" (evaluate the selected expression), \"print it\" (evaluate the selected expression and insert the print string of the result immediately after the selection), and \"inspect it\" (open an inspector on the result of the evaluation of the selected expression, see \"Inspector\" below) are three oft used actions. Note that the fifth pane in the Browser is also a workspace, so that one can evaluate expressions and insert their results while editing method definitions, and a common thing is to include evalteable expressions, typically examples, in comments in a method, because almost everywhere the text of a method is shown (for example in the debugger) code is executable as in a workspace. Both workspaces and the browser's text panes are typically syntax highlighted. By using blocks to separate different expressions one can have several syntax highlighted expressions, each with their own temporaries in a single workspace. \nTranscript.\nThe Transcript is a special workspace associated with the global Transcript. So evaluating Transcript print: 52 factorial; cr; flush causes 80658175170943878571660636856403766975289505440883277824000000000000 followed by a newline to appear on the Transcript window. The Transcript therefore serves as a place to emit logging messages, although it can also function as a Workspace\nInspector.\nThere are various inspectors, some tailored to displaying different kinds of object. The most basic inspector has two panes. To the left is a list of the object itself (with the label \"self\"), followed by the instance variables in the object, which will include numbered instance variables in sequences such as strings and arrays. To the right is a workspace pane. Selecting a name in the list replaces the workspace's contents with a print string of the selected variable. Editing and \"accepting\" the text in the workspace pane when an instance variable is selected will assign the result of the evaluation to the selected variable. One can \"drill down\" by using the \"inspect\" command on the list menu which will apply to the selected instance variable. More sophisticated inspectors (e.g. explorers) support finder-like tree access so that object structure can be traversed without opening additional windows.\nNotifier/Debugger.\nThe default response to an unhandled exception is to open a Notifier, which is a window containing a stack backtrace of the first few activations, and buttons such as \"Debug\", \"Proceed\", \"Close\", etc. If the programmer chooses \"Debug\" then the full debugger opens. This has six panes. At the top is the stack window, containing a list of the contexts in the stack. Selecting a context causes the middle pane to display the text of the context's method, and to highlight the current expression within the method. Selecting the top context will display the method raising the exception and the message raising the exception will be highlighted. Selecting a context causes the bottom four panes to be updated. The bottom left two panes are the receiver inspector, that inspect the receiver of the selected message. The bottom right two panes are the context inspector that show the argument and temporary variable names in the selected context and allow display and modification of these variables.\nSending the message codice_39 causes an exception which opens a notifier, providing a simple breakpoint facility (typically breakpoint facilities provide more than just the simple halt, but it was the first such facility). Workspaces also provide a \"debug it\" evaluator which opens a debugger on the selected expression positioned at the first message send within the expression. So selecting codice_40 and choosing \"debug it\" from the pop-up menu opens a debugger with the \"doit context\" selected and the codice_41 selector highlighted. The debugger provides buttons to do \"step into\", \"step over\", etc. Hence by choosing \"step into\" one can explore the evaluation of codice_40. In this way the debugger provides an inspector of a process, allowing one to explore a halted computation.\nIf an exception results from a doesNotUnderstand:, or subclassResponsibility send, then the notifier will include a \"Create\" button, allowing the programmer to choose where in the receiver's hierarchy to define an \"initial draft\" of the method to be implemented. Redefining a method in the debugger causes the selected context to reset back to the first statement (arguments are not modifiable in Smalltalk so this gets the execution state back to the start of a method). In this way the debugger supports live programming, defining methods as the computation proceeds. This is an extremely productive and enjoyable way to program. Everything in the system is at your finger tips. One has the full power of workspaces to evaluate subexpressions, and the browser to search for supporting code as one programs.\nClicking on the Debug button opens the Notifier into a Debugger allowing inspecting the call stack and editing and continuing from any method activation. In this case the Notifier has created a template of the missing method that the programmer can edit, compile, and then continue the computation.\nHello World example.\nThe Hello world program is used by virtually all texts to new programming languages as the first program learned to show the most basic syntax and environment of the language. For Smalltalk, the program is extremely simple to write. The following code, the message \"show:\" is sent to the object \"Transcript\" with the String literal 'Hello, world!' as its argument. Invocation of the \"show:\" method causes the characters of its argument (the String literal 'Hello, world!') to be displayed in the transcript (\"terminal\") window.\nTranscript show: 'Hello, world!'.\nTo see the results of this example, a Transcript window must be open.\nImage-based persistence.\nMost popular programming systems separate static program code (in the form of class definitions, functions or procedures) from dynamic, or run time, program state (such as objects or other forms of program data). They load program code when a program starts, and any prior program state must be recreated explicitly from configuration files or other data sources. Any settings the program (and programmer) does not explicitly save must be set up again for each restart. A traditional program also loses much useful document information each time a program saves a file, quits, and reloads. This loses details such as undo history or cursor position. Image based systems don't force losing all that just because a computer is turned off, or an OS updates.\nMany Smalltalk systems, however, do not differentiate between program data (objects) and code (classes). In fact, classes are objects. Thus, most Smalltalk systems store the entire program state (including both Class and non-Class objects) in an image file. The image can then be loaded by the Smalltalk virtual machine to restore a Smalltalk-like system to a prior state. This was inspired by FLEX, a language created by Alan Kay and described in his M.Sc. thesis.\nSmalltalk images are similar to (restartable) core dumps and can provide the same functionality as core dumps, such as delayed or remote debugging with full access to the program state at the time of error.\nOther languages that model application code as a form of data, such as Lisp, often use image-based persistence as well (see EMACS, for example). This method of persistence is powerful for rapid development because all the development information (e.g. parse trees of the program) is saved which facilitates debugging.\nHowever, it also has serious drawbacks as a true persistence mechanism. For one thing, developers may often want to hide implementation details and not make them available in a run time environment. For reasons of legality and maintenance, allowing anyone to modify a program at run time inevitably introduces complexity and potential errors that would not be possible with a compiled system that exposes no source code in the run time environment. Also, while the persistence mechanism is easy to use, it lacks the true persistence abilities needed for most multi-user systems. The most obvious is the ability to do transactions with multiple users accessing the same database in parallel.\nLevel of access.\nEverything in Smalltalk-80, unless customised to avoid the possibility, is available for modification from within a running program. This means that, for example, the IDE can be changed in a running system without restarting it. In some implementations, the syntax of the language or the garbage collection implementation can also be changed on the fly. Even the statement codice_43 is valid in Smalltalk, although executing it is not recommended except for demonstration purposes (see virtual machine, image-based persistence, and backups).\nJust-in-time compilation.\nSmalltalk programs are usually compiled to bytecode, which is then interpreted by a virtual machine or dynamically translated into native machine-code. The results of previous message lookups are cached in self-modifying machine-code resulting in very high-performance sends that can out-perform the indirect function calls in C++ virtual method calls.\nList of implementations.\nOpenSmalltalk.\nOpenSmalltalk VM (OS VM) is a relatively high-performance implementation of the Smalltalk virtual machine on which several modern open-source Smalltalk dialects are based. The OS VM derives from the original Back-to-the-Future (BTTF) Squeak interpreter implemented by Dan Ingalls, Ted Khaeler, John Maloney and many other contributors. As with the BTTF VM, OS VM is transpiled from the Smalltalk system in which it is developed (using a subset of Smalltalk named Slang) to native C language source code, which is in turn compiled against specific platform and architecture of the hardware practically enabling cross-platform execution of the Smalltalk images. The OS VM differs from the BTTF VM in\nThe notable Smalltalk dialects based on the OS VM are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28320", "revid": "886011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28320", "title": "Steve Biko", "text": "South African anti-apartheid activist (1946\u20131977)\nBantu Stephen Biko OMSG (18 December 1946\u00a0\u2013 12 September 1977) was a South African anti-apartheid activist. Ideologically an African nationalist and African socialist, he was at the forefront of a grassroots anti-apartheid campaign known as the Black Consciousness Movement during the late 1960s and 1970s. His ideas were articulated in a series of articles published under the pseudonym Frank Talk.\nRaised in a poor Xhosa family, Biko grew up in Ginsberg township in the Eastern Cape. In 1966, he began studying medicine at the University of Natal, where he joined the National Union of South African Students (NUSAS). Strongly opposed to the apartheid system of racial segregation and white-minority rule in South Africa, Biko was frustrated that NUSAS and other anti-apartheid groups were dominated by white liberals, rather than by the blacks who were most affected by apartheid. He believed that well-intentioned white liberals failed to comprehend the black experience and often acted in a paternalistic manner. He developed the view that to avoid white domination, black people had to organise independently, and to this end he became a leading figure in the creation of the South African Students' Organisation (SASO) in 1968. Membership was open only to \"Blacks\", a term that Biko used in reference not just to Bantu-speaking Africans but also to Coloureds and Indians. He was careful to keep his movement independent of white liberals, but opposed anti-white hatred and had white friends. The white-minority National Party government were initially supportive, seeing SASO's creation as a victory for apartheid's ethos of racial separatism.\nInfluenced by the Martinican philosopher Frantz Fanon, Biko and his compatriots developed Black Consciousness as SASO's official ideology. The movement campaigned for an end to apartheid and the transition of South Africa toward universal suffrage and a socialist economy. It organised Black Community Programmes (BCPs) and focused on the psychological empowerment of black people. Biko believed that black people needed to rid themselves of any sense of racial inferiority, an idea he expressed by popularizing the slogan \"black is beautiful\". In 1972, he was involved in founding the Black People's Convention (BPC) to promote Black Consciousness ideas among the wider population. The government came to see Biko as a subversive threat and placed him under a banning order in 1973, severely restricting his activities. He remained politically active, helping organise BCPs such as a healthcare centre and a cr\u00e8che in the Ginsberg area. During his ban he received repeated anonymous threats, and was detained by state security services on several occasions. Following his arrest in August 1977, Biko was beaten to death by state security officers. Over 20,000 people attended his funeral.\nBiko's fame spread posthumously. He became the subject of numerous songs and works of art, while a 1978 biography by his friend Donald Woods formed the basis for the 1987 film \"Cry Freedom\". During Biko's life, the government alleged that he hated whites, various anti-apartheid activists accused him of sexism, and African racial nationalists criticised his united front with Coloureds and Indians. Nonetheless, Biko became one of the earliest icons of the movement against apartheid, and is regarded as a political martyr and the \"Father of Black Consciousness\". His political legacy remains a matter of contention.\nBiography.\nEarly life: 1946\u20131966.\nBantu Stephen Biko was born on 18 December 1946, at his grandmother's house in Tarkastad, Eastern Cape. The third child of Mzingaye Mathew Biko and Alice 'Mamcete' Biko, he had an older sister, Bukelwa, an older brother, Khaya, and a younger sister, Nobandile. His parents had married in Whittlesea, where his father worked as a police officer. Mzingaye was transferred to Queenstown, Port Elizabeth, Fort Cox, and finally King William's Town, where he and Alice settled in Ginsberg township. This was a settlement of around 800 families, with every four families sharing a water supply and toilet. Both Africans and Coloured people lived in the township, where Xhosa, Afrikaans, and English were all spoken. After resigning from the police force, Mzingaye worked as a clerk in the King William's Town Native Affairs Office, while studying for a law degree by correspondence from the University of South Africa. Alice was employed first in domestic work for local white households, then as a cook at Grey Hospital in King William's Town. According to his sister, it was this observation of his mother's difficult working conditions that resulted in Biko's earliest politicisation.\nBiko's given name \"Bantu\" means \"people\" in IsiXhosa; Biko interpreted this in terms of the saying \"Umntu ngumntu ngabantu\" (\"a person is a person by means of other people\"). As a child he was nicknamed \"Goofy\" and \"Xwaku-Xwaku\", the latter a reference to his unkempt appearance. He was raised in his family's Anglican Christian faith. In 1950, when Biko was four, his father fell ill, was hospitalised in St. Matthew's Hospital, Keiskammahoek, and died, making the family dependent on his mother's income.\nBiko spent two years at St. Andrews Primary School and four at Charles Morgan Higher Primary School, both in Ginsberg. Regarded as a particularly intelligent pupil, he was allowed to skip a year. In 1963 he transferred to the Forbes Grant Secondary School in the township. Biko excelled at maths and English and topped the class in his exams. In 1964 the Ginsberg community offered him a bursary to join his brother Khaya as a student at Lovedale, a prestigious boarding school in Alice, Eastern Cape. Within three months of Steve's arrival, Khaya was accused of having connections to Poqo, the armed wing of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), an African nationalist group which the government had banned. Both Khaya and Steve were arrested and interrogated by the police; the former was convicted, then acquitted on appeal. No clear evidence of Steve's connection to Poqo was presented, but he was expelled from Lovedale. Commenting later on this situation, he stated: \"I began to develop an attitude which was much more directed at authority than at anything else. I hated authority like hell.\"\nFrom 1964 to 1965, Biko studied at St. Francis College, a Catholic boarding school in Mariannhill, Natal. The college had a liberal political culture, and Biko developed his political consciousness there. He became particularly interested in the replacement of South Africa's white minority government with an administration that represented the country's black majority. Among the anti-colonialist leaders who became Biko's heroes at this time were Algeria's Ahmed Ben Bella and Kenya's Jaramogi Oginga Odinga. He later said that most of the \"politicos\" in his family were sympathetic to the PAC, which had anti-communist and African racialist ideas. Biko admired what he described as the PAC's \"terribly good organisation\" and the courage of many of its members, but he remained unconvinced by its racially exclusionary approach, believing that members of all racial groups should unite against the government. In December 1964, he travelled to Zwelitsha for the ulwaluko circumcision ceremony, symbolically marking his transition from boyhood to manhood.\nEarly student activism: 1966\u20131968.\nBiko was initially interested in studying law at university, but many of those around him discouraged this, believing that law was too closely intertwined with political activism. Instead they convinced him to choose medicine, a subject thought to have better career prospects. He secured a scholarship, and in 1966 entered the University of Natal Medical School. There, he joined what his biographer Xolela Mangcu called \"a peculiarly sophisticated and cosmopolitan group of students\" from across South Africa; many of them later held prominent roles in the post-apartheid era. The late 1960s was the heyday of radical student politics across the world, as reflected in the protests of 1968, and Biko was eager to involve himself in this environment. Soon after he arrived at the university, he was elected to the Students' Representative Council (SRC).\nThe university's SRC was affiliated with the National Union of South African Students (NUSAS). NUSAS had taken pains to cultivate a multi-racial membership but remained white-dominated because the majority of South Africa's students were from the country's white minority. As Clive Nettleton, a white NUSAS leader, put it: \"the essence of the matter is that NUSAS was founded on white initiative, is financed by white money and reflects the opinions of the majority of its members who are white\". NUSAS officially opposed apartheid, but it moderated its opposition in order to maintain the support of conservative white students. Biko and several other black African NUSAS members were frustrated when it organised parties in white dormitories, which black Africans were forbidden to enter. In July 1967, a NUSAS conference was held at Rhodes University in Grahamstown; after the students arrived, they found that dormitory accommodation had been arranged for the white and Indian delegates but not the black Africans, who were told that they could sleep in a local church. Biko and other black African delegates walked out of the conference in anger. Biko later related that this event forced him to rethink his belief in the multi-racial approach to political activism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I realized that for a long time I had been holding onto this whole dogma of nonracism almost like a religion\u00a0... But in the course of that debate I began to feel there was a lot lacking in the proponents of the nonracist idea\u00a0... they had this problem, you know, of superiority, and they tended to take us for granted and wanted us to accept things that were second-class. They could not see why we could not consider staying in that church, and I began to feel that our understanding of our own situation in this country was not coincidental with that of these liberal whites.\nFounding the South African Students' Organisation: 1968\u20131972.\nDeveloping SASO.\nFollowing the 1968 NUSAS conference in Johannesburg, many of its members attended a July 1968 conference of the University Christian Movement at Stutterheim. There, the black African members decided to hold a December conference to discuss the formation of an independent black student group. The South African Students' Organisation (SASO) was officially launched at a July 1969 conference at the University of the North; there, the group's constitution and basic policy platform were adopted. The group's focus was on the need for contact between centres of black student activity, including through sport, cultural activities, and debating competitions. Though Biko played a substantial role in SASO's creation, he sought a low public profile during its early stages, believing that this would strengthen its second level of leadership, such as his ally Barney Pityana. Nonetheless, he was elected as SASO's first president; Pat Matshaka was elected vice president and Wuila Mashalaba elected secretary. Durban became its \"de facto\" headquarters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLike Black Power in the United States, South Africa's \"Black Consciousness movement\" was grounded in the belief that African-descendant peoples had to overcome the enormous psychological and cultural damage imposed on them by a succession of white racist domains, such as enslavement and colonialism. Drawing upon the writings and speeches of Frantz Fanon, Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire, and Malcolm X, advocates of Black Consciousness supported cultural and social activities that promoted a knowledge of black protest history. They actively promoted the establishment of independent, black-owned institutions, and favored radical reforms within school curricula that nurtured a positive black identity for young people.\n\u2014 Manning Marable and Peniel Joseph\nBiko developed SASO's ideology of \"Black Consciousness\" in conversation with other black student leaders. A SASO policy manifesto produced in July 1971 defined this ideology as \"an attitude of mind, a way of life. The basic tenet of Black Consciousness is that the Blackman must reject all value systems that seek to make him a foreigner in the country of his birth and reduce his basic human dignity.\" Black Consciousness centred on psychological empowerment, through combating the feelings of inferiority that most black South Africans exhibited. Biko believed that, as part of the struggle against apartheid and white-minority rule, blacks should affirm their own humanity by regarding themselves as worthy of freedom and its attendant responsibilities. It applied the term \"black\" not only to Bantu-speaking Africans, but also to Indians and Coloureds. SASO adopted this term over \"non-white\" because its leadership felt that defining themselves in opposition to white people was not a positive self-description. Biko promoted the slogan \"black is beautiful\", explaining that this meant \"Man, you are okay as you are. Begin to look upon yourself as a human being.\"\nBiko presented a paper on \"White Racism and Black Consciousness\" at an academic conference in the University of Cape Town's Abe Bailey Centre in January 1971. He also expanded on his ideas in a column written for the \"SASO Newsletter\" under the pseudonym \"Frank Talk\". His tenure as president was taken up largely by fundraising activities, and involved travelling around various campuses in South Africa to recruit students and deepen the movement's ideological base. Some of these students censured him for abandoning NUSAS' multi-racial approach; others disapproved of SASO's decision to allow Indian and Coloured students to be members. Biko stepped down from the presidency after a year, insisting that it was necessary for a new leadership to emerge and thus avoid any cult of personality forming around him.\nSASO decided after a debate to remain non-affiliated with NUSAS, but would nevertheless recognise the larger organisation as the national student body. One of SASO's founding resolutions was to send a representative to each NUSAS conference. In 1970 SASO withdrew its recognition of NUSAS, accusing it of attempting to hinder SASO's growth on various campuses. SASO's split from NUSAS was a traumatic experience for many white liberal youth who had committed themselves to the idea of a multi-racial organisation and felt that their attempts were being rebuffed. The NUSAS leadership regretted the split, but largely refrained from criticising SASO. The government\u00a0\u2013 which regarded multi-racial liberalism as a threat and had banned multi-racial political parties in 1968\u00a0\u2013 was pleased with SASO's emergence, regarding it as a victory of apartheid thinking.\nAttitude to liberalism and personal relations.\nThe early focus of the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) was on criticising anti-racist white liberals and liberalism itself, accusing it of paternalism and being a \"negative influence\" on black Africans. In one of his first published articles, Biko stated that although he was \"not sneering at the [white] liberals and their involvement\" in the anti-apartheid movement, \"one has to come to the painful conclusion that the [white] liberal is in fact appeasing his own conscience, or at best is eager to demonstrate his identification with the black people only insofar as it does not sever all ties with his relatives on his side of the colour line.\"\nBiko and SASO were openly critical of NUSAS' protests against government policies. Biko argued that NUSAS merely sought to influence the white electorate; in his opinion, this electorate was not legitimate, and protests targeting a particular policy would be ineffective for the ultimate aim of dismantling the apartheid state. SASO regarded student marches, pickets, and strikes to be ineffective and stated it would withdraw from public forms of protest. It deliberately avoided open confrontation with the state until such a point when it had a sufficiently large institutional structure. Instead, SASO's focus was on establishing community projects and spreading Black Consciousness ideas among other black organisations and the wider black community. Despite this policy, in May 1972 it issued the Alice Declaration, in which it called for students to boycott lectures in response to the expulsion of SASO member Abram Onkgopotse Tiro from the University of the North after he made a speech criticising its administration. The Tiro incident convinced the government that SASO was a threat.\nIn Durban, Biko entered a relationship with a nurse, Nontsikelelo \"Ntsiki\" Mashalaba; they married at the King William's Town magistrates court in December 1970. Their first child, Nkosinathi, was born in 1971. Biko initially did well in his university studies, but his grades declined as he devoted increasing time to political activism. Six years after starting his degree, he found himself repeating his third year. In 1972, as a result of his poor academic performance, the University of Natal barred him from further study.\nBlack Consciousness activities and Biko's banning: 1971\u20131977.\nBlack People's Convention.\nIn August 1971, Biko attended a conference on \"The Development of the African Community\" in Edendale. There, a resolution was presented calling for the formation of the Black People's Convention (BPC), a vehicle for the promotion of Black Consciousness among the wider population. Biko voted in favour of the group's creation but expressed reservations about the lack of consultation with South Africa's Coloureds or Indians. A. Mayatula became the BPC's first president; Biko did not stand for any leadership positions. The group was formally launched in July 1972 in Pietermaritzburg. By 1973, it had 41 branches and 4000 members, sharing much of its membership with SASO.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy major problem at this moment is a strange kind of guilt. So many friends of mine have been arrested for activities in something that I was most instrumental in starting. A lot of them are blokes I spoke into the movement. And yet I am not with them. One does not think this way in political life of course. Casualties are expected and should be bargained for.\n\u2014 Steve Biko\nWhile the BPC was primarily political, Black Consciousness activists also established the Black Community Programmes (BCPs) to focus on improving healthcare and education and fostering black economic self-reliance. The BCPs had strong ecumenical links, being part-funded by a program on Christian action, established by the Christian Institute of Southern Africa and the South African Council of Churches. Additional funds came from the Anglo-American Corporation, the International University Exchange Fund, and Scandinavian churches. In 1972, the BCP hired Biko and Bokwe Mafuna, allowing Biko to continue his political and community work. In September 1972, Biko visited Kimberley, where he met the PAC founder and anti-apartheid activist Robert Sobukwe.\nBiko's banning order in 1973 prevented him from working officially for the BCPs from which he had previously earned a small stipend, but he helped to set up a new BPC branch in Ginsberg, which held its first meeting in the church of a sympathetic white clergyman, David Russell. Establishing a more permanent headquarters in Leopold Street, the branch served as a base from which to form new BCPs; these included self-help schemes such as classes in literacy, dressmaking and health education. For Biko, community development was part of the process of infusing black people with a sense of pride and dignity. Near King William's Town, a BCP Zanempilo Clinic was established to serve as a healthcare centre catering for rural black people who would not otherwise have access to hospital facilities. He helped to revive the Ginsberg cr\u00e8che, a daycare for children of working mothers, and establish a Ginsberg education fund to raise bursaries for promising local students. He helped establish Njwaxa Home Industries, a leather goods company providing jobs for local women. In 1975, he co-founded the Zimele Trust, a fund for the families of political prisoners.\nBiko endorsed the unification of South Africa's black liberationist groups\u00a0\u2013 among them the BCM, PAC, and African National Congress (ANC)\u00a0\u2013 in order to concentrate their anti-apartheid efforts. To this end, he reached out to leading members of the ANC, PAC, and Unity Movement. His communications with the ANC were largely via Griffiths Mxenge, and plans were being made to smuggle him out of the country to meet Oliver Tambo, a leading ANC figure. Biko's negotiations with the PAC were primarily through intermediaries who exchanged messages between him and Sobukwe; those with the Unity Movement were largely via Fikile Bam.\nBanning order.\nBy 1973, the government regarded Black Consciousness as a threat. It sought to disrupt Biko's activities, and in March 1973 placed a banning order on him. This prevented him from leaving the King William's Town magisterial district, prohibited him from speaking either in public or to more than one person at a time, barred his membership of political organisations, and forbade the media from quoting him. As a result, he returned to Ginsberg, living initially in his mother's house and later in his own residence.\nIn December 1975, attempting to circumvent the restrictions of the banning order, the BPC declared Biko their honorary president. After Biko and other BCM leaders were banned, a new leadership arose, led by Muntu Myeza and Sathasivian Cooper, who were considered part of the Durban Moment. Myeza and Cooper organised a BCM demonstration to mark Mozambique's independence from Portuguese colonial rule in 1975. Biko disagreed with this action, correctly predicting that the government would use it to crack down on the BCM. The government arrested around 200 BCM activists, nine of whom were brought before the Supreme Court, accused of subversion by intent. The state claimed that Black Consciousness philosophy was likely to cause \"racial confrontation\" and therefore threatened public safety. Biko was called as a witness for the defence; he sought to refute the state's accusations by outlining the movement's aims and development. Ultimately, the accused were convicted and imprisoned on Robben Island.\nIn 1973, Biko had enrolled for a law degree by correspondence from the University of South Africa. He passed several exams, but had not completed the degree at his time of death. His performance on the course was poor; he was absent from several exams and failed his Practical Afrikaans module. The state security services repeatedly sought to intimidate him; he received anonymous threatening phone calls, and gun shots were fired at his house. A group of young men calling themselves 'The Cubans' began guarding him from these attacks. The security services detained him four times, once for 101 days. With the ban preventing him from gaining employment, the strained economic situation impacted his marriage.\nDuring his ban, Biko asked for a meeting with Donald Woods, the white liberal editor of the \"Daily Dispatch\". Under Woods' editorship, the newspaper had published articles criticising apartheid and the white-minority regime and had also given space to the views of various black groups, but not the BCM. Biko hoped to convince Woods to give the movement greater coverage and an outlet for its views. Woods was initially reticent, believing that Biko and the BCM advocated \"for racial exclusivism in reverse\". When he met Biko for the first time, Woods expressed his concern about the anti-white liberal sentiment of Biko's early writings. Biko acknowledged that his earlier \"antiliberal\" writings were \"overkill\", but said that he remained committed to the basic message contained within them.\nOver the coming years the pair became close friends. Woods later related that, although he continued to have concerns about \"the unavoidably racist aspects of Black Consciousness\", it was \"both a revelation and education\" to socialise with blacks who had \"psychologically emancipated attitudes\". Biko also remained friends with another prominent white liberal, Duncan Innes, who served as NUSAS President in 1969; Innes later commented that Biko was \"invaluable in helping me to understand black oppression, not only socially and politically, but also psychologically and intellectually\". Biko's friendship with these white liberals came under criticism from some members of the BCM.\nDeath: 1977.\nArrest and death.\nIn 1977, Biko broke his banning order by travelling to Cape Town, hoping to meet Unity Movement leader Neville Alexander and deal with growing dissent in the Western Cape branch of the BCM, which was dominated by Marxists like Johnny Issel. Biko drove to the city with his friend Peter Jones on 17 August, but Alexander refused to meet with Biko, fearing that he was being monitored by the police. Biko and Jones drove back toward King William's Town, but on 18 August they were stopped at a police roadblock near Grahamstown. Biko was arrested for having violated the order restricting him to King William's Town. Unsubstantiated claims have been made that the security services were aware of Biko's trip to Cape Town and that the road block had been erected to catch him. Jones was also arrested at the roadblock; he was subsequently held without trial for 533 days, during which time he was interrogated on numerous occasions.\nThe security services took Biko to the Walmer police station in Port Elizabeth, where he was held naked in a cell with his legs in shackles. On 6 September, he was transferred from Walmer to room 619 of the security police headquarters in the Sanlam Building in central Port Elizabeth, where he was interrogated for 22 hours, handcuffed and in shackles, and chained to a grille. Exactly what happened has never been ascertained, but during the interrogation he was severely beaten by at least one of the ten security police officers. He suffered three brain lesions that resulted in a massive brain haemorrhage on 6 September. Following this incident, Biko's captors forced him to remain standing and shackled to the wall. The police later said that Biko had attacked one of them with a chair, forcing them to subdue him and place him in handcuffs and leg irons.\nBiko was examined by a doctor, Ivor Lang, who stated that there was no evidence of injury on Biko. Later scholarship has suggested Biko's injuries must have been obvious. He was then examined by two other doctors who, after a test showed blood cells to have entered Biko's spinal fluid, agreed that he should be transported to a prison hospital in Pretoria. On 11 September, police loaded him into the back of a Land Rover, naked and manacled, and drove him to the hospital. There, Biko died alone in a cell on 12 September 1977. According to an autopsy, an \"extensive brain injury\" had caused \"centralisation of the blood circulation to such an extent that there had been intravasal blood coagulation, acute kidney failure, and uremia\". He was the twenty-first person to die in a South African prison in twelve months, and the forty-sixth political detainee to die during interrogation since the government introduced laws permitting imprisonment without trial in 1963.\nResponse and investigation.\nNews of Biko's death spread quickly across the world, and became symbolic of the abuses of the apartheid system. His death attracted more global attention than he had ever attained during his lifetime. Protest meetings were held in several cities; many were shocked that the security authorities would kill such a prominent dissident leader. Biko's Anglican funeral service, held on 25 September 1977 at King William's Town's Victoria Stadium, took five hours and was attended by around 20,000 people. The vast majority were black, but a few hundred whites also attended, including Biko's friends, such as Russell and Woods, and prominent progressive figures like Helen Suzman, Alex Boraine, and Zach de Beer. Foreign diplomats from thirteen nations were present, as was an Anglican delegation headed by Bishop Desmond Tutu. The event was later described as \"the first mass political funeral in the country\". Biko's coffin had been decorated with the motifs of a clenched black fist, the African continent, and the statement \"One Azania, One Nation\"; Azania was the name that many activists wanted South Africa to adopt after apartheid. Biko was buried in the cemetery at Ginsberg. Two BCM-affiliated artists, Dikob\u00e9 Ben Martins and Robin Holmes, produced a T-shirt marking the event; the design was banned the following year. Martins also created a commemorative poster for the funeral, the first in a tradition of funeral posters that proved popular throughout the 1980s.\nSpeaking publicly about Biko's death, the country's police minister Jimmy Kruger initially implied that it had been the result of a hunger strike, a statement he later denied. His account was challenged by some of Biko's friends, including Woods, who said that Biko had told them that he would never kill himself in prison. Publicly, he stated that Biko had been plotting violence, a claim repeated in the pro-government press. South Africa's attorney general initially stated that no one would be prosecuted for Biko's death. Two weeks after the funeral, the government banned all Black Consciousness organisations, including the BCP, which had its assets seized.\nBoth domestic and international pressure called for a public inquest to be held, to which the government agreed. It began in Pretoria's Old Synagogue courthouse in November 1977, and lasted for three weeks. Both the running of the inquest and the quality of evidence submitted came in for extensive criticism. An observer from the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law stated that the affidavit's statements were \"sometimes redundant, sometimes inconsistent, frequently ambiguous\"; David Napley described the police investigation of the incident as \"perfunctory in the extreme\". The security forces alleged that Biko had acted aggressively and had sustained his injuries in a scuffle, in which he had banged his head against the cell wall. The presiding magistrate accepted the security forces' account of events and refused to prosecute any of those involved.\nThe verdict was treated with scepticism by much of the international media and the US Government led by President Jimmy Carter. On 2 February 1978, based on the evidence given at the inquest, the attorney general of the Eastern Cape stated that he would not prosecute the officers. After the inquest, Biko's family brought a civil case against the state; at the advice of their lawyers, they agreed to a settlement of R65,000 (US$78,000) in July 1979. Shortly after the inquest, the South African Medical and Dental Council initiated proceedings against the medical professionals who had been entrusted with Biko's care; eight years later two of the medics were found guilty of improper conduct. The failure of the government-employed doctors to diagnose or treat Biko's injuries has been frequently cited as an example of a repressive state influencing medical practitioners' decisions, and Biko's death as evidence of the need for doctors to serve the needs of patients before those of the state.\nAfter the abolition of apartheid and the establishment of a majority government in 1994, a Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established to investigate past human-rights abuses. The commission made plans to investigate Biko's death, but his family petitioned against this on the grounds that the commission could grant amnesty to those responsible, thereby preventing the family's right to justice and redress. In 1996, the Constitutional Court ruled against the family, allowing the investigation to proceed. Five police officers (Harold Snyman, Gideon Nieuwoudt, Ruben Marx, Daantjie Siebert, and Johan Beneke) appeared before the commission and requested amnesty in return for information about the events surrounding Biko's death. In December 1998, the Commission refused amnesty to the five men; this was because their accounts were conflicting and thus deemed untruthful, and because Biko's killing had no clear political motive, but seemed to have been motivated by \"ill-will or spite\". In October 2003, South Africa's justice ministry announced that the five policemen would not be prosecuted because the statute of limitations had elapsed and there was insufficient evidence to secure a prosecution. In 2025, the South African government reopened an investigation into Biko's death.\nIdeology.\nThe ideas of the Black Consciousness Movement were not developed solely by Biko, but through lengthy discussions with other black students who were rejecting white liberalism. Biko was influenced by his reading of authors like Frantz Fanon, Malcolm X, L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor, James Cone, and Paulo Freire. The Martinique-born Fanon, in particular, has been cited as a profound influence over Biko's ideas about liberation. Biko's biographer Xolela Mangcu cautioned that it would be wrong to reduce Biko's thought to an interpretation of Fanon, and that the impact of \"the political and intellectual history of the Eastern Cape\" had to be appreciated too. Additional influences on Black Consciousness were the United States\u2013based Black Power movement, and forms of Christianity like the activist-oriented black theology.\nBlack Consciousness and empowerment.\nBiko rejected the apartheid government's division of South Africa's population into \"whites\" and \"non-whites\", a distinction that was marked on signs and buildings throughout the country. Building on Fanon's work, Biko regarded \"non-white\" as a negative category, defining people in terms of an absence of whiteness. In response, Biko replaced \"non-white\" with the category \"black\", which he regarded as being neither derivative nor negative. He defined blackness as a \"mental attitude\" rather than a \"matter of pigmentation\", referring to \"blacks\" as \"those who are by law or tradition politically, economically and socially discriminated against as a group in the South African society\" and who identify \"themselves as a unit in the struggle towards the realization of their aspirations\". In this way, he and the Black Consciousness Movement used \"black\" in reference not only to Bantu-speaking Africans but also to Coloureds and Indians, who together made up almost 90% of South Africa's population in the 1970s. Biko was not a Marxist and believed that it was oppression based on race, rather than class, which would be the main political motivation for change in South Africa. He argued that those on the \"white left\" often promoted a class-based analysis as a \"defence mechanism... primarily because they want to detach us from anything relating to race. In case it has a rebound effect on them because they are white\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBlack Consciousness directs itself to the black man and to his situation, and the black man is subjected to two forces in this country. He is first of all oppressed by an external world through institutionalised machinery and through laws that restrict him from doing certain things, through heavy work conditions, through poor pay, through difficult living conditions, through poor education, these are all external to him. Secondly, and this we regard as the most important, the black man in himself has developed a certain state of alienation, he rejects himself precisely because he attaches the meaning white to all that is good, in other words he equates good with white. This arises out of his living and it arises out of his development from childhood.\nSteve Biko\nBiko saw white racism in South Africa as the totality of the white power structure. He argued that under apartheid, white people not only participated in the oppression of black people but were also the main voices in opposition to that oppression. He thus argued that in dominating both the apartheid system and the anti-apartheid movement, white people totally controlled the political arena, leaving black people marginalised. He believed white people were able to dominate the anti-apartheid movement because of their access to resources, education, and privilege. He nevertheless thought that white South Africans were poorly suited to this role because they had not personally experienced the oppression that their black counterparts faced.\nBiko and his comrades regarded multi-racial anti-apartheid groups as unwittingly replicating the structure of apartheid because they contained whites in dominant positions of control. For this reason, Biko and the others did not participate in these multi-racial organisations. Instead, they called for an anti-apartheid programme that was controlled by black people. Although he called on sympathetic whites to reject any concept that they themselves could be spokespeople for the black majority, Biko nevertheless believed that they had a place in the anti-apartheid struggle, asking them to focus their efforts on convincing the wider white community on the inevitability of apartheid's fall. Biko clarified his position to Woods: \"I don't reject liberalism as such or white liberals as such. I reject only the concept that black liberation can be achieved through the leadership of white liberals.\" He added that \"the [white] liberal is no enemy, he's a friend\u00a0\u2013 but for the moment he holds us back, offering a formula too gentle, too inadequate for our struggle\".\nBiko's approach to activism focused on psychological empowerment, and both he and the BCM saw their main purpose as combating the feeling of inferiority that most black South Africans experienced. Biko expressed dismay at how \"the black man has become a shell, a shadow of man\u00a0... bearing the yoke of oppression with sheepish timidity\", and stated that \"the most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind of the oppressed\". He believed that blacks needed to affirm their own humanity by overcoming their fears and believing themselves worthy of freedom and its attendant responsibilities. He defined Black Consciousness as \"an inward-looking process\" that would \"infuse people with pride and dignity\". To promote this, the BCM adopted the slogan \"Black is Beautiful\".\nOne of the ways that Biko and the BCM sought to achieve psychological empowerment was through community development. Community projects were seen not only as a way to alleviate poverty in black communities but also as a means of transforming society psychologically, culturally, and economically. They would also help students to learn about the \"daily struggles\" of ordinary black people and to spread Black Consciousness ideas among the population. Among the projects that SASO set its members to conduct in the holidays were repairs to schools, house-building, and instructions on financial management and agricultural techniques. Healthcare was also a priority, with SASO members focusing on primary and preventative care.\nForeign and domestic relations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt becomes more necessary to see the truth as it is if you realise that the only vehicle for change are these people who have lost their personality. The first step therefore is to make the black man come to himself; to pump back life into his empty shell; to infuse him with pride and dignity, to remind him of his complicity in the crime of allowing himself to be mis-used and therefore letting evil reign supreme in the land of his birth. That is what we mean by an inward-looking process. This is the definition of Black Consciousness.\nSteve Biko\nBiko opposed any collaboration with the apartheid government, such as the agreements that the Coloured and Indian communities made with the regime. In his view, the Bantustan system was \"the greatest single fraud ever invented by white politicians\", stating that it was designed to divide the Bantu-speaking African population along tribal lines. He openly criticised the Zulu leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi, stating that the latter's co-operation with the South African government \"[diluted] the cause\" of black liberation. He believed that those fighting apartheid in South Africa should link with anti-colonial struggles elsewhere in the world and with activists in the global African diaspora combating racial prejudice and discrimination. He also hoped that foreign countries would boycott South Africa's economy.\nBiko believed that while apartheid and white-minority rule continued, \"sporadic outbursts\" of violence against the white minority were inevitable. He wanted to avoid violence, stating that \"if at all possible, we want the revolution to be peaceful and reconciliatory\". He noted that views on violence differed widely within the BCM\u00a0\u2013 which contained both pacifists and believers in violent revolution\u00a0\u2013 although the group had agreed to operate peacefully, and unlike the PAC and ANC, had no armed wing.\nA staunch anti-imperialist, Biko saw the South African situation as a \"microcosm\" of the broader \"black\u2013white power struggle\" which manifests as \"the global confrontation between the Third World and the rich white nations of the world\". He was suspicious of the Soviet Union's motives in supporting African liberation movements, relating that \"Russia is as imperialistic as America\", although he acknowledged that \"in the eyes of the Third World they have a cleaner slate\". He also acknowledged that the material assistance provided by the Soviets was \"more valuable\" to the anti-apartheid cause than the \"speeches and wrist-slapping\" provided by Western governments. He was cautious of the possibility of a post-apartheid South Africa getting caught up in the imperialist Cold War rivalries of the United States and the Soviet Union.\nOn a post-apartheid society.\nBiko hoped that a future socialist South Africa could become a completely non-racial society, with people of all ethnic backgrounds living peacefully together in a \"joint culture\" that combined the best of all communities. He did not support guarantees of minority rights, believing that doing so would continue to recognise divisions along racial lines. Instead he supported a one person, one vote system. Initially arguing that one-party states were appropriate for Africa, he developed a more positive view of multi-party systems after conversations with Woods. He saw individual liberty as desirable, but regarded it as a lesser priority than access to food, employment, and social security.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBlack, said Biko, is not a colour; Black is an experience. If you are oppressed, you are Black. In the South African context, this was truly revolutionary. Biko's subsidiary message was that the unity of the oppressed could not be achieved through clandestine armed struggle; it had to be achieved in the open, through a peaceful but militant struggle.\nMahmood Mamdani \nBiko was neither a communist nor capitalist. Described as a proponent of African socialism, he called for \"a socialist solution that is an authentic expression of black communalism\". This idea was derided by some of his Marxist contemporaries, but later found parallels in the ideas of the Mexican Zapatistas. Noting that there was significant inequality in the distribution of wealth in South Africa, Biko believed that a socialist society was necessary to ensure social justice. In his view, this required a move towards a mixed economy that allowed private enterprise but in which all land was owned by the state and in which state industries played a significant part in forestry, mining, and commerce. He believed that, if post-apartheid South Africa remained capitalist, some black people would join the bourgeoisie but inequality and poverty would remain. As he put it, if South Africa transitioned to proportional democracy without socialist economic reforms, then \"it would not change the position of \"economic\" oppression of the blacks\".\nIn conversation with Woods, Biko insisted that the BCM would not degenerate into anti-white hatred \"because it isn't a negative, hating thing. It's a positive black self-confidence thing involving no hatred of anyone\". He acknowledged that a \"fringe element\" may retain \"anti-white bitterness\"; he added: \"we'll do what we can to restrain that, but frankly it's not one of our top priorities or one of our major concerns. Our main concern is the liberation of the blacks.\" Elsewhere, Biko argued that it was the responsibility of a vanguard movement to ensure that, in a post-apartheid society, the black majority would not seek vengeance upon the white minority. He stated that this would require an education of the black population in order to teach them how to live in a non-racial society.\nPersonal life and personality.\nTall and slim in his youth, by his twenties Biko was over six feet tall, with the \"bulky build of a heavyweight boxer carrying more weight than when in peak condition\", according to Woods. His friends regarded him as \"handsome, fearless, a brilliant thinker\". Woods saw him as \"unusually gifted\u00a0... His quick brain, superb articulation of ideas and sheer mental force were highly impressive.\" According to Biko's friend Trudi Thomas, with Biko \"you had a remarkable sense of being in the presence of a great mind\". Woods felt that Biko \"could enable one to share his vision\" with \"an economy of words\" because \"he seemed to communicate ideas through extraverbal media\u00a0\u2013 almost psychically.\" Biko exhibited what Woods referred to as \"a new style of leadership\", never proclaiming himself to be a leader and discouraging any cult of personality from growing up around him. Other activists did regard him as a leader and often deferred to him at meetings. When engaged in conversations, he displayed an interest in listening and often drew out the thoughts of others.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe charisma of Steve Biko was entirely his own. He had from an early age the unmistakable bearing and quality of a unique leader. I say unique because his style of leadership was his own\u00a0\u2013 it was un-pushy, un-promotional, yet immediately acknowledged by his peers\u00a0... I was thirteen years older than Steve, yet I always had the feeling I was talking to someone older and wiser, and like many others I often sought his advice on all manner of problems.\nDonald Woods\nBiko and many others in his activist circle had an antipathy toward luxury items because most South African blacks could not afford them. He owned few clothes and dressed in a low-key manner. He had a large record collection and particularly liked gumba. He enjoyed parties, and according to his biographer Linda Wilson, he often drank substantial quantities of alcohol. Religion did not play a central role in his life. He was often critical of the established Christian churches, but remained a believer in God and found meaning in the Gospels. Woods described him as \"not conventionally religious, although he had genuine religious feeling in broad terms\". Mangcu noted that Biko was critical of organised religion and denominationalism and that he was \"at best an unconventional Christian\".\nThe Nationalist government portrayed Biko as a hater of whites, but he had several close white friends, and both Woods and Wilson insisted that he was not a racist. Woods related that Biko \"simply wasn't a hater of people\", and that he did not even hate prominent National Party politicians like B. J. Vorster and Andries Treurnicht, instead hating their ideas. It was rare and uncharacteristic of him to display any rage, and was rare for him to tell people about his doubts and inner misgivings, reserving those for a small number of confidants.\nBiko never addressed questions of gender and sexism in his politics. The sexism was evident in many ways, according to Mamphela Ramphele, a BCM activist and doctor at the Zanempilo Clinic, including that women tended to be given responsibility for the cleaning and catering at functions. \"There was no way you could think of Steve making a cup of tea or whatever for himself\", another activist said. Feminism was viewed as irrelevant \"bra-burning\". Surrounded by women who cared about him, Biko developed a reputation as a womaniser, something that Woods described as \"well earned\". He displayed no racial prejudice, sleeping with both black and white women. At NUSAS, he and his friends competed to see who could have sex with the most female delegates. Responding to this behaviour, the NUSAS general secretary Sheila Lapinsky accused Biko of sexism, to which he responded: \"Don't worry about my sexism. What about your white racist friends in NUSAS?\" Sobukwe also admonished Biko for his womanising, believing that it set a bad example to other activists.\nBiko married Ntsiki Mashalaba in December 1970. They had two children together: Nkosinathi, born in 1971, and Samora, born in 1975. Biko's wife chose the name Nkosinathi (\"The Lord is with us\"), and Biko named their second child after the Mozambican revolutionary leader Samora Machel. Angered by her husband's serial adultery, Mashalaba ultimately moved out of their home, and by the time of his death, she had begun divorce proceedings. Biko had also begun an extra-marital relationship with Mamphela Ramphele. In 1974, they had a daughter, Lerato, who died after two months. A son, Hlumelo, was born to Ramphele in 1978, after Biko's death. Biko was also in a relationship with Lorrain Tabane; they had a child named Motlatsi in 1977.\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nBiko is viewed as the \"father\" of the Black Consciousness Movement and the anti-apartheid movement's first icon. Nelson Mandela called him \"the spark that lit a veld fire across South Africa\", adding that the Nationalist government \"had to kill him to prolong the life of apartheid\". Opening an anthology of his work in 2008, Manning Marable and Peniel Joseph wrote that his death had \"created a vivid symbol of black resistance\" to apartheid that \"continues to inspire new black activists\" over a decade after the transition to majority rule. Johann de Wet, a professor of communication studies, described him as \"one of South Africa's most gifted political strategists and communicators\". In 2004 he was elected 13th in SABC 3's Great South Africans public poll.\nAlthough Biko's ideas have not received the same attention as Frantz Fanon's, in 2001 Ahluwalia and Zegeye wrote that the men shared \"a highly similar pedigree in their interests in the philosophical psychology of consciousness, their desire for a decolonising of the mind, the liberation of Africa and in the politics of nationalism and socialism for the 'wretched of the earth'\". Some academics argue that Biko's thought remains relevant; for example, in \"African Identities\" in 2015, Isaac Kamola wrote that Biko's critique of white liberalism was relevant to situations like the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals and Invisible Children, Inc.'s \"KONY 2012\" campaign.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThough internationally Steve Biko became a symbol of apartheid abuse in the years following his death, for the [Black Consciousness]-minded (wherever they live) he has always been remembered for the life he led and the ethos he inspired among millions. And for his family and friends, he was much more: a husband, a father, a son, a brother, a confidant, a self-described freedom fighter.\nShannen L. Hill\nWoods held the view that Biko had filled the vacuum within the country's African nationalist movement that arose in the late 1960s following the imprisonment of Nelson Mandela and the banning of Sobukwe. Following Biko's death, the Black Consciousness Movement declined in influence as the ANC emerged as a resurgent force in anti-apartheid politics. This brought about a shift in focus from the BCM's community organising to wider mass mobilisation, including attempts to follow Tambo's call to make South Africa \"ungovernable\", which involved increasing violence and clashes between rival anti-apartheid groups.\nFollowers of Biko's ideas re-organised as the Azanian People's Organisation (AZAPO), which subsequently split into the Socialist Party of Azania and the Black People's Convention. Several figures associated with the ANC denigrated Biko during the 1980s. For instance, members of the ANC-affiliated United Democratic Front assembled outside Biko's Ginsberg home shouting \"U-Steve Biko, I-CIA!\", an allegation that Biko was a spy for the United States' Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). These demonstrations resulted in clashes with Biko supporters from AZAPO.\nA year after Biko's death, his \"Frank Talk\" writings were published as an edited collection, \"I Write What I Like\". The defence that Biko provided for arrested SASO activists was used as the basis for the 1978 book \"The Testimony of Steve Biko\", edited by Millard Arnold. Woods fled to England that year, where he campaigned against apartheid and further publicised Biko's life and death, writing many newspaper articles about him, as well as a book, \"Biko\" (1978). This was made into the 1987 film \"Cry Freedom\" by Richard Attenborough, starring Denzel Washington as Biko. Many film critics and Black Consciousness proponents were concerned that the film foregrounded white characters like Woods over Biko himself, but \"Cry Freedom\" brought Biko's life and activism to a wider audience. The state censors initially permitted its release in South Africa, but after it began screening in the country's cinemas, copies were confiscated by police on the order of Police Commissioner General Hendrik de Wit, who claimed that it would inflame tensions and endanger public safety. The South African government banned many books about Biko, including those of Arnold and Woods.\nAs of 2025, the National Prosecuting Authority is set to open an inquest into Biko's death.\nCommemoration.\nBiko was commemorated in several artworks after his death. Gerard Sekoto, a South African artist based in France, produced \"Homage to Steve Biko\" in 1978, and another South African artist, Peter Stopforth, included a work entitled \"The Interrogators\" in his 1979 exhibition. A triptych, it depicted the three police officers implicated in Biko's death. Kenya released a commemorative postage stamp featuring Biko's face.\nBiko's death also inspired several songs, including from artists outside South Africa such as Tom Paxton and Peter Hammill. The English singer-songwriter Peter Gabriel released \"Biko\" in tribute to him, which was a hit single in 1980, and was banned in South Africa soon after. Along with other anti-apartheid music, the song helped to integrate anti-apartheid themes into Western popular culture. Biko's life was also commemorated through theatre. The inquest into his death was dramatised as a play, \"The Biko Inquest\", first performed in London in 1978; a 1984 performance was directed by Albert Finney and broadcast on television. Anti-apartheid activists used Biko's name and memory in their protests; in 1979, a mountaineer climbed the spire of Grace Cathedral in San Francisco to unfurl a banner with the names of Biko and imprisoned Black Panther Party leader Geronimo Pratt on it.\nFollowing apartheid's collapse, Woods raised funds to commission a bronze statue of Biko from Naomi Jacobson. It was erected outside the front door of city hall in East London on the Eastern cape, opposite a statue commemorating British soldiers killed in the Second Boer War. Over 10,000 people attended the monument's unveiling in September 1997. In the following months it was vandalised several times; in one instance it was daubed with the letters \"AWB\", an acronym of the Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging, a far-right Afrikaner paramilitary group. In 1997, the cemetery where Biko was buried was renamed the Steve Biko Garden of Remembrance. The District Six Museum also held an exhibition of artwork marking the 20th anniversary of his death by examining his legacy.\nAlso in September 1997, Biko's family established the Steve Biko Foundation. The Ford Foundation donated money to the group to establish a Steve Biko Centre in Ginsberg, opened in 2012. The Foundation launched its annual Steve Biko Memorial Lecture in 2000, each given by a prominent black intellectual. The first speaker was Njabulo Ndebele; later speakers included Zakes Mda, Chinua Achebe, Ng\u0169g\u0129 wa Thiong'o, and Mandela.\nBuildings, institutes and public spaces around the world have been named after Biko, such as the Steve Bikoplein in Amsterdam. In 2008, the Pretoria Academic Hospital was renamed the Steve Biko Hospital. The University of the Witwatersrand has a Steve Biko Centre for Bioethics. In Salvador, Bahia, a Steve Biko Institute was established to promote educational attainment among poor Afro-Brazilians. In 2012, the Google Cultural Institute published an online archive containing documents and photographs owned by the Steve Biko Foundation. On 18 December 2016, Google marked what would have been Biko's 70th birthday with a Google Doodle.\nAmid the dismantling of apartheid in the early 1990s, various political parties competed over Biko's legacy, with several saying they were the party that Biko would support if he were still alive. AZAPO in particular claimed exclusive ownership over Black Consciousness. In 1994, the ANC issued a campaign poster suggesting that Biko had been a member of their party, which was untrue. Following the end of apartheid when the ANC formed the government, they were accused of appropriating his legacy. In 2002, AZAPO issued a statement declaring that \"Biko was not a neutral, apolitical and mythical icon\" and that the ANC was \"scandalously\" using Biko's image to legitimise their \"weak\" government. Members of the ANC have also criticised AZAPO's attitude to Biko; in 1997, Mandela said that \"Biko belongs to us all, not just AZAPO.\" On the anniversary of Biko's death in 2015, delegations from both the ANC and the Economic Freedom Fighters independently visited his grave. In March 2017, the South African President Jacob Zuma laid a wreath at Biko's grave to mark Human Rights Day.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28321", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28321", "title": "Survivor", "text": "Survivor(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28323", "revid": "50620075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28323", "title": "Samhain", "text": "Gaelic festival marking the start of winter\nSamhain ( , ; ; ) or () is a Gaelic festival on 1 November marking the end of the harvest season in autumn and beginning of winter or the \"darker half\" of the year. It is also the Irish and Scottish Gaelic name for November. Celebrations begin on the evening of 31 October, since the Celtic day began and ended at sunset. This is about halfway between the autumnal equinox and winter solstice. It is one of the four Gaelic seasonal festivals along with Imbolc, Bealtaine, and Lughnasa. Historically it originated in Ireland and it was widely observed throughout Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man. Its Brittonic Celtic equivalent is called \"Calan Gaeaf\" in Wales.\nSamhain is believed to have Celtic pagan origins, and some Neolithic passage tombs in Great Britain and Ireland are aligned with the sunrise at the time of Samhain. Samhain is mentioned in the earliest Irish literature, from the 9th century, and is associated with many important events in Irish mythology. The early literature says Samhain was marked by great gatherings and feasts and was when the ancient burial mounds were open, which were seen as portals to the Otherworld. Some of the medieval tales also associate Samhain with bonfires and sacrifice.\nThe festival was not recorded in detail until the early modern era. It was when cattle were brought down from the summer pastures and livestock were slaughtered. Special bonfires were lit, which were deemed to have protective and cleansing powers. Like Bealtaine, Samhain was a liminal or threshold festival, when the boundary between this world and the Otherworld blurred, making contact with the \"aos s\u00ed\" (the 'spirits' or 'fairies') more likely. Most scholars see them as remnants of pagan deities. At Samhain, they were appeased with offerings of food and drink to ensure the people and livestock survived the winter. The souls of dead kin were also thought to revisit their homes seeking hospitality, and a place was set at the table for them during a meal. Mumming and guising were part of the festival from at least the early modern era, whereby people went door-to-door in costume, reciting verses in exchange for food. The costumes may have been a way of imitating and disguising oneself from the \"aos s\u00ed\". Divination was also a big part of the festival and often involved nuts and apples. In the late 19th century, John Rhys and James Frazer suggested it had been the \"Celtic New Year\", but that is disputed.\nIn the 9th century, the Western Church endorsed 1 November as the date of All Saints' Day, possibly due to the influence of Alcuin or Irish missionaries, and 2 November later became All Souls' Day. It is believed that Samhain and All Saints'/All Souls' influenced each other and the modern Halloween. Most American Halloween traditions were inherited from Irish and Scottish immigrants. Folklorists have used the name 'Samhain' to refer to Gaelic 'Halloween' customs until the 19th century.\nSince the later 20th century Celtic neopagans and Wiccans have observed Samhain, or something based on it, as a religious holiday.\nName.\nIn Modern Irish and Scottish Gaelic the name is , while the traditional Manx Gaelic name is . It is usually written with the definite article (Irish), (Scottish Gaelic), and (Manx). Older forms of the word include the Scottish Gaelic spellings and . The Gaelic names for the month of November are derived from \"Samhain\". The Irish name for Samhain night is ( ).\nThe name of the superficially similar Galician festival of \"Sama\u00edn\" from the Cedeira comarca is etymologically unrelated, being derived from Latin 'elderberry'.\nEtymology.\nThese names all come from the Old and Middle Irish \"Samain\" or \"Samuin\" , the name for the festival held on 1 November in medieval Ireland. Traditionally, it is derived from proto-Indo-European ('summer'). But as John T. Koch points out, it is unclear why a festival marking the beginning of winter would include the word for 'summer'. Linguist Joseph Vendryes contends that it is unrelated, saying that the Celtic summer ended in August. More recently, linguists Xavier Delamarre and Ranko Matasovi\u0107 have proposed that it derives from proto-Celtic *\"samoni\" ('reunion, assembly'), cognate with Old Norse \"saman\", Gothic \"samana\" and Sanskrit \"sam\u0101na\" (all meaning 'together'), as well as the Old Irish term \"bech-samain\" ('bee swarm'). Delamarre further suggests it could refer to an \"assembly of the living and the dead\".\nThe word \"Samain\" is believed to be related to the month name on the Gaulish Coligny calendar from the 2nd century CE. The 17th day of is marked as (\"the three nights of \"Samon\"\"), indicating a possible festival. This festival could represent the early November festival of Samain, or possibly the summer solstice. Six months later is the month , which appears to contain the word for \"winter\". An early Irish glossary, \"Sanas Cormaic\", gives \"Gamain\" as \"November, the winter month after the festival of \"Samain\"\".\nOrigins.\n\"Samain\" or \"Samuin\" was the name of the festival (\"feis\") marking the beginning of winter in Gaelic Ireland. It is attested in the earliest Old Irish literature, which dates from the 9th century onward. Samhain was one of four Gaelic seasonal festivals: Samhain (~1 November), Imbolc (~1 February), Bealtaine (~1 May), and Lughnasa (~1 August). Of these, Samhain and Bealtaine, marking the transitions into winter and summer respectively, are thought to have been the most significant. Sir James George Frazer, in his 1890 book, \"The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion\", theorized that these festivals, particularly 1 May and 1 November, were significant to herding communities practicing seasonal transhumance. Cattle were driven to summer pastures in May and returned to lowlands in November, suggesting the festival's pastoral origins.\nSome Neolithic passage tombs in Ireland are aligned with the sunrise around the times of Samhain and Imbolc. These include the Mound of the Hostages (\"Dumha na nGiall\") at the Hill of Tara, and Cairn L at Slieve na Calliagh.\nIn Irish mythology.\nWhile Irish mythology was originally a spoken tradition, much of it was eventually written down in the Middle Ages by Christian monks. The tenth-century tale \"Tochmarc Emire\" ('The Wooing of Emer') lists Samhain as the first of the four seasonal festivals of the year. The literature says a peace would be declared, and there were great gatherings where they held meetings, feasted, drank alcohol, and held contests. These gatherings are a popular setting for early Irish tales. The tale \"Echtra Cormaic\" ('Cormac's Adventure') says that the Feast of Tara was held every seventh Samhain, hosted by the High King of Ireland, during which new laws and duties were ordained; anyone who broke the laws established during this time would be banished.\nAccording to Irish mythology, Samhain (like Bealtaine) was a time when the 'doorways' to the Otherworld opened, allowing supernatural beings and the souls of the dead to come into our world; while Bealtaine was a summer festival for the living, Samhain \"was essentially a festival for the dead\". \"The Boyhood Deeds of Fionn\" says that the \"s\u00eddhe\" (fairy mounds or portals to the Otherworld) \"were always open at Samhain\". Each year the fire-breather Aillen emerges from the Otherworld and burns down the palace of Tara during the Samhain festival after lulling everyone to sleep with his music.\nOne Samhain, the young Fionn mac Cumhaill, stays awake and slays Aillen with a magical spear, for which he is made leader of the fianna. In a similar tale, one Samhain, the Otherworld being C\u00faldubh emerges from the burial mound on Slievenamon and snatches a roast pig. Fionn kills C\u00faldubh with a spear throw as he re-enters the mound. Fionn's thumb is caught between the door and the post as it shuts, and he puts it in his mouth to ease the pain. As his thumb had been inside the Otherworld, Fionn is bestowed with great wisdom. This may refer to gaining knowledge from the ancestors. \"Acallam na Sen\u00f3rach\" ('Colloquy of the Elders') tells how three female werewolves emerge from the cave of Cruachan (an Otherworld portal) each Samhain and kill livestock. When Cas Corach plays his harp, they take on human form, and the fianna warrior Ca\u00edlte then slays them with a spear.\nSome tales suggest that offerings or sacrifices were made at Samhain. In the \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn\" (or 'Book of Invasions'), each Samhain the people of Nemed had to give two-thirds of their children, their corn, and their milk to the monstrous Fomorians. The Fomorians seem to represent the harmful or destructive powers of nature; personifications of chaos, darkness, death, blight, and drought. This tribute paid by Nemed's people may represent a \"sacrifice offered at the beginning of winter, when the powers of darkness and blight are in the ascendant\". According to the later \"Dindsenchas\" and the \"Annals of the Four Masters\"\u2014which were written by Christian monks\u2014Samhain in ancient Ireland was associated with a god or idol called Crom Cruach. The texts claim that a firstborn child would be sacrificed at the stone idol of Crom Cruach in Magh Sl\u00e9cht. They say that King Tigernmas, and three-fourths of his people, died while worshiping Crom Cruach there one Samhain.\nThe legendary kings Diarmait mac Cerbaill and Muirchertach mac Ercae each die a threefold death on Samhain, which involves wounding, burning, and drowning, and of which they are forewarned. In the tale \"Togail Bruidne D\u00e1 Derga\" ('The Destruction of D\u00e1 Derga's Hostel'), king Conaire M\u00f3r also meets his death on Samhain after breaking his \"geasa\" (prohibitions or taboos). He is warned of his impending doom by three undead horsemen who are messengers of Donn, the god of the dead. \"The Boyhood Deeds of Fionn\" tells how each Samhain the men of Ireland went to woo a beautiful maiden who lives in the fairy mound on Br\u00ed \u00c9ile (Croghan Hill). It says that each year someone would be killed \"to mark the occasion\", by persons unknown. Some academics suggest that these tales recall human sacrifice, and argue that several ancient Irish bog bodies (such as Old Croghan Man) appear to have been kings who were ritually killed, some of them around the time of Samhain.\nIn the \"Echtra Nera\u00ed\" ('The Adventure of Nera'), King Ailill of Connacht sets his retinue a test of bravery on Samhain night. He offers a prize to whoever can make it to a gallows and tie a band around a hanged man's ankle. Demons thwart each challenger, who runs back to the king's hall in fear. However, Nera succeeds, and the dead man asks for a drink. Nera carries him on his back, and they stop at three houses. They enter the third, where the dead man drinks and spits it on the householders, killing them. Returning, Nera sees a fairy host burning the king's hall and slaughtering those inside. He follows the host through a portal into the Otherworld. Nera learns that what he saw was only a vision of what will happen the next Samhain unless something is done. He returns to the hall and warns the king.\nThe tale \"Aided Chrimthainn maic Fidaig\" ('The Killing of Crimthann mac Fidaig') tells how Mongfind kills her brother, King Crimthann of Munster, so that one of her sons might become king. Mongfind offers Crimthann a poisoned drink at a feast, but he asks her to drink from it first. Having no other choice but to drink the poison, she dies on Samhain eve. The Middle Irish writer notes that Samhain is also called \"F\u00e9ile Moingfhinne\" (the Festival of Mongfind or Mongfhionn) and that \"women and the rabble make petitions to her\" at Samhain.\nMany other events in Irish mythology happen or begin on Samhain. The invasion of Ulster that makes up the main action of the \"T\u00e1in B\u00f3 C\u00faailnge\" ('Cattle Raid of Cooley') begins on Samhain. As cattle-raiding typically was a summer activity, the invasion during this off-season surprised the Ulstermen. The \"Second Battle of Magh Tuireadh\" also begins on Samhain. The Morr\u00edgan and The Dagda meet and have sex before the battle against the Fomorians; in this way, the Morr\u00edgan acts as a sovereignty figure and gives the victory to the Dagda's people, the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann. In \"Aislinge \u00d3engusa\" ('The Dream of \u00d3engus') it is when he and his bride-to-be switch from bird to human form, and in \"Tochmarc \u00c9ta\u00edne\" ('The Wooing of \u00c9ta\u00edn') it is the day on which \u00d3engus claims the kingship of Br\u00fa na B\u00f3inne.\nSeveral sites in Ireland are especially linked to Samhain. Each Samhain, a host of otherworldly beings was said to emerge from the Cave of Cruachan in County Roscommon. The Hill of Ward (or Tlachtga) in County Meath is thought to have been the site of a great Samhain gathering and bonfire; the Iron Age ringfort is said to have been where the goddess or druid Tlachtga gave birth to triplets and where she later died.\nIn \"The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain\" (1996), Ronald Hutton writes: \"No doubt there were [pagan] religious observances as well, but none of the tales ever portrays any\". He says that the only historical reference to pagan religious rites is in the work of Geoffrey Keating (died 1644), whose source is unknown. Hutton says it may be that no religious rites are mentioned because, centuries after Christianization, the writers had no record of them. Hutton suggests Samhain may not have been \"particularly\" associated with the supernatural. He says that the gatherings of royalty and warriors on Samhain may have been an ideal setting for such tales, in the same way that many Arthurian tales are set at courtly gatherings at Christmas or Pentecost.\nHistorical customs.\nSamhain was one of the four main festivals of the Gaelic calendar, marking the end of the harvest and the beginning of winter. Samhain customs are mentioned in several medieval texts. In \"Serglige Con Culainn\" ('C\u00fachulainn's Sickbed'), it is said that the festival of the Ulaid at Samhain lasted a week: Samhain itself, and the three days before and after. It involved great gatherings where they held meetings, feasted, drank alcohol, and held contests. The \"Togail Bruidne D\u00e1 Derga\" notes that bonfires were lit at Samhain and stones cast into the fires. It is mentioned in Geoffrey Keating's \"Foras Feasa ar \u00c9irinn\", which was written in the early 1600s but drew on earlier medieval sources, some of which are unknown. He claims that the \"feis\" of Tara was held for a week every third Samhain when the nobles and ollams of Ireland met to lay down and renew the laws, and to feast. He also claims that the druids lit a sacred bonfire at Tlachtga and made sacrifices to the gods, sometimes by burning their sacrifices. He adds that all other fires were doused and re-lit from this bonfire.\nRitual bonfires.\nLike Bealtaine, bonfires were lit on hilltops at Samhain, and there were rituals involving them. By the early modern era, they were most common in parts of the Scottish Highlands, on the Isle of Man, in north and mid-Wales, and in parts of Ulster. F. Marian McNeill says that they were formerly need-fires, but that this custom died out. Likewise, only certain kinds of wood were traditionally used, but later records show that many kinds of flammable material were burnt. It is suggested that the fires were a kind of imitative or sympathetic magic; mimicking the Sun, helping the \"powers of growth\" and holding back the decay and darkness of winter. They may also have served to symbolically \"burn up and destroy all harmful influences\". Accounts from the 18th and 19th centuries suggest that the fires, smoke, and ashes were deemed to have protective and cleansing powers.\nIn 19th-century Moray, boys asked for bonfire fuel from each house in the village. When the fire was lit, \"one after another of the youths laid himself down on the ground as near to the fire as possible so as not to be burned and in such a position as to let the smoke roll over him. The others ran through the smoke and jumped over him\". When the bonfire burnt, they scattered the ashes, vying for who should scatter them most. In some areas, two bonfires would be built side by side, and the people\u2014sometimes with their livestock\u2014would walk between them as a cleansing ritual. The bones of slaughtered cattle were said to have been cast upon bonfires.\nPeople also took the flames from the bonfire back to their homes. During the 19th century, in parts of Scotland, torches of burning fir or turf were carried sunwise around homes and fields to protect them. In some places, people doused their hearth fires on Samhain night. Each family then solemnly re-lit its hearth from the communal bonfire, thus bonding the community. The 17th-century writer Geoffrey Keating claimed that this was an ancient tradition instituted by the druids. Dousing the old fire and bringing in the new may have been a way of banishing evil, which was part of New Year festivals in many countries.\nDivination.\nThe bonfires were used in divination. In 18th-century Ochtertyre, a ring of stones\u2014one for each person\u2014was laid around the fire, perhaps on a layer of ash. Everyone then ran around it with a torch, \"exulting\". In the morning, the stones were examined, and if any were mislaid, it was said that the person it represented would not live out the year. A similar custom was observed in north Wales and in Brittany. James Frazer suggests this may come from \"an older custom of actually burning them\" (i.e. human sacrifice) or it may have always been symbolic. Divination has likely been a part of the festival since ancient times, and it has survived in some rural areas.\nAt household festivities throughout the Gaelic regions and Wales, many rituals were intended to divine the future of those gathered, especially concerning death and marriage. Apples and hazelnuts were often used in these divination rituals and games. In Celtic mythology, apples were strongly associated with the Otherworld and immortality, while hazelnuts were associated with divine wisdom. One of the most common games was apple bobbing. Another involved hanging a small wooden rod from the ceiling at head height, with a lit candle on one end and an apple hanging from the other. The rod was spun round, and everyone took turns to try to catch the apple with their teeth. Apples were peeled in one long strip, the peel tossed over the shoulder, and its shape was said to form the first letter of the future spouse's name.\nTwo hazelnuts were roasted near a fire; one named for the person roasting them and the other for the person they desired. If the nuts jumped away from the heat, it was a bad sign, but if the nuts roasted quietly, it foretold an excellent match. Items were hidden in food\u2014usually a cake, barmbrack, cranachan, champ or sowans\u2014and portions of it served out at random. A person's future was foretold by the item they happened to find; for example, a ring meant marriage, and a coin meant wealth. A salty oatmeal bannock was baked; the person ate it in three bites and then went to bed in silence without anything to drink. This was said to result in a dream in which their future spouse offers them a drink to quench their thirst. Egg whites were dropped in water, and the shapes foretold the number of future children. Young people would also chase crows and divine some of these things from the number of birds or the direction they flew.\nSpirits and souls.\nSamhain was seen as a liminal time when the boundary between this world and the Otherworld could more easily be crossed. This meant the \"aos s\u00ed\", the 'spirits' or 'fairies', could more easily come into our world. Many scholars see the \"aos s\u00ed\" as remnants of pagan gods and nature spirits. At Samhain, it was believed that the \"aos s\u00ed\" needed to be propitiated to ensure that the people and their livestock survived the winter. Offerings of food and drink would be left outside for the \"aos s\u00ed\", and portions of the crops might be left in the ground for them.\nOne custom\u2014described as a \"blatant example\" of a \"pagan rite surviving into the Christian epoch\"\u2014was recorded in the Outer Hebrides and Iona in the 17th century. On the night of 31 October, fishermen and their families would go down to the shore. One man would wade into the water up to his waist, where he would pour out a cup of ale and ask 'Seonaidh' ('Shoney'), whom he called \"god of the sea\", to bestow on them a good catch. The custom was ended in the 1670s after a campaign by ministers, but the ceremony shifted to the springtime and survived until the early 19th century.\nPeople also took special care not to offend the \"aos s\u00ed\" and sought to ward off anyone out to cause mischief. They stayed near to home or, if forced to walk in the darkness, turned their clothing inside-out or carried iron or salt to keep them at bay. In southern Ireland, it was customary on Samhain to weave a small cross of sticks and straw called a 'parshell' or 'parshall', which was similar to the Brigid's cross and God's eye. It was fixed over the doorway to ward-off bad luck, sickness, and witchcraft and would be replaced each Samhain.\nThe dead were also honoured at Samhain. The beginning of winter may have been seen as the most fitting time to do so, as it was a time of 'dying' in nature. The souls of the dead were thought to revisit their homes, seeking hospitality. Places were set at the dinner table and by the fire to welcome them. The belief that the souls of the dead return home on one night of the year and must be appeased seems to have ancient origins and is found in many cultures throughout the world. James Frazer suggests, \"It was perhaps a natural thought that the approach of winter should drive the poor, shivering, hungry ghosts from the bare fields and the leafless woodlands to the shelter of the cottage\". However, the souls of thankful kin could return to bestow blessings just as easily as that of a wronged person could return to wreak revenge.\nMumming and guising.\nIn some areas, mumming and guising were part of Samhain. It was first recorded in 16th century Scotland and later in parts of Ireland, Mann, and Wales. People went from house to house in costume or disguise, usually reciting songs or verses in exchange for food. It may have evolved from a tradition whereby people impersonated the \"aos s\u00ed\", or the souls of the dead, and received offerings on their behalf. Impersonating these spirits or souls was also believed to protect oneself from them. S. V. Peddle suggests the guisers \"personify the old spirits of the winter, who demanded reward in exchange for good fortune\". McNeill suggests that the ancient festival included people in masks or costumes representing these spirits and that the modern custom came from this. In Ireland, costumes were sometimes worn by those who went about before nightfall collecting for a Samhain feast.\nIn Scotland, young men went house-to-house with masked, veiled, painted, or blackened faces, often threatening to do mischief if they were not welcomed. This was common in the 16th century in the Scottish countryside and persisted into the 20th. It is suggested that the blackened faces come from using the bonfire's ashes for protection. In Ireland in the late 18th century, peasants carrying sticks went house-to-house on Samhain collecting food for the feast. Charles Vallancey wrote that they demanded this in the name of St Colm Cille, asking people to \"lay aside the fatted calf, and to bring forth the black sheep\". In parts of southern Ireland during the 19th century, the guisers included a hobby horse known as the \"L\u00e1ir Bh\u00e1n\" (white mare). A man covered in a white sheet and carrying a decorated horse skull would lead a group of youths, blowing on cow horns, from farm to farm. At each, they recited verses, some of which \"savoured strongly of paganism\", and the farmer was expected to donate food. By doing so, he could expect good fortune from the 'Muck Olla'; not doing so would bring misfortune. This is akin to the \"Mari Lwyd\" (grey mare) procession in Wales, which takes place at Midwinter. In Wales, the white horse is often seen as an omen of death. Elsewhere in Europe, costumes, mumming, and hobby horses were part of other yearly festivals. However, in the Celtic-speaking regions, they were \"particularly appropriate to a night upon which supernatural beings were said to be abroad and could be imitated or warded off by human wanderers\".\nHutton writes: \"When imitating malignant spirits, it was a very short step from guising to playing pranks\". Playing pranks at Samhain is recorded in the Scottish Highlands as far back as 1736 and was also common in Ireland, which led to Samhain being nicknamed \"Mischief Night\" in some parts. Wearing costumes at Halloween spread to England in the 20th century, as did the custom of playing pranks, though there had been mumming at other festivals. At the time of mass transatlantic Irish and Scottish immigration, which popularised Halloween in North America, Halloween in Ireland and Scotland had a strong tradition of guising and pranks. Trick-or-treating may have come from the custom of going door-to-door collecting food for Samhain feasts, fuel for Samhain bonfires or offerings for the \"aos s\u00ed\". Alternatively, it may have come from the Allhallowtide custom of collecting soul cakes.\nThe \"traditional illumination for guisers or pranksters abroad on the night in some places was provided by turnips or mangel wurzels, hollowed out to act as lanterns and often carved with grotesque faces\". They were also set on windowsills. By those who made them, the lanterns were variously said to represent the spirits or supernatural beings, or were used to ward off evil spirits. These were common in parts of Ireland and the Scottish Highlands in the 19th century. They were also found in Somerset (see Punkie Night). In the 20th century, they spread to other parts of Britain and became generally known as jack-o'-lanterns.\nLivestock.\nTraditionally, Samhain was a time to take stock of the herds and food supplies. Cattle were brought down to the winter pastures after six months in the higher summer pastures (see transhumance). It was also the time to choose which animals would be slaughtered. This custom is still observed by many who farm and raise livestock. It is thought that some of the rituals associated with the slaughter have been transferred to other winter holidays. On St. Martin's Day (11 November) in Ireland, an animal\u2014usually a rooster, goose, or sheep\u2014would be slaughtered and some of its blood sprinkled on the threshold of the house. It was offered to Saint Martin, who may have taken the place of a god or gods, and it was then eaten as part of a feast. This custom was common in parts of Ireland until the 19th century, and was found in other parts of Europe. At New Year in the Hebrides, a man dressed in a cowhide would circle the township sunwise. A bit of the hide would be burnt, and everyone would breathe in the smoke. These customs were meant to keep away bad luck, and similar customs were found in other Celtic regions.\nCeltic Revival.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th century Celtic Revival, there was an upswell of interest in Samhain and the other Celtic festivals. Sir John Rhys put forth that it had been the \"Celtic New Year\". He inferred it from contemporary folklore in Ireland and Wales, which he felt was \"full of Hallowe'en customs associated with new beginnings\". He visited Mann and found that the Manx sometimes called 31 October \"New Year's Night\" or \"Hog-unnaa\". The \"Tochmarc Emire\", written in the Middle Ages, reckoned the year around the four festivals at the beginning of the seasons and put Samhain at the beginning of those. Rhys's theory was popularised by Sir James George Frazer, though at times he acknowledged that the evidence is inconclusive. Frazer also said that Samhain had been the pagan Celtic festival of the dead and had been Christianized as All Saints and All Souls. Since then, Samhain has been popularly seen as the Celtic New Year and an ancient festival of the dead. The calendar of the Celtic League, for example, begins and ends at Samhain.\nRonald Hutton says the evidence that Samhain was the Celtic or Gaelic new year is flimsy. Hutton determined, \"the medieval records furnish no evidence that 1 November was a major pan-Celtic festival\".\nRelated holidays.\nIn the Brittonic branch of the Celtic languages, Samhain is known as the \"calends of winter\". The Brittonic lands of Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany held festivals on 31 October similar to the Gaelic one. In Wales it is \"Calan Gaeaf\", in Cornwall it is Allantide or \"Kalan Gwav\", and in Brittany it is \"Kalan Goa\u00f1v\".\nThe Manx celebrate Hop-tu-Naa on 31 October, which is a celebration of the original New Year's Eve. Traditionally, children carve turnips rather than pumpkins and carry them around the neighbourhood singing traditional songs relating to hop-tu-naa.\nAllhallowtide.\nIn 609, Pope Boniface IV endorsed 13 May as a holy day commemorating all Christian martyrs. By 800, churches in Gaelic Ireland and Anglo-Saxon Northumbria were holding a feast commemorating all saints on 1 November, which became All Saints' Day. There had been much Gaelic influence on Northumbria and its church. James Frazer suggested this date was a Celtic idea (being the date of Samhain), while Ronald Hutton suggests it was a Germanic idea, writing that the Irish church commemorated all saints on 20 April. Some manuscripts of the Irish \"Martyrology of Tallaght\" and \"Martyrology of \u00d3engus\", which date to this time, have a commemoration of all saints \"of Europe\" on 20 April, but a commemoration of all saints of the world on 1 November. In 835, the Frankish Empire officially adopted 1 November as the date of All Saints' Day. This may have been influenced by Alcuin of Northumbria, who was a member of Charlemagne's court, or it may have been promoted by the Irish clerics and scholars who were also members of the Frankish court. The new date was eventually adopted by the rest of the Western Church, and in the 11th century, 2 November became established as All Souls' Day. This created the three-day observance known as Allhallowtide: All Hallows' Eve (31 October), All Hallows' Day (1 November), and All Souls' Day (2 November).\nIt is suggested that many of the modern secular customs of All Hallows' Eve (Halloween) were influenced by the festival of Samhain. Other scholars argue that Samhain's influence has been exaggerated and that All Hallows' also influenced Samhain itself.\nMost North American Halloween traditions were brought over by Irish and Scottish immigrants in the 19th century. Then, through American influence, these Halloween traditions spread to many other countries by the late 20th century.\nModern paganism.\nSome modern pagans hold Samhain and Samhain-inspired festivals. As there are many kinds of Neopaganism, their Samhain celebrations can be very different. Some try to emulate the historic festival as much as possible. Others base their celebrations on sundry unrelated sources, with Gaelic culture only one of them. Folklorist Jenny Butler describes how Irish pagans pick some elements of historic Samhain celebrations and meld them with references to the Celtic past, making a new festival of Samhain that is uniquely part of neopagan culture.\nNeopagans usually celebrate Samhain on 31 October\u20131 November in the Northern Hemisphere and 30 April\u20131 May in the Southern Hemisphere, beginning and ending at sundown. Some Neopagans celebrate it at the astronomical midpoint between the autumnal equinox and winter solstice (or the full moon nearest this point), which is usually around 6 or 7 November in the Northern hemisphere.\nCeltic Reconstructionism.\nLike other Reconstructionist traditions, Celtic Reconstructionist Pagans (CRs) emphasize historical accuracy. They base their celebrations and rituals on traditional lore as well as research into the beliefs of the polytheistic Celts.\nThey celebrate Samhain around 1 November but may adjust the date to suit their regional climate, such as when the first winter frost arrives. Their traditions include saining the home and lighting bonfires. Some follow the old tradition of building two bonfires, which celebrants and animals pass between as a purification ritual. For CRs, it is a time when the dead are especially honoured. Though CRs make offerings at all times of the year, Samhain is when more elaborate offerings are made to specific ancestors. This may involve making a small altar or shrine. They often have a meal where a place for the dead is set at the table, and they are invited to join. An untouched portion of food and drink is left outside as an offering. Traditional tales may be told and traditional songs, poems, and dances performed. A western-facing door or window may be opened and a candle left burning on the windowsill to guide the dead home. Divination for the coming year is often done, whether in solemnity or as games. The more mystically inclined may also see this as a time for deeply communing with their deities, especially those particularly linked with this festival.\nWicca.\nWiccans celebrate a variation of Samhain as one of their yearly Sabbats of the Wheel of the Year. Most Wiccans deem it the most important of the four \"greater Sabbats\". Some see Samhain as a time to celebrate the lives of those who have died, and it often involves paying respect to ancestors, family members, elders of the faith, friends, pets, and other loved ones who have died. In some rituals, the spirits of the dead are invited to attend the festivities. It is seen as a festival of darkness, balanced at the opposite point of the wheel by the spring festival of Bealtaine.\nWiccans believe that at Samhain, the veil between this world and the afterlife is at its thinnest, making it easier to communicate with those who have left this world.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28324", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28324", "title": "Spring equinox (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "28325", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28325", "title": "Sabbat", "text": ""}
{"id": "28327", "revid": "11801436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28327", "title": "Stargate (film)", "text": "1994 film by Roland Emmerich\nStargate is a 1994 science fiction action-adventure film directed by Roland Emmerich, written by Emmerich and Dean Devlin. The film is the first entry in the eponymous media franchise and stars Kurt Russell, James Spader, Jaye Davidson, Alexis Cruz, Mili Avital, and Viveca Lindfors. The plot centers on the \"Stargate\", an ancient ring-shaped device that creates a wormhole, enabling travel to a similar device elsewhere in the universe. The central plot explores the theory of extraterrestrial beings having an influence upon human civilization.\n\"Stargate\" was released on October 28, 1994, by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the United States, while it was released by AMLF in France. The film received mixed reviews, with its atmosphere, story, characters, and graphic content both praised and criticized. The film grossed $196.6\u00a0million worldwide against a production budget of $55\u00a0million.\nPlot.\nIn 1928 at Giza, Egypt, archaeologist Professor Paul Langford, accompanied by his daughter Catherine, unearths cover stones engraved with Egyptian hieroglyphs and other markings. Beneath he discovers a large metallic ring of unknown purpose.\nIn 1994, the now-elderly Catherine invites Egyptologist and linguist Daniel Jackson, Ph.D. to translate the hieroglyphs. The stones, located underground at a military installation in Colorado, are now part of a classified U.S. Air Force project overseen by Special Operations Colonel Jack O'Neil. Jackson determines that the hieroglyphs refer to a \"stargate\" which uses star constellations as spatial coordinates. He is then shown the Stargate, the ring device from Giza. They use his coordinates to align the Stargate's rotating inner track with V-shaped markings (or \"chevrons\") along its outside. When all seven chevrons are locked in, a wormhole opens, connecting the Stargate with a distant planet. Jackson joins O'Neil and his team (Reilly, Porro, Freeman, Brown, Ferretti, and Kawalsky) as they pass through the wormhole.\nThey emerge inside a pyramid on the arid desert planet of Abydos. Jackson attempts to locate the symbols required for the return journey through the Stargate but fails. O'Neil orders Kawalsky to set up camp. Jackson sees a mastadge, a large animal with a harness, which drags him off when he approaches it to investigate. O'Neil, Kawalsky and Brown follow and they discover a tribe of humans working to mine a strange mineral, which Brown identifies as the same material the Stargate is made of. O'Neil radios the others to secure basecamp. Following them back to their city, Jackson realizes that the people speak a variant of Ancient Egyptian and is able to communicate with them. He learns that the tribe sees him and his comrades as emissaries of their god Ra due to an amulet given to him by Catherine. The tribe's chieftain Kasuf presents Jackson with his daughter Sha'uri as a gift, and although Jackson initially refuses her, he later becomes romantically attached to her. O'Neil befriends Kasuf's teenaged son Skaara and his friends. That night, Ra's ship lands atop the pyramid structure, and his soldiers capture Ferretti and Freeman while killing Porro and Reilly.\nThrough hidden markings and discussions with the tribe, Jackson learns that Ra is an alien being who came to Earth during the Ancient Egyptian period to possess human bodies to extend his own life. Ra enslaved these humans and used the Stargate to bring some of them to Abydos to mine the mineral that is used in the alien technology. Humans on Earth revolted, overthrew Ra's overseers, and buried the Stargate to prevent its use. During this investigation, Jackson comes across a cartouche containing six of the seven symbols needed to configure the Stargate for the return to Earth, but the seventh has been broken off and has worn away.\nWhen Jackson, O'Neil, Brown, and Kawalsky return to the pyramid, there is a firefight against Ra's soldiers. Brown is killed and Kawalsky is injured. Jackson and O'Neil are captured and brought before Ra and his guards, who are revealed to be humanoids when they retract their armored head-pieces. A firefight ensues and Jackson is killed; O'Neil is incapacitated and is incarcerated with the others. Ra places Jackson's body in a sarcophagus-like device that regenerates him. Ra then shows Jackson a nuclear bomb which O'Neil had secretly brought with him. Perceiving their arrival as an act of war, Ra declares his intentions to send the bomb back through the Stargate to Earth, along with a shipment of the mineral, which will increase its explosive power a hundred fold\u2014essentially creating a world-ending event. Ra then orders the human tribe to watch as he prepares to force Jackson to execute the others to demonstrate his power, but Skaara and his friends create a diversion that allows Jackson, O'Neil, Kawalsky, and Ferretti to escape, while Freeman is killed. They flee to nearby caves to hide from Ra. Skaara and his friends celebrate, and Skaara draws a sign of victory on a wall, which Jackson recognizes as the final Stargate symbol needed for the return to Earth.\nO'Neil and his remaining men aid Skaara in overthrowing the remaining overseers and then launch an attack on Ra, who sends out fighter ships to strafe the humans while he orders his ship to depart. The humans outside run out of ammunition and are forced to surrender to the fighter ships' pilots, but the rest of the tribe, seeing that their false gods are really humanoid, rebel against the guards and overthrow them. Sha'uri is killed, but Jackson takes her body and sneaks aboard Ra's ship using a teleportation system, leaving O'Neil to fight Ra's guard captain, Anubis. Jackson places Sha'uri in the regeneration device, and she recovers, but Ra discovers them and attempts to kill Jackson. O'Neil activates the teleportation system, killing Anubis and allowing Jackson and Sha'uri to escape the ship. O'Neil and Jackson teleport the bomb to Ra's ship, destroying the ship and killing Ra. With the humans freed, the remaining team\u2014O'Neil, Kawalsky, and Ferretti\u2014return to Earth while Jackson chooses to stay behind with Sha'uri and the others.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe film in its original cut and in the director's cut plays out in chronological order. When Devlin and Emmerich edited the film in the director's cut to tighten the narrative, they decided to add a scene at the very beginning of the film to show who the human host of Ra was before the aliens took him. Only Davidson's upper torso was filmed. The first scene was a combination of model shots and a set in Yuma, Arizona where \"Rambo III\" had been filmed. The scene of the excavation of the Stargate was also filmed in three days in Arizona. A golden look was achieved by filming near sunset. To keep within the budget, the producers put stick figures with cloth in the distant desert to appear as humans. The original Stargate was painted black, but it looked like a giant tire so it was repainted silver at the last moment.\nDaniel Jackson's lecture on his theories was filmed in a hotel in Los Angeles. The scene was originally much longer and delved more into the theories that aliens had built the Egyptian pyramids, but it was trimmed for time concerns for the release. The scenes with O'Neil at his house were the first ones filmed with Kurt Russell; his hair was cut short afterwards. Russell requested his hair color to be brightened a little for the film. The fictional facility housing the Stargate was the largest set for the film, the former Spruce Goose Dome located in Long Beach, California. Egyptologist Stuart Tyson Smith joined the production to make all Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics and spoken language as accurate as possible.\nFilming.\nThe mask of the pharaoh in the opening credits was made out of fiberglass and modeled in the workshop. The sequence used a motion-control camera to give better depth of field. The score of \"Stargate\" was composer David Arnold's first work on an American feature film. When Devlin and Emmerich first flew to London to meet with Arnold, they had not yet heard the score; hearing it, they felt \"he had elevated the film to a whole other level\". Arnold later interviewed the actors during principal photography, using the information to improve his score.\nVisual effects.\nJeff Kleiser and Kleiser-Walczak Construction Co.'s visual effects team of 40 people created the look of the Stargate. They used self-written image-creation and compositing software, as well as commercial digital packages to create the Stargate, the morphing helmets worn by Ra and the Horus guards, and the cityscape of Nagada. The morphing helmets were not true 3D but 2D elements, as Kleiser explained: \"You shoot the character without the headdress, you shoot the character with a headdress. And then you have to go in and, and create all these little sections that you would then wipe off to reveal\u2014and it had to match up, the two things had to match up. I think the cameras were moving as well.\"\nFootprints in the sand were often digitally removed. The creation of the wormhole, which was fully digital, was one of the biggest challenges in the making of the film. The ripples had to be digitally composited to appear accurate and realistic. Scanning lasers were lined up parallel to the gate to illustrate the amount of body that passed the surface of the Stargate plane. Afterwards, the parts of the body that had or had not yet gone through the gate (depending on the side of filming) were obliterated with a digital matte, a process that removes unwanted components from an individual frame or sequence of frames. The funnel of water that precedes the Stargate opening was filmed by discharging an air cannon into a water tank, as Jeff Kleiser explained: \"We didn't know how much air pressure to set the cannon on but it went from 1 to 500\u00a0lb, so we said 'Let's try 100\u2014start the camera rolling and hit the thing.' It evacuated all the water out of the tank and onto the camera and everybody. It turned out that 1\u00a0lb was about the right amount.\"\nThe use of computers generating a big 3D storyboard allowed Emmerich to try out different shooting angles before settling on one angle.\nMusic.\nThe film's score was composed by David Arnold, played by the Sinfonia of London and conducted by Nicholas Dodd. It was the second motion picture score that Arnold had composed and his first major one. At the time of production, Arnold had recently started to work in a local video store in London. Once hired, he spent several months in a hotel room working on the soundtrack, spending more time rewriting the music and improving it, during delays due to film companies trying to get the rights to distribution. According to Arnold, \"when I first read the script for Stargate, I knew what approach to take, which was to be as big and bold as possible,\" saying: \"Every time there was an amazing sight, the characters would stand back and say, 'Oh my God!' But James would just smile and walk towards it. That was the basis for the Stargate score, moving forward with a sense of majesty instead of being frightened by what's around the corner.\"\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"Stargate\" was released in the United States and Canada on October 28, 1994.\nHome media.\nIn 1995, the film was released on VHS and as a Dolby Digital-encoded laserdisc spanning two discs (three sides). The first DVD release was on June 18, 1997. The DVD format was re-released in October 1999 under the title \"Stargate Special Edition\", and again in 2003 on VHS and a 2-disc DVD set with remastered theatrical and extended editions. The film was released on Blu-ray format on August 29, 2006.\nLawsuit.\nIn January 1995, Omar Zuhdi, a high school teacher, filed a lawsuit against the makers and originators of the original movie, claiming that they stole the plot and story of his 1984 film script \"Egyptscape\", as the basis of the film \"Stargate\" (and thus the \"Stargate\" franchise). The suit was later settled out of court.\nDirector's cut.\nThe director's cut had several scenes which were cut from the theatrical release. This version begins with a short scene showing the abduction of the human that is possessed by Ra. The second added scene took place immediately after the excavation of the Stargate in 1928 and showed a petrified Anubis guard underneath a broken cover stone. With this scene, the producers had tried to introduce the idea that beings had attempted to come through the Stargate after its burial but the scene was ultimately cut for time concerns.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film received a warm reception from the public, grossing $71,567,262 at the United States box office and $125\u00a0million internationally for a worldwide total of $196,567,262. At the time, the film set a record for the highest-grossing opening weekend for a film released in the month of October. It would hold this record for four years until 1998 when \"Antz\" took it.\nIn its first run, \"Stargate\" made more money than film industry insiders predicted, considering the lukewarm reviews. Some regard it as Emmerich's breakthrough film. \"Stargate\" grossed over $16,651,000 in the United States during its opening week in October 1994. It was the 35th-highest-grossing film opening in the U.S. in October. From November 4\u20136, the film grossed around $12,368,700, declining 25%. It topped the box office for two weeks until it was dethroned by \"Interview with the Vampire\". The film would continue this decline until the end of November, when the film garnered $4,777,198, or an 8.2% rise. The week before that the film garnered around $4,413,420, a 45.6% decline. In its last week playing theatrically, the film garnered around $1,170,500 in the U.S.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 53% based on 51 reviews, and an average rating of 5.4/10. The site's critics consensus states: \"\"Stargate\" has splashy visuals and James Spader to recommend it, but corny characterization and a clunky script makes this a portal to ho-hum.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 42 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". At Movie Review Query Engine (MRQE), which assigns a normalized rating to mainstream critics, the film holds a score of 64 out of 100 based on 95 reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B+\" on an A+ to F scale.\nMost of the negativity focused on what was criticized as overuse of special effects, thinness of plot, and excessive use of clich\u00e9s. Roger Ebert went so far as to say, \"The movie \"Ed Wood\", about the worst director of all time, was made to prepare us for \"Stargate\"\". Ebert awarded the film one out of four stars and, even over 10 years later, \"Stargate\" remained on his list of most-hated films. Mike DiBella from \"Allmovie\" said, \"There simply isn't enough spectacle in \"Stargate\" to make up for its many flaws.\" The film peaked at number one on the \"Billboard\" chart \"Top Video Rentals\" on April 29, 1995.\nThe positive reviews stated that it was an \"instant camp classic\" and praised the film for its special effects and entertainment value, with Chris Hicks of the \"Deseret News\" calling it \"\"Star Wars\" meets \"Ben Hur\"\". Scott McKenzie from DVDactive said, \"It's a shame because the world created around the \"Stargate\" is compelling and detailed. It's almost enough to make me want to watch the TV series, but not quite.\"\nAccolades.\nIn 1995, \"Stargate\" was considered for various film awards worldwide. It won six of the ten awards it was nominated for.\nOther media.\nVideo Games.\nTwo video games based on the film were published by Acclaim Entertainment: a 1995 side-scrolling platform game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Sega Genesis, and a Tetris-like puzzle video game for the Game Gear and Game Boy.\nCancelled film sequels.\nDevlin and Emmerich always envisioned \"Stargate\" as the first part of a trilogy of films, but Parts 2 and 3 were never developed. At Comic-Con 2006, twelve years after the original film was released, Devlin stated that he was in early discussions with rights-holders MGM about finally bringing the final two parts to the screen.\nAccording to Devlin, the second film is intended to be set around twelve years after the original, with Jackson making a discovery that leads him back to Earth and to the uncovering of a new Stargate. The second entry would supposedly use a different mythology from the Egyptian one which formed the background to the original film, with the third installment tying these together to reveal that \"all mythologies are actually tied together with a common thread that we haven't recognized before.\" Devlin stated that he hoped to enlist original stars Kurt Russell (Col. Jack O'Neil) and James Spader (Dr. Daniel Jackson) for the sequels. The actors reportedly expressed an interest in participating in the project.\nThe film trilogy would not directly tie into the series \"Stargate SG-1\". According to Devlin, the relationship between the movie and the series is \"we would just continue the mythology of the movie and finish that out. I think the series could still live on at the end of the third sequel. So we're going to try to not tread on their stories.\" Plans for sequels to the original film are unrelated to the development of straight-to-DVD films made as sequels to \"Stargate SG-1\". According to Devlin, he and Emmerich had always planned to do three films with the potential for more, but MGM preferred to play out the television series first.\nNovel series.\nUsing some of Emmerich's notes, Bill McCay wrote a series of five novels, continuing the story the original creators had envisioned, which involved the Earth-humans, the locals and the successors of Ra.\nTelevision spin-offs.\nThe CD-ROM programme \"Secrets of Stargate\", released after the film, showed how the special effects were made, and included behind-the-scenes of the film and the showing of interviews with the cast and the production members. Dean Devlin eventually gave Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) the rights over the film. In 1996, MGM hired Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner to create a spin-off television series. \"Stargate SG-1\" premiered on the American subscription channel Showtime on July 27, 1997 and ended its ten-season run in 2007. \"Stargate SG-1\" itself spawned the non-canon animated television series \"Stargate Infinity\" (2002\u201303), and the live-action television series \"Stargate Atlantis\" (2004\u201309) and \"Stargate Universe\" (2009\u201311).\nDifferences from film to television franchise.\n\"SG-1\" creators and executive producers Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner altered the canon by introducing several new concepts during production of the \"SG-1\" and \"Atlantis\" series. In the television series, characters were portrayed by different actors, and names were spelled differently. Daniel Jackson was played by James Spader in the film and by Michael Shanks in the series. Kurt Russell's character Jonathan \"Jack\" O'Neil, a rather humorless Colonel, is played by Richard Dean Anderson as Jonathan \"Jack\" O'Neill (with two 'l's) in \"SG-1\". French Stewart's character was Lieutenant Louis Ferretti but in \"SG-1\", played by Brent Stait, he is a Major. The spelling of Daniel Jackson's wife changes from \"Sha'uri\" to \"Sha're\", O'Neill's wife from Sarah to Sara. (Similarly, the name of O'Neil's son changes from \"Tyler\" in the film to \"Charlie\".)\nThe Stargate Command setting was transferred from the fictional military facility located in Creek Mountain, to the Cheyenne Mountain military complex. The unnamed planet from the film was named Abydos in the series and the distance from Earth changed from millions of light-years away (in an entirely different galaxy, \"the Kalium galaxy\") to becoming the closest planet to Earth with a Stargate, residing in the same galaxy as Earth. Also in \"SG-1\", Stargate travel is limited to the Stargate network in the Milky Way galaxy (unless a tremendous amount of power is used to lengthen the subspace wormhole of a Stargate to another galaxy's Stargate). Ra was the last of an unnamed race in the film, being of a humanoid species with large black eyes and a lack of facial features. In \"SG-1\", Ra is one of many \"Goa'uld System Lords\", a race of parasitic eel-like creatures.\nThere were also changes to the Stargate. The unique set of 39 Stargate symbols in the film was replaced with the concept of 38 symbols that are the same for each Stargate (Earth's symbols based on Earth's constellations), plus a single point of origin symbol that is unique to that individual gate. While the \"kawoosh\" effect in the movie was created by filming the actual swirl of water in a glass tube, and looked like a vortex on the back of the Gate, on the television series this effect was completely created in computer graphics by the Canadian visual effects company Rainmaker.\nAt the beginning of \"SG-1\" season 9, the original wormhole-traversal sequence used in the film, and in the series up to that point, was replaced with a new sequence similar to the one already used on \"Stargate Atlantis\", but blue as it was in the movie and \"SG-1\". In \"Atlantis\", it is green, and in \"Universe\", it is white.\nReboot.\nOn September 5, 2013, during an interview with Digital Spy, Emmerich said that he and MGM are planning a new \"Stargate\" as a reboot with a trilogy. On May 29, 2014, it was announced that MGM and Warner Bros. are partnering together for a reboot as a trilogy with Emmerich directing, Devlin producing, and Nicolas Wright and James A. Woods writing. On November 17, 2016, Devlin told Empire Online that the plans to make a reboot and a potential new series are stalled. On April 14, 2023, it was announced that MGM were rebooting their film franchises for film and television, including \"Stargate\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28328", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28328", "title": "Sigismund", "text": "Sigismund is an ancient Germanic given name, from Proto-Germanic \"victory\" + \"protection\", recorded from the 5th century (Sigismund of Burgundy, c.\u2009475\u2013524) in the Kingdom of Burgundy. An older variant, \"Segimundus,\" was Latinized by Tacitus. In the later medieval period it became a standard name in the Austrian, German, Hungarian, and Polish-Lithuanian royal families.\nThe name is often confused with its cognates Sigmund and Siegmund. While Sigismund was derived from the East Germanic languages, particularly Burgundian or Gothic, the forms Siegmund and Sigmund trace their origins to the High German languages. In Slavic languages, the variants Zygmunt/Zikmund/\u017digmund was adopted, notably in Czech, Serbo-Croatian, Slovak, and Polish. Other language variants of the name include Zsigmond in Hungarian, and also appeared in various forms across the Romance languages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "28329", "revid": "40414428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28329", "title": "Solomon", "text": "Biblical monarch of ancient Israel\nSolomon (), also called Jedidiah, was the fourth monarch of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, according to the Hebrew Bible. The successor of his father David, he is described as the penultimate ruler of all Twelve Tribes of Israel under a united Israel and Judah. His reign is hypothesized to have lasted from 970 to 931 B.C. According to the biblical narrative, his reign brought commercial prosperity through alliances and trade, but his accumulation of wealth, horses, and foreign wives, many of whom introduced idolatry, led to divine punishment. After Solomon\u2019s death, his son Rehoboam\u2019s harsh policies led the northern Israelites to reject David\u2019s line and follow Jeroboam, splitting the kingdom into Israel in the north and Judah in the south, according to the Hebrew Bible.\nConsidered a Jewish prophet, Solomon is portrayed as wealthy, wise, powerful, and a dedicated follower of Yahweh (God), as attested by the eponymous Solomon's Temple. He is also traditionally regarded as the author of the biblical books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. He is also the subject of many later references and legends, most notably in the Testament of Solomon, part of biblical apocrypha from the 1st century CE.\nThe historicity of Solomon is the subject of significant debate. While current scholarship generally allows for the possibility of a historical Solomon, the details of his reign over Israel and Judah are contested and the biblical portrayal of his apparent empire's opulence is considered highly likely to be an anachronistic exaggeration.\nSolomon is also revered in Christianity and Islam. In the New Testament, he is portrayed as a teacher of wisdom, compared to Jesus, and invoked rhetorically to illustrate God's generosity. In the Quran, he is considered to be a major Islamic prophet. In primarily non-biblical circles, Solomon also came to be known as a magician and an exorcist, with numerous amulets and medallion seals dating from the Hellenistic period invoking his name.\nBiblical account.\nThe life of Solomon is primarily described in 2Samuel, 1Kings and 2Chronicles. His two names are traditionally taken to mean \"peaceful\" and \"friend of God\", both considered \"predictive of the character of his reign\". A 2023 textbook described three possibilities for the etymology of Solomon\u2019s name: \u201ccompensation or a substitute,\u201d \u201cthe ruler of peace,\u201d or based on the deified evening star Shalim.\nChronology.\nThe conventional dates of Solomon's reign are derived from biblical chronology and are set from about 970 to 931 BCE. Regarding the Davidic dynasty, to which King Solomon belongs, its chronology can be checked against datable Babylonian and Assyrian records at a few points, and these correspondences have allowed archaeologists to date its kings in a modern framework. According to the most widely used chronology, based on that by the Old Testament professor Edwin R. Thiele, the death of Solomon and the division of his kingdom would have occurred in the fall of 931 BCE.\nChildhood.\nSolomon was born in Jerusalem, the second-born child of David and his wife Bathsheba (widow of Uriah the Hittite). The first child (unnamed in that account), a son conceived adulterously during Uriah's lifetime, had died seven days after birth. It is suggested in Scripture that this was a judgment from God. Solomon had three named full brothers born to Bathsheba: Nathan, Shammua, and Shobab, besides six known older half-brothers born of as many mothers.\nThe biblical narrative shows that Solomon served as a peace offering between God and David, due to David's adulterous relationship with Bathsheba. In an effort to hide this sin, David sent Bathsheba's husband, Uriah the Hittite, to battle, and specifically to the front line wherein David ordered the commanding officer Joab to withdraw support for Uriah in order to have him killed in battle by the enemy. After he died, David was finally able to marry Bathsheba. As punishment, the first child, who was conceived during the adulterous relationship, died. Solomon was born after David was forgiven. It is this reason why his name, which means peace, was chosen. Some historians cited that Nathan the Prophet brought up Solomon as his father was busy governing the realm. This could also be attributed to the notion that the prophet held great influence over David because he knew of his adultery, which was considered a grievous offense under the Mosaic Law.\nSuccession and administration.\nAccording to the First Book of Kings, when David was old, \"he could not get warm\". \"So they sought a beautiful young woman throughout all the territory of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunamite, and brought her to the king. The young woman was very beautiful, and she was of service to the king and attended to him, but the king knew her not.\"\nWhile David was in this state, court factions were maneuvering for power. Adonijah, David's heir apparent, acted to have himself declared king, but was outmaneuvered by Bathsheba and the biblical prophet Nathan, who convinced David to proclaim Solomon king according to his earlier promise (not recorded elsewhere in the biblical narrative), despite Solomon's being younger than his brothers.\nSolomon, as instructed by David, began his reign with an extensive purge, including his father's chief general, Joab, among others, and further consolidated his position by appointing friends throughout the administration, including in religious positions as well as in civic and military posts. It is said that Solomon ascended to the throne when he was only about fifteen.\nSolomon greatly expanded his military strength, especially the cavalry and chariot arms. He founded numerous colonies, some of which doubled as trading posts and military outposts. He also increased the bureaucracy.\nTrade relationships were a focus of his administration. In particular he continued his father's very profitable relationship with the Phoenician king Hiram I of Tyre (see 'wealth' below); they sent out joint expeditions to the lands of Tarshish and Ophir to engage in the trade of luxury products, importing gold, silver, sandalwood, pearls, ivory, apes, and peacocks. Solomon is considered the most wealthy of the Israelite kings named in the Bible.\nWisdom.\nSolomon was the biblical king most famous for his wisdom. In 1Kings he sacrificed to God, and God later appeared to him in a dream, asking what Solomon wanted from God. Solomon asked for wisdom in order to better rule and guide his people. Pleased, God personally answered Solomon's prayer, promising him great wisdom because he did not ask for self-serving rewards like long life or the death of his enemies.\nPerhaps the best known story of his wisdom is the Judgement of Solomon; two women each lay claim to being the mother of the same child. Solomon easily resolved the dispute by commanding the child to be cut in half and shared between the two. One woman promptly renounced her claim, proving that she would rather give the child up than see it killed. Solomon declared the woman who showed compassion to be the true mother, entitled to the whole child.\nSolomon has traditionally been considered the author of three biblical books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. He has also traditionally been ascribed authorship of the Book of Wisdom which is included among the deuterocanonical books recognized by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodox Churches, and Church of the East, but is considered apocryphal in Protestant traditions.\nWealth.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the ancient Kingdom of Israel gained its highest splendour and wealth during Solomon's reign of 40 years. In a single year, according to , Solomon collected tribute amounting to 666 talents (18,125 kilograms) of gold. Solomon is described as surrounding himself with all the luxuries and the grandeur of an Eastern monarch, and his government prospered. He entered into an alliance with Hiram I, king of Tyre, who in many ways greatly assisted him in his numerous undertakings.\nConstruction projects.\nFor years before his death, David was engaged in collecting materials for building a temple in Jerusalem as a permanent home for Yahweh and the Ark of the Covenant. Solomon is described as undertaking the construction of the temple, with the help of an architect, also named Hiram, and other materials, sent from King Hiram of Tyre.\nAfter the completion of the temple, Solomon is described in the biblical narrative as erecting many other buildings of importance in Jerusalem. For 13 years, he was engaged in the building of a royal palace on Ophel (a hilly promontory in central Jerusalem). This complex included buildings referred to as:\nThe House (or Hall) of the Forest of Lebanon\nThe Hall or Porch of Pillars\nThe Hall of the Throne or the Hall of Justice as well as his own residence and a residence for his wife, Pharaoh's daughter.\nSolomon's throne is said to have been spectacularly opulent and possessed moving parts, making it one of the earliest mechanical devices in history. It is said that \"Nothing like it (the throne) had ever been made for any other kingdom.\" Solomon also constructed great water works for the city, and the Millo (Septuagint, \"Acra\") for the defense of the city. However, excavations of Jerusalem have discovered no monumental architecture from the era, and no remains of either the Temple or Solomon's palace have been found.\nSolomon is also described as rebuilding cities elsewhere in Israel, creating the port of Ezion-Geber, and constructing Palmyra in the wilderness as a commercial depot and military outpost. Although the location of the port of Ezion-Geber is known, no remains have ever been found. More archaeological success has been achieved with the major cities Solomon is said to have strengthened or rebuilt, for example, Hazor, Megiddo and Gezer. These all have substantial ancient remains, including impressive six-chambered gates, and ashlar palaces; however it is no longer the scholarly consensus that these structures date to the time, according to the Bible, when Solomon ruled.\nAccording to the Bible, during Solomon's reign, Israel enjoyed great commercial prosperity, with extensive traffic being carried on by land with Tyre, Egypt, and Arabia, and by sea with Tarshish, Ophir, and South India.\nWives and concubines.\nAccording to the biblical account, Solomon had 700 wives and 300 concubines. The wives were described as foreign princesses, including Pharaoh's daughter and women of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Sidon and of the Hittites. His marriage to Pharaoh's daughter appears to have cemented a political alliance with Egypt, whereas he clung to his other wives and concubines \"in love\". The only wife mentioned by name is Naamah the Ammonite, mother of Solomon's successor, Rehoboam.\nThe biblical narrative notes with disapproval that Solomon permitted his foreign wives to import their national deities, building temples to Ashtoreth and Milcom.\nIn the branch of literary analysis that examines the Bible, called higher criticism, the story of Solomon falling into idolatry by the influence of Pharaoh's daughter and his other foreign wives is \"customarily seen as the handiwork of the 'deuteronomistic historian(s)'\", who are held to have written, compiled, or edited texts to legitimize the reforms of Hezekiah's great-grandson, King Josiah who reigned from about 641 to 609 BCE (over 280 years after Solomon's death according to Bible scholars). Scholarly consensus in this field holds that \"Solomon's wives/women were introduced in the 'Josianic' (customarily Dtr) edition of Kings as a theological construct to blame the schism [between Judah and the Northern Kingdom of Israel] on his misdeeds\".\nRelationship with Queen of Sheba.\nIn a brief, unelaborated, and enigmatic passage, the Hebrew Bible describes how the fame of Solomon's wisdom and wealth reached even the far-off Queen of Sheba. The queen is described as visiting with gifts including gold, spices and precious stones. When Solomon gave her \"all her desire, whatsoever she asked\", she left satisfied.\nWhether the passage is simply to provide a brief foreign witness of Solomon's wealth and wisdom, or whether the visit is meant to have more significance, is unknown; nevertheless the Queen of Sheba has become the subject of numerous stories.\nSheba is typically identified as Saba, a nation once spanning the Red Sea on the coasts of what are now Eritrea, Somalia, Ethiopia and Yemen, in Arabia Felix; although other sources place it in the area of what is now northern Ethiopia and Eritrea.\nIn a Rabbinical account (e.g. Targum Sheni, ), Solomon was accustomed to ordering animals to dance before him (a power granted by God), and upon summoning the mountain-cock or hoopoe (Aramaic name: \"nagar tura\"), the bird told him it had discovered a land in the east, rich in gold, silver, and plants, whose capital was called \"Kitor\" and whose ruler was the Queen of Sheba. Solomon then sent the bird to request the queen's visit.\nAn Ethiopian account from the 14th century (\"Kebra Nagast\") maintains that the Queen of Sheba had sexual relations with King Solomon and gave birth beside the Mai Bella stream in the province of Hamasien, Eritrea. The Ethiopian tradition has a detailed account of the affair. The child was a son who became Menelik I, King of Axum, and founded a dynasty that would reign as the Jewish, then Christian, Empire of Ethiopia which lasted 2900 years until Haile Selassie was overthrown in 1974. Menelik was said to be a practicing Jew who was given a replica of the Ark of the Covenant by King Solomon; and, moreover, that the original Ark was switched and went to Axum with him and his mother, and is still there, guarded by a single dedicated priest.\nThe claim of such a lineage and of possession of the Ark was an important source of legitimacy and prestige for the Ethiopian monarchy through the centuries, and had important and lasting effects on Ethiopian culture. The Ethiopian government and church deny all requests to view the alleged ark.\nSome classical-era Rabbis, attacking Solomon's moral character, have claimed instead that the child was an ancestor of Nebuchadnezzar II, who destroyed Solomon's temple some 300 years later.\nSins and punishment.\nJewish scribes say that Solomon's teacher was Shimei ben Gera, and while he lived, he prevented Solomon from marrying foreign wives. The Talmud says at Ber. 8a: \"For as long as Shimei the son of Gera was alive Solomon did not marry the daughter of Pharaoh\" (see also Midrash Tehillim to Ps. 3:1). Solomon's execution of Shimei was his first descent into sin.\nAccording to 1 Kings 11:4, Solomon's \"wives turned his heart after other gods\", their own national deities, to whom Solomon built temples, thus incurring divine anger and retribution in the form of the division of the kingdom after Solomon's death.\n1 Kings 11 describes Solomon's descent into idolatry, particularly his turning after Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom, the god of the Ammonites. In Deuteronomy 17:16-17, a king is commanded not to multiply horses or wives, neither greatly multiply to himself gold or silver. Solomon sinned in all three of these areas. In addition to his wives, he collected 666 talents of gold each year, a huge amount for a small nation like Israel. He gathered multitudes of horses and chariots from as far as Egypt, and as Deuteronomy warns, took Israel back to Egypt in spirit.\nAccording to 1 Kings 11:30\u201334 and 1 Kings 11:9-13, it was because of these sins that the Lord punished Solomon by removing most of the tribes of Israel from rule by Solomon's house.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart had turned away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not keep what the Lord commanded. Therefore the Lord said to Solomon, \"Since this has been your practice and you have not kept my covenant and my statutes that I have commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom from you and will give it to your servant. Yet for the sake of David your father I will not do it in your days, but I will tear it out of the hand of your son. However, I will not tear away all the kingdom, but I will give one tribe to your son, for the sake of David my servant and for the sake of Jerusalem that I have chosen.\nEnemies.\nNear the end of his life, Solomon was beset by several enemies, including Hadad of Edom, Rezon of Zobah, and his own official Jeroboam of the tribe of Ephraim.\nDeath, succession of Rehoboam, and kingdom division.\nKing Solomon is a central biblical figure, who, according to the Hebrew Bible, was the builder of the First Temple in Jerusalem and the last ruler of the united Kingdom of Israel. After a reign of forty years (1 Kings 11:42), he died of natural causes, at around 55 years of age.\nUpon Solomon's death, his son, Rehoboam, succeeded him, but ten of the Tribes of Israel refused him as king, splitting the monarchy into the northern Kingdom of Israel under Jeroboam, while Rehoboam continued to reign over the smaller southern Kingdom of Judah. Henceforth the two kingdoms were never again united.\nSolomon is associated with the peak \"golden age\" of the independent Kingdom of Israel and is a legendary source of judicial and religious wisdom.\nAccording to Jewish tradition, King Solomon wrote three books of the Bible:\nThe Hebrew word appears in the title of two hymns (72 and 127) in the Psalms. This Hebrew word means \"to Solomon\", but it can also be translated as \"by Solomon\", thus suggesting to some that Solomon wrote the two psalms.\nApocryphal or deuterocanonical texts.\nRabbinical tradition attributes the \"Book of Wisdom\" (included within the Septuagint and recognized as part of a biblical canon by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodox Churches, and Church of the East) to Solomon, although this book was probably written in the 2nd century BCE. In this work, Solomon is portrayed as an astronomer. Other books of wisdom poetry such as the \"Odes of Solomon\" and the \"Psalms of Solomon\" also bear his name. The Jewish historian Eupolemus, who wrote about 157 BCE, included copies of apocryphal letters exchanged between Solomon and the kings of Egypt and Tyre.\nThe Gnostic \"Apocalypse of Adam\", which may date to the 1st or 2nd century, refers to a legend in which Solomon sends out an army of demons to seek a virgin who had fled from him, perhaps the earliest surviving mention of the later common tale that Solomon controlled demons and made them his slaves. This tradition of Solomon's control over demons appears fully elaborated in the early pseudoepigraphical work called the \"Testament of Solomon\" with its elaborate and grotesque demonology.\nHistoricity.\nAs with most biblical personages in the middle era of Israelite society, the historicity of Solomon is hotly debated. Current consensus states that regardless of whether or not a man named Solomon truly reigned as king over the Judean hills in the tenth century BCE, the biblical description of his apparent empire's lavishness is almost surely an anachronistic exaggeration.\nAs for Solomon himself, scholars on both the maximalist and minimalist sides of the spectrum of biblical archeology generally agree that he probably existed. However, a historically accurate picture of the Davidic king is difficult to construct. According to some archaeologists, Solomon could have only been the monarch or chieftain of Judah, and that the northern kingdom was a separate development. Such positions have been criticized by other archaeologists and scholars, who argue that a united monarchy did exist in the 10th century BCE, while agreeing that the biblical account contains exaggerations.\nArguments against biblical description.\nHistorical evidence of King Solomon other than the biblical accounts has been so minimal that some scholars have understood the period of his reign as a 'Dark Age' (Muhly 1998). The first-century Romano-Jewish scholar Josephus in \"Against Apion\", citing Tyrian court records and Menander, gives a specific year during which King Hiram I of Tyre sent materials to Solomon for the construction of the Temple. However, no material evidence indisputably of Solomon's reign has been found. Yigael Yadin's excavations at Hazor, Megiddo, Beit Shean and Gezer uncovered structures that he and others have argued date from Solomon's reign, but others, such as Israel Finkelstein and Neil Silberman, argue that they should be dated to the Omride period, more than a century after Solomon.\nAccording to Finkelstein and Silberman, authors of \"The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its Sacred Texts\", at the time of the kingdoms of David and Solomon, Jerusalem was populated by only a few hundred residents or less, which is insufficient for an empire stretching from the Euphrates to Eilath. According to \"The Bible Unearthed\", archaeological evidence suggests that the kingdom of Israel at the time of Solomon was little more than a small city state, and so it is implausible that Solomon received tribute as large as 666 talents of gold per year. Although both Finkelstein and Silberman accept that David and Solomon were real inhabitants of Judah about the 10th century BCE, they claim that the earliest independent reference to the Kingdom of Israel is about 890 BCE, and for Judah about 750 BCE. They suggest that because of religious prejudice, the authors of the Bible suppressed the achievements of the Omrides (whom the Hebrew Bible describes as being polytheist), and instead pushed them back to a supposed golden age of Judaism and monotheists, and devotees of Yahweh. Some Biblical minimalists like Thomas L. Thompson go further, arguing that Jerusalem became a city and capable of being a state capital only in the mid-7th century. Likewise, Finkelstein and others consider the claimed size of Solomon's temple implausible.\nArguments in favour of biblical description.\nAndr\u00e9 Lemaire states in \"Ancient Israel: From Abraham to the Roman Destruction of the Temple\" that the principal points of the biblical tradition of Solomon are generally trustworthy, although elsewhere he writes that he could find no substantiating archaeological evidence that supports the Queen of Sheba's visit to king Solomon, saying that the earliest records of trans-Arabian caravan voyages from Tayma and Sheba unto the Middle-Euphrates etc. occurred in the mid-8th century BCE, placing a possible visit from the Queen of Sheba to Jerusalem around this time\u2014some 250 years later than the timeframe traditionally given for king Solomon's reign. Seventeen years later, traces of cinnamon were found in Phoenician clay flasks from three small sites in the Israeli coastal plain dating from the 10th century BCE. The authors suggested that trade routes with South Asia existed much earlier than previously thought.\nKenneth Kitchen argues that Solomon ruled over a comparatively wealthy \"mini-empire\", rather than a small city-state, and considers 666 gold talents a modest amount of money. Kitchen calculates that over 30 years, such a kingdom might have accumulated up to 500 tons of gold, which is small compared to other examples, such as the 1,180 tons of gold that Alexander the Great took from Susa. Similarly, Kitchen and others consider the temple of Solomon a reasonable and typically sized structure for the region at the time. Dever states \"that we now have direct Bronze and Iron Age parallels for every feature of the 'Solomonic temple' as described in the Hebrew Bible\".\nMiddle way.\nSome scholars have charted a middle path between minimalist scholars like Finkelstein, Silberman, and Philip Davies (who believes that \"Solomon is a totally invented character\") and maximalist scholars like Lemaire and Kitchen. For instance, the archaeologist Avraham Faust has argued that biblical depictions of Solomon date to later periods and do overstate his wealth, buildings, and kingdom, but that Solomon did have an acropolis and ruled over a polity larger than Jerusalem. In particular, his archaeological research in regions near Jerusalem, like Sharon, finds commerce too great not to be supported by a polity and such regions probably were ruled loosely by Jerusalem. Scholars like Lester Grabbe also believe that there must have been a ruler in Jerusalem during this period and that he likely built a temple, although the town was quite small. William G. Dever argues that Solomon only reigned over Israel and did build a temple, but that descriptions of his lavishness and the other conquests are strongly exaggerated.\nArchaeology.\nGeneral observations.\nThe archaeological remains that are considered to date from the time of Solomon are notable for the fact that Canaanite material culture appears to have continued unabated; there is a distinct lack of magnificent empire, or cultural development. However, there is a lack of physical evidence of its existence, despite some archaeological work in the area. This is not unexpected because the area was devastated by the Babylonians, then rebuilt and destroyed several times.\nIn 2014, professor of anthropology James W. \"Jimmy\" Hardin and his team from the Cobb Institute of Archaeology at Mississippi State University discovered six official clay \nbullae seals at a site east of Gaza called Khirbet Summeily. He states that these bullae are associated with an Iron Age IIA political entity typified by elite activities dated to the 10th century BCE. The bullae appear to be the only known examples that date to this period. In his view, this lends general support to the historical veracity of David and Solomon as recorded in the Hebrew biblical texts.\nTemple Mount in Jerusalem.\nLittle archaeological excavation has been done around the area known as the Temple Mount, in what is thought to be the foundation of Solomon's Temple, because attempts to do so are met with protests by Muslim authorities of the Jerusalem Waqf.\nPrecious metals from Tarshish.\nThe biblical passages that understand Tarshish as a source of King Solomon's great wealth in metals\u2014especially silver, but also gold, tin and iron (Ezekiel 27)\u2014were linked to archaeological evidence from silver-hoards found in Phoenicia in 2013. The metals from Tarshish were reportedly obtained by Solomon in partnership with King Hiram of Phoenician Tyre (Isaiah 23) and the fleets of Tarshish and ships that sailed in their service. The silver hoards provide the first recognized material evidence that agrees with the ancient texts concerning Solomon's kingdom and his wealth (see 'Wealth' above).\nPossible evidence for the described wealth of Solomon and his kingdom was discovered in ancient silver hoards, which were found in Israel and Phoenicia and recognized for their importance in 2003. The evidence from the hoards shows that the Levant was a center of wealth in precious metals during the reigns of Solomon and Hiram, and matches the texts that say the trade extended from Asia to the Atlantic Ocean.\nCabul.\nThe distribution of fortified cities between Phoenicia and Galilee in Iron Age IIA (10th-9th century BCE) provides context on Solomon's sale of territory to Hiram, which he derided as \"Cabul\" (i.e. \"good for nothing\"). Kyle H. Keimer argues that they reflected Solomon's apathy to the tribe of Asher, who lived in Phoenicia, or his strategic thinking, where these cities served as defense barriers against foreign invasions. When it came to national defense, Near Eastern states did not rely on walls. Instead, they guarded resources, which they prioritized over the people. In addition, it revealed Solomon's political upper hand over Hiram. These events were subsequently preserved in sources, which a Deuteronomistic historian relied on when writing 1 Kings 9:11-14.\nBiblical criticism: Solomon's religiosity.\nFrom a critical point of view, Solomon's building of a temple for Yahweh should not be considered an act of particular devotion to Yahweh because Solomon is also described as building places of worship for a number of other deities. Some scholars and historians argue that the passages, such as his dedication prayer (), that describe Solomon's apparent initial devotion to Yahweh were written much later, after Jerusalem had become the religious centre of the kingdom, replacing locations such as Shiloh and Bethel. Earlier historians maintain that there is evidence that these passages in Kings are derived from official court records at the time of Solomon and from other writings of that time that were incorporated into the canonical books of Kings. More recent scholars believe that passages such as these in the Books of Kings were not written by the same authors who wrote the rest of the text, instead probably by the Deuteronomist.\nReligious views.\nJudaism.\nKing Solomon sinned by acquiring many foreign wives and horses because he thought he knew the reason for the biblical prohibition and thought it did not apply to him. When King Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter, a sandbank formed which eventually formed the \"great nation of Rome\"\u2014the nation that destroyed Herod's Temple. Solomon gradually lost more and more prestige until he became like a commoner. Some say he regained his status while others say he did not. In the end, however, he is regarded as a righteous king and is especially praised for his diligence in building the Temple.\nAdin Steinsaltz reads Solomon's wisdom as \"realpolitik\". His geopolitical success possible only by paying lip service to idolatrous practices without actually believing in them. This set a terrible example for his subjects. Solomon assumed incorrectly that ordinary people would be as wise as himself and keep idolatry at arm's length.\nKing Josiah was also said to have had the Ark of the Covenant, Aaron's rod, vial of manna and the anointing oil placed within a hidden chamber which had been built by Solomon.\nThe \"Seder Olam Rabbah\" holds that Solomon's reign was not in 1000 BCE, but rather in the ninth century BCE, during which time he built the First Temple in 832 BCE. However, \"The Jewish Encyclopedia\" of 1906 gives the more common date of \"971 to 931 BCE\".\nChristianity.\nChristianity has traditionally accepted the historical existence of Solomon, though some modern Christian scholars have also questioned at least his authorship of those biblical texts ascribed to him. Such disputes tend to divide Christians into traditionalist and modernist camps.\nOf the two genealogies of Jesus given in the Gospels, Matthew mentions Solomon, but Luke does not. Some commentators see this as an issue that can be reconciled while others disagree. For instance, it has been suggested that Matthew is using Joseph's genealogy and Luke is using Mary's, but Darrell Bock states that this would be unprecedented, \"especially when no other single woman appears in the line\". Other suggestions include the use by one of the royal and the other of the natural line, one using the legal line and the other the physical line, or that Joseph was adopted.\nJesus refers to Solomon, using him for comparison in his admonition against worrying about life. This account is recorded in Matthew 6:29 and the parallel passage in Luke 12:27.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, Solomon is commemorated as a saint, with the title of \"Righteous Prophet and King\". His feast day is celebrated on the Sunday of the Holy Forefathers (two Sundays before the Great Feast of the Nativity of the Lord).\nThe staunchly Catholic King Philip II of Spain sought to model himself after King Solomon. Statues of King David and Solomon stand on either side of the entrance to the basilica of El Escorial, Philip's palace, and Solomon is also depicted in a great fresco at the center of El Escorial's library. Philip identified the warrior-king David with his own father Charles V, and himself sought to emulate the thoughtful and logical character which he perceived in Solomon. Moreover, the structure of the Escorial was inspired by that of Solomon's Temple.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, Solomon is also known as Sulaim\u0101n ibn D\u0101w\u016bd, and is considered a prophet and a messenger of God, as well as a divinely appointed monarch. Solomon inherited his position from his father as the prophetic King of the Israelites. Unlike in the Bible, according to Muslim tradition Solomon never participated in idolatry.\nThe Quran ascribes to Solomon a great level of wisdom, knowledge and power. He knew the language of the birds ().\nSolomon was also known in Islam to have other supernatural abilities bestowed upon him by God, like controlling the wind, ruling over the jinn, enslaving divs, and hearing the communication of ants:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And to Solomon \u02f9We subjected\u02fa the wind: its morning stride was a month's journey and so was its evening stride. And We caused a stream of molten copper to flow for him, and \u02f9We subjected\u02fa some of the jinn to work under him by his Lord's Will. And whoever of them deviated from Our command, We made them taste the torment of the blaze. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And when they came across a valley of ants, an ant warned, \"O ants! Go quickly into your homes so Solomon and his armies do not crush you, unknowingly.\"\nThe Quran says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They \u02f9instead\u02fa followed the magic promoted by the devils during the reign of Solomon. Never did Solomon disbelieve, rather the devils disbelieved. They taught magic to the people, along with what had been revealed to the two angels, H\u00e2r\u00fbt and M\u00e2r\u00fbt, in Babylon. The two angels never taught anyone without saying, \"We are only a test \u02f9for you\u02fa, so do not abandon \u02f9your\u02fa faith.\" Yet people learned \u02f9magic\u02fa that caused a rift \u02f9even\u02fa between husband and wife; although their magic could not harm anyone except by Allah's Will. They learned what harmed them and did not benefit them\u2014although they already knew that whoever buys into magic would have no share in the Hereafter. Miserable indeed was the price for which they sold their souls, if only they knew!\nSolomon's gifts are often used allegorically in popular literature. The demons taking over Solomon's kingdom mirrors the Sufi concept of the mind giving in to evil urges. The ant is depicted as a wise creature, revealing to Solomon the reason behind his gift to control the wind and his name.\nDuring the Islamization of Iran, Solomon became merged with Jamshid, a great king from Persian mythology, to whom similar attributes are ascribed.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Solomon is regarded as one of the lesser prophets along with David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, along with others. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds see Solomon as a prophet who was sent by God to address the issues of his time. Baha'ullah wrote about Solomon in the \"Hidden Words\". He also mentions Solomon in the \"Tablet of Wisdom\", where he is depicted as a contemporary of Pythagoras.\nDruze faith.\nIn the Druze faith, Solomon had the ability to speak to animals and plants and was well respected in the natural world. According to Druze tradition, when Solomon died, all the trees shed their leaves in mourning, except for the olive tree, which continued to bear fruit to honor Solomon's memory.\nLegends.\n\"One Thousand and One Nights\".\nA well-known story in the collection \"One Thousand and One Nights\" describes a genie who had displeased King Solomon and was punished by being locked in a bottle and thrown into the sea. Since the bottle was sealed with Solomon's seal, the genie was helpless to free himself, until he was freed many centuries later by a fisherman who discovered the bottle. In other stories from the \"One Thousand and One Nights\", protagonists who had to leave their homeland and travel to the unknown places of the world saw signs which proved that Solomon had already been there. Sometimes, protagonists discovered words of Solomon that were intended to help those who were lost and had unluckily reached those forbidden and deserted places.\nAngels and magic.\nAccording to Rabbinic literature, on account of his modest request for wisdom only, Solomon was rewarded with riches and an unprecedented glorious realm, which extended over the upper world inhabited by the angels and over the whole of the terrestrial globe with all its inhabitants, including all the beasts, fowl, and reptiles, as well as the demons and spirits. His control over the demons, spirits, and animals augmented his splendor, the demons bringing him precious stones, besides water from distant countries to irrigate his exotic plants. The beasts and fowl of their own accord entered the kitchen of Solomon's palace, so that they might be used as food for him, and extravagant meals for him were prepared daily by each of his 700 wives and 300 concubines, with the thought that perhaps the king would feast that day in her house.\nSeal of Solomon.\nThe Seal of Solomon is the legendary signet ring attributed to Solomon in medieval mystical traditions, from which it developed in parallel within Jewish mysticism, Islamic mysticism and Western occultism. It is the predecessor to the Star of David, the contemporary cultural and religious symbol of the Jewish people. It was often depicted in the shape of either a pentagram or a hexagram. In religious lore, the ring is described as having given Solomon the power to command the supernatural and also the ability to speak with animals. Due to the proverbial wisdom of Solomon, it came to be seen as an amulet or talisman, or a symbol or character in medieval magic and Renaissance magic, occultism, and alchemy.\nSolomon and Asmodeus.\nOne legend concerning Asmodeus (see: ) goes on to state that Solomon one day asked Asmodeus what could make demons powerful over man, and Asmodeus asked to be freed and given the ring so that he could demonstrate; Solomon agreed but Asmodeus threw the ring into the sea and it was swallowed by a fish. Asmodeus then swallowed the king, stood up fully with one wing touching heaven and the other earth, and spat out Solomon to a distance of 400 miles. The Rabbis claim this was a divine punishment for Solomon's having failed to follow three divine commands, and Solomon was forced to wander from city to city, until he eventually arrived in an Ammonite city where he was forced to work in the king's kitchens. Solomon gained a chance to prepare a meal for the Ammonite king, which the king found so impressive that the previous cook was sacked and Solomon put in his place; the king's daughter, Naamah, subsequently fell in love with Solomon, but the family (thinking Solomon a commoner) disapproved, so the king decided to kill them both by sending them into the desert. Solomon and the king's daughter wandered the desert until they reached a coastal city, where they bought a fish to eat, which just happened to be the one which had swallowed the magic ring. Solomon was then able to regain his throne and expel Asmodeus. The element of a ring thrown into the sea and found back in a fish's belly also appeared in Herodotus' account of Polycrates, the tyrant of Samos (c. 538\u2013522 BCE).\nIn another familiar version of the legend of the Seal of Solomon, Asmodeus disguises himself. In some myths, he's disguised as King Solomon himself. The concealed Asmodeus tells travelers who have ventured up to King Solomon's grand lofty palace that the Seal of Solomon was thrown into the sea. He then convinces them to plunge in and attempt to retrieve it, for if they do they would take the throne as king.\nArtifacts.\nOther magical items attributed to Solomon are his key and his Table. The latter was said to be held in Toledo in Visigothic Spain and was part of the loot taken by Tariq ibn Ziyad during the Muslim conquest of Spain according to ibn Abd al-Hakam's \"History of the Conquest of Spain\". The former appears in the title of \"The Lesser Key of Solomon\", a Christian grimoire whose framing story is Solomon capturing demons using his ring, and forcing them to explain themselves to him.\nIn \"The Book of Deadly Names\", purportedly translated from Arabic manuscripts found hidden in a building in Spain, the \"King of the Jinn\" Fiqi\u1e6dush brings 72 jinn before King Solomon to confess their corruptions and places of residence. Fiqitush tells King Solomon the recipes for curing such corruptions as each evil jinn confesses.\nAngels.\nAngels also helped Solomon in building the Temple, though not by choice. The edifice was, according to rabbinical legend, miraculously constructed throughout, the large heavy stones rising and settling in their respective places of themselves. The general opinion of the Rabbis is that Solomon hewed the stones by means of a \"shamir\", a mythical worm whose mere touch cleft rocks. According to Midrash Tehillim, the shamir was brought from paradise by Solomon's eagle; but most of the rabbis state that Solomon was informed of the worm's haunts by Asmodeus. The shamir had been entrusted by the prince of the sea to the mountain rooster alone, and the rooster had sworn to guard it well, but Solomon's men found the bird's nest, and covered it with glass. When the bird returned, it used the shamir to break the glass, whereupon the men scared the bird, causing it to drop the worm, which the men could then bring to Solomon.\nIn the Kabbalah.\nEarly adherents of the Kabbalah portray Solomon as having sailed through the air on a throne of light placed on an eagle, which brought him near the heavenly gates as well as to the dark mountains behind which the fallen angels \"Uzza\" and \"Azzazel\" were chained; the eagle would rest on the chains, and Solomon, using the magic ring, would compel the two angels to reveal every mystery he desired to know.\nThe palace without entrance.\nAccording to one legend, while traveling magically, Solomon noticed a magnificent palace to which there appeared to be no entrance. He ordered the demons to climb to the roof and see if they could discover any living being within the building but they found only an eagle, which said that it was 700 years old, but that it had never seen an entrance. An elder brother of the eagle, 900 years old, was then found, but it also did not know the entrance. The eldest brother of these two birds, which was 1,300 years old, then declared it had been informed by its father that the door was on the west side, but that it had become hidden by sand drifted by the wind. Having discovered the entrance, Solomon found an idol inside that had in its mouth a silver tablet saying in Greek (a language not thought by modern scholars to have existed 1000 years before the time of Solomon) that the statue was of \"Shaddad, the son of 'Ad\", and that it had \"reigned over a million cities, rode on a million horses, had under it a million vassals and slew a million warriors\", yet it could not resist the angel of death.\nThrone.\nSolomon's throne is described at length in Targum Sheni, which is compiled from three different sources, and in two later Midrash. According to these, there were on the steps of the throne twelve golden lions, each facing a golden eagle. There were six steps to the throne, on which animals, all of gold, were arranged in the following order: on the first step a lion opposite an ox; on the second, a wolf opposite a sheep; on the third, a tiger opposite a camel; on the fourth, an eagle opposite a peacock, on the fifth, a cat opposite a cock; on the sixth, a sparrow-hawk opposite a dove. On the top of the throne was a dove holding a sparrow-hawk in its claws, symbolizing the dominion of Israel over the Gentiles. The first midrash claims that six steps were constructed because Solomon foresaw that six kings would sit on the throne, namely, Solomon, Rehoboam, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Amon, and Josiah. There was also on the top of the throne a golden candelabrum, on the seven branches of the one side of which were engraved the names of the seven patriarchs Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job, and on the seven of the other the names of Levi, Kohath, Amram, Moses, Aaron, Eldad, Medad, and, in addition, Hur (another version has Haggai). Above the candelabrum was a golden jar filled with olive oil and beneath it a golden basin which supplied the jar with oil and on which the names of Nadab, Abihu, and Eli and his two sons were engraved. Over the throne, twenty-four vines were fixed to cast a shadow on the king's head.\nBy a mechanical contrivance the throne followed Solomon wherever he wished to go. Supposedly, due to another mechanical trick, when the king reached the first step, the ox stretched forth its leg, on which Solomon leaned, a similar action taking place in the case of the animals on each of the six steps. From the sixth step the eagles raised the king and placed him in his seat, near which a golden serpent lay coiled. When the king was seated the large eagle placed the crown on his head, the serpent uncoiled itself, and the lions and eagles moved upward to form a shade over him. The dove then descended, took the scroll of the Law from the Ark, and placed it on Solomon's knees. When the king sat, surrounded by the Sanhedrin, to judge the people, the wheels began to turn, and the beasts and fowls began to utter their respective cries, which frightened those who had intended to bear false testimony. Moreover, while Solomon was ascending the throne, the lions scattered various fragrant spices. After Solomon's death, Pharaoh Shishak, when taking away the treasures of the Temple (I Kings xiv. 26), carried off the throne, which remained in Egypt until Sennacherib conquered that country. After Sennacherib's fall Hezekiah gained possession of it, but when Josiah was slain by Pharaoh Necho, the latter took it away. However, according to rabbinical accounts, Necho did not know how the mechanism worked and so accidentally struck himself with one of the lions causing him to become lame; Nebuchadnezzar, into whose possession the throne subsequently came, shared a similar fate. The throne then passed to the Persians, whose king Darius was the first to sit successfully on Solomon's throne after his death; subsequently the throne came into the possession of the Greeks and Ahasuerus.\nFreemasonry.\nMasonic rituals refer to King Solomon and the building of his Temple. Masonic Temples, where a Masonic Lodge meets, are an allegorical reference to King Solomon's Temple.\nPlaces.\nThe Solomon Islands, a country and archipelago in Melanesia, were named for King Solomon by the Spanish navigator \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a, who became the first European to see the islands in 1568.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28330", "revid": "88768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28330", "title": "Saul", "text": "Biblical figure and Israelite monarch\nSaul (; , ; , ; transl.\u2009\"asked/prayed for\"; ) was a monarch of ancient Israel and Judah and, according to the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament, the first king of the United Monarchy, a polity of uncertain historicity. His reign, traditionally placed in the late eleventh century\u00a0BC, according to the Bible, marked the transition of the Israelites from a scattered tribal society ruled by various judges to organized statehood.\nThe historicity of Saul and the United Kingdom of Israel is not universally accepted, as what is known of both comes largely from the Hebrew Bible. According to the text, he was anointed as king of the Israelites by Samuel, and reigned from Gibeah. Saul is said to have committed suicide when he fell on his sword during a battle with the Philistines at Mount Gilboa, in which three of his sons were also killed. Saul's son Ish-bosheth succeeded him to the throne, reigning for only two years before being murdered by his own military leaders. Saul's son-in-law David then became king.\nThe biblical narrative of Saul's rise to kingship and his death contains several textual inconsistencies and plays on words that scholars have discussed. These issues include conflicting accounts of Saul's anointing and death, changes in the portrayal of Saul from positive to negative following David's introduction, and etymological discrepancies in the birth-narrative of Samuel, which some scholars believe originally described Saul's birth.\nBiblical account.\nThe biblical accounts of Saul's life are found in the Books of Samuel:\nHouse of King Saul.\nAccording to the Hebrew text of the Bible, Saul reigned for two years, but Biblical scholars generally agree that the text is faulty and that a reign of 20 or 22 years is more probable. In the New Testament book of Acts 13:21, the Apostle Paul indicates that Saul's reign lasted for forty years.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Saul was the son of Kish, of the family of the Matrites, and a member of the tribe of Benjamin, one of the twelve Tribes of Israel. It appears that he came from Gibeah.\nSaul married Ahinoam, daughter of Ahimaaz, with whom he sired at least five sons (Jonathan, Abinadab, Malchishua, Ishvi and Ish-bosheth) and two daughters (Merab and Michal).\nSaul also had a concubine named Rizpah, daughter of Aiah, who bore him two sons, Armoni and Mephibosheth.\nSaul died at the Battle of Mount Gilboa, and was buried in Zelah, in the region of Benjamin. Three of Saul's sons \u2013 Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua \u2013 died with him at Mount Gilboa. His surviving son Ish-bosheth became king of Israel, at the age of forty. At David's request, Abner had Michal returned to David. Ish-bosheth reigned for two years, but after the death of Abner, was killed by two of his own captains.\nDuring a famine, God told king David that the famine happened because of how Saul treated the Gibeonites. The Gibeonites told David that only the death of seven sons of Saul would compensate them for losing their livelihood after the priests at Nob were killed under Saul's orders. David then granted the Gibeonites the jurisdiction to individually execute Saul's surviving two sons and five of Saul's grandsons (the sons of Merab and Adriel). The Gibeonites killed all seven, and hung up their bodies at the sanctuary at Gibeah. For five months their bodies were hung out in the elements, and the grieving Rizpah guarded them from being eaten by the beasts and birds of prey. Finally, David had the bodies taken down and buried in the family grave at Zelah with the remains of Saul and their half-brother Jonathan. Michal was childless.\nThe only male descendant of Saul to survive was Mephibosheth, Jonathan's lame son, who was five years old at the time of his father's and grandfather's deaths. In time, he came under the protection of David. Mephibosheth had a young son, Micah, who had four sons and descendants named until the ninth generation.\nAnointed as king.\nThe First Book of Samuel gives three accounts of Saul's rise to the throne in three successive chapters:\nAndr\u00e9 Lemaire finds the third account probably the most reliable tradition. The Pulpit Commentary distinguishes between a private and a public selection process.\nMilitary victories.\nAfter relieving the siege of Jabesh-Gilead, Saul conducted military campaigns against the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Aram Rehob and the kings of Zobah, the Philistines, and the Amalekites. A biblical summary states that \"wherever he turned, he was victorious\".\nIn the second year of his reign, King Saul, his son Jonathan, and a small force of a few thousand Israelite soldiers defeated a massive Philistine force of 3,000 chariots, 6,000 horsemen, and more than 30,000 infantry in the pass of Michmash. After the battle, Saul instructed his armies, by a rash oath, to fast. Methodist commentator Joseph Benson suggests that \"Saul's intention in putting this oath was undoubtedly to save time, lest the Philistines should gain ground of them in their flight. But the event showed it was a false policy; for the people were so faint and weak for want of food, that they were less able to follow and slay the Philistines than if they had stopped to take a moderate refreshment\". Jonathan's party were not aware of the oath and ate honey resulting in Jonathan realizing that he had broken an oath of which he was not aware, but was nevertheless liable for its breach, until popular intervention allowed Jonathan to be saved from death on account of his victory over the Philistines.\nRejection.\nDuring Saul's campaign against the Philistines, Samuel said that he would arrive in seven days to perform the requisite rites. When a week passed with no word of Samuel, and with the Israelites growing restless, Saul prepared for battle by offering sacrifices. Samuel arrived just as Saul had finished sacrificing and reprimanded Saul for not obeying his instructions.\nSeveral years after Saul's victory against the Philistines at Michmash Pass, Samuel instructed Saul to make war on the Amalekites and to \"utterly destroy\" them including all their livestock in fulfilment of a mandate set out:\n\"When the Lord your God has given you rest from all your enemies on every hand, in the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, you shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; do not forget\".\nHaving forewarned the Kenites who were living among the Amalekites to leave, Saul went to war and defeated the Amalekites. Saul killed all the men, women, children and poor quality livestock, but left the king, Agag alive, and the best livestock. When Samuel heard that Saul had disobeyed and plundered the livestock for self-gain, he informed Saul that God had rejected him as king. As Samuel turned to go, Saul seized hold of his garments and had torn off a piece; Samuel prophesied that the kingdom would likewise be torn from Saul. Samuel then killed Agag by himself. Samuel and Saul each returned home and never met again after these events.\nSaul and David.\nAfter Samuel told Saul that God had rejected him as king, David, a son of Jesse, from the tribe of Judah, entered the story: from this point on Saul's story is largely the account of his increasingly troubled relationship with David.\n\"a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is skillful in playing, a mighty man of valor, a man of war, prudent in speech, and a handsome person; and the Lord is with him\"\nWhen word of Saul's needs reached Jesse, he sent David, who had been looking after Jesse's flock, with gifts as a tribute, and David was appointed as Saul's armor bearer. With Jesse's permission he remained at the court, playing the harp to calm Saul during his troubled spells.\nSaul offered his elder daughter Merab as a wife to the now popular David, after his victory over Goliath, but David demurred. David distinguished himself in the Philistine wars. Upon David's return from battle, the women praised him in song:\n\"Saul has slain his thousands and David his tens of thousands\" \nimplying that David was the greater warrior. Saul feared David's growing popularity and henceforth viewed him as a rival to the throne.\nSaul's son Jonathan and David became close friends. Jonathan recognized David as the rightful king, and \"made a covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul.\" Jonathan even gave David his military clothes, symbolizing David's position as a successor to Saul.\nOn two occasions, Saul threw a spear at David while he was playing the harp for Saul. David became increasingly successful and Saul became increasingly resentful. Now Saul actively plotted against David. Saul offered his other daughter, Michal in marriage to David. David also initially rejected this offer, claiming he was too poor. Saul offered to accept a bride price of 100 Philistine foreskins, intending that David should die in the attempt. Instead, David obtained 200 foreskins and was consequently married to Michal. Jonathan arranged a short-lived reconciliation between Saul and David and for a while David served Saul \"as in times past\" until \"the distressing spirit from the Lord\" re-appeared. Saul sent assassins in the night, but Michal helped David escape, tricking them by placing a household idol in his bed. David fled to Jonathan, who arranged a meeting with his father. While dining with Saul, Jonathan explained David's absence, saying he had been called away to his brothers. But Saul noticed through the ruse and reprimanded Jonathan for protecting David, warning him that his love of David would cost him the kingdom, furiously throwing a spear at him. The next day, Jonathan met David and told him about Saul's intent. The two friends gave their goodbyes, and David fled into the countryside. Saul later had Michal married to another man.\nSaul was later informed by his head shepherd, Doeg the Edomite, that high priest Ahimelech assisted David, giving him the sword of Goliath, which had been kept at the temple at Nob. Doeg killed Ahimelech and eighty-five other priests. Then, Saul ordered the death of the entire population of Nob.\nDavid had left Nob by this point and had amassed some 300 dissatisfied men, including some outlaws. With these men David rescued the town of Keilah from a Philistine attack. Saul realized he could trap David and his men by laying the city to siege. David felt that the citizens of Keilah would betray him to Saul and fled to Ziph pursued by Saul. Saul hunted David in the vicinity of Ziph on two occasions:\nBattle of Gilboa and the death of King Saul.\nThe Philistines went to war again, assembling at Shunem, and Saul led his army to face them at Mount Gilboa. Before the battle he went to consult a medium or witch at Endor. The medium, unaware of his identity, reminded him that the king had made witchcraft a capital offence, but he assured her that Saul would not harm her. She conjured a spirit which appeared to be the prophet Samuel, and told him that God had fully rejected him, would no longer hear his prayers, had given the kingdom to David, and that the next day he would lose both the battle and his life. Saul collapsed in fear, and the medium restored him with food in anticipation of the next day's battle.\nSaul's death is described by the narrator (and also in 1 Chronicles 10) but a conflicting account was given by a young Amalekite. The defeated Israelites fled from the enemy and Saul asked his armour bearer to kill him, but the armour bearer refused because he was too scared, and so Saul fell upon his own sword. But the Amalekite told David he found Saul leaning on his spear after the battle and delivered the \"coup de gr\u00e2ce\" then took the Saul's crown and armband. David had the Amalekite put to death, advancing the theme that he would never kill the Lord's anointed king (cf. 1 Samuel 24, 26).\nThe victorious Philistines recovered Saul's body as well as those of his three sons who also died in the battle, decapitated them and display them on the wall of Beth-shan. They displayed Saul's armour in the temple of Ashtaroth (an Ascalonian temple of the Canaanites). But at night the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead retrieved the bodies for cremation and burial.\"And David sent messengers to the men of Yavesh-Gilad, and said to them: \u2018May you be blessed of Hashem, that you have shown this kindness to your lord, to Saul, and buried him.\u2019\u201d(). Later on, David took the bones of Saul and of his son Jonathan and buried them in Zela, in the tomb of his father. The account in 1 Chronicles summarises by stating that:\n\"Saul died for his unfaithfulness which he had committed against the Lord, because he did not keep the word of the Lord, and also because he consulted a medium for guidance\".\nBiblical criticism.\nThere are several textual or narrative issues in the text, including the aforementioned conflicting accounts of Saul's rise to kingship and his death, as well as plays on words, that biblical scholars have discussed.\nThe birth-narrative of the prophet Samuel is found at 1 Samuel 1:1\u201328. It describes how Samuel's mother Hannah requested a son from Yahweh, and dedicateed the child to God at the shrine of Shiloh. The passage makes extensive play with the root-elements of Saul's name, and ends with the phrase 'he is dedicated to Yahweh'. Hannah named the resulting son Samuel, giving as her explanation, 'because from God I requested him'. Samuel's name, however, can mean 'name of God', (or 'Heard of God' or 'Told of God') and the etymology and multiple references to the root of the name seems to fit Saul instead. The majority explanation for the discrepancy is that the narrative originally described the birth of Saul, and was given to Samuel to enhance the position of David and Samuel at the former king's expense.\nThe Bible's tone with regard to Saul changes over the course of the narrative, especially around the passage where David appears, midway through 1 Samuel. Before, Saul is presented in positive terms, but afterward his mode of ecstatic prophecy is suddenly described as fits of madness, his errors and disobedience to Samuel's instructions were stressed and he became a paranoiac. This may indicate that the David story is inserted from a source loyal to the House of David; David's lament over Saul in 2 Samuel 1 then serves an apologetic purpose, clearing David of the blame for Saul's death.\nIn the narrative of Saul's private anointing in 1 Samuel 9:1\u201310:16, Saul is not referred to as a king (\"melech\"), but rather as a \"leader\" or \"commander\" (\"nagid\"). Saul is only given the title \"king\" (\"melech\") at the public coronation ceremony at Gilgal.\nVarious authors have attempted to harmonize the two narratives regarding Saul's death. Josephus writes that Saul's attempted suicide was stalled because he was not able to run the sword through himself, and that he therefore asked the Amalekite to finish it. Later biblical criticism has posited that the story of Saul's death was redacted from various sources, although this view in turn has been criticized because it does not explain why the contradiction was left in by the redactors. But since 2 Samuel records only the Amalekite's report, and not the report of any other eyewitness, some scholars theorize that the Amalekite might have been lying to try to gain favor with David. In this view, 1 Samuel records what actually happened, while 2 Samuel records what the Amalekite \"claimed\" happened.\nClassical rabbinical views.\nTwo opposing views of Saul are found in classical rabbinical literature. One is based on the reverse logic that punishment is a proof of guilt, and therefore seeks to rob Saul of any halo which might surround him. The passage referring to Saul as \"a choice young man, and goodly\" is in this view interpreted as meaning that Saul was not good in every respect, but \"goodly\" only with respect to his personal appearance. According to this view, Saul is only a \"weak branch\", owing his kingship not to his own merits, but rather to his grandfather, who had been accustomed to light the streets for those who went to the beit midrash, and had received as his reward the promise that one of his grandsons should sit upon the throne.\nThe second view of Saul makes him appear in the most favourable light as man, as hero, and as king. In this view, it was on account of his modesty that he did not reveal the fact that he had been anointed king; and he was extraordinarily upright as well as perfectly just. Nor was there any one more pious than he; for when he ascended the throne he was as pure as a child, and had never committed sin. He was marvelously handsome; and the maidens who told him concerning Samuel talked so long with him to observe his beauty for longer. In war he was able to march 120 miles without rest. When commanded to smite Amalek, Saul said: \"For one found slain the Torah requires a sin offering; and here so many shall be slain. If the old have sinned, why should the young suffer; and if men have been guilty, why should the cattle be destroyed?\" It was this humaneness which cost him his crown. And while Saul was merciful to his enemies, he was strict with his own people; when he found out that Ahimelech, a kohen, had assisted David with finding food, Saul, in retaliation, killed the remaining 85 kohanim of Ahimelech's family and the rest of his hometown, Nob. The fact that he was merciful even to his enemies, being indulgent to rebels themselves, and frequently waiving the homage due to him, was incredible as well as deceiving. But if his mercy toward a foe was a sin, it was his only one; it was his misfortune that it was reckoned against him, while David (who had committed many sins) was so favored that it was not remembered to his injury. In some respects Saul was superior to David, e.g., in having only one concubine (Rizpah), while David had many. Saul expended his own substance for the war, and although he knew that he and his sons would fall in battle, he nevertheless went forward, while David heeded the wish of his soldiers not to go to war in person.\nAccording to the Rabbis, Saul followed the rules of ritual impurity prescribed for the sacrifice, and taught the people how they should slaughter cattle. As a reward for this, God himself gave Saul a sword on the day of battle, since no other sword suitable for him was found. Saul's attitude toward David was excused by arguing that his courtiers were all tale-bearers, and slandered David to him; and in like manner he was incited by Doeg against the priests of Nob\u2014this act was forgiven him, however, and a heavenly voice (\"bat kol\") was heard, proclaiming: \"Saul is the chosen one of God\". His anger at the Gibeonites was not personal hatred, but was induced by zeal for the welfare of Israel. The fact that he made his daughter remarry finds its explanation in his (Saul's) view that her betrothal to David had been gained by false pretenses, and was therefore invalid. During the lifetime of Saul there was no idolatry in Israel. The famine in the reign of David, seemingly blamed on Saul, was in fact the people's fault, for not according Saul the proper honours at his burial. In Sheol, Samuel reveals to Saul that in the next world, Saul would dwell with Samuel, which is a proof that all has been forgiven him by God.\nIn Islam.\nIn the Quran, the character Talut () is traditionally identified with king Saul.\nMuslims believe that (as in the Bible) he was the commander of Israel. According to the Qur'an, Talut was chosen by the Prophet Samuel (not mentioned by name explicitly, but rather as \"a Prophet\" of the Israelites) after being asked by the people of Israel for a King to lead them into war. The Israelites criticized Samuel for appointing Talut, lacking respect for Talut because he was not wealthy. Samuel rebuked the people for this and told them that Talut was more favored than they were. Talut led the Israelites to victory over the army of Goliath, who was killed by David. Talut is considered a divinely appointed king.\nName.\nThe name has uncertain etymology. Unlike some other Quranic figures, the Arabic name is not similar to the Hebrew name (\"Sha'ul\"). According to Muslim exegetes, the name means 'tall' (from the Arabic ) and refers to the extraordinary stature of Saul, which would be consistent with the Biblical account. In explanation of the name, exegetes such as Tha'labi hold that at this time, the future King of Israel was to be recognised by his height; Samuel set up a measure, but no one in Israel reached its height except \u1e6c\u0101l\u016bt (Saul).\nSaul as the King of Israel.\nIn the Qur'an, Israelites demanded a King after the time of Moses. God appointed Talut as their King. Saul was distinguished by the greatness of his knowledge and of his physique; it was a sign of his role as King that God brought back the Ark of the Covenant for Israel. Talut tested his people at a river; whoever drank from it would not follow him in battle excepting one who takes [from it] in the hollow of his hand. Many drank but only the faithful ventured on. In the battle, however, David slew Goliath and was made the subsequent King of Israel.\nThe Qur'anic account differs from the Biblical account (if Saul is assumed to be Talut) in that in the Bible the sacred Ark was returned to Israel before Saul's accession, and the test by drinking water is made in the Hebrew Bible not by Saul but by Gideon.\nHistoricity.\nThe historicity of Saul's kingdom is not universally accepted and there is insufficient extra-biblical evidence to verify if the biblical account reflects historical reality. While several scholars believe that the existence of the United Monarchy is corroborated by archaeological evidence, although with considerable theological exaggerations, others, like Israel Finkelstein, believe it to be a late ideological construct.\nIn the \"Jewish Study Bible\" (2014), Oded Lipschits states the concept of the United Monarchy should be abandoned, while Aren Maeir highlights the lack of evidence about the United Monarchy. However, in his books \"Beyond the Texts\" (2018) and \"Has Archeology Buried the Bible?\" (2020) William G. Dever has defended the historicity of the United Monarchy, maintaining that the reigns of Saul, David and Solomon are \"reasonably well attested\". Similar arguments were advanced by Amihai Mazar in a 2013 essay, which points toward recent archaeological evidence emerging from excavation sites in Jerusalem by Eilat Mazar and in Khirbet Qeiyafa by Yosef Garfinkel. In their book, \"The Bible's First Kings\" (2025), Avraham Faust and Zev Farber have also defended the existence of the United Monarchy, arguing that archaeological evidence and early biblical traditions attest to its emergence in the 11th-10th centuries BCE. Archeology seems to confirm that until about 1000\u00a0BCE, the end of Iron Age I, Israelite society was essentially a society of farmers and stockbreeders, without any truly centralized organization and administration.\nPsychological analyses.\nAccounts of Saul's behavior have made him a popular subject for speculation among modern psychiatrists. George Stein views the passages depicting Saul's ecstatic episodes as suggesting that he may have suffered from mania. Martin Huisman sees the story of Saul as illustrative of the role of stress as a factor in depression. Liubov Ben-Noun of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, believes that passages referring to King Saul's disturbed behavior indicate he was afflicted by a mental disorder, and lists a number of possible conditions. However, Christopher C. H. Cook of the Department of Theology and Religion, Durham University, UK recommends caution in offering any diagnoses in relation to people who lived millennia ago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28331", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28331", "title": "Stubs", "text": ""}
{"id": "28333", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28333", "title": "Samaria", "text": "Region of ancient Israel\nSamaria (), the Hellenized\u00a0form of\u00a0the Hebrew name Shomron (), is used as a historical and biblical name for the central region of the Land of Israel. It is bordered by Judea to the south and Galilee to the north. The region is known in Arabic under two names, Samirah (, \"as-S\u0101mira\"), and Mount Nablus (\u062c\u064e\u0628\u064e\u0644 \u0646\u064e\u0627\u0628\u064f\u0644\u064f\u0633, \"Jabal N\u0101bulus\").\nThe first-century historian Josephus set the Mediterranean Sea as its limit to the west, and the Jordan River as its limit to the east. Its territory largely corresponds to the biblical allotments of the tribe of Ephraim and the western half of Manasseh. It includes most of the region of the ancient Kingdom of Israel, which was north of the Kingdom of Judah. The border between Samaria and Judea, while historically fluid, is set at the latitude of Ramallah.\nThe name \"Samaria\" is derived from the ancient city of Samaria, capital of the northern Kingdom of Israel. The name Samaria likely began being used for the entire kingdom not long after the town of Samaria had become Israel's capital, but it is first documented after its conquest by the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which incorporated the land into the province of Samerina.\nSamaria was used to describe the northern midsection of the land in the UN Partition Plan for Palestine in 1947. It became the administrative term in 1967, when the West Bank was defined by Israeli officials as the Judea and Samaria Area, of which the entire area north of the Jerusalem District is termed as Samaria. In 1988, Jordan ceded its claim of the area to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). In 1994, control of Areas 'A' (full civil and security control by the Palestinian Authority) and 'B' (Palestinian civil control and joint Israeli\u2013Palestinian security control) were transferred by Israel to the Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian Authority and the international community do not recognize the term \"Samaria\"; in modern times, the territory is generally known as part of the West Bank.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Hebrew name \"Shomron\" () is derived from the individual (or clan) \"Shemer\" (), from whom King Omri (ruled 880s\u2013870s BCE) purchased the hill on which he built his new capital city of \"Shomron\".\nThe fact that the mountain was called Shomeron when Omri bought it may indicate that the correct etymology of the name is to be found more directly in the Semitic root for \"guard\", hence its initial meaning would have been \"watch mountain\". In the earlier cuneiform inscriptions, Samaria is designated under the name of \"Bet \u1e24umri\" (\"the house of Omri\"); but in those of Tiglath-Pileser III (ruled 745\u2013727 BCE) and later it is called Samirin, after its Aramaic name, Shamerayin.\nHistorical boundaries.\nNorthern kingdom to Hellenistic period.\nIn Nelson's Encyclopaedia (1906\u20131934), the Samaria region in the three centuries following the fall of the northern kingdom of Israel, i.e. during the Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian periods, is described as a \"province\" that \"reached from the [Mediterranean] sea to the Jordan Valley\".\nRoman-period definition.\nThe classical Roman-Jewish historian Josephus wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring the first century, the boundary between Samaria and Judea passed eastward of Antipatris, along the deep valley which had Beth Rima (now Bani Zeid al-Gharbia) and Beth Laban (today's al-Lubban al-Gharbi) on its southern, Judean bank; then it passed Anuath and Borceos, identified by Charles William Wilson (1836\u20131905) as the ruins of 'Aina and Khirbet Berkit; and reached the Jordan Valley north of Acrabbim and Sartaba. Tall Asur also stands at that boundary.\nGeography.\nThe area known as the hills of Samaria is bounded by the Jezreel Valley(north); by the Jordan Rift Valley (east); by the Carmel Ridge (northwest); by the Sharon plain (west); and by the Jerusalem mountains (south).\nThe Samarian hills are not very high, seldom reaching the height of over . Samaria's climate is more hospitable than the climate further south.\nThere is no clear division between the mountains of southern Samaria and northern Judea.\nHistory.\nOver time, the region has been controlled by numerous different civilizations, including Canaanites, Israelites, Neo-Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Seleucids, Hasmoneans, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Crusaders, and Ottoman Turks.\nIsraelite tribes and kingdoms.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Israelites captured the region known as Samaria from the Canaanites and assigned it to the Tribe of Joseph. The southern part of Samaria was then known as Mount Ephraim. After the death of King Solomon (c. 931 BC), the northern tribes, including Ephraim and Menashe, separated themselves politically from the southern tribes and established the separate Kingdom of Israel. Initially its capital was Tirzah until the time of King Omri (c. 884 BC), who built the city of Samaria and made it his capital. Samaria functioned as the capital of the Kingdom of Israel (the \"Northern Kingdom\") until its fall to the Assyrians in the 720s. Hebrew prophets condemned Samaria for its \"ivory houses\" and luxury palaces displaying pagan riches.\nThe archaeological record suggests that Samaria experienced significant settlement growth in Iron Age II (from c. 950 BC). Archaeologists estimate that there were 400 sites, up from 300 during the previous Iron Age I (c. 1200 BC onwards). The people dwelt on tells, in small villages, farms, and forts, and in the cities of Shechem, Samaria and Tirzah in northern Samaria. Zertal estimated that about 52,000 people inhabited the Manasseh Hill in northern Samaria prior to the Assyrian deportations. According to botanists, the majority of Samaria's forests were torn down during the Iron Age II, and were replaced by plantations and agricultural fields. Since then, few oak forests have grown in the region.\nAssyrian period.\nIn the 720s, the conquest of Samaria by Shalmaneser V of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which culminated in the three-year siege of the capital city of Samaria, saw the territory annexed as the Assyrian province of Samerina. The siege has been tentatively dated to 725 or 724 BC, with its resolution in 722 BC, near the end of Shalmaneser's reign. The first documented mention of the province of Samerina is from the reign of Shalmaneser V's successor Sargon II. This is also the first documented instance where a name derived from \"Samaria\", the capital city, was used for the entire region, although it is thought likely that this practice was already in place.\nFollowing the Assyrian conquest, Sargon II claimed in Assyrian records to have deported 27,280 people to various places throughout the empire, mainly to Guzana in the Assyrian heartland, as well as to the cities of the Medes in the eastern part of the empire (modern-day Iran). The deportations were part of a standard resettlement policy of the Neo-Assyrian Empire to deal with defeated enemy peoples. The resettled people were generally treated well as valued members of the empire and transported together with their families and belongings. At the same time, people from other parts of the empire were resettled in the depopulated Samerina. The resettlement is also called the Assyrian captivity in Jewish history and provides the basis for the narrative of the Ten Lost Tribes.\nBabylonian and Persian periods.\nAccording to many scholars, archaeological excavations at Mount Gerizim indicate that a Samaritan temple was built there in the first half of the 5th century BCE. The date of the schism between Samaritans and Jews is unknown. Much of the anti-Samaritan polemic in the Hebrew Bible and extra-biblical texts (such as Josephus) originate from this point and on.\nHellenistic period.\nDuring the Hellenistic period, Samaria was largely divided between a Hellenizing faction based around the town of Samaria and a pious faction in Shechem and surrounding rural areas, led by the High Priest.\nSamaria was a largely autonomous province nominally dependent on the Seleucid Empire. However, the province gradually declined as the Maccabean movement and Hasmonean Judea grew stronger. The transfer of three districts of Samaria\u2014 Ephraim, Lod and Ramathaim\u2014under the control of Judea in 145 BCE as part of an agreement between Jonathan Apphus and Demetrius II is one indication of this decline. Around 110 BCE, the decline of Hellenistic Samaria was complete, when the Jewish Hasmonean ruler John Hyrcanus destroyed the cities of Samaria and Shechem, as well as the city and temple on Mount Gerizim. Only a few stone remnants of the Samaritan temple exist today.\nRoman period.\nIn 6 CE, Samaria became part of the Roman province of Iudaea, following the death of King Herod the Great.\nSouthern Samaria reached a peak in settlement during the early Roman period (63 BCE\u201370 CE), partly as a result of the Hasmonean dynasty's settlement efforts. The impact of the Jewish\u2013Roman wars is archaeologically evident in Jewish-inhabited areas of southern Samaria, as many sites were destroyed and left abandoned for extended periods of time. After the First Jewish-Roman War, the Jewish population of the area decreased by around 50%, whereas after the Bar Kokhba revolt, it was completely wiped out in many areas. According to Klein, the Roman authorities replaced the Jews with a population from the nearby provinces of Syria, Phoenicia, and Arabia. An apparent new wave of settlement growth in southern Samaria, most likely by non-Jews, can be traced back to the late Roman and Byzantine eras.\nNew Testament references.\nThe New Testament mentions Samaria in Luke 17:11\u20132, in the miraculous healing of the ten lepers, which took place on the border of Samaria and Galilee. John 4:1-26 records Jesus' encounter at Jacob's Well with the woman of Sychar, in which he declares himself to be the Messiah. In Acts 8:1, it is recorded that the early community of disciples of Jesus began to be persecuted in Jerusalem and were 'scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria'. Philip went down to the city of Samaria and preached and healed the sick there. In the time of Jesus, \"Iudaea\" of the Romans was divided into the toparchies of Judea, Samaria, Galilee and the Paralia. Samaria occupied the centre of \"Iudaea\". (\"Iudaea\" was later renamed \"Syria Palaestina\" in 135, following the Bar Kokhba revolt.) In the Talmud, Samaria is called the \"land of the Cuthim\".\nByzantine period.\nFollowing the bloody suppression of the Samaritan Revolts (mostly in 525 CE and 555 CE) against the Byzantine Empire, which resulted in death, displacement, and conversion to Christianity, the Samaritan population dramatically decreased. In the central parts of Samaria, the vacuum left by departing Samaritans was filled by nomads who gradually became sedentarized.\nThe Byzantine period is considered the peak of settlement in Samaria, as in other regions of the country. Based on historical sources and archeological data, the Manasseh Hill surveyors concluded that Samaria's population during the Byzantine period was composed of Samaritans, Christians, and a minority of Jews. The Samaritan population was mainly concentrated in the valleys of Nablus and to the north as far as Jenin and Kfar Othenai; they did not settle south of the Nablus-Qalqiliya line. Christianity slowly made its way into Samaria, even after the Samaritan revolts. With the exception of Neapolis, Sebastia, and a small cluster of monasteries in central and northern Samaria, most of the population of the rural areas remained non-Christian. In southwestern Samaria, a significant concentration of churches and monasteries was discovered, with some of them built on top of citadels from the late Roman period. Magen raised the hypothesis that many of these were used by Christian pilgrims, and filled an empty space in the region whose Jewish population was wiped out in the Jewish\u2013Roman wars.\nEarly Muslim, Crusader, Mamluk and Ottoman periods.\nFollowing the Muslim conquest of the Levant, and throughout the early Islamic period, Samaria underwent a process of Islamization as a result of waves of conversion among the remaining Samaritan population, along with the migration of Muslims into the area. Evidence implies that a large number of Samaritans converted under Abbasid and Tulunid rule, as a result of droughts, earthquakes, religious persecution, high taxes, and anarchy. By the mid-Middle Ages, the Jewish writer and explorer Benjamin of Tudela estimated that only around 1,900 Samaritans remained in Palestine and Syria.\nOttoman Period.\nDuring the Ottoman Period, the northern part of Samaria belonged to the\nTurabay Emirate (1517\u20131683), which encompassed also the Jezreel Valley, Haifa, Jenin, Beit She'an Valley, northern Jabal Nablus, Bilad al-Ruha/Ramot Menashe, and the northern part of the Sharon plain. The areas south of Jenin, including Nablus itself and its hinterland up to the Yarkon River, formed a separate district called the District of Nablus.\nBritish Mandate.\nDuring the Great War, Palestine was wrested by the armies of the British Empire from the Ottoman Empire and in the aftermath of the war it was entrusted to the United Kingdom to administer as a League of Nations mandated territory Samaria was the name of one of the administrative districts of Palestine for part of this period. The 1947 UN partition plan called for the Arab state to consist of several parts, the largest of which was described as \"the hill country of Samaria and Judea.\"\nJordanian period.\nAs a result of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, most of the territory was unilaterally incorporated as Jordanian-controlled territory, and was administered as part of the West Bank (west of the Jordan river).\nIsraeli administration.\nThe Jordanian-held West Bank was captured and has been occupied by Israel since the 1967 Six-Day War. Jordan ceded its claims in the West Bank (except for certain prerogatives in Jerusalem) to the PLO in November 1988, later confirmed by the Israel\u2013Jordan Treaty of Peace of 1994. In the 1994 Oslo accords, the Palestinian Authority was established and given responsibility for the administration over some of the territory of West Bank (Areas 'A' and 'B').\nSamaria is one of several standard statistical districts utilized by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. \"The Israeli CBS also collects statistics on the rest of the West Bank and the Gaza District. It has produced various basic statistical series on the territories, dealing with population, employment, wages, external trade, national accounts, and various other topics.\" The Palestinian Authority however use Nablus, Jenin, Tulkarm, Qalqilya, Salfit, Ramallah and Tubas governorates as administrative centers for the same region.\nThe Shomron Regional Council is the local municipal government that administers the smaller Israeli towns (settlements) throughout the area. The council is a member of the network of regional municipalities spread throughout Israel. Elections for the head of the council are held every five years by Israel's ministry of interior, all residents over age 17 are eligible to vote. In special elections held in August 2015 Yossi Dagan was elected as head of the Shomron Regional Council.\nIsraeli settlements in the West Bank are considered by most in the international community to be illegal under international law, but others including the United States and Israeli governments dispute this. In September 2016, the Town Board of the American Town of Hempstead in the State of New York, led by Councilman Bruce Blakeman entered into a partnership agreement with the Shomron Regional Council, led by Yossi Dagan, as part of an anti-Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions campaign.\nArchaeological sites.\nAncient city of Samaria/Sebaste.\nThe ancient site of Samaria-Sebaste covers the hillside overlooking the West Bank village of Sebastia on the eastern slope of the hill. Remains have been found from the Canaanite, Israelite, Hellenistic, Roman (including Herodian) and Byzantine periods.\nArchaeological finds from Roman-era Sebaste, a site that was rebuilt and renamed by Herod the Great in 30 BC, include a colonnaded street, a temple-lined acropolis, and a lower city, where John the Baptist is believed to have been buried.\nThe Harvard excavation of Samaria, which began in 1908, was headed by Egyptologist George Andrew Reisner. The findings included Hebrew, Aramaic, cuneiform and Greek inscriptions, as well as pottery remains, coins, sculpture, figurines, scarabs and seals, faience, amulets, beads and glass. The joint British-American-Hebrew University excavation continued under John Winter Crowfoot in 1931\u201335, during which time some of the chronology issues were resolved. The round towers lining the acropolis were found to be Hellenistic, the street of columns was dated to the 3\u20134th century, and 70 inscribed potsherds were dated to the early 8th century.\nIn 1908\u20131935, remains of luxury furniture made of wood and ivory were discovered in Samaria, representing the Levant's most important collection of ivory carvings from the early first millennium BC. Despite theories of their Phoenician origin, some of the letters serving as fitter's marks are in Hebrew.\nAs of 1999 three series of coins have been found that confirm Sinuballat was a governor of Samaria. Sinuballat is best known as an adversary of Nehemiah from the Book of Nehemiah where he is said to have sided with Tobiah the Ammonite and Geshem the Arabian. All three coins feature a warship on the front, likely derived from earlier Sidonian coins. The reverse side depicts the Persian King in his kandys robe facing down a lion that is standing on its hind legs.\nSamaritans.\nThe Samaritans (Hebrew: Shomronim) are an ethnoreligious group named after and descended from ancient Semitic inhabitants of Samaria, since the Assyrian exile of the Israelites, according to and first-century historian Josephus. Religiously, the Samaritans are adherents of Samaritanism, an Abrahamic religion closely related to Judaism. Based on the Samaritan Torah, Samaritans claim their worship is the true religion of the ancient Israelites prior to the Babylonian exile, preserved by those who remained behind. Their temple was built at Mount Gerizim in the middle of the 5th century BCE, and was destroyed under the Hasmonean king John Hyrcanus of Judea in 110 BCE, although their descendants still worship among its ruins. The antagonism between Samaritans and Jews is important in understanding the Bible's New Testament stories of the \"Samaritan woman at the well\" and \"Parable of the Good Samaritan\". The modern Samaritans, however, see themselves as co-equals in inheritance to the Israelite lineage through Torah, as do the Jews, and are not antagonistic to Jews in modern times.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe geographical region lies on the Irano-Turanian border, and its slopes support vegetation grown in that broad region. Typical for this region are \"maquis\", the dense scrub vegetation consisting of hardy evergreen shrubs and small trees, characteristic of coastal regions in the Mediterranean and which, in this area, are found on the cliffs' step-crevices. The kermes oak (\"Quercus coccifera\") is common. \nIn contrast to the Galilee and the Judean Mountains, there are very few remnants of natural vegetation in the Samaria Mountains. Large areas in the south and west of Samaria and in the valleys have been cultivated for many generations as agricultural land and are planted mainly with olive, fig, almond and pomegranate trees; the areas in the valleys are used for arable land or vegetable crops. Only on the edges of the fields and in places that have been regenerated and where damaging the plant-life is prohibited by law have remnants of natural vegetation been preserved.\nThe wildlife of Samaria, as in other regions of the country, consists of populations that invaded the general area at different times and adapted to the conditions prevailing in the area. Hunting (with the introduction of modern firearms in the 20th-century) and extensive farming have been the principal causes for a decline in the area's natural wildlife. The animals that dominate the general area have their origins in the Mediterranean basin and in Europe, such as the badger, the wild boar, the red fox, the hedgehog, the field mouse, and the mole (among mammals).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28334", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28334", "title": "Sennacherib", "text": "King of Assyria\nSennacherib ( or , meaning \"S\u00een has replaced the brothers\") was the king of the Neo-Assyrian Empire from 705BC until his assassination in 681BC. The second king of the Sargonid dynasty, Sennacherib is one of the most famous Assyrian kings for the role he plays in the Hebrew Bible, which describes his campaign in the Levant. Other events of his reign include his destruction of the city of Babylon in 689BC and his renovation and expansion of the last great Assyrian capital, Nineveh.\nAlthough Sennacherib was one of the most powerful and wide-ranging Assyrian kings, he faced considerable difficulty in controlling Babylonia, which formed the southern portion of his empire. Many of Sennacherib's Babylonian troubles stemmed from the Chaldean tribal chief Marduk-apla-iddina\u00a0II, who had been Babylon's king until Sennacherib's father defeated him. Shortly after Sennacherib inherited the throne in 705BC, Marduk-apla-iddina retook Babylon and allied with the Elamites. Though Sennacherib reclaimed the south in 700BC, Marduk-apla-iddina continued to trouble him, probably instigating Assyrian vassals in the Levant to rebel, leading to the Levantine War of 701\u00a0BC, and himself warring against Bel-ibni, Sennacherib's vassal king in Babylonia.\nAfter the Babylonians and Elamites captured and executed Sennacherib's eldest son A\u0161\u0161ur-n\u0101din-\u0161umi, whom Sennacherib had proclaimed as his new vassal king in Babylon, Sennacherib campaigned in both regions, subduing Elam. Because Babylon, well within his own territory, had been the target of most of his military campaigns and had caused the death of his son, he destroyed the city in 689BC.\nIn the Levantine War, the states in the southern Levant, especially the Kingdom of Judah under King Hezekiah, were not subdued as easily as those in the north. The Assyrians thus invaded Judah. Though the biblical narrative holds that divine intervention by an angel ended the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem by destroying the Assyrian army, an outright defeat is unlikely as Hezekiah submitted to Sennacherib at the end of the campaign. Contemporary records, even those written by Assyria's enemies, do not mention the Assyrians being defeated at Jerusalem.\nSennacherib transferred the capital of Assyria to Nineveh, where he had spent most of his time as crown prince. To transform Nineveh into a capital worthy of his empire, he launched one of the most ambitious building projects in ancient history. He expanded the size of the city and constructed great city walls, numerous temples and a royal garden. His most famous work in the city is the Southwest Palace, which Sennacherib named his \"Palace without Rival\".\nAfter the death of his eldest son and crown prince A\u0161\u0161ur-n\u0101din-\u0161umi, Sennacherib originally designated his second son Arda-Mulissu heir. He later replaced him with a younger son, Esarhaddon, in 684BC, for unknown reasons. Sennacherib ignored Arda-Mulissu's repeated appeals to be reinstated as heir, and in 681BC, Arda-Mulissu and his brother Nabu-shar-usur murdered Sennacherib, hoping to seize power for themselves. Babylonia and the Levant welcomed his death as divine punishment, while the Assyrian heartland probably reacted with resentment and horror. Arda-Mulissu's coronation was postponed, and Esarhaddon raised an army and seized Nineveh, installing himself as king as intended by Sennacherib.\nBackground.\nEarly life.\nSennacherib was the son and successor of the Neo-Assyrian king Sargon\u00a0II, who had reigned as king of Assyria from 722 to 705\u00a0BC and as king of Babylon from 710 to 705\u00a0BC. The identity of Sennacherib's mother is uncertain. Historically, the most popular view has been that Sennacherib was the son of Sargon's wife Ataliya, although this is now considered unlikely. To have been Sennacherib's mother, Ataliya would have had to be born around the year 760\u00a0BC, at the latest, and lived to at least 692\u00a0BC, as a \"queen mother\" is attested in that year, but Ataliya's grave at Nimrud, which was discovered in the 1980s, indicates she was 35 years old at most when she died. The Assyriologist Josette Elayi considers it more plausible Sennacherib's mother was another of Sargon's wives, Ra'\u012bm\u00e2; a stele from Assur (once the capital of Assyria), discovered in 1913, specifically refers to her as the \"mother of Sennacherib\". Ra'\u012bm\u00e2's existence is a recent discovery, based on a 2014 reading of the inscription on the stele. Sargon claimed he was himself the son of the earlier king Tiglath-Pileser\u00a0III, but this is uncertain as Sargon usurped the throne from Tiglath-Pileser's other son Shalmaneser\u00a0V.\nSennacherib was probably born c. 745\u00a0BC in Nimrud. If Sargon was the son of Tiglath-Pileser and not a non-dynastic usurper, Sennacherib would have grown up in the royal palace at Nimrud and spent most of his youth there. Sargon continued to live in Nimrud long after he had become king, leaving the city in 710\u00a0BC to reside at Babylon, and later at his new capital, Dur-Sharrukin, in 706\u00a0BC. By the time Sargon moved to Babylon, Sennacherib, who served as the crown prince and designated heir, had already left Nimrud, living in a residence at Nineveh. Nineveh had been the designated seat of the Assyrian crown prince since the reign of Tiglath-Pileser. As crown prince, Sennacherib also owned an estate at Tarbisu. The royal educator, Hunn\u00ee, would have educated Sennacherib and his siblings. They probably received a scribal education, learning arithmetic and how to read and write in Sumerian and Akkadian.\nSennacherib had several brothers and at least one sister. In addition to the older brothers who died before his birth, Sennacherib had a number of younger brothers, some of whom are mentioned as being alive as late as 670\u00a0BC, then in the service of Sennacherib's son and successor Esarhaddon. Sennacherib's only known sister, Ahat-abisha, was married off to Ambaris, the king of Tabal, but probably returned to Assyria after Sargon's first successful campaign against Tabal.\nSennacherib's name, \"S\u00een-a\u1e25\u1e25\u0113-er\u012bba\", means \"S\u00een (the moon-god) has replaced the brothers\" in Akkadian. The name probably derives from Sennacherib not being Sargon's first son, but all his older brothers being dead by the time he was born. In Hebrew, his name was rendered as \"Sn\u1e25ryb\" and in Aramaic it was \"\u0160n\u1e25\u2019ryb\". According to a 670\u00a0BC document, it was illegal to give the name Sennacherib (then the former king) to a commoner in Assyria, as it was considered sacrilege.\nSennacherib as crown prince.\nAs crown prince, Sennacherib exercised royal power with his father, or alone as a substitute while Sargon was away campaigning. During Sargon's longer absences from the Assyrian heartland, Sennacherib's residence would have served as the center of government in the Neo-Assyrian Empire, with the crown prince taking on significant administrative and political responsibilities. The vast responsibilities entrusted to Sennacherib suggests a certain degree of trust between the king and the crown prince. In reliefs depicting both Sargon and Sennacherib, they are portrayed in discussion, appearing almost as equals. As regent, Sennacherib's primary duty was to maintain relations with Assyrian governors and generals and oversee the empire's vast military intelligence network. Sennacherib oversaw domestic affairs and often informed Sargon of the progress being made on building projects throughout the empire. Sargon also assigned him to the reception and distribution of audience gifts and tribute. After distributing such financial resources, Sennacherib sent letters to his father to inform him of his decisions.\nA letter to his father indicates that Sennacherib respected him and that they were on friendly terms. He never disobeyed his father, and his letters indicate he knew Sargon well and wanted to please him. For unknown reasons, Sargon never took him on his military campaigns. Elayi believes that Sennacherib may have resented his father for this as he missed out on the glory attached to military victories. In any event, Sennacherib never took action against Sargon or attempted to usurp the throne despite being more than old enough to become king himself.\nAssyria and Babylonia.\nBy the time Sennacherib became king, the Neo-Assyrian Empire had been the dominant power in the Near East for over thirty years, chiefly due to its well-trained and large army, superior to that of any other contemporary kingdom. Though Babylonia to the south had also once been a large kingdom, it was typically weaker than its northern neighbor during this period, due to internal divisions and the lack of a well-organized army. The population of Babylonia was divided into various ethnic groups with different priorities and ideals. Though old native Babylonians ruled most of the cities, such as Kish, Ur, Uruk, Borsippa, Nippur, and Babylon itself, Chaldean tribes led by chieftains who often squabbled with each other dominated most of the southernmost land. The Arameans lived on the fringes of settled land and were notorious for plundering surrounding territories. Because of the infighting of these three major groups, Babylonia often represented an appealing target for Assyrian campaigns. The two kingdoms had competed since the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the 14th century BC, and in the 8th century BC, the Assyrians consistently gained the upper hand. Babylon's internal and external weakness led to its conquest by the Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III in 729\u00a0BC.\nDuring the expansion of Assyria into a major empire, the Assyrians had conquered various neighboring kingdoms, either annexing them as Assyrian provinces or turning them into vassal states. Because the Assyrians venerated the long history and culture of Babylon, it was preserved as a full kingdom, either ruled by an appointed client king, or by the Assyrian king in a personal union. The relationship between Assyria and Babylonia was similar to the relationship between Greece and Rome in later centuries; much of Assyria's culture, texts and traditions had been imported from the south. Assyria and Babylonia also shared the same language (Akkadian). The relationship between Assyria and Babylon was emotional in a sense; Neo-Assyrian inscriptions implicitly gender the two countries, calling Assyria the metaphorical \"husband\" and Babylon its \"wife\". In the words of the Assyriologist Eckart Frahm, \"the Assyrians were in love with Babylon, but also wished to dominate her\". Though Babylon was respected as the well-spring of civilization, it was expected to remain passive in political matters, something that Assyria's \"Babylonian bride\" repeatedly refused to be.\nReign.\nDeath of Sargon II and succession.\nIn 705\u00a0BC, Sargon, probably in his sixties, led the Assyrian army on a campaign against King Gurd\u00ee of Tabal in central Anatolia. The campaign was disastrous, resulting in the defeat of the Assyrian army and the death of Sargon, whose corpse the Anatolians carried off. Sargon's death made the defeat significantly worse because the Assyrians believed the gods had punished him for some major past misdeed. In Mesopotamian mythology, the afterlife suffered by those who died in battle and were not buried was terrible, being doomed to suffer like beggars for eternity. Sennacherib was about 35 years old when he ascended to the Assyrian throne in August of 705\u00a0BC. He had a great deal of experience with how to rule the empire because of his long tenure as crown prince. His reaction to his father's fate was to distance himself from Sargon. Frahm characterized Sennacherib's reaction as \"one of almost complete denial\", writing that Sennacherib \"apparently felt unable to acknowledge and mentally deal with what had happened to Sargon\". Sennacherib immediately abandoned Sargon's great new capital city, Dur-Sharrukin, and moved the capital to Nineveh instead. One of Sennacherib's first actions as king was to rebuild a temple dedicated to the god Nergal, associated with death, disaster and war, at the city of Tarbisu.\nEven with this public denial in mind, Sennacherib was superstitious and spent a great deal of time asking his diviners what kind of sin Sargon could have committed to suffer the fate that he had, perhaps considering the possibility that he had offended Babylon's deities by taking control of the city. A text, though probably written after Sennacherib's death, says he proclaimed he was investigating the nature of a \"sin\" committed by his father. A minor 704\u00a0BC campaign (unmentioned in Sennacherib's later historical accounts), led by Sennacherib's magnates rather than the king himself, was sent against Gurd\u00ee in Tabal to avenge Sargon. Sennacherib spent much time and effort to rid the empire of Sargon's imagery. Raising the level of the courtyard made images that Sargon had created at the temple in Assur invisible. When Sargon's wife Ataliya died, she was buried hastily and in the same coffin as another woman, the queen of the previous king Tiglath-Pileser. Sargon is never mentioned in Sennacherib's inscriptions.\nFirst Babylonian campaign.\nSargon\u00a0II's death in the battle and the disappearance of his body inspired rebellions across the Assyrian Empire. Sargon had ruled Babylonia since 710\u00a0BC, when he defeated the Chaldean tribal chief Marduk-apla-iddina\u00a0II, who had taken control of the south in the aftermath of the death of Sargon's predecessor Shalmaneser\u00a0V in 722\u00a0BC. Like his immediate predecessors, Sennacherib took the ruling titles of both Assyria and Babylonia when he became king, but his reign in Babylonia was less stable. Unlike Sargon and previous Babylonian rulers, who had proclaimed themselves as \"shakkanakku\" (viceroys) of Babylon, in reverence for the city's deity Marduk (who was considered Babylon's formal \"king\"), Sennacherib explicitly proclaimed himself as Babylon's king. Furthermore, he did not \"take the hand\" of the Statue of Marduk, the physical representation of the deity, and thus did not honor the god by undergoing the traditional Babylonian coronation ritual.\nIn angry response to this disrespect, revolts a month apart in 704 or 703\u00a0BC overthrew Sennacherib's rule in the south. First, a Babylonian by the name of Marduk-zakir-shumi\u00a0II took the throne, but Marduk-apla-iddina, the same Chaldean warlord who had seized control of the city once before and had warred against Sennacherib's father, deposed him after just two or four weeks. Marduk-apla-iddina rallied large portions of Babylonia's people to fight for him, both the urban Babylonians and the tribal Chaldeans, and he also enlisted troops from the neighboring civilization of Elam, in modern-day south-western Iran. Though assembling all these forces took time, Sennacherib reacted slowly to these developments, which allowed Marduk-apla-iddina to station large contingents at the cities of Kutha and Kish.\nPortions of the Assyrian army were away in Tabal in 704\u00a0BC. Because Sennacherib might have considered a two-front war too risky, Marduk-apla-iddina was left unchallenged for several months. In 703\u00a0BC, after the Tabal expedition had been completed, Sennacherib gathered the Assyrian army at Assur, often used as a mustering spot for campaigns against the south. The Assyrian army, led by Sennacherib's chief commander, launched an unsuccessful attack on the coalition forces near the city of Kish, bolstering the legitimacy of the coalition. However, Sennacherib also realized that the anti-Assyrian forces were divided and led his entire army to engage and destroy the portion of the army encamped at Kutha. Thereafter, he moved to attack the contingent at Kish, winning this second battle as well. Fearing for his life, Marduk-apla-iddina had already fled the battlefield. Sennacherib's inscriptions state that among the captives taken after the victory was a stepson of Marduk-apla-iddina and brother of an Arab queen, Yatie, who had joined the coalition.\nSennacherib then marched on Babylon. As the Assyrians appeared on the horizon, Babylon opened its gates to him, surrendering without a fight. The city was reprimanded, suffering a minor sack, though its citizens were unharmed. After a brief period of rest in Babylon, Sennacherib and the Assyrian army then moved systematically through southern Babylonia, where there was still organized resistance, pacifying both the tribal areas and the major cities. Sennacherib's inscriptions state that over two hundred thousand prisoners were taken. Because his previous policy of reigning as king of both Assyria and Babylonia had evidently failed, Sennacherib attempted another method, appointing a native Babylonian who had grown up at the Assyrian court, Bel-ibni, as his vassal king of the south. Sennacherib described Bel-ibni as \"a native of Babylon who grew up in my palace like a young puppy\".\nWar in the Levant.\nAfter the Babylonian war, Sennacherib's second campaign was in the Zagros Mountains. There, he subdued the Yasubigallians, a people from east of the Tigris river, and the Kassites, a people who had ruled Babylonia centuries before. Sennacherib's third campaign, directed against the kingdoms and city-states in the Levant, is very well-documented compared to many other events in the ancient Near East and is the best-documented event in the history of Israel during the First Temple period. In 705\u00a0BC, Hezekiah, the king of Judah, had stopped paying his annual tribute to the Assyrians and began pursuing a markedly aggressive foreign policy, probably inspired by the recent wave of anti-Assyrian rebellions across the empire. After conspiring with Egypt (then under Kushite rule) and Sidqia, an anti-Assyrian king of the city of Ashkelon, to garner support, Hezekiah attacked Philistine cities loyal to Assyria and captured the Assyrian vassal Padi, king of Ekron, and imprisoned him in his capital, Jerusalem. In the northern Levant, former Assyrian vassal cities rallied around Luli, the king of Tyre and Sidon. Sennacherib's arch-enemy Marduk-apla-iddina encouraged the anti-Assyrian sentiment among some of the empire's western vassals. He corresponded with and sent gifts to western rulers like Hezekiah, probably hoping to assemble a vast anti-Assyrian alliance.\nIn 701\u00a0BC, Sennacherib first moved to attack the Neo-Hittite and Phoenician cities in the north. Like many rulers of these cities had done before and would do again, Luli fled rather than face the wrath of the Assyrians, escaping by boat until he was beyond Sennacherib's reach. In his stead, Sennacherib proclaimed a noble by the name Ethbaal as the new king of Sidon and his vassal and oversaw the submission of many of the surrounding cities to his rule. Faced with a massive Assyrian army nearby, many of the Levantine rulers, including Budu-ilu of Ammon, Kammusu-nadbi of Moab, Mitinti of Ashdod and Aya-ramu of Edom, quickly submitted to Sennacherib to avoid retribution.\nThe resistance in the southern Levant was not as easily suppressed, forcing Sennacherib to invade the region. The Assyrians began by taking Ashkelon and defeating Sidqia. They then besieged and took numerous cities, including Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Banai-Barqa, and Azjuru. As the Assyrians were preparing to retake Ekron, Hezekiah's ally, Egypt, intervened in the conflict. The Assyrians defeated the Egyptian expedition in a battle near the city of Eltekeh. They took the cities of Ekron and Timnah and Judah stood alone, with Sennacherib setting his sights on Jerusalem. While a portion of Sennacherib's troops prepared to blockade Jerusalem, Sennacherib himself marched on the important Judean city of Lachish. Both the blockade of Jerusalem and the siege of Lachish probably prevented further Egyptian aid from reaching Hezekiah, and intimidated the kings of other smaller states in the region. The siege of Lachish, which ended in the city's destruction, was so lengthy that the defenders eventually began using arrowheads made of bone rather than metal, which had run out. To take the city, the Assyrians constructed a great siege mound, a ramp made of earth and stone, to reach the top of Lachish's walls. After they had destroyed the city, the Assyrians deported the survivors to the Assyrian Empire, forcing some of them to work on Sennacherib's building projects, and others to serve in the king's personal guard.\nSennacherib at the gates of Jerusalem.\nSennacherib's account of what happened at Jerusalem begins with \"As for Hezekiah\u00a0... like a caged bird I shut up in Jerusalem his royal city. I barricaded him with outposts, and exit from the gate of his city I made taboo for him.\" Thus, Jerusalem was blockaded in some capacity, though the lack of massive military activities and appropriate equipment meant that it was probably not a full siege. According to the Biblical narrative, a senior Assyrian official with the title Rabshakeh stood in front of the city's walls and demanded its surrender, threatening that the Judeans would 'eat feces and drink urine' during the siege. Although the Assyrian account of the operation may lead one to believe that Sennacherib was present in person, this is never explicitly stated and reliefs depicting the campaign show Sennacherib seated on a throne in Lachish instead of overseeing the preparations for an assault on Jerusalem. According to the biblical account, the Assyrian envoys to Hezekiah returned to Sennacherib to find him engaged in a struggle with the city of Libnah.\nThe account of the blockade erected around Jerusalem is different from the sieges described in Sennacherib's annals and the massive reliefs in Sennacherib's palace at Nineveh, which depict the successful siege of Lachish rather than events at Jerusalem. Though the blockade of Jerusalem was not a proper siege, it is clear from all available sources that a massive Assyrian army was encamped in the city's vicinity, probably on its northern side.\nThough it is clear that the blockade of Jerusalem ended without significant fighting, how it was resolved and what stopped Sennacherib's massive army from overwhelming the city is uncertain. The Biblical account of the end of Sennacherib's attack on Jerusalem holds that though Hezekiah's soldiers manned the walls of the city, ready to defend it against the Assyrians, an entity referred to as the destroying angel, sent by Yahweh, annihilated Sennacherib's army, killing 185,000 Assyrian soldiers in front of Jerusalem's gates. The ancient Greek historian Herodotus describes the operation as an Assyrian failure due to a \"multitude of field-mice\" descending upon the Assyrian camp, devouring crucial material such as quivers and bowstrings, leaving the Assyrians unarmed and causing them to flee. It is possible that the story of the mice infestation is an allusion to some kind of disease striking the Assyrian camp, possibly the septicemic plague. An alternative hypothesis, first advanced by journalist Henry T. Aubin in 2001, is that the blockade of Jerusalem was lifted through the intervention of a Kushite army from Egypt. The battle with the Egyptians is considered unlikely to have been an outright Assyrian defeat, especially because contemporary Babylonian chronicles, otherwise eager to mention Assyrian failures, are silent on the matter.\nDespite the seemingly inconclusive end to the blockade of Jerusalem, the Levantine campaign was largely an Assyrian victory. After the Assyrians had seized many of Judah's most important fortified cities and destroyed several towns and villages, Hezekiah realized that his anti-Assyrian activities had been disastrous military and political miscalculations and accordingly submitted to the Assyrians once more. He was forced to pay a heavier tribute than previously, probably along with a heavy penalty and the tribute that he had failed to send to Nineveh from 705 to 701\u00a0BC. He was also forced to release the imprisoned king of Ekron, Padi, and Sennacherib granted substantial portions of Judah's land to the neighboring kingdoms of Gaza, Ashdod and Ekron.\nResolving the Babylonian problem.\nBy 700\u00a0BC, the situation in Babylonia had once again deteriorated to such an extent that Sennacherib had to invade and reassert his control. Bel-ibni now faced the open revolts of two tribal leaders: Shuzubu (who later became Babylonian king under the name Mushezib-Marduk) and Marduk-apla-iddina, now an elderly man. One of Sennacherib's first measures was to remove Bel-ibni from the Babylonian throne, either because of incompetence or complicity, and he was brought back to Assyria, whereafter he is not heard of again in the sources. The Assyrians searched the northern marshes of Babylonia in an attempt to find and capture Shuzubu, but they failed. Sennacherib then hunted for Marduk-apla-iddina, a hunt so intense the Chaldean escaped on boats with his people across the Persian Gulf, taking refuge in the Elamite city of Nagitu. Victorious, Sennacherib attempted yet another method to govern Babylonia and appointed his son Ashur-nadin-shumi to reign as Babylonian vassal king.\nAshur-nadin-shumi was also titled \"m\u0101ru r\u0113\u0161t\u00fb\", a title that could be interpreted either as the \"pre-eminent son\" or the \"firstborn son\". His appointment as king of Babylon and the new title suggests that Ashur-nadin-shumi was being groomed to succeed Sennacherib as the king of Assyria upon his death. If \"m\u0101ru r\u0113\u0161t\u00fb\" means \"pre-eminent\" such a title would befit only the crown prince, and if it means \"firstborn\", this also suggests that Ashur-nadin-shumi was the heir. In most cases the Assyrians followed the principle of primogeniture, wherein the oldest son inherits. More evidence in favor of Ashur-nadin-shumi being the crown prince is Sennacherib's construction of a palace for him at the city of Assur, something Sennacherib would also do for the later crown prince Esarhaddon. As an Assyrian king of Babylon, Ashur-nadin-shumi's position was politically important and highly delicate and would have granted him valuable experience as the intended heir to the entire Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nIn the years that followed, Babylonia stayed relatively quiet, with no chronicles recording any significant activity. In the meantime, Sennacherib campaigned elsewhere. His fifth campaign in 699\u00a0BC involved a series of raids against the villages around the foot of Mount Judi, located to the northeast of Nineveh. Sennacherib's generals led other small campaigns without the king present, including a 698\u00a0BC expedition against Kirua, an Assyrian governor revolting in Cilicia, and a 695\u00a0BC campaign against the city of Tegarama. In 694\u00a0BC, Sennacherib invaded Elam, with the explicit goal of the campaign being to root out Marduk-apla-iddina and the other Chaldean refugees.\nThe Elamite campaign and revenge.\nIn preparation for his attack on Elam, Sennacherib assembled two great fleets on the Euphrates and the Tigris. The latter fleet was then used to transport the Assyrian army to the city of Opis, where the ships were then pulled ashore and transported overland to a canal that linked to the Euphrates. The two fleets then combined into one and continued down to the Persian Gulf. At the head of the Persian Gulf, a storm flooded the Assyrian camp and the Assyrian soldiers had to take refuge on their ships. They then sailed across the Persian Gulf, a journey which Sennacherib's inscriptions indicate was difficult since repeated sacrifices were made to Ea, the god of the deep.\nSuccessfully landing on the Elamite coast, the Assyrians then hunted and attacked the Chaldean refugees, something that both Babylonian and Assyrian sources hold went well for the Assyrians. Sennacherib's account of the campaign describe the affair as a \"great victory\" and list several cities taken and sacked by the Assyrian army. Although Sennacherib at last got his revenge on Marduk-apla-iddina, his arch-enemy had not lived to see it, having died of natural causes before the Assyrians landed in Elam. The war then took an unexpected turn as the king of Elam, Hallutash-Inshushinak I, took advantage of the Assyrian army being so far away from home to invade Babylonia. With the aid of surviving Chaldean troops, Hallutash-Inshushinak took the city of Sippar, where he also managed to capture Ashur-nadin-shumi and take him back to Elam. Ashur-nadin-shumi was then never heard from again, probably having been executed. In Ashur-nadin-shumi's place, a native Babylonian, Nergal-ushezib, became Babylon's king. Babylonian records ascribe Nergal-ushezib's rise to power to being appointed by Hallutash-Inshushinak, whereas Assyrian records state that he was chosen by the Babylonians themselves.\nThe Assyrian army, by now surrounded by the Elamites in southern Babylonia, managed to kill the son of Hallutash-Inshushinak in a skirmish but remained trapped for at least nine months. Wishing to consolidate his position as king, Nergal-ushezib took advantage of the situation and captured and plundered the city of Nippur. Some months later, the Assyrians attacked and captured the southern city of Uruk. Nergal-ushezib was frightened by this development and called on the Elamites for aid. Just seven days after taking Uruk, the Assyrians and Babylonians met in battle at Nippur, where the Assyrians won a decisive victory; routing the Elamite-Babylonian army and capturing Nergal-ushezib, finally free from their entrapped position in the south. Through some unknown means, Sennacherib had managed to slip by the Babylonian and Elamite forces undetected some months prior and was not present at the final battle, instead probably being on his way from Assyria with additional troops. Once he rejoined his southern army, the war with Babylonia was already won.\nSoon thereafter, a revolt broke out in Elam which saw the deposition of Hallutash-Inshushinak and the rise of Kutur-Nahhunte to the throne. Determined to end the threat of Elam, Sennacherib retook the city of Der, occupied by Elam during the previous conflict, and advanced into northern Elam. Kutur-Nahhunte could not organize an efficient defense against the Assyrians and refused to fight them, instead fleeing to the mountain city of Haidalu. Shortly thereafter, the severe weather forced Sennacherib to retreat and return home.\nDestruction of Babylon.\nDespite the defeat of Nergal-ushezib and the flight of the Elamites, Babylonia did not surrender to Sennacherib. The rebel Shuzubu, hunted by Sennacherib in his 700\u00a0BC invasion of the south, had resurfaced under the name Mushezib-Marduk and, seemingly without foreign support, acceded to the throne of Babylon. As he was king by 692\u00a0BC, but not described in Assyrian sources as \"revolting\" until 691\u00a0BC, it is possible that his rule was initially accepted by Sennacherib. There was also a change in rulership in Elam, where Kutur-Nahhunte was deposed in favor of Humban-menanu, who began assembling the anti-Assyrian coalition once more. Mushezib-Marduk ensured Humban-menanu's support by bribing him. The Assyrian records considered Humban-menanu's decision to support Babylonia to be unintelligent, describing him as a \"man without any sense or judgement\".\nSennacherib met his enemies in battle near the city of Halule. Humban-menanu and his commander, Humban-undasha, led the Babylonian and Elamite forces. The outcome of the Battle of Halule is unclear since the records of both sides claim a great victory. Sennacherib claims in his annals that Humban-undasha was killed and that the enemy kings fled for their lives whereas the Babylonian chronicles claim that it was the Assyrians who retreated. If the battle was a southern victory, the setback faced by the Assyrians would have to have been minor as Babylon was under siege in the late summer of 690\u00a0BC (and had apparently been under siege for some time at that point). The Assyrians had not marched on Babylon immediately, however, as military actions are recorded elsewhere. In 1973, the Assyriologist John A. Brinkman wrote that it was likely that the southerners won the battle, though probably suffering many casualties, since both of Sennacherib's enemies still remained on their respective thrones after the fighting. In 1982, Assyriologist Louis D. Levine wrote that the battle was probably an Assyrian victory, though not a decisive one and that though the southerners had been defeated and fled, the Assyrian advance on Babylon itself was temporarily halted. The Assyrian army's diversion from its course could then be interpreted by the Babylonian chroniclers as an Assyrian retreat.\nIn 690\u00a0BC, Humban-menanu suffered a stroke and his jaw became locked in a way that prevented him from speaking. Taking advantage of the situation, Sennacherib embarked on his final campaign against Babylon. Although the Babylonians were successful initially, that was short-lived, and in the same year, the siege of Babylon was already well underway. It is likely Babylon would have been in a poor position once it fell to Sennacherib in 689\u00a0BC, having been besieged for over fifteen months. Although Sennacherib had once anxiously considered the implications of Sargon's seizure of Babylon and the role that the city's offended gods may have played in his father's downfall, his attitude towards the city had shifted by 689\u00a0BC. Ultimately, Sennacherib decided to destroy Babylon. Brinkman believed that Sennacherib's change in attitude came from a will to avenge his son and tiring of a city well within the borders of his empire repeatedly rebelling against his rule. According to Brinkman, Sennacherib might have lost the affection he once had for Babylon's gods because they had inspired their people to attack him. Sennacherib's own account of the destruction reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Into my land I carried off alive Mu\u0161\u0113zib-Marduk, king of Babylonia, together with his family and officials. I counted out the wealth of that city\u2014silver, gold, precious stones, property and goods\u2014into the hands of my people; and they took it as their own. The hands of my people laid hold of the gods dwelling there and smashed them; they took their property and goods.I destroyed the city and its houses, from foundation to parapet; I devastated and burned them. I razed the brick and earthenwork of the outer and inner wall of the city, of the temples, and of the ziggurat; and I dumped these into the Ara\u1e2btu canal. I dug canals through the midst of that city, I overwhelmed it with water, I made its very foundations disappear, and I destroyed it more completely than a devastating flood. So that it might be impossible in future days to recognize the site of that city and its temples, I utterly dissolved it with water and made it like inundated land.\nAlthough Sennacherib destroyed the city, he appears to have still been somewhat fearful of Babylon's ancient gods. Earlier in his account of the campaign, he specifically mentions the sanctuaries of the Babylonian deities had provided financial support to his enemies. The passage describing the seizure of the property of the gods and the destruction of some of their statues is one of the few where Sennacherib uses \"my people\" rather than \"I\". Brinkman interpreted this in 1973 as leaving the blame of the fate of the temples not personally on Sennacherib himself, but on the decisions made by the temple personnel and the actions of the Assyrian people.\nDuring the destruction of the city, Sennacherib destroyed the temples and the images of the gods, except for that of Marduk, which he took to Assyria. This caused consternation in Assyria itself, where Babylon and its gods were held in high esteem. Sennacherib attempted justifying his actions to his own countrymen through a campaign of religious propaganda. Among the elements of this campaign, he commissioned a myth in which Marduk was put on trial before Ashur, the god of Assyria. This text is fragmentary, but it seems Marduk is found guilty of some grave offense. Sennacherib described his defeat of the Babylonian rebels in the language of the Babylonian creation myth, identifying Babylon with the evil demon-goddess Tiamat and himself with Marduk. Ashur replaced Marduk in the New Year's festival, and in the temple of the festival he placed a symbolic pile of rubble from Babylon. In Babylonia, Sennacherib's policy spawned a deep-seated hatred amongst much of the populace.\nSennacherib's goal was the complete eradication of Babylonia as a political entity. Though some northern Babylonian territories became Assyrian provinces, the Assyrians made no effort to rebuild Babylon itself, and southern chronicles from the time refer to the era as the \"kingless\" period when there was no king in the land.\nRenovation of Nineveh.\nAfter the final war with Babylon, Sennacherib dedicated his time to improving his new capital at Nineveh rather than embarking on large military campaigns. Nineveh had been an important city in northern Mesopotamia for millennia. The oldest traces of human settlement at its location are from the 7th millennium\u00a0BC, and from the 4th\u00a0millennium BC and onward it formed an important administrative center in the north. When Sennacherib made the city his new capital it experienced one of the most ambitious building projects in ancient history, being completely transformed from the somewhat neglected state it had been in before his reign. Whereas his father's new capital, Dur-Sharrukin, was more or less an imitation of the previous capital of Nimrud, Sennacherib intended to make Nineveh into a city whose magnificence and size astonished the civilized world.\nThe earliest inscriptions discussing the building project at Nineveh date to 702\u00a0BC and concern the construction of the Southwest Palace, a large residence constructed in the southwestern part of the citadel. Sennacherib called this palace the \"ekallu \u0161a \u0161\u0101nina la i\u0161u\", the \"Palace without Rival\". During the construction process, a smaller palace was torn down, a stream of water which had been eroding parts of the palace mound was redirected and a terrace which the new palace was to stand on was erected and raised to the height of 160 layers of brick. Though many of these early inscriptions talk about the palace as if it were already completed, this was the standard way of writing about building projects in ancient Assyria. The Nineveh described in Sennacherib's earliest accounts of its renovation was a city which at that point only existed in his imagination.\nBy 700\u00a0BC the walls of the Southwest Palace's throne room were being constructed, followed shortly by the many reliefs to be displayed within it. The final step in the palace's construction was the erection of colossal statues depicting bulls and lions, characteristic of Late Assyrian architecture. Though such stone statues have been excavated at Nineveh, similar colossal statues mentioned in the inscriptions as being made of precious metals remain missing. The roof of the palace was constructed with cypress and cedar recovered from the mountains in the west, and the palace was illuminated through multiple windows and decorated with silver and bronze pegs on the inside and glazed bricks on the outside. The full structure, going by the mound it was built on, measured long and wide. An inscription on a stone lion in the quarter associated with Sennacherib's queen, Tashmetu-sharrat, contains hopes that the king and queen would both live healthily and long within the new palace. The text of the inscription, written in an unusually intimate way, reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And for the queen Tashmetu-sharrat, my beloved wife, whose features Belet-ili has made more beautiful than all other women, I had a palace of love, joy and pleasure built. [...] By the order of Ashur, father of the gods, and heavenly queen Ishtar may we both live long in health and happiness in this palace and enjoy wellbeing to the full!\nThough probably conceived as a structure like the palace Sargon built at Dur-Sharrukin, Sennacherib's palace, and especially the artwork featured within it, shows some differences. Though Sargon's reliefs usually show the king as close to other members of the Assyrian aristocracy, Sennacherib's art usually depicts the king towering above everyone else in his vicinity due to being mounted in a chariot. His reliefs show larger scenes, some almost from a bird's-eye point of view. There are also examples of a more naturalistic approach in the art; where colossal statues of bulls from Sargon's palace depict them with five legs so that four legs could be seen from either side and two from the front, Sennacherib's bulls all have four legs. Sennacherib constructed beautiful gardens at his new palace, importing various plants and herbs from throughout his empire and beyond. Cotton plants may have been imported from as far away as India. Some suggest the famous Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, were actually these gardens in Nineveh. Eckhart Frahm considers this idea unlikely on account of the impressive royal gardens in Babylon itself.\nBesides the palace, Sennacherib oversaw other building projects at Nineveh. He built a large second palace at the city's southern mound, which served as an arsenal to store military equipment and as permanent quarters for part of the Assyrian standing army. Numerous temples were built and restored, many of them on the Kuyunjik mound (where the Southwest Palace was located), including a temple dedicated to the god S\u00een (invoked in the king's own name). Sennacherib also massively expanded the city to the south and erected enormous new city walls, surrounded by a moat, up to high and thick.\nConspiracy, murder and succession.\nWhen his eldest son and original crown prince, Ashur-nadin-shumi, disappeared, presumably executed, Sennacherib selected his eldest surviving son, Arda-Mulissu, as the new crown prince. Arda-Mulissu held the position of the heir apparent for several years until 684\u00a0BC when Sennacherib suddenly replaced him with his younger brother Esarhaddon. The reason for Arda-Mulissu's sudden dismissal is unknown, but it is clear from contemporary inscriptions that he was very disappointed. Esarhaddon's influential mother, Naqi'a, may have played a role in convincing Sennacherib to choose Esarhaddon as heir. Despite his dismissal, Arda-Mulissu remained a popular figure, and some vassals secretly supported him as the heir to the throne.\nSennacherib forced Arda-Mulissu to swear loyalty to Esarhaddon, but Arda-Mulissu made many appeals to his father to reinstate him as heir. Sennacherib noted the increasing popularity of Arda-Mulissu and came to fear for his designated successor, so he sent Esarhaddon to the western provinces. Esarhaddon's exile put Arda-Mulissu in a difficult position as he had reached the height of his popularity but was powerless to do anything to his brother. To take advantage of the opportunity, Arda-Mulissu decided he needed to act quickly and take the throne by force. He concluded a \"treaty of rebellion\" with another of his younger brothers, Nabu-shar-usur, and on 20\u00a0October 681\u00a0BC, they attacked and killed their father in one of Nineveh's temples, possibly the one dedicated to S\u00een.\nThe murder of Sennacherib, ruler of one of the world's strongest empires at the time, shocked his contemporaries. People throughout the Near East received the news with strong emotions and mixed feelings. The denizens of the Levant and Babylonia celebrated the news and proclaimed the act as divine punishment because of Sennacherib's brutal campaigns against them, while in Assyria the reaction was probably resentment and horror. Many sources recorded the event, including the Bible, where Arda-Mulissu is called \"Adrammelech\".\nDespite the success of their conspiracy, Arda-Mulissu could not seize the throne. The murder of the king caused some resentment against him by his own supporters which delayed his potential coronation, and in the meantime, Esarhaddon had raised an army. The army raised by Arda-Mulissu and Nabu-shar-usur met Esarhaddon's forces in Hanigalbat, a region in the western parts of the empire. There, most of their soldiers deserted and joined Esarhaddon, who then marched on Nineveh without opposition, becoming the new king of Assyria. Shortly after taking the throne, Esarhaddon executed all of the conspirators and political enemies within his reach, including his brothers' families. Every servant involved with the security of the royal palace at Nineveh was executed. Arda-Mulissu and Nabu-shar-usur survived this purge, escaping as exiles to the northern kingdom of Urartu.\nFamily and children.\nAs was traditional for Assyrian kings, Sennacherib had a harem of many women. Two of his wives are known by name\u2014Tashmetu-sharrat (\"Ta\u0161metu-\u0161arrat\") and Naqi'a (\"Naqi\u02be\u0101\"). Whether both held the position of queen is uncertain, but contemporary sources suggest that though the king's family included multiple women, only one at a time would be recognized as queen and primary consort. For most of Sennacherib's reign, the queen was Tashmetu-sharrat, whose name literally means \"Tashmetum is queen\". Inscriptions suggest that Sennacherib and Tashmetu-sharrat had a loving relationship, with the king referring to her as \"my beloved wife\" and publicly praising her beauty.\nWhether Naqi'a ever held the title of queen is unclear. She was referred to as the \"queen mother\" during Esarhaddon's reign, but as she was Esarhaddon's mother, the title may have been bestowed upon her either late in Sennacherib's reign or by Esarhaddon. Though Tashmetu-sharrat was the primary consort for longer, Naqi'a is more well-known today for her role during Esarhaddon's reign. When she became one of Sennacherib's wives, she took the Akkadian name \"Zak\u00fbtu\" (Naqi'a being an Aramaic name). Having two names could point to Naqi'a being born outside Assyria proper\u2014possibly in Babylonia or in the Levant\u2014but there is no substantial evidence for any theory regarding her origin.\nSennacherib had at least seven sons and one daughter. Except for Esarhaddon, who is known to be Naqi'a's son, which of Sennacherib's wives were his children's mothers is unknown. Tashmetu-sharrat is likely to have been the mother of at least some of them. Their names were:\nA small tablet excavated at Nineveh lists the names of mythological Mesopotamian heroes, such as Gilgamesh, and some personal names. As the name Ashur-ili-muballissu appears in the list of personal names, alongside fragmentary names that could possibly be reconstructed as Ashur-nadin-shumi (or Ashur-shumu-ushabshi) and Esarhaddon, it is also possible that the other personal names were names of further sons of Sennacherib. These names include \"Ile\"e-bullutu-A\u0161\u0161ur\", \"A\u0161\u0161ur-mukkani\u0161-ilija\", \"Ana-A\u0161\u0161ur-taklak\", \"A\u0161\u0161ur-bani-beli\", \"Sama\u0161-andulla\u0161u\" (or \"Sama\u0161-salam\u0161u\") and \"A\u0161\u0161ur-\u0161akin-liti\".\nCharacter.\nThe main sources that can be used to deduce Sennacherib's personality are his royal inscriptions. These inscriptions were not written by the king, but by his royal scribes. They often served as propaganda meant to portray the king as better than all other rulers, both contemporary and ancient. Furthermore, Assyrian royal inscriptions often describe only military and construction matters and were highly formulaic, differing little from king to king. By examining the inscriptions and comparing them to those of other kings and non-royal inscriptions, it is possible to infer some aspects of Sennacherib's character. Like the inscriptions of other Assyrian kings, his show pride and high self-esteem, for instance in the passage: \"Ashur, father of the gods, looked steadfastly upon me among all the rulers and he made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.\" In several places, Sennacherib's great intelligence is emphasized, for instance in the passage, \"the god Ninshiku gave me wide understanding equal to (that of) the sage Adapu (and) endowed me with broad knowledge\". Several inscriptions call him \"foremost of all rulers\" (\"a\u0161ared kal malk\u012b\") and a \"perfect man\" (\"e\u1e6dlu gitm\u0101lu\"). Sennacherib's decision to keep his birth name when he became king rather than assuming a throne name, something at least 19 of his 21 immediate predecessors had done, suggests self-confidence. Sennacherib assumed several new epithets never used by Assyrian kings, such as \"guardian of the right\" and \"lover of justice\", suggesting a desire to leave a personal mark on a new era beginning with his reign.\nWhen Sennacherib became king, he was already an adult and had served as Sargon's crown prince for over 15 years and understood the empire's administration. Unlike many preceding and later Assyrian kings (including his father), Sennacherib did not portray himself as a conqueror or express much desire to conquer the world. Instead, his inscriptions often portrayed the most important parts of his reign as his large-scale building projects. Most of Sennacherib's campaigns were not aimed at conquest, but at suppressing revolts against his rule, restoring lost territories and securing treasure to finance his building projects. That his generals led several of the campaigns, rather than Sennacherib himself, shows he was not as interested in campaigning as his predecessors had been. The brutal retribution and punishment served to Assyria's enemies described in Sennacherib's accounts do not necessarily reflect the truth. They also served as intimidating tools for propaganda and psychological warfare.\nDespite the apparent lack of interest in world domination, Sennacherib assumed the traditional Mesopotamian titles that designated rule of the entire world; \"king of the universe\" and \"king of the four corners of the world\". Other titles, such as \"strong king\" and \"mighty king\", emphasized his power and greatness, along with epithets such as \"virile warrior\" (\"zikaru qardu\") and \"fierce wild bull\" (\"r\u012bmu ekdu\"). Sennacherib described all of his campaigns, even the unsuccessful ones, as victories in his own accounts. This was not necessarily because of personal pride; his subjects would have viewed a failed campaign as a sign that the gods no longer favored his rule. Sennacherib was fully convinced that the gods supported him and saw all his wars as just for this reason.\nFrahm believes that it is possible that Sennacherib suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder because of the catastrophic fate of his father. From the sources, it appears that bad news easily enraged Sennacherib and that he developed serious psychological problems. His son and successor Esarhaddon mentions in his inscriptions that the \"\"al\u00fb\" demon\" afflicted Sennacherib and that none of his diviners initially dared to tell the king they had observed signs pointing to the demon. What the \"al\u00fb\" demon was is not entirely understood, but the typical symptoms described in contemporary documents include the afflicted not knowing who they are, their pupils constricting, their limbs being tense, being incapable of speech and their ears roaring.\nFrahm and the Assyriologist Julian E. Reade have pondered the idea that Sennacherib could be classified as a feminist. Female members of the court were more prominent and enjoyed greater privileges under Sennacherib's reign than under the reigns of previous Assyrian kings. The reasons for his policy towards his female relatives are unknown. He might have wanted to shift power away from powerful generals and magnates to his own family, having encountered powerful Arab queens who made their own decisions and led armies. He may have been compensating for the way he treated his father's memory. Evidence of the increased standing of the royal women includes the larger number of texts referencing Assyrian queens from Sennacherib's reign compared to queens of earlier times, and evidence that Sennacherib's queens had their own standing military units, just like the king. Mirroring the increased standing of the women of the royal family, during Sennacherib's time female deities were depicted more frequently. For example, the god Ashur is portrayed frequently with a female companion, probably the goddess Mullissu.\nDespite Sennacherib's superstition in regards to the fate of his father and his conviction of divine support, Reade believes that the king to some degree was skeptical of religion. Sennacherib's ultimate treatment of Babylon, destroying the city and its temples, was sacrilege and the king appears to have neglected the temples in Assyria until he carried out a renovation of the temple of Ashur in Assur late in his reign.\nLegacy.\nSennacherib in popular memory.\nThroughout the millennia following Sennacherib's death, the popular image of the king has been mainly negative. The first reason for this is Sennacherib's negative portrayal in the Bible as the evil conqueror who attempted to take Jerusalem; the second is his destruction of Babylon, one of the most prominent cities in the ancient world. This negative view of Sennacherib endured until modern times. Sennacherib is presented as akin to a ruthless predator, attacking Judah as a \"wolf on the fold\" in the famous 1815 poem \"The Destruction of Sennacherib\" by Lord Byron:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.\u2014\u200a\nBiblical archaeologist Isaac Kalimi and historian Seth Richardson described Sennacherib's 701\u00a0BC attack against Jerusalem as a \"world event\" in 2014, noting that it drew together the fates of numerous otherwise disparate groups. According to Kalimi, the event and its aftermath affected and had consequences for not only the Assyrians and the Israelites, but also the Babylonians, Egyptians, Nubians, Neo-Hittites and Anatolian peoples. The siege is discussed not only in contemporary sources, but in later folklore and traditions, such as Aramaic folklore, in later Greco-Roman histories of the Near East and in the tales of medieval Syriac Christians and Arabs. Sennacherib's Levantine campaign is a significant event in the Bible, being brought up and discussed in many places, notably 2\u00a0Kings 18:13\u201319:37, 20:6 and 2\u00a0Chronicles 32:1\u201323. A vast majority of the Biblical accounts of King Hezekiah's reign in 2 Kings is dedicated to Sennacherib's campaign, cementing it as the most important event of Hezekiah's time. In Chronicles, Sennacherib's failure and Hezekiah's success is emphasized. The Assyrian campaign (described as an act of aggression rather than as a response to Hezekiah's rebellious activities) is seen as doomed to fail from the start. According to the narrative, no enemy, not even the powerful king of Assyria, would have been able to triumph over Hezekiah as the Judean king had God on his side. The conflict is presented as something akin to a holy war: God's war against the pagan Sennacherib.\nThough Assyria had more than a hundred kings throughout its long history, Sennacherib (along with his son Esarhaddon and grandsons Ashurbanipal and Shamash-shum-ukin) is one of the few kings who was remembered and figured in Aramaic and Syriac folklore long after the kingdom had fallen. The ancient Aramaic story of Ahikar portrays Sennacherib as a benevolent patron of the titular character Ahikar, with Esarhaddon portrayed more negatively. Medieval Syriac tales characterize Sennacherib as an archetypical pagan king assassinated as part of a family feud, whose children convert to Christianity. The legend of the 4th-century Saints Behnam and Sarah casts Sennacherib, under the name Sinharib, as their royal father. After Behnam converts to Christianity, Sinharib orders his execution, but is later struck by a dangerous disease that is cured through being baptized by Saint Matthew in Assur. Thankful, Sinharib then converts to Christianity and founds an important monastery near Mosul, called Deir Mar Mattai.\nSennacherib also occupied various roles in later Jewish tradition. In Midrash, examinations of the Old Testament and later stories, the events of 701\u00a0BC are often explored in detail; many times featuring massive armies deployed by Sennacherib and pointing out how he repeatedly consulted astrologers on his campaign, delaying his actions. In the stories, Sennacherib's armies are destroyed when Hezekiah recites Hallel psalms on the eve of Passover. The event is often portrayed as an apocalyptic scenario, with Hezekiah portrayed as a messianic figure and Sennacherib and his armies being personifications of Gog and Magog. Sennacherib, due to the role he plays in the Bible, remains one of the most famous Assyrian kings to this day.\nSennacherib appears in Dante\u2019s Divine Comedy, in the Purgatorio, as an exemplar of pride: \u201cNow was shown how his sons fell upon Sennacherib inside the temple, and how, slain, they left him there\u201d (XII. 51-54). Hollander notes that the Vulgate associates Sennacherib\u2019s campaigns against Hezekiah with \u201csuperbia.\u201d\nArchaeological discoveries.\nThe discovery of Sennacherib's own inscriptions in the 19th\u00a0century, in which brutal and cruel acts such as ordering the throats of his Elamite enemies to be slit, and their hands and lips cut off, amplified his already ferocious reputation. Today, many such inscriptions are known, most of them housed in the collections of the Vorderasiatisches Museum in Berlin and the British Museum in London, though many are located throughout the world in other institutions and private collections. Some large objects with Sennacherib's inscriptions remain at Nineveh, where some have even been reburied. Sennacherib's own accounts of his building projects and military campaigns, typically referred to as his \"annals\", were often copied several times and spread throughout the Neo-Assyrian Empire during his reign. For the first six years of his reign, they were written on clay cylinders, but he later began using clay prisms, probably because they provided a greater surface area.\nLetters associated with Sennacherib are fewer in number than those known from his father and the time of his son Esarhaddon; most of them are from Sennacherib's tenure as crown prince. Other types of non-royal inscriptions from Sennacherib's reign, such as administrative documents, economic documents and chronicles, are more numerous. In addition to written sources, many pieces of artwork have also survived from Sennacherib's time, notably the king's reliefs from his palace at Nineveh. They typically depict his conquests, sometimes with short pieces of text explaining the scene shown. First discovered and excavated from 1847 to 1851 by the British archaeologist Austen Henry Layard, the discovery of reliefs depicting Sennacherib's siege of Lachish in the Southwest Palace was the first archaeological confirmation of an event described in the Bible.\nThe Assyriologists Hormuzd Rassam and Henry Creswicke Rawlinson from 1852 to 1854, William Kennett Loftus from 1854 to 1855 and George Smith from 1873 to 1874 led further excavations of the Southwest Palace. Among the many inscriptions found at the site, Smith discovered a fragmentary account of a flood, which generated much excitement both among scholars and the public. Since Smith, the site has experienced several periods of intense excavation and study; Rassam returned from 1878 to 1882, the Egyptologist E. A. Wallis Budge oversaw excavations from 1889 to 1891, the Assyriologist Leonard William King from 1903 to 1904 and the Assyriologist Reginald Campbell Thompson in 1905 and from 1931 to 1932. The Iraqi Department of Antiquities under the Assyriologist Tariq Madhloom conducted the most recent expeditions from 1965 to 1968. Many of Sennacherib's reliefs are exhibited today at the Vorderasiatisches Museum, the British Museum, the Iraq Museum in Baghdad, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the Louvre in Paris.\nThe traditional negative assessment of Sennacherib as a ruthless conqueror has faded away in modern scholarship. Writing in 1978, Reade assessed Sennacherib as a king who stands out among Assyrian rulers as open-minded and far-sighted and that he was a man \"who not only coped effectively with ordinary crises but even turned them to advantage as he created, or attempted to create, a stable imperial structure immune from traditional problems\". Reade believes that the collapse of the Assyrian Empire within seventy years of Sennacherib's death can be partly attributed to later kings ignoring Sennacherib's policies and reforms. Elayi, writing in 2018, concluded that Sennacherib was different both from the traditional negative image of him and from the perfect image the king wanted to convey himself through his inscriptions, but that elements of both were true. According to Elayi, Sennacherib was \"certainly intelligent, skillful, with an ability of adaptation\", but \"his sense of piety was contradictory, as, on the one hand, he impiously destroyed the statues of gods and temples of Babylon while, on the other hand, he used to consult the gods before acting and prayed to them\". Elayi believes Sennacherib's greatest flaw was \"his irascible, vindictive and impatient character\" and that he, when emotional, could be pushed to make irrational decisions.\nIn 2011, a huge slope was discovered in Qasr Shemamok (Kilizu) in Erbil governorate, with a multi-step staircase of very low height, the steps are built of proud bricks, and a cuneiform text was found on one of the proud bricks with which the stairs were built bearing the name of the Assyrian king Sennacherib. During the French excavations, many cuneiform inscriptions were found, most of which bear a text mentioning one of the king's titles, mentioning the construction of wall and a palace in the city.\nTitles.\nThe following titulature is used by Sennacherib in early accounts of his 703\u00a0BC Babylonian campaign:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of Assyria, king without rival, righteous shepherd, favorite of the great gods, prayerful shepherd, who fears the great gods, protector of righteousness, lover of justice, who lends support, who comes to the aid of the cripple and aims to do good deeds, perfect hero, mighty man, first among all kings, neckstock that bends the insubmissive, who strikes the enemy like a thunderbolt, Ashur, the great mountain, has bestowed upon me an unrivalled kingship and has made my weapons mightier than the weapons of all other rulers sitting on daises.\nThis variant of the titulature is used in an inscription from the Southwest Palace at Nineveh written after Sennacherib's 700\u00a0BC Babylonian campaign:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sennacherib, the great king, the mighty king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world); favorite of the great gods; the wise and crafty one; strong hero, first among all princes; the flame that consumes the insubmissive, who strikes the wicked with the thunderbolt. Assur, the great god, has intrusted to me an unrivaled kingship, and has made powerful my weapons above (all) those who dwell in palaces. From the upper sea of the setting sun to the lower sea of the rising sun, all princes of the four quarters (of the world) he has brought in submission to my feet.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrint\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28335", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28335", "title": "Sinaiticus codex", "text": ""}
{"id": "28338", "revid": "50813145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28338", "title": "Saaremaa", "text": "Largest island in Estonia\nSaaremaa (; ) is the largest and most populous island in Estonia. Measuring , its population is 31,435 (as of January 2020). The main island of the West Estonian archipelago (Moonsund archipelago), it is located in the Baltic Sea, south of Hiiumaa island and northwest of the Gulf of Riga. The administrative centre of the island, and of the Saare \"maakond\" (county), is the town of Kuressaare.\nFrom the 13th century until the first half of the 20th century, the island of Saaremaa was known in most of the world by variants of its other historical name \u00d6sel.\nEtymology.\nSaaremaa was called \"Eys\u00fdsla\" in the Icelandic sagas and other early medieval Scandinavian sources (Old Norse: , meaning 'the island district'), and named in contrast with \"A\u00f0als\u00fdsla\" ('the great district') or the Estonian mainland. The island is called in modern Estonian and in Finnish\u2014literally, 'land of the isle' or 'land of the island', that is, the same as the ancient Scandinavian name for the island.\nThe old Scandinavian name is also the origin of the island's name in Danish (), German and Swedish (), Gutnish (\"Oysl\"), and Latin (). In Latvian, the island is called , which possibly means 'the island of Saami'. Saaremaa may have been the historic Ultima Thule.\nHistory.\nAccording to archaeological finds, the territory of Saaremaa has been inhabited from at least 5000 BCE. Nordic Iron Age ship burials, dated to 700\u2013750\u00a0CE, have been found in S\u00f5rve Peninsula. Sagas talk about numerous skirmishes between the islanders and Vikings. Saaremaa was and the home of notorious pirates, sometimes called the Eastern Vikings. The Chronicle of Henry of Livonia describes a fleet of sixteen ships and 500 Osilians ravaging the area that is now southern Sweden, then belonging to Denmark.\nProbably around 1000, Gunnar H\u00e1mundarson from Iceland took part in a Viking raid at Eys\u00fdsla (Saaremaa). There he obtained his famous atgeir, by taking it from a man named Hallgr\u00edmur. \"Nj\u00e1ls saga\" tells the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thence they held on south to Denmark and thence east to Sm\u00e1l\u00f6nd and had victory wherever they went. They did not come back in autumn. The next summer they held on to Rafala (Tallinn) and fell in there with sea-rovers, and fought at once, and won the fight. After that they steered east to Eys\u00fdsla (Saaremaa) and lay there somewhile under a ness. There they saw a man coming down from the ness above them; Gunnar went on shore to meet the man, and they had a talk. Gunnar asked him his name, and he said it was T\u00f3fi. Gunnar asked again what he wanted.\n\"Thee I want to see,\" says the man. \"Two warships lie on the other side under the ness, and I will tell thee who command them: two brothers are the captains\u2014one's name is Hallgr\u00edmur, and the other's Kolskeggur. I know them to be mighty men of war; and I know too that they have such good weapons that the like are not to be had. Hallgr\u00edmur has an atgeir which he had made by seething-spells; and this is what the spells say, that no weapon shall give him his death-blow save that atgeir. That thing follows it too that it is known at once when a man is to be slain with that atgeir, for something sings in it so loudly that it may be heard a long way off\u2014such a strong nature has that atgeir in it.\nThe Chronicle of Henry of Livonia describes a fleet of sixteen ships and five hundred pirates from Saaremaa ravaging the area that is now southern Sweden, then belonging to Denmark. The XIVth book of Gesta Danorum, Saxo Grammaticus describes a subsequent battle on \u00d6land in 1170 in which the Danish king Valdemar I mobilized his entire fleet to curb the incursions of pirates from \"Couronia\" (Courland) and Saaremaa.\nPerhaps the most renowned raid by the inhabitants of Saaremaa occurred in 1187, with the attack on the Swedish town of Sigtuna (other candidates as raiders are Karelians and Curonians). Among the casualties of this raid was the Swedish archbishop Johannes. Archaeological excavations have not verified the traditions of destruction of the town. Normal life in Sigtuna continued until town started to slowly lose its importance during 13th century due to navigability problems caused by post-glacial rebound.\nIn 1227, Saaremaa was conquered by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword during the Livonian Crusade but the resistance of the local inhabitants remained strong. The crusaders founded the Bishopric of \u00d6sel\u2013Wiek there. When the Order was defeated by the Lithuanian army in the Battle of Saule in 1236, the Saaremaa islanders rebelled. The conflict was ended by a treaty that was signed by the Osilians and the Master of the Order. In the following year, the Sword-Brothers were absorbed into the Teutonic Order. As the crusaders' hold on Saaremaa got stronger, Christianity also became more established on the island, and to this day Saaremaa has a unique set of medieval churches in Kaarma, Karja, Kihelkonna, Muhu, P\u00f6ide, P\u00fcha and Valjala churches. The crusader's fortress Kuressaare Castle, known in German as Schloss Arensburg, was built by the Teutonic Order for the bishops of \u00d6sel\u2013Wiek (Estonian: Saare-L\u00e4\u00e4ne). Construction began in 1380 and it is one of the most well-preserved medieval castles in Estonia and bears testimony to the late Medieval Age.\nDuring the 14th\u201316th centuries, and possibly earlier, inhabitants of Saaremaa started to resettle into areas surrounding the Baltic Sea and, for example, to establish villages on the Livonian coast.\nMost of Saaremaa was ruled directly by the Bishopric of \u00d6sel\u2013Wiek, while some parts were enfeoffed to the Livonian Order. In 1559, the bishopric and Saaremaa were sold to Denmark, becoming part of Danish Estonia. From 1570 until 1645 the entire island was under Danish possession.\nIn 1645, Saaremaa was ceded from Denmark\u2013Norway to Sweden by the Treaty of Br\u00f6msebro. In 1721, along with the rest of Livonia, Saaremaa (then known by its Swedish name of \u00d6sel) was ceded to the Russian Empire by the Treaty of Nystad, becoming a part of the Governorate of Livonia.\nIn 1840, the first spa opened in Kuressaare (then known as Arensburg), and the town experienced renaissance and became a popular seaside resort.\nDuring World War I, the West Estonian Archipelago was conquered by Imperial German Army in October 1917 (Operation Albion) and remained occupied by Germans until the end of hostilities in November 1918. Thereafter Saaremaa became part of the newly independent Republic of Estonia. Most of the local Baltic German population of the island was resettled to Germany following the August 1939 Nazi\u2013Soviet Pact. During World War II, the island was first occupied by the Soviet Red Army in June 1940 and, along with the rest of Estonian territory, formally annexed into the Stalinist USSR in August 1940. On 8 August 1941, Soviet Naval Aviation started a bombing campaign on Berlin from Saaremaa. The island was then invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany later (Operation Beowulf). German troops were expelled and the island was reoccupied by the Soviet Red Army in the Moonsund Landing Operation in October and November 1944. In 1946, the Soviet military authorities declared Saaremaa a restricted zone closed to all non-local civilians, i.e., mainland Estonians and foreigners. It remained a restricted area until 1989. Estonia regained full independence in August 1991.\nGeography.\nThe island forms the main barrier between the Gulf of Riga and the Baltic Sea. To the south of it is the main passage out of the gulf, the Irbe Strait, next to S\u00f5rve Peninsula, the southernmost portion of the island. In medieval times islanders crossed the strait to form fishing villages on the Livonian coast, notably Pitrags. In those days it was easier and quicker to cross the strait towards nearby Kolka, Saunags or Mazirbe, than travel by horse large distances inland. The highest point on the island is 54\u00a0m above sea level. The Kaali crater is on the island. The island has much forested terrain. One of the symbols of the island is the juniper.\nNature.\nMore than 10,000 years ago the first parts of Saaremaa arose from the Baltic Ice Lake. The uplift of the Earth's crust is continuing even today at a rate of per year. The West Estonian islands are low-lying plains resting on limestone; their average elevation is roughly above sea level. Limestone has become denuded in a great number of places, resulting in cliffs, limestone pits and quarries at Mustjala, Ninase, Pulli, \u00dc\u00fcgu and Kaugatuma.\nBecause of its mild maritime climate and a variety of soils, Saaremaa has a rich flora, illustrated by the fact that 80% of the plant species found in Estonia are represented here. Altogether 1200 species of vascular plants can be found in Saaremaa. About 120 of the local plant species are rare ones that have received special protection status. The most famous endemic species is Rhinanthus osiliensis, a rare little flower growing mostly in spring fens. Rare and beautiful flowers are widespread; out of the 36 species found in Estonia, 35 of them are found on Saaremaa and its adjacent islands.\nOver 40% of Saaremaa is covered with forests, most of which are mixed forests, but in some areas, one can find broad-leaved (deciduous) trees, which are relicts of plant communities of former milder climatic periods. Wooded meadows were common in Saaremaa before World War II, but many of these unique natural complexes have gradually become overgrown and thus converted into the ordinary forest. The same is true for alvars (limestone areas covered with thin soil and stunted vegetation). Once a typical and exclusive landscape element in Saaremaa alvars are now in decline. Nature conservation planning for Saaremaa now includes protection of the largest and most unusual alvar areas.\nSaaremaa has a wide variety of rare wildlife species, ranging from insects to seals. The smallest protected wildlife species in terms of size include the clouded apollo butterflies and Roman snails.\nThe coastal areas of Saaremaa are well-known seal habitats; in fact, the indigenous gray seal can be found in three large permanent resting areas on the islets off the coast in the western and southern parts of Saaremaa. Nowadays, the local population of said seals is slightly increasing. Ringed seals can be encountered everywhere in the coastal waters of Saaremaa but, because of their timidity, it has not been possible to make an estimation of their number.\nThe islands lie in the East Atlantic Flyway, a migration route of waterfowl. This \"bird road\" connects northeastern Europe with Arctic regions. Each year hundreds of thousands of migratory birds visit Saaremaa in spring and autumn. The barnacle goose, mute swan, whooper swan, eider, shelduck and a great many other bird species have been given protection status. But on the whole, the islands are somewhat poorer in wildlife species than the mainland. Neither mole, mink, nor otter can be found here, whilst the Eurasian lynx and the brown bear are infrequent guests.\nKaali Meteorite.\nKaali is a small group of nine unique meteorite craters on Saaremaa. The largest of the craters measures in diameter and contains a small lake, known as Lake Kaali (). The meteor cluster had an impact velocity of and a mass of . At the altitude of the meteor broke into pieces. The largest fragment produced the main crater with a depth of .\nEight smaller craters with diameters ranging from and depths varying from are all within of the main crater. The age estimates of the crater vary, with 4000 \u00b1 1000 BCE being a commonly accepted estimate, though other estimates suggest the explosion was as recent as 660 \u00b1 85 BCE. The energy of the impact\u2014about 80 TJ (20 kilotons of TNT), comparable with the Hiroshima bomb\u2014burned forests within a radius of of the impact site. There are numerous legends related to the crater; these are summarized by former Estonian President Lennart Meri in his book \"H\u00f5bevalge\".\nResources.\nDolomite, limestone, curative mud, mineral water, ceramic clay, sand, and gravel are the major local resources. Of these local resources, dolomite is perhaps the most famous above all.\nCharacteristics.\nThe majority of the island's population is Estonian (97%). The two most numerous ethnic minorities, Russians and Finns, together comprise less than 3% of the inhabitants. Compared to the Republic of Estonia on the whole, the population of Saare County and particularly of Kuressaare town is younger, whereas the number of the retired people is considerably smaller. Saaremaa is located in the heart of the Baltic region, which is one of the most rapidly growing markets in Europe, with 70 million consumers. The island's \"Gates to the West\" include the reconstructed Kuressaare Airport and Roomassaare Harbour, the operation of modern ferries between Saaremaa and the Estonian mainland, and the rapid development of the telecommunications. Saaremaa is also a significant tourist destination, revisited by 35% of foreign and 95% of domestic tourists.\nTransportation.\nSaaremaa is reached by TS Laevad's ferries from Virtsu on the Estonian mainland to Kuivastu on Muhu island, which is itself connected to Saaremaa by a causeway, the V\u00e4inatamm. Saaremaa can also be reached by ferry from S\u00f5ru on the island of Hiiumaa to Triigi. There are also passenger services from Roomassaare to the smaller island of Abruka. During many winters it is possible to drive to Saaremaa by an ice road between the mainland and Muhu or between Saaremaa and the island of Hiiumaa.\nThere are regular bus services from Tallinn, P\u00e4rnu and Tartu on the mainland, which use the ferry from Virtsu to Muhu.\nKuressaare Airport offers regular flights to Tallinn operated by NyxAir. There are regular services to Ruhnu and P\u00e4rnu operated by Diamond Sky.\nHistorically there was a Soviet air base at Aste Airfield during the Cold War. Plans to connect Saaremaa to the mainland by either bridge or tunnel are being studied.\nSport.\nFC Kuressaare competes in the first tier of Estonian football, the Meistriliiga. Saaremaa has been competing in the biannual Island Games since 1991. They have participated in the IIGA organised competition consistently since 1991, winning 126 gold medals, 129 silver medals and 101.5 bronze medals, as they shared a medal. In total they have won 356.5 medals during their time in the Games.\nThere are three main international traditional sport events in Saaremaa:\nSaaremaa Rally takes place every year in October and attracts thousands of rally fans. The first rally was an amateur competition and it took place in 1974. The first professional competition took place in 1975 and from 1993 the rally has been international.\nSaaremaa Velotuur is a group race of road cyclists that is oldest in the Nordic countries (held since 1957) and the only international one in the Baltic states.\nSaaremaa three-day running marathon takes place on the roads around Kuressaare town and S\u00f5rve peninsula. The main race consists of three different runs, which are held on three sequential days (10+16,195+16=42,195\u00a0km). The first marathon was held in 1974.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28340", "revid": "49715059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28340", "title": "Single-shot", "text": "Firearm that holds one round of ammunition\nIn firearm designs, the term single-shot refers to guns that can hold only a single round of ammunition inside and thus must be reloaded manually after every shot. Compared to multi-shot repeating firearms (\"repeaters\"), single-shot designs have no moving parts other than the trigger, hammer/firing pin or frizzen, and therefore do not need a sizable receiver behind the barrel to accommodate a moving action, making them far less complex and more robust than revolvers or magazine/belt-fed firearms, but also with much slower rates of fire.\nThe history of firearms began with muzzleloading single-shot firearms such as the hand cannon and arquebus, then multi-barreled designs such as the derringer appeared, and eventually many centuries passed before breechloading repeating firearms became commonplace. Although largely disappeared from military usage due to insufficient firepower, single-shot firearms are still produced by many manufacturers in both muzzleloading and cartridge-firing varieties, from zip guns and ultra-concealable pocket pistols to the highest-quality hunting and match rifles.\nHistory.\nPre-cartridge era.\nThe vast majority of firearms before the introduction of metallic cartridges from the 1860s onwards were single shot muzzleloaders . However, multi-barrel, breechloading, revolving, and other multi-shot firearms had been experimented with for centuries. Notable pre-cartridge era single-shot firearms included matchlock, wheellock, snaplock, doglock, miquelet lock, flintlock, and percussion cap firearms. Muzzleloaders included the Brown Bess, Charleville and Springfield Model 1861 muskets, the Kentucky and Mississippi rifles, and the duelling pistol. There were also early breech-loading single-shot rifles, such as those manufactured by Hall, Ferguson, and Sharps.\nCartridge era.\nRifles.\nAlmost all of the early cartridge-fed rifles were single-shot designs, taking advantage of the strength and simplicity of single-shot actions. A good example is the \"trapdoor\" or Allin action used in early cartridge conversions of 1863 Springfield muzzleloading rifles. The conversion consisted of filing out (or later milling out) the rear of the barrel, and attaching a folding bolt, the \"trapdoor\", that flipped up and forwards to allow the cartridge to be loaded in the breech. Once loaded, the bolt was closed and latched in place, holding the round securely in place. The bolt contained a firing pin that used the existing percussion hammer, so no changes were required to the lock. After firing, the act of opening the bolt would partially extract the fired case from the chamber, allowing it to be removed. In 1866, the United States standardized on the Springfield Model 1866 rifle and .50-70 cartridge, chambered in trapdoor conversions of rifled muskets that had been used in the American Civil War. The trapdoor mechanism continued usage in 1873 with the adoption of the Springfield Model 1873 rifle and .45-70 cartridge. The Springfield Model 1873 rifle stayed in service until 1892 when it was replaced by the Krag\u2013J\u00f8rgensen bolt-action rifle from 1892 until 1903.\nAnother muzzleloader conversion similar in concept to the Allin action was the British Snider\u2013Enfield, also introduced in 1866, which hinged to the side rather than forward. Unlike the US Army, which kept its trapdoors for decades, the British soon moved beyond the Snider to the more sophisticated dropping-block Martini action derived from the Peabody action. Martini\u2013Henrys were the standard British rifles of the late Victorian era, and Martini\u2013Enfield conversions continued in second-line service until the Second World War.\nSingle-shot rifles were the preferred tools of big-game hunters in the late 19th century. The buffalo hunters of the American West used Sharps, Remington, and Springfield single-shots; ivory and trophy hunters in Africa and Asia used Martini and break-action \"express rifles\" and \"elephant guns.\" These rifles were designed for very large black-powder cartridges, from military-issue .45-70 on up to the enormous .50-140 Sharps and .500 Express; early repeating actions were not capable of handling rounds of this power and physical size. The single-shot big-game rifle would only be displaced by bolt-action repeaters firing high-velocity smokeless-powder cartridges in the early 20th century.\nAfter the advent of high-powered repeating rifles, single-shot rifles were primarily used for target shooting matches, with the first official match shooting event, opening at Creedmoor, Long Island in 1872. From about 1872 until the U.S. entry into World War I in 1917, target shooting with single-shot rifles was nearly as popular in America as golf is today. During that golden age of match shooting, the most popular target rifles were made by Bullard, Stevens, Remington, Maynard, Ballard, Farrow, and Winchester. Calibers used by some of these rifles during matches ranged from the .25-20 Winchester, .32-40 Winchester, .33 Winchester, .35 Winchester, .38-55 Winchester, .40-50 Winchester, .40-70 Winchester, .44-105 Winchester, etc. for over shooting at Creedmoor. However, two calibers maintained consistency throughout their tenure during the single-shot era: the .32-40 and the .38-55 calibers. The minimum standard in the beginning of the sport had been firing from the standing position (off-hand position). No rifle scopes, no bench rests, no prone (lying down on the front) positions, but shooting, as famed rifle barrel maker, \"Harry Melville Pope\" (1861\u20131950), once stated, \"standing on his hind legs and shooting like a man.\" The .32-40 and .38-55 were able to buck the wind better at , and not wear the rifleman out by heavy recoil, all while sustaining great accuracy. In the end, though, it was the .32-40 single-shot rifle that became the dean of match shooters, as the recoil from the .38-55 took its toll after hundreds of rounds had been fired during a match.\nIn 1878, John Moses Browning patented arguably the greatest single-shot rifle ever produced: after Browning sold his design to the Winchester Repeating Arms Company it was brought out as the Winchester Model 1885 Rifle. Although fewer than 200,000 Model 1885 Single Shots were built, they remained in production from 1885 to 1920.\nRemington, Sharps, and Browning all made single-shot rifles using different actions, such as the rolling block and falling block. These rifles were originally chambered in large black-powder cartridges, such as the .50-110 Winchester, and were used for hunting large game, often bison. Later production rifles would be in popular smokeless powder cartridges, such as the .30-40 Krag.\nSingle-shot rifles co-existed for some time with the lever-action rifle, but they began to fade out of manufacture with the advent of reliable bolt-action rifles.\nPistols.\nThe handgun began as a single-shot weapon in China in the 14th century. In its many versions, it remained a muzzle-loaded weapon until the advent of the metallic cartridge in the first third of the 18th century. Such single-shot cartridge-firing pistols were short-lived, as revolver technology evolved rapidly, and cartridge conversions existed for the common models of cap and ball revolvers. Two forms of single-shot pistol, however, remained: single-shot derringers, and target pistols, which were essentially single-shot rifle actions cut down to pistol size. The Remington Rolling Block is perhaps the most well-known of these. As the era of single-shot rifles faded, so did these early single-shot pistols.\nIn 1907, J. Stevens Arms, a maker of inexpensive break-open single-shot rifles in pistol calibers, started making pistol versions of their rifles. This pistol was chambered in .22 Long Rifle and came with adjustable iron sights and grips designed for target shooting. These models were discontinued in 1939.\nShotguns.\nSingle-barrel shotguns have always been popular as an inexpensive alternative to double-barreled shotguns. They are almost always break-open designs, like the double-barreled designs, but far less expensive since they do not require the precise aligning of parallel barrels. Single-barrel shotguns are also lighter, which can be an advantage if they are carried hunting, though it does mean they have more felt recoil. They are not widely used in shotgun sports, as most events require the ability to quickly fire two successive shots.\nThe single-barrel shotgun is often referred to as a \"kitchen door gun\" or a \"farm gun\" due to its low cost as a self-defense weapon.\nTypes of single-shot cartridge actions.\nTrapdoor actions.\nThe earliest metallic-cartridge breechloaders designed for general military issue began as conversions of muzzle-loading rifle muskets. The upper rear portion of the barrel was filed or milled away and replaced by a hinged breechblock which opened upward to permit loading. An internal angled firing pin allowed the re-use of the rifle's existing side-hammer. The Allin action made by Springfield Arsenal in the US hinged forward; the Snider\u2013Enfield used by the British opened to the side. Whereas the British quickly replaced the Snider with a dropping-block Peabody-style Martini action, the US Army felt the trapdoor action to be adequate and followed its muzzleloader conversions with the new-production Springfield Model 1873, which was the principal longarm of the Indian Wars and was still in service with some units in the Spanish\u2013American War.\nOther trapdoor actions include the rare Confederate Tarpley carbine, the Austrian Wanzl, the Belgian Albini-Braendlin rifle and Terssen conversion (some of which were made from French 1777 pattern flintlocks), the M1842/59/67 Swiss Milbank-Amsler, the M1859/67 Spanish Berdan, and the Colt-manufactured Russian Berdan Type I. All of these designs save the 1863 Tarpley date from the period 1865\u20131869, and all but the Tarpley and the Russian Berdan were conversions from muzzle-loaders.\nBreak actions.\nPerhaps the most common type of single-shot action, usually found in shotguns, small pistols, and black-powder \"elephant\" guns, a break action connects the barrel assembly to the breechblock with a hinge. When a locking latch is released, the barrel assembly pivots away from the receiver, opening the breech and sometimes on higher quality firearms, partially extracting the spent cartridge.\nRolling block actions.\nIn a rolling block action, the breechblock takes the form of a part-cylinder, with a pivot pin through its axis. The operator rotates or \"rolls\" the block to open and close the breech; it is a simple, rugged and reliable design. Rolling blocks are most often associated with firearms made by Remington in the later 19th century; in the Remington action the hammer serves to lock the breech closed at the moment of firing, and the block, in turn, prevents the hammer from falling with the breech open. An interesting variation of the rolling block was the Austrian M1867 Werndl\u2013Holub, in which the pivot pin was parallel to the barrel and the block rotated sideways.\nDropping block actions.\nThese are actions wherein the breechblock lowers or \"drops\" into the receiver to open the breech, usually actuated by an underlever. There are two principal types of dropping block: the tilting or pivoting block and the falling or sliding block.\nTilting block actions.\nIn a tilting or pivoting block action, the breechblock is hinged at the rear (in contrast with tilting bolt, which is not hinged). When the lever is operated, the block tilts down and forward, exposing the chamber. The best-known pivoting block designs are the Peabody, the Peabody\u2013Martini, and Ballard actions.\nThe original Peabody rifles, manufactured by the Providence Tool Company, used a manually cocked side-hammer. Swiss gunsmith Friedrich Martini devised an action that resembled the Peabody but incorporated a hammerless striker cocked by the operating lever with the same motion that pivoted the block. The 1871 Martini\u2013Henry which replaced the \"trapdoor\" Snider\u2013Enfield was the standard British Army rifle of the later Victorian era, and the Martini was also a popular action for civilian rifles.\nCharles H. Ballard's self-cocking tilting-block action was produced by the Marlin Firearms Company from 1875 and earned a superlative reputation among long-range \"Creedmoor\" target shooters. Surviving Marlin Ballards are today highly prized by collectors, especially those mounted in the elaborate Swiss-style \"Sch\u00fctzen\" stocks of the day.\nFalling block actions.\nIn a falling or sliding block action the block does not pivot but rather slides vertically in a slot milled into the receiver. Falling blocks are among the strongest small-arm actions ever produced, and are also used in heavy artillery. Well-known falling block designs include the Sharps rifles and carbines, the Browning/Winchester Single Shot, the Farquharson rifle, and the modern Ruger No. 1.\nBolt-actions.\nAlthough bolt-actions are usually associated with fixed or detachable box magazines, in fact, the first general-issue military breechloader was a single-shot bolt-action: the paper-cartridge Prussian needle gun of 1841. France countered in 1866 with its superior Chassepot rifle, also a paper-cartridge bolt-action. The first metallic-cartridge bolt-actions in general military service were the Berdan Type II introduced by Russia in 1870, the Mauser Model 1871, and a modified Chassepot, the Gras rifle of 1874; all these were single-shots.\nToday most top-level smallbore match rifles are single-shot bolt-actions.\nSingle-shot bolt-actions in .22 caliber were also widely manufactured as inexpensive \"boys' guns\" in the earlier 20th century; and there have been a few single-shot bolt-action shotguns, usually in .410 bore.\nOther single-shot actions.\nThe OSS stinger pen pistol and several other clandestine pen guns, as well as homemade zip guns often made using plumbing parts, and cane guns used for both defense and poaching use a screw thread to attach the chambered barrel to a receiver with some sort of breech and firing pin. The user unscrews the barrel from the receiver to expose the chamber to load a cartridge. The RN50 .50 BMG single-shot rifle uses a similar screwthread breech cap to allow an otherwise simple break-action to contain a .50 BMG cartridge.\nModern single-shots.\nAlthough non-cartridge single-shot firearms are still made in hobbyist contexts (for example, replicas of antique guns), this discussion focuses on newer designs employing cartridges.\nPistols.\nThe modern era of single-shot firearms is most visible in the realm of pistols. Remington introduced the single-shot bolt-action XP-100 pistol in 1963, which heralded the era of high-performance, high-velocity pistols. The .221 Fireball cartridge lived up to its name by reaching velocities of from a barrel. Essentially a shortened .222 Remington, the compact .221 Fireball delivered accuracy exceeding many rifles, out to ranges unheard of for other handguns.\nEven bigger than the XP-100, the 1967 introduction of the Thompson Center Arms Contender pistol changed handgun sports forever. The Contender was a break-open design that allowed barrels to be changed by the shooter in minutes. Available in calibers from .22 Long Rifle up to .45-70, and in barrel lengths of , the Contender could, in the right hands, handle any type of game, and delivered rifle-like accuracy to match the XP-100.\nMany other manufacturers make single-shot pistols, most based on the bolt-action rifle, with barrels generally ranging from . Single-shots dominate handgun metallic silhouette shooting and are the most common type used for hunting.\nSingle-shot pistols have sometimes found popularity among insurgents, resistance fighters, and street gangs. The mass-produced, low-cost Liberator pistol of World War II, which was manufactured and distributed by U.S. forces to Allied resistance forces and guerrilla fighters as an assassination pistol, is the most common example of a mass-produced single-shot pistol. More than a million units were produced and distributed freely, and many remain in private hands. A few varieties of zip guns could also be considered single-shot pistols. In recent years, these improvised firearms have become more common in the hands of criminals and insurgents, especially when manufactured firearms are difficult to acquire.\nRifles.\nRuger.\nIn 1966, Sturm, Ruger introduced their first true rifle, Ruger No. 1, which uses a falling-block action and is available in a wide selection of calibers from .22 Hornet to .458 Winchester Magnum. The No. 1 has always been sought after by shooters who appreciate the compact size of a single-shot rifle, and the falling block action cuts about off the length of the rifle for a given barrel length. From 1972 to 1987, Ruger also made a less expensive version of the #1, the #3. The #3, which sold for about half the price of a #1, used a simplified, non-locking lever for the falling block action, and came with an uncheckered stock.\nBrowning.\nIn 1985, Browning re-introduced the famous Winchester Model 1885 single-shot rifles in popular calibers but under the Browning name. Although the rifle gained fame under the Winchester brand name, it was John Moses Browning that designed the rifle, selling the rights to Winchester in the early 1880s and was in production from 1885 to 1920.\nCooper.\nThe majority of rifles made by Cooper are single-shot bolt-action rifles. Many of their rifles are specially crafted to suit long-range varmint hunting, where the accuracy of the single-shot action is helpful.\nRemington.\nRemington has once again made their No. 1 Rolling Block rifles available through their custom shop.\nNew England Firearms (H&amp;R).\nOne of the most common single-action rifles would be the New England Firearms' inexpensive break-open rifles, which are built on their 12 gauge break-open shotgun actions. The rifles, however, are made on a heat-treated steel action, and the shotgun actions are not heat-treated. Any rifle frame may accept rifle or shotgun barrels. The shotgun frames, however, are only safe for shotgun barrels. These were originally built by Harrington &amp; Richardson starting in 1871. H&amp;R was later acquired by NEF, and both are now part of the Marlin Firearms family. Rifles are sold both under the NEF and the H&amp;R names. These rifles are quite accurate, and often less than half the price of a bolt-action rifle in the same caliber.\nWinchester.\nIn 2005, Winchester re-marketed their legendary Model 1885 Single Shot Rifle, under their \"Limited Series\" category. The modern calibers of .17 were offered in a Low-Wall design, and the .243 Winchester and .30-06 Springfield were of the High-Wall design. The most faithful of the reproductions are the \"Traditional Hunter Limited Series\" Model 1885 Single Shots, as they have the original style steel crescent butt plates, and folding steel tang rear sights, with full-length octagon barrels. The Traditional Hunters are chambered in the 19th-century calibers of .45-90 Sharps, .45-70 Government, .405 Winchester, and .38-55 Winchester. Test firing of some of these Winchesters showed that they are high quality in construction, using the latest technology and modern steel, they are stronger and safer than their 19th-century predecessors, and accuracy from their factory (non-custom) barrels were exceptionally good; especially at .\nSharps.\nSharps rifles were a staple of the buffalo hunters in the late 19th century. Recently, they have had a resurgence in popularity for hunting large game as well as historical firearms events and black-powder cartridge (BPCR) competitions. Much of the current popularity is due to the film Quigley Down Under that featured a Sharps Model 1874 rifle. The popularity of Cowboy action shooting has also affected the availability of single-shot rifles, with many replicas of the old black-powder rifles, particularly the Sharps, now being available.\nBarrett M99.\nThe Barrett M99 is a single-shot, bolt-action, bullpup sniper rifle. It is chambered in .50 BMG, and .416 Barrett round that has 0.5 MOA accuracy at ranges that far exceed one mile.\nDenel NTW-20.\nThe Denel NTW-20 is a bolt-action, anti-material, or large-caliber sniper rifle. With a buffered slide in the receiver, the barrel can recoil inside the frame, allowing for large rounds to be fired with relative ease by the user. It is chambered for 20\u00d782mm Mauser, 14.5\u00d7114mm, and 20\u00d7110mm Hispano-Suiza round. Specifically, it is only a single-shot when chambered to the 20mm Hispano-Suiza round, while the remaining chamberings fed from 3-round magazines.\nSteyr.\nThe original version of Steyr HS .50 is a single-shot bolt-action sniper rifle. It is chambered in .50 BMG (or .460 Steyr) and can reach ranges from .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28341", "revid": "11487052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28341", "title": "Simon the Sorcerer", "text": "1993 video game\nSimon the Sorcerer is a 1993 point-and-click adventure game developed and published by Adventure Soft, for Amiga and MS-DOS. The story focuses on a boy named Simon who is transported into a parallel universe of magic and monsters, where he embarks on a mission to become a wizard and rescue another from an evil sorcerer. The setting was inspired by the novels of the \"Discworld\" series, and incorporates parodies on fantasy novels and fairy tales, such as \"The Lord of the Rings\" and Jack and the Beanstalk. The lead character's design was inspired by that of the fictional British television character Blackadder. The character was voiced by Chris Barrie in the CD re-release.\nThe game was well received by critics, who praised the humour, graphics and gameplay, with some minor criticism towards the plot. \"Simon the Sorcerer\" went on to become a video game series, with a sequel in 1995, \"\". The game was later released for PC in 2008 on GOG.com. A 20th Anniversary Edition was developed by MojoTouch and released on Google Play in 2013.\nGameplay.\nAs a point-and-click adventure game, the player controls the protagonist, Simon, by using the mouse. The iOS and Android versions use touchscreen controls instead. Gameplay involves the player moving Simon to different locations in the game, interacting with objects and other characters at each site. The player can make Simon perform actions through verbal commands like \"Look at\", \"Talk to\", and \"Give\", with objects that are picked up being placed into an inventory. Using these items requires the right verbal command and then selecting the target for that object. The game primarily involves talking to people for information, including hints or acquiring items, and using the correct items to solve puzzles. A menu system is provided for loading, saving and quitting the game via a postcard contained in the inventory. A fast-travel system is also provided in the form of a map in the inventory that can be used up until a certain point in the story.\nSynopsis.\nSetting.\nThe story takes in a parallel universe to the real world, where magic and monsters exist, although it contains some modern items and elements. The game's world features elements that are parodies of those from popular fantasy novels and fairy tales, including Rapunzel, \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"Discworld\", The Chronicles of Narnia, Jack and the Beanstalk, and the Three Billy Goats Gruff.\nPlot.\nOn his 12th birthday, a young boy named Simon is surprised when he receives a dog as a present from his parents, which he names Chippy. Unknown to Simon, his parents found the dog at their front door without warning, wrapped in paper, and possessing a book that nobody could read and which was eventually dumped in the loft. Sometime after his birthday, Simon hears Chippy playing around in the loft, to which he discovers it holding the book in its mouth. Reading it, he notes it is titled \"Ye Olde Spellbooke\", and unwittingly blurts out a spell on one of the pages. A portal suddenly appears, which Chippy enters. Simon follows after him and ends up in another world, dressed in a wizard's robe. After Chippy helps Simon escape a group of goblins, Simon follows Chippy to a village, and is brought to the home of the wizard Calypso.\nInside the house, Simon finds a letter addressed to him from Calypso, who reveals he was responsible for bringing him into his world to help defeat the evil sorcerer Sordid. Simon learns Calypso has since been kidnapped and that he must rescue the wizard in order to be able to go home. Per Calypso's instructions, Simon meets with a group of wizards in the village pub and asks them to make him a wizard. Carrying out a task set by them and paying them a small fee, Simon is made a wizard, and works to find the items needed to breach Sordid's mountain lair. After gaining entry to the tower with a potion that shrinks him, Simon overcomes further difficulties before returning to normal height to explore the tower. In Sordid's bedroom, he learns that the sorcerer created a wand which can turn people into stone, and can only be destroyed in the Fiery Pits of Rondor where Sordid had travelled to. Finding the wand in the tower, Simon uses a teleporter to reach Rondor, destroys the wand, and then defeats Sordid by pushing him into the fiery pits.\nSent back to his world, Simon awakens in his bedroom, assuming it was a dream. However, another portal opens in his room, whereupon a large gloved hand appears to take him back through.\nDevelopment and release.\nMike Woodroffe, \"Simon the Sorcerer\"'s director and producer, wanted to create the game to exploit a market for comic adventure games, which he realised existed due to the success of \"\". His son, Simon, penned the script. He was inspired by Terry Pratchett (Adventure Soft originally intended to make a \"Discworld\" game, but were unable to obtain a licence), and he and his father hoped that he would become involved with the game. Although he chose not to become involved, the script still contained his original humour. Many scenes are based on fairy tales, and the Wise Owl was modelled on Patrick Moore. Woodroffe said that Adventure Soft (then known as HorrorSoft) had done enough horror games and wanted to try a comedy game. Switching genres prompted the name change.\nSimon Woodroffe explained the character of Simon was a mixture of Blackadder, Rincewind, and Guybrush, and that he was originally intended to be a trainee wizard, similar to Harry Potter. He also explained he was invented because they needed someone to compete with characters such as Rincewind, and that the game was inspired by the \"Discworld\" books and \"Monkey Island\". Mike Woodroffe said that the game was inspired by \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"' magic stories. Other influences, according to Simon Woodroffe, included \"Red Dwarf\", \"Fawlty Towers\", and \"Monty Python\". The character was invented during a journey on the M5 motorway, and was not named after Woodroffe. The name \"Simon the Sorcerer\" had that format due to the magical nature of the character, and because other names, such as \"Willy The Wizard\", were rejected since they were disliked. \"Simon the Sorcerer\" was developed by a team of 15 people. There was an effort to be British in order to distinguish themselves from the humour of \"Monkey Island\". Simon Woodroffe stated that his greatest challenges were the script creation and puzzle design, and he tuned the scripts (which were written in an in-house scripting language) continuously. The world was created for the characters rather than the puzzles, and the story was wrapped around characters the team liked. Woodroffe believed that Adventure Soft were able to rival more experienced studios due to their small team, all of whom had the same goals and passion for the game. On deciding which fairy tales to feature in the game, Simon Woodroffe said he \"read a whole bunch of that kind of stuff\", including the \"Grimms' Fairy Tales\", and he also owned Ladybird Books when he was growing up. He said that there were some he \"really wanted\" to include, such as \"The Magic Porridge Pot\", but could not.\nAlan Brigman was the technical director and co-producer. He and Mike Woodroffe developed a game creation system, Adventure Graphic Operating System (AGOS) II, which facilitated the development of \"Simon the Sorcerer\" and enabled the team to focus on the gameplay and story without worrying about the technical aspects. The system allowed the developers to input text commands on a separate monitor, and the engine could be ported to other platforms. Other features included translating actions performed by the mouse into text commands (a sentence parser carries them out), the loading of data as needed, and functions could be implemented by the addition of commands. The game was built as a database, which contained tables for rooms and objects. These tables contained animation code and information about what is supposed to happen. Alan Cox was also involved in the development of the AGOS engine, which is based on AberMUD.\nThe art was developed by Paul Drummond (lead artist), Kevin Preston (who hand-drew the character art and animation), Maria Drummond, Jeff Wall, and Karen Pinchin. This team were based at a studio in Newcastle, rather than Birmingham, the central studio. Their work included character animations, developed in Autodesk Animator using its language POCO, which the graphics tools were built in. The artwork (including the sprites) was made as a selection of clips, and a final image was formed by pasting them together. The ability to use clips in multiple locations, and the colour information being stored separately and used on an as\u2014needed basis meant that the art took much less space than normal. The background artwork was sketched in black-and-white, and then scanned into a computer and colourised. The music is credited to Media Sorcery (Adam Gilmore and Mark McLeod).\n\"Simon the Sorcerer\" was released on floppy disk in 1993 for the Amiga and IBM PC compatibles. It was re-released in 1994 for the Amiga CD32 and PC CD-ROM, with an enhanced soundtrack featuring Chris Barrie as the voice of Simon. Simon Woodroffe stated that he had Barrie in mind when writing the scripts (Woodroffe said he is a fan of \"Red Dwarf\" and Arnold Rimmer), and it was easier for him to do so when thinking of an actor he knew speaking the lines. It cost around \u00a33,000 per day to hire Barrie. Woodroffe said there was \"no hesitation\" in doing a talkie version, and that it was \"the next big thing\". He also said that Barrie was \"very patient and professional\". \"Simon the Sorcerer\" used the visual and interface designs from LucasArts' games, and Woodroffe said this was because they had set a standard, and Adventure Soft's focus was humour and story-telling.\nThe PC version was later ported to Microsoft Windows. The game was published in the United States by Activision. A patch was released, fixing compatibility issues with Windows ME, 2000, and XP. \"Simon the Sorcerer\" was released on GOG.com in December 2008. In 2009, the game was re-released for the iPhone by iPhSoft. A new version titled '20th Anniversary Edition was developed by MojoTouch and released for Android in August 2013. This version featured new animations and icons, remastered music, high-definition graphics, and updated game menus. A 25th Anniversary Edition was released on the iOS App Store, Steam and GOG.com on 3 April 2018. A sequel, \"\", was released in 1995.\nReception.\n\"Simon the Sorcerer\" received critical acclaim: across all platforms, the humour and visuals in particular were commended, although criticisms included the controls and the linear nature. The game's global sales surpassed 600,000 units by September 1999.\nThe Amiga version received generally high ratings. \"CU Amiga\" praised the high quality graphics and how much fun the game was to play. \"Amiga Computing\"'s Simon Clays also praised the graphics and the locations, saying the locations' stylisation made the game resemble a fairy tale. He also enjoyed the puzzles and detail in the game. \"The One\"'s reviewer said the graphics are \"excellent\", but believed the music did not take full advantage of the Amiga's sound hardware. A reviewer of \"G\u00e9n\u00e9ration 4\" found the Amiga version's graphics to be \"magnificent\".\nThe CD32 version was noted for its speech. \"CU Amiga\"'s Dean Evans was impressed with \"sumptuous\" backgrounds and the animation, and believed the main selling point was the digitised speech, especially Chris Barrie as Simon. Jonathan Nash of \"Amiga Power\" liked the \"gorgeous\" graphics, but thought the dialogue was annoying, and he also criticised the puzzles as \"spread thinly over the pointlessly large playing area\". The reviewer of \"Amiga CD32 Gamer\" was impressed with the soundtrack, describing it as \"top notch\", and thought the story had plenty of wit. The main criticism was the scenes downplaying interaction, making the comedy linear. \"The One\"'s reviewer corroborated others' opinions on the graphics, finding them to be \"stunning\", and also believed the atmosphere was augmented by the speech. Chris Barrie as Simon was believed by \"Amiga Computing\" to \"greatly enhance\" the game by giving the speech a new appeal. \"Amiga Format\"'s reviewer criticised the controls, believing the controller's limitations would make players \"an insane hysterical gibbering wreck\", but complimented the addition of speech, and echoed others' opinions on the graphics by calling them \"beautiful\". In a later review, Andy Smith believed that Barrie's voice acting livened the humour, and concurred with Evans' evaluation of the graphics as \"sumptuous\", but said it was difficult to get the game working on an Amiga 1200.\nReviewers of the DOS and Windows versions praised the humour and dialogue. The reviewers of ' described the adventure as \"excellent\", and believed \"Simon the Sorcerer\" might be the most amusing and idiosyncratic adventure game. \"Computer Gaming World\" stated that the \"wacky, tongue-in-cheek interactive fantasy [...] features a rich world of tasty puzzles designed to test the wits of the most astute adventurer while keeping the humor dial turned up to the max\". Jeuxvideo.com described the characters' dialogue as \"crazy\" and praised the amount of humour, but they believed the adventure is over too quickly. Their review of the Amiga version was identical. Tawny Ditmer of \"Gamezebo\" lauded the story as \"hilarious\" and the scenery and music as \"wonderfully colorful and cheery\", criticised the lack of side-quests and pointed out that the original graphics looks outdated in 2009. The script and dialogue were praised as \"fantastic\" by Rob Franklin of \"Adventure Gamers\", and complimented Chris Barrie's \"brilliant\" voice acting, but criticised the plot for being vague. He recommended the game for fans of adventure games and British humour. Zolt\u00e1n Orm\u00e1ndi of Adventure Classic Gaming thought highly of the puzzles' originality and Simon's humour. He claimed the game's popularity caused a term, \"Simonology\" to be coined describing the humour of an adventure's protagonist. GameRankings wrote the PC version has a rating of 86 per cent. The reviewer of ' liked the decoration, animation, and characters.\nPaul Marchant of \"Pocket Gamer\" reviewed the iOS version, and said that it was the game he liked, rather than the iPhone implementation. He thought the game was a \"classic\" and described the dialogue as \"original\". Damian Chiappara of AppSpy believed the iOS version's graphics are improved over the original, and liked the \"quirky\" humour, but thought that it can take time for players to familiarise themselves with its controls. The iPad and Android versions appeared on \"Pocket Gamer\"'s Top 10 point-and-click adventure games for their respective platforms.\nIn 2011, \"Adventure Gamers\" named \"Simon the Sorcerer\" the 44th-best adventure game ever released.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28343", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28343", "title": "South African Republic", "text": "1852\u20131902 Boer republic in Southern Africa\nThe South African Republic (, abbreviated ZAR; ), also known as the Transvaal Republic, was a landlocked independent Boer republic in Southern Africa which existed from 1852 to 1902, when it was annexed into the British Empire as a result of the Second Boer War.\nThe ZAR was established as a result of the 1852 Sand River Convention, in which the British government agreed to formally recognise independence of the Boers living north of the Vaal River. Relations between the ZAR and Britain started to deteriorate after the British Cape Colony expanded into the Southern African interior, eventually leading to the outbreak of the First Boer War between the two nations. The Boer victory confirmed the ZAR's independence; however, Anglo-ZAR tensions soon flared up again over various diplomatic issues. In 1899, war again broke out between Britain and the ZAR, which was swiftly occupied by British forces. Many Boer combatants in the ZAR refused to surrender, leading British commander Lord Kitchener to order the adoption of several scorched-earth policies. In the treaty which ended the war, the ZAR was transformed into the Transvaal Colony, and eventually the Union of South Africa. During World War I, there was a failed attempt at resurrecting the republic in the Maritz rebellion.\nThe land area that was once the ZAR now comprises all or most of the provinces of Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, and North West in the northeastern portion of the modern-day Republic of South Africa.\nName and etymology.\nIn 1853 the Volksraad adopted a resolution briefly adopting the name of the (South African Republic). The same year, the Volksraad renamed the state to the (South African Republic to the North of the Vaal River). In 1858, the constitution permanently established the name of the country as the . The ZAR was also commonly referred to as in reference to the area beyond (or \"trans\") the Vaal River, including by the British and European press. The British objected to the use of the name . After the end of the First Boer War, the ZAR came under British suzerainty and in the Pretoria Convention of 3 August 1881, the British insisted on the use of the name Transvaal State over . This convention was renegotiated in a subsequent treaty between Britain and the ZAR, the London Convention of 27 February 1884, where Britain acquiesced to the ZAR's demands to revert to the use of the previous name.\nThe name of the South African Republic was of such political significance that on 1 September 1900, the British declared by special proclamation that the name of the country had been changed from to \"the Transvaal\". This proclamation was issued during the British occupation of the region in the Second Boer War and while the ZAR was still nominally an independent country.\nOn 31 May 1902, the Treaty of Vereeniging was signed with the government of the South African Republic, the Orange Free State government, and the British government, ending the war, and converted the ZAR into the Transvaal Colony. Following the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910, the Transvaal Colony became Transvaal Province. The name Transvaal was finally changed in 1994, when the post-apartheid African National Congress-dominated South African government broke up the province into four provinces and renamed the core region Gauteng.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Boer republics emerged when the British had annexed the Cape Colony from the Dutch in 1806, in order to prevent the sea routes to the East (India etc.) from falling to Napoleon. This area was inhabited by the Boers, who, dissatisfied with British rule, decided to leave the colony and move into the hinterland of South Africa in what became the Great Trek. These Boers then settled these lands, becoming farmers.\nThe South African Republic came into existence on 17 January 1852, when the British signed the Sand River Convention treaty with about 40,000\u00a0Boer people, recognising their independence in the region to the north of the Vaal River, which had previously been under British annexation as the Orange Rivers Sovereignty.\nThe first president of the ZAR was Marthinus Wessel Pretorius, elected in 1857, son of Boer leader Andries Pretorius, who commanded the Boers to victory at the Battle of Blood River. The capital was established at Potchefstroom and later moved to Pretoria. The parliament was called the and had 24 members.\nBritish annexation.\nBy the 1870s, the British Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Carnarvon, adopted a policy of confederating South Africa, in order to solve the problems of a restless frontier and of containing the Boers, which both threatened their colonies of Natal and the Cape of Good Hope. These colonies were absolutely vital in providing a route to India, which was Britain's prime colony. Confederation of the South African region was thought to be very beneficial for the British, as it would \"cheapen the administration of affairs\" and reduce the need for imperial money and troops.\nThe first issue that prompted the annexation of Transvaal was the prospect that the Boers might gain an outlet to the sea, which the British government was trying to prevent, as shown by the annexation of Natal, which had previously been a Boer republic called Natalia. This annexation happened because the MacMahon award gave the Delagoa bay to the Portuguese, who were friendly to the Boers. The Transvaal government immediately took steps to acquire a loan to build a railway there, and even led discussions to purchase the bay outright. This railway and purchase caused the loss of the only control that the British had, since previously the British could at the very least restrict the supply of arms and ammunition that was exported and fell into the hands of the Boers and natives and thereby rein in what the British saw as the anarchy in the Transvaal. Additionally, the sea outlet that the Boers acquired which was outside the control of the British made persuading the Boers to enter a South African confederation far more difficult, as the Boers as a result achieved greater independence.\nMoreover, the Foreign Office was concerned that the opening of Delagoa Bay could signal the involvement of other nations in the Transvaal, which could threaten the Cape Colony. This concern was intensified by the fact that some German merchants had already approached Bismark with the proposition that he annex the Transvaal, which proposition, although rejected, raised the possibility of the Boers requesting German protection, which in turn raised the possibility of the appearance of a foreign and unfriendly power in the Cape which could threaten Britain's position there. These fears were further stoked by the trip that Thomas Burgers, the president of Transvaal took to Europe, during which he tried to negotiate a loan for a railway, as well as possible European alliances.\nThe second issue that prompted the annexation was native policy and Boer relations with local African kingdoms. The British considered these relations a problem ever since the founding of the ZAR. Only one year after the Sand Rivers Convention, the Lieutenant-Governor of Natal, Benjamin Pine, reported that the Boers had interpreted the treaty as having placed Zululand under their exclusive control. Pine stated that such a union of the Zulus and the Boers, who had wanted to create a settlement in the North-West corner of Zululand, would imperil the safety of Natal. This combination meant that control of the land around the areas of Utrecht would be in dispute between the Boers and the Zulus, raising tension in the region. The Boers had also been acting provocatively towards the Bantu peoples living in Bechuanaland: for instance, in 1852, Boer commandos raided the town of Kwena, taking many prisoners, and in 1857 a Boer commandos led another raid on Batlhaping, after claiming that the tribesmen stole their cattle. For the British, these conflicts had a high chance for escalating and presented big problems no matter how they turned out: if the Boers won in their war against the Zulus, there would be a substantial increase of Zulu refugees into the already crowded area of Natal, and the displacement of peoples had been shown to create an atmosphere conducive to war, as shown by the Xhosa wars). If the Zulus won, other independent tribes such as the Bantu, the Pondo, Swazi, Bapedi, and others, would gain confidence that they might obtain their independence from the British or at least offer the British resistance, endangering the Cape Colony. Annexation was therefore the only way of preventing either of these outcomes.\nWhat precipitated action and confirmed the aforementioned fears was that in 1876, war broke out between the Boers and the Bapedi chief Sekhukhune. Initially, the Boers faced heavy defeats: the Republic was close to bankruptcy and its siege of Sekhukhune's stronghold failed because commando members objected to Burgers's theology, calling him a heretic, and abandoned the siege in droves. Sir Henry Barkley exaggerated this failure as a major and decisive defeat of the Boers, and was thereby led to anticipate an immediate application to the High Commissioner to take over the country. A.N. Pelzer wrote: \"Although Sekhukhune made overtures for peace, he was not defeated and this fact, together with the shaky financial position, gave Sir Theophilus Shepstone the pretext he required to annex the republic [as the Transvaal, a British colony, on 12 April 1877].\" Barkly's warning hastened the action of Lord Carnarvon and led to the dispatch of Sir Theophilus Shepstone, who happened to be in England, on his mission as special commissioner \"to carry out any negotiations which may be found necessary and practicable.\" Shepstone's warrant authorised him to annex the Transvaal, provided he was satisfied that a sufficient number of the inhabitants, or the legislature, desired it. By the time Shepstone arrived, however, the Bapedi and the Boers had signed a peace treaty. However, this conflict cannot be lightly dismissed as \"the picturesque pretext\" for annexation. In spite of the Boer \"victory,\" on 16 February 1877, the Boers and Bapedi, mediated by Alexander Merensky, signed a peace treaty at Botshabelo). Nonetheless, the situation could not be described as anything but critical. The war had been expensive, leading the government of the Republic to be insolvent, and the desertion of Boer commandos gave the Zulus, the arch-enemies of the Boers, the impression that the Transvaal was weak, as they had been barely able to defeat Sekhukhune, who they considered a minor vassal. In the spring and summer of 1876\u201377, frontier skirmishes between the Zulus and Boers flared up once again, and Cetewayo, the Zulu king, began moving his impis towards the border between the Transvaal and Zululand.\nBelieving that the only answer to the instability of the region was British intervention, senior War Office official Sir Garnet Wolseley argued that Britain should \"use Cetewayo as a powerful lever to influence wavering spirit\". It has therefore been suggested that the danger that the Zulus presented was specifically manufactured by the British to induce the Boers to accept annexation, and the impis had been massed on the border \"on a hint from Shepstone\". This suggestion is supported by the presence of Zulu emissaries in March 1877 in Natal stating that the Zulu army had massed \"in readiness at the call of Somtseu (Shepstone) to go round towards the upper side of the Dutch.\" Moreover, Shepstone requested Sir Henry Bulwer, the British Lieutenant-Governor of Natal, to cease the importation of military materiel into the Transvaal.\nHowever, the independence of the Zulu kingdom must not be understated, and the influence that Shepstone had over Cetewayo should not be exaggerated. What kept the Zulus loyal to the British was their fear of the Boers: but once the Zulus realized that the Boers were not a threat, they realised that they did not need to acquiesce to British demands. This is shown by the response that Cetewayo made to the calls for peace from the Lieutenant-Governor of Natal: \"I shall not act on my own account. I shall not agree to any laws or rules from Natal.\" Writing on the 14th February 1877, Shepstone asserted: \"While I am here, Cetewayo will do nothing; but if I were to withdraw without completing my mission[annexation], I believe that not only the Zulus but every native tribe in the Transvaal and bordering on it would attack and wipe it out.\" The danger of a Zulu attack was therefore very real, and not invented by the British. However, the British did apply pressure on the Boers to excite apprehensions of the danger the Zulus presented by cutting off Boer access to the coast, which prevented them from profiting from customs duties on maritime imports and exports, as well as cutting off their source of arms, which contributed to their fear of a Zulu attack.\nIn 1877, Shepstone left Natal for Pretoria. He was warmly received by Burgers, the president of the Transvaal. Since the country was on the eve of an election which Burgers was bound to lose due to his unpopularity, Sir Theophilius therefore \"was convinced beyond any doubt of Burgers' support against their common enemy: Kruger\", since Kruger was Burger's primary rival in the election, against whom he could leverage the aid of the Natalian (Shepstone). Thomas Burgers hoped to use the presence of Shepstone to induce the Volksraad to accept, as an alternative to annexation, a reform to the constitution that would strengthen his executive authority and prolong his rule by two more years. Even when Shepstone informed Burgers of his determination to go through with annexing the Transvaal, Burgers assured Shepstone of his co-operation.\nIt is argued by some that Shepstone had annexed the area in haste, \"without troubling to ascertain the real drift of Dutch opinion.\" However, his decision was certainly not made in haste, as he remained in Pretoria for three months before making a proclamation of annexation, at which time he was in contact with the members of the community in Pretoria. Moreover, due to the economic depression, as well as the \"incurable insolvency\" of the government, the burghers were ready to support the annexation, which was expected to solve these problems, whilst providing them protection from the natives. Additionally, the state attorney, Dr Jorissen, opined that, had Shepstone summoned the Volksraad after annexation, he would have obtained a vote of confidence.\nAt Pretoria the annexation was received quietly enough. The republican printing press (De Volksstem) made no difficulty over the printing of Shepstone's proclamation. Despite the official protest of the executive council, all but one of its members retained office under the new administration, and no military incidents occurred during or immediately after the annexation. Sir Garnet Wolseley, High Commissioner for Southeast Africa, declared war on Sekhukhune. With British and allied troops, including the Swazis who had supported Burgers, in 1879 Wolseley defeated Sekhukhune and imprisoned him in Pretoria. With the Bapedi threat removed, the Burghers were no longer so amenable to British rule.\nOn 13 December 1880, the members of the last were summoned to a meeting at Paardekraal. The meeting placed authority in the hands of a triumvirate: Paul Kruger, Piet Joubert, and Marthinus Wessel Pretorius. They declared Heidelberg their seat of government and hoisted the Vierkleur there on 16 December. The war, not officially declared to the occupying British troops, opened with an irregular attack on a British regiment on the march at Bronkhorstspruit. The British garrisons in the Transvaal were besieged, but only one fell to the republicans.\nThe Boers defeated the British at Laing's Nek and Ingogo, and on 27 February 1881, at Majuba, General Sir George Pomeroy Colley fell at the head of his troops. While the British would in other circumstances have sent more troops and defeated the rebels, Prime Minister William Gladstone chose to make peace. Drawing up of the detailed peace treaty\u2014the Pretoria Convention\u2014was left in the hands of a royal commission comprising Sir Hercules Robinson, General Sir Evelyn Wood and Justice John de Villiers of the Cape Colony. Britain now referred to the territory as the Transvaal State, but the regarded the old South African Republic as having been restored.\nIndependence.\nThe ZAR became fully independent on 27 February 1884, when the London Convention was signed. The country independently also entered into various agreements with other foreign countries after that date. On 3 November 1884 the country signed a postal convention with the government of the Cape Colony and later a similar convention with the Orange Free State.\nIn November 1859, the independent Republics of Lijdenburg and Utrecht merged with the ZAR. On 9 May 1887, burghers from the territories of Stellaland and Goosen (sometimes referred to as \"Goshen\") were granted the ZAR franchise. The ZAR incorporated the former Nieuwe Republiek (Republic of Vryheid) on 20 July 1888. On 25 July 1895, the burghers that took part in the battle at Zoutpansberg were granted citizenship of the ZAR.\nConstitution and laws.\nThe constitution of the ZAR was legally interesting for its time. It contained provisions for the division between the political leadership and office bearers in government administration. The legal system consisted of higher and lower courts and had adopted a jury system. Laws were enforced by the South African Republic Police ( or ZARP) which were divided into Mounted Police () and Foot Police.\nAlso established were municipal government, the Witwatersrand District Court and the High Court of Transvaal.\nDemographics.\nThe State Almanac for 1897 states that the total white population was 245,397; with the total black population being 622,544.\nReligion.\nInitially, the state and church were not separated in the constitution; citizens of the ZAR had to be members of the Nederduitsch Hervormde Kerk, a denomination which had broken from the Dutch Reformed Church. In 1858, these clauses were altered in the constitution to allow for the to approve other Dutch Christian churches. The Dopper Church was approved by the in 1858, which had the effect of allowing Paul Kruger, a Dopper himself, to remain a citizen of the ZAR.\nThe Bible itself was also often used to interpret the intention of legal documents. The Bible was also used to interpret a prisoner exchange agreement, reached in terms of the Sand River Convention, between a commando of the ZAR, led by Kruger, and a Commando of the Orange Free State. President Jacobus Nicolaas Boshoff had issued a death sentence over two ZAR citizens, for treason. Kruger argued with President Boshoff that the Bible said punishment does not mean a death sentence and at the prisoner exchange, it was agreed that the accused would be punished if found guilty. After consulting Commandant Kruger's Bible, Boshoff commuted the men's sentences to lashes with a sjambok.\nCitizenship.\nCitizenship of the ZAR was legislated by the constitution as well as Law No 7 of 1882, as amended on 23 June 1890. Citizenship was gained by being born in the republic or by naturalisation. The voting age was 16 years. Persons not born in the republic could become citizens by taking the prescribed oath and procuring the letters of naturalisation. The oath involved abandoning, discarding and renouncing all allegiance and subjugation towards foreign sovereignties and in particular their previous citizenship. Under a law of 1855, only white people were permitted to be citizens of the ZAR and to own land. The constitution of the ZAR stated: \"The \"volk\" (people) are not prepared to allow any equality of the non-white with the white inhabitants, either in the church or the state\".\nThe Witwatersrand gold rush led to an influx of Indians and Chinese into the new city of Johannesburg that was emerging on the \"veld\", which led the \"volksraad\" to pass Law Number 3, which was aimed at stopping Asian immigration into the Transvaal. Under Law Number 3, all Asians which were defined as \"Coolies, Chinese etc, Arabs, Malays, and Mohammedan subjects of the Turkish dominion\" were forbidden from owning fixed property, had to register with the local magistrate within 8 days of arriving, were restricted to living in certain neighborhoods and had to pay an entry fee of \u00a325. The Indian merchants, who were classified as \"Arabs\", objected to this law and appealed to the British government to protect their rights as British subjects. Following British diplomatic pressure, Law Number 3 was amended by the \"volksraad\" in 1887 to allow the \"Asiatics\" the right to own fixed property, though not land, and the entry fee was lowered to \u00a33. Because the Indians in the ZAR had the British government to protect them, the anti-Asian laws in the ZAR tended to single out the Chinese, though the Hong Kong Chinese were like the Indians able to claim as British subjects certain exemptions from the anti-Chinese laws.\nTo be eligible for citizenship, white foreigners had to have been residing in the Republic for a period of two years, be of good character and have been accepted as member of the Dutch Reformed or Reformed Church. On 20 September 1893 the ZAR Constitution was amended so that two-thirds of the Volksraad would have to agree to changes to the citizenship law. This proclamation, No 224, also changed Law No 7 with regard to voting.\nAll citizens who were born in the ZAR or had obtained their franchise prior to 23 June 1890 would have the right to vote for both the first and second and in all other elections. Citizens who obtained their franchise through naturalization after 23 June 1890 would be able to vote in all elections, except those for the first . The total population of the republic in 1890 was an estimated 120,000 people.\nMilitary.\nIn common with the Orange Free State, the basis of the military of the ZAR was the \"kommando\" system under which all able-bodied \"burghers\" could be called up for military service under their own elected officers. The men of the \"kommandos\" wore no uniforms and had no medals. The basic officer was the field cornet who was elected by the local \"burghers\" and performed both military and administrative functions in his district. The field cornet was responsible for collecting taxes, performing the census, training the male \"burghers\", collecting arms and with upholding the power of the state over the local black population. The commander of the ZAR's military was the elected commandant-general who like the field cornets performed both military and political functions. The commandant-general was responsible for buying guns and ammunition, fixed the prices of commodities and most importantly controlled the ivory trade. The economy of the Transvaal was very much a barter economy, and ivory was one of the principal currencies used in trade and commerce. The professional military of the ZAR was the \"Staatsartillerie\" (State Artillery), who in 1899 numbered 314 men. The \"Staatsartillerie\" was armed with the modern Krupp artillery guns imported from Germany, and whose second-in-command was the Austrian officer Captain Adolf Zboril, who did his best to bring up the \"Staatsartillerie\" to the level of a European army. The closest the ZAR had to a professional infantry and cavalry was the para-military ZARP (\"Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek Politie\"-South African Republic Police). In 1899, the ZAR had about 30,000 men who were called up to serve in the \"kommandos\".\nThough in theory, any white male \"burgher\" could be elected to a military office, in practice the men who were elected came from the wealthier families, who used their wealth to build up patronage networks that put the poorer farmers into their debt in one manner or another. The South African historian Ian van der Waag described Boer society as being characterized by a quasi-feudalism as the wealthier families set themselves up as something alike to the marcher lords of medieval Europe. The field cornets often waged war against local African natives in order to seize land, ivory and people to distribute as spoils to their constituents in exchange for their electoral support, often specifically for elections to higher republic offices. There was a strong dynastic element to the election of generals who commanded the \"kommandos\" as there was a tendency for men from the same families to be elected to the office of general generation after generation. In 1899, while the average age of a general in the ZAR was 58, the majority had a very limited education. In a society that venerated age, the most respected man was the \"takhaar\", the wealthy patriarch with the long hair and long beard that indicated wisdom, and these were accordingly the people most likely to be elected as officers. Most of the \"takhaars\" serving as officers in 1899 were in some way connected to President Paul Kruger, either by ties of blood or marriage.\nLanguage.\nThe language spoken and written by the citizens of the ZAR was a variant of Dutch, locally referred to as . On 3 October 1884, the stated that they had reason to believe that in certain schools impure Dutch (in fact an early form of Afrikaans) was being used. The issued Proclamation 207 and compelled the Superintendent of Education to apply the language law enforcing the exclusive use of Dutch. On 30 July 1888, Dutch language was declared the sole official language, in court as well as education, trade and general use. All other languages were declared \"foreign\".\nThese changes to the ZAR laws made the use of all other foreign languages illegal in the ZAR. On 1 October 1895 Alfred Fernandez Harington was appointed English master at the Staats Model School in Pretoria. Use of any foreign language was subject to criminal penalty and fine of \u00a320 (ZAR) for each offence. The British similarly had declared English to be the only language spoken in the Cape Colony some decades earlier to outlaw the Dutch language. The discovery of gold in 1885 led to a major influx of foreigners. By 1896, the language of government and citizens remained Dutch but in many market places, shops and homes the English language was spoken.\nMilitary history.\nWar with Mapela and Makapaan, 1854.\nHendrik Potgieter was elected at the assembly of 1849 as commandant general for life and it became necessary, to avoid strife, to appoint three commandants general all possessing equal powers. Commandant General Andries Pretorius became commandant general of the Potchefstroom and Rustenburg districts. On 16 December 1852, Andries died and his son, Piet Pretorius, was appointed as commandant general of the Lydenburg and Zoutpansberg districts in his stead.\nThere were some disputes over cattle which Mapela was raising on behalf of Potgieter and earlier Commandant Scholtz had confiscated a large number of rifles and amounts of ammunition, rifle repair equipment and materials of war from the home of an English missionary, the Reverend Livingstone. Livingstone admitted to storing weaponry for the Secheli, a breach of the Sand River Convention, which prohibited providing arms or ammunition to the natives.\nIn 1853, Herman Potgieter was called to Mapela to aid in a cull of the elephant population. Upon arrival, Maphela guided the Potgieter party, which included Herman, his son, his groom and a few other burghers to the purported location where the elephants were herding. Rather instead, Mapela led the unsuspecting Boers into an ambush where hundreds of native warriors attacked the Potgieter party, killing Andries, then proceeding to drag Herman up a hill, where he was skinned alive. They stopped once they had torn the entrails from his body. At the same time of these events, the Ndebele chief Magobane (known to the Boers as Makapaan) attacked and killed an entire convoy of women and children traveling to Pretoria. The two chiefs had concluded an agreement to murder all the Europeans in their respective districts and to keep the cattle that they were raising for the Europeans.\nGeneral Piet Potgieter set out with 100 men from Zoutpansberg and Commandant General Pretorius left Pretoria with 200 men. After the commandos met up, they first attacked Magobane and the natives were driven back to their caves in the mountains where they lived before. The Boers held them at siege in their caves and eventually hundreds of women and children came out.\nOrphan children of the native tribes were booked in strictly controlled by legal process, at appointed Boer families to look after them until they came of age. The administration was similar to the system of indentured workers, which was simply another form of slavery, with the exception that children so registered had to be released at age 16. The commando would return all such children to the nearest landdrost district, for registration and allocation to a Boer family.\nAs there were slavers and other criminals dealing in children, any burgher found in possession of an unregistered minor child was guilty of a criminal offence. These children were also often called \"oorlams\" in reference to being overly used to the Dutch culture, and in reference to a hand-raised orphan sheep, or \"hanslam\". These children, even after their 16th birthday, and being free to come and go as they please, rarely re-connected with their own culture and own language and except for surviving and being cared for in terms of food and shelter, were basically forcefully divorced from their native tribe forever.\nAmong the casualties of this war was Commandant General Potgieter. The natives were armed with rifles and were good shots. The general was killed by a native sniper on the ridge of a trench and his body recovered by then commandant Paul Kruger whilst under heavy fire from the natives. What remained of the joint commando, now under command of General Pretorius focussed their attention on Mapela. By the time the commando had reached Mapela, the natives had fled. A few wagons, bloody clothes, chests and other goods were discovered at a kop near Mapela's town. Mapela and his soldiers escaped and with their rifles and ammunition intact and Mapela was only captured much later, in 1858.\nCivil War, 1861\u20131864.\nCommandant-General Stephanus Schoeman did not accept the proclamation of 20 September 1858, under which members of the Reformed Churches of South Africa would be entitled to citizenship of the ZAR. Consequently, Paul Kruger was not accepted as a citizen and disallowed from political intercourse. Acting President van Rensburg called a special meeting of the general council of the Dutch Reformed Church, which then voted in a special resolution to allow members of the Reformed Church access to the franchise.\nSekhukune War, 1876.\nIn 1876, a war between the ZAR and the Bapedi broke out over cattle theft and land encroachment. The declared war on the Pedi leader, Sekhukune, on 16 May 1876. The war only began in July 1876. The president of the ZAR, Burgers led an army of 2000 burghers and was joined by a strong force of Swazi warriors. The Swazis joined the war to aid Mampuru, who was ousted from his position of chieftain by Sekhukune.\nOne of the early battles occurred at Botsabelo Mission Station on 13 July 1876, against Johannes Dinkwanyane, who was Sekhukune's brother. The Boer forces were led by Commandant Coetzee and accompanied by Swazi warriors. The Swazi warriors launched a surprise and successful attack while the Boers held back. Seeing this, the Swazis refused to hand over to the Boers any spoils from the battle, thereafter leaving and returning to Swaziland. Dinkwanyane's followers also surrendered after this campaign.\nFirst Boer War, 1880\u20131881.\nOn 12 April 1877, British officials issued the \"Annexation of the S. A. Republic to the British Empire.\" The proclamation stated that the country was \"unstable, ungovernable, bankrupt and facing civil war\", though in reality the British wished to annex it for its strategic position, using skirmishes as a \"casus belli\". The annexation would not suspend self-government, but nonetheless attempted to convert the ZAR into a colony of the British Empire. The ZAR unanimously decided to resist the British annexation. Instead of declaring war, the country decided to send a delegation to the United Kingdom and the United States, to protest. This did not have any effect, and the First Boer War formally broke out on 20 December 1880.\nIt would see the introduction of the khaki uniform among British troops, marking the beginning of the end of the famous red coat. The Battle of Laing's Nek would be the last occasion on which a British Army regiment carried its official regimental colours into battle. The Pretoria Convention of 1881 was signed on 3 August 1881 and ratified on 25 October 1881 by the ZAR, where the is referred to by the name \"Transvaal Territory\". The Pretoria Convention of 1881 was superseded in 1884 by the London Convention, in which the British suzerainty over the South African Republic was relinquished.\nThe British government, in the London Convention, accepted the name of the country as the South African Republic. The convention was signed in duplicate in London on 27 February 1884, by Hercules Robinson, Paul Kruger, Stephanus Jacobus du Toit and Nicolaas Smit, and later ratified by the South African Republic . In 1885, rich gold reefs were discovered. ZAR burghers were farmers and not miners and much of the mining fell to immigrants. The immigrants were also referred to as \"outlanders\". By 1897, immigrants had invested over 300,000,000\u00a0British Pounds in the ZAR goldfields.\nMalaboch War, 1894.\nThe Malaboch War was between Chief Malaboch (Mmaleboho, Mmaleboxo) of the Bahananwa (Xananwa) people and the South African Republic (ZAR) Government led by Commandant-General Piet Joubert. Malaboch refused to pay taxes to the Transvaal after it was given back to the Boers in 1881 by the British, which resulted in a military drive against him by the South African Republic (ZAR).\nSecond Boer War, 1899\u20131902.\nThe British first attacked the ZAR with the December 1895 Jameson Raid, which ended in failure. British forces started building up troops and resources at the borders, followed by a demand for voting rights for the ZAR's 60,000 foreign nationals\u2014of whom 50,000 were British. Kruger rejected the British demand and called for the withdrawal of British troops from the ZAR's borders. When the British refused, Kruger declared war against Britain, Britain received assistance from its possessions Australia, and Canada, as well as Natal and the Cape Colony.\nThe Second Boer War was a watershed for the British Army in particular and for the British Empire as a whole. The British used concentration camps where women and children were held without adequate food or medical care. The abhorrent conditions in these camps caused the death of 4,177\u00a0women and 22,074\u00a0children under 16; death rates were between 344 and 700 per 1000 per year.\nThe Treaty of Vereeniging was signed on 31 May 1902. The treaty ended the existence of the ZAR and the Orange Free State as independent Boer republics and placed them within the British Empire. On 20 May 1903, an Inter Colonial Council was established to manage the colonies of the British Government. The Boers were promised eventual limited self-government and this was granted in 1906 and 1907. The Union of South Africa was established in 1910.\nMaritz Rebellion, 1914\u20131915.\nThe Maritz rebellion was an armed insurrection which occurred in South Africa in 1914 at the start of World War I. It was led by Boers who created a provisional government and sought to reestablish the South African Republic in the Transvaal. Many members of the South African government were themselves former Boers who had fought with the Maritz rebels against the British in the Second Boer War. The self-proclaimed rebel republic allied with Germany, with whom Britain and South Africa were at war. Boer commandos operated in and out of bordering German South West Africa. By 1915, the rebellion had failed, and the ringleaders received heavy fines and terms of imprisonment.\nEconomy and transport.\nThe discovery of gold during the Witwatersrand Gold Rush in 1886 changed the economic fortunes of the formerly impoverished ZAR. The city of Johannesburg was founded as a gold mining town in the same year. Within 10 years it grew into the largest city in Southern Africa at about 100.000 inhabitants, surpassing Cape Town and becoming one of the fastest-growing cities ever.\nThe discovery of gold allowed the construction of a railway network in the ZAR. The east\u2013west railways in the ZAR, and notably the line from Pretoria to Louren\u00e7o Marques in Portuguese East Africa, were constructed by the Netherlands-South African Railway Company. The construction of the Pretoria-Louren\u00e7o Marques line allowed the ZAR access to harbour facilities not controlled by the British Empire, a key policy of Paul Kruger who deemed it vital to the country's long-term survival.\nFlag.\nThe flag of the South African Republic featured three horizontal stripes of red, white and blue (mirroring the flag of the Netherlands) with a vertical green stripe at the hoist, and was known as the (English: \"Four colour\"). While the only legislation describing the flag required that the green panel be inscribed \"\" (\"Unity makes strength,\" the motto of the republic), this was in fact rarely seen, and instead the motto was displayed with the republic's coat of arms. The Vierkleur was later incorporated into the flag of South Africa between 1928 and 1994.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28346", "revid": "141948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28346", "title": "Superego", "text": ""}
{"id": "28347", "revid": "2490716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28347", "title": "Sling (weapon)", "text": "Ranged weapon to throw projectiles\nA sling is a projectile weapon typically used to hand-throw a blunt projectile such as a stone, clay, or lead \"sling-bullet\". It is also known as the shepherd's sling or slingshot (in British English, although elsewhere it means something else). Someone who specializes in using slings is called a slinger.\nA sling has a small cradle or \"pouch\" in the middle of two retention cords, where a projectile is placed. There is a loop on the end of one side of the retention cords. Depending on the design of the sling, either the middle finger or the wrist is placed through a loop on the end of one cord, and a tab at the end of the other cord is placed between the thumb and forefinger. The sling is swung in an arc, and the tab released at a precise moment. This action releases the projectile to fly inertially and ballistically towards the target. By its double-pendulum kinetics, the sling enables stones (or spears) to be thrown much further than they could be by hand alone.\nThe sling is inexpensive and easy to build. Historically it has been used for hunting game and in combat. Today the sling is of interest as a wilderness survival tool and an improvised weapon.\nThe sling in antiquity.\nArchaeology.\nWhereas stones and clay objects thought by many archaeologists to be sling-bullets are common finds in the archaeological record, slings themselves are rare. This is both because a sling's materials are biodegradable and because slings were lower-status weapons, rarely preserved in a wealthy person's grave.\nModified stones suggested to represent ammunition for slings (slingstones) have been reported from the Near East at least as early as the 6th millennium BC, during the Pottery Neolithic, from cultures such as the Wadi Rabah culture in the southern Levant.\nThe oldest-known surviving slings\u2014radiocarbon dated to c.\u20092500 BC\u2014were recovered from South American archaeological sites on the coast of Peru. The oldest-known surviving North American sling\u2014radiocarbon dated to c.\u00a01200\u00a0BC\u2014was recovered from Lovelock Cave, Nevada.\nOne of the oldest slings in the Near East is the \"Manchester Sling\" from the Twelfth Dynasty of ancient Egypt, c. 2000-1800 BC, a completely preserved sling constructed entirely of plant fibre. Another sling was found in the tomb of the pharoah Tutankhamun, who died c.\u00a01325\u00a0BC. A pair of finely plaited slings were found with other weapons. The sling was probably intended for the departed pharaoh to use for hunting game. Another Egyptian sling was excavated in El-Lahun in Al Fayyum Egypt in 1914 by William Matthew Flinders Petrie, and is now in the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology\u2014Petrie dated it to c.\u00a0800\u00a0BC. It was found alongside an iron spearhead. The remains are broken into three sections. Although fragile, the construction is clear: it is made of bast fibre (almost certainly flax) twine; the cords are braided in a 10-strand elliptical sennit and the cradle seems to have been woven from the same lengths of twine used to form the cords.\nAncient representations.\nRepresentations of slingers can be found on artifacts from all over the ancient world, including Assyrian and Egyptian reliefs, the columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius, on coins, and on the Bayeux Tapestry.\nThe oldest representation of a slinger in art may be from \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck, from c.\u00a07000\u00a0BC, though it is the only such depiction at the site, despite numerous depictions of archers.\nWritten history.\nMany European, Middle Eastern, Asian, and African peoples were users of slings. Thucydides and others authors talk about its usage by Greeks and Romans, and Strabo also extends it to the Iberians, Lusitanians and even some Gauls (which Caesar describes further in his account of the siege of Bibrax). He also mentions Persians and Arabs among those who used them. For his part, Diodorus includes Libyans and Phoenicians. Britons were frequent users of slings too.\nLivy mentions some of the most famous of ancient sling experts: the people of the Balearic Islands, who often worked as mercenaries. Of Balearic slingers Strabo writes: \"And their training in the use of slings used to be such, from childhood up, that they would not so much as give bread to their children unless they first hit it with the sling.\"\nClassical accounts.\nThe sling is mentioned as early as in the writings of Homer, where several characters kill enemies by hurling stones at them.\nBalearic slingers were amongst the specialist mercenaries extensively employed by Carthage against the Romans and other enemies. These light troops used three sizes of sling, according to the distance of their opponents. The weapons were made of vegetable fibre and animal sinew, launching either stones or lead missiles with devastating impact.\nXenophon in his history of the retreat of the Ten Thousand, 401 BC, relates that the Greeks suffered severely from the slingers in the army of Artaxerxes II of Persia, while they themselves had neither cavalry nor slingers, and were unable to reach the enemy with their arrows and javelins. This deficiency was rectified when a company of 200 Rhodians, who understood the use of leaden sling-bullets, was formed. They were able, says Xenophon, to project their missiles twice as far as the Persian slingers, who used large stones.\nVarious Greeks enjoyed a reputation for skill with the sling. Thucydides mentions the Acarnanians and Livy refers to the inhabitants of three Greek cities on the northern coast of the Peloponnesus as expert slingers.\nGreek armies would also use mounted slingers (\u1f00\u03ba\u03c1\u03bf\u03b2\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03af).\nRoman skirmishers armed with slings and javelins were established by Servius Tullius. The late Roman writer Vegetius, in his work \"De Re Militari\", wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Recruits are to be taught the art of throwing stones both with the hand and sling. The inhabitants of the Balearic Islands are said to have been the inventors of slings, and to have managed them with surprising dexterity, owing to the manner of bringing up their children. The children were not allowed to have their food by their mothers till they had first struck it with their sling. Soldiers, notwithstanding their defensive armour, are often more annoyed by the round stones from the sling than by all the arrows of the enemy. Stones kill without mangling the body, and the contusion is mortal without loss of blood. It is universally known the ancients employed slingers in all their engagements. There is the greater reason for instructing all troops, without exception, in this exercise, as the sling cannot be reckoned any encumbrance, and often is of the greatest service, especially when they are obliged to engage in stony places, to defend a mountain or an eminence, or to repulse an enemy at the attack of a castle or city.\nBiblical accounts.\nThe sling is mentioned in the Bible, which provides what is believed to be the oldest textual reference to a sling in the Book of Judges, 20:16. This text was thought to have been written c.\u00a06th century\u00a0BC, but refers to events several centuries earlier.\nThe Bible provides a famous slinger account, the battle between David and Goliath from the First Book of Samuel 17:34\u201336, probably written in the 7th or 6th century BC, describing events that might have occurred c.\u00a010th century\u00a0BC. The sling, easily produced, was the weapon of choice for shepherds fending off animals. Due to this, the sling was a commonly used weapon by the Israelite militia. Goliath was a tall, well equipped and experienced warrior. In this account, the shepherd David persuades Saul to let him fight Goliath on behalf of the Israelites. Unarmoured and equipped only with a sling, five smooth rocks, and his staff, David defeats the champion Goliath with a well-aimed shot to the head, followed by a decapitation with Goliath's own sword.\nUse of the sling is also mentioned in Second Kings 3:25, First Chronicles 12:2, and Second Chronicles 26:14 to further illustrate Israelite use.\nCombat.\nAncient peoples used the sling in combat\u2014armies included both specialist slingers and regular soldiers equipped with slings. As a weapon, the sling had several advantages; a sling bullet lobbed in a high trajectory can achieve ranges in excess of . Modern authorities vary widely in their estimates of the effective range of ancient weapons. A bow and arrow could also have been used to produce a long range arcing trajectory, but ancient writers repeatedly stress the sling's advantage of range. The sling was light to carry and cheap to produce; ammunition in the form of stones was readily available and often to be found near the site of battle. The ranges the sling could achieve with moulded lead sling-bullets was surpassed only by the strong composite bow.\nCaches of sling ammunition have been found at the sites of Iron Age hill forts of Europe; some 22,000 sling stones were found at Maiden Castle, Dorset. It is proposed that Iron Age hill forts of Europe were designed to maximize the effective defence by slingers.\nThe hilltop location of the wooden forts would have given the defending slingers the advantage of range over the attackers, and multiple concentric ramparts, each higher than the other, would allow a large number of men to create a hailstorm of stone. Consistent with this, it has been noted that defences are generally narrow where the natural slope is steep, and wider where the slope is more gradual.\nConstruction.\nA classic sling is braided from non-elastic material. The traditional materials are flax, hemp or wool. Slings by Balearic islanders were said to be made from a rush. Flax and hemp resist rotting, but wool is softer and more comfortable. Polyester is often used for modern slings, because it does not rot or stretch and is soft and free of splinters.\nBraided cords are used in preference to twisted rope, as a braid resists twisting when stretched. This improves accuracy.\nThe overall length of a sling can vary. A slinger may have slings of different lengths. A longer sling is used when greater range is required. A length of about is typical.\nAt the centre of the sling, a cradle or pouch is constructed. This may be formed by making a wide braid from the same material as the cords or by inserting a piece of a different material such as leather. The cradle is typically diamond shaped (although some take the form of a net), and will fold around the projectile in use. Some cradles have a hole or slit that allows the material to wrap around the projectile slightly, thereby holding it more securely.\nAt the end of one cord (called the retention cord) a finger-loop is formed. At the end of the other cord (the release cord), it is a common practice to form a knot or a tab. The release cord will be held between finger and thumb to be released at just the right moment, and may have a complex braid to add bulk to the end. This makes the knot easier to hold, and the extra weight allows the loose end of a discharged sling to be recovered with a flick of the wrist.\nBraided construction resists stretching, and therefore produces an accurate sling. Modern slings are begun by plaiting the cord for the finger loop in the centre of a double-length set of cords. The cords are then folded to form the finger-loop. The retained cord is then plaited away from the loop as a single cord up to the pocket. The pocket is then plaited, most simply as another pair of cords, or with flat braids or a woven net. The remainder of the sling, the released cord, is plaited as a single cord, and then finished with a knot or plaited tab.\nImpact.\nAncient poets wrote that sling-bullets could penetrate armour, and that lead projectiles, heated by their passage through the air, would melt in flight. In the first instance, it seems likely that the authors were indicating that slings could cause injury through armour by a percussive effect (\"i.e.\", the energy of a sling-bullet delivered at high velocity causing blunt trauma injury upon impact) rather than by penetration. In the latter case, it has been proposed that they were impressed by the degree of deformation suffered by lead sling-bullet after hitting a hard target.\nAccording to description of Procopius, the sling had an effective range further than a Hun bow and arrow. In his book \"Wars of Justinian\", he recorded the felling of a Hun warrior by a slinger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now one of the Huns who was fighting before the others was making more trouble for the Romans than all the rest. And some rustic made a good shot and hit him on the right knee with a sling, and he immediately fell headlong from his horse to the ground, which thing heartened the Romans still more.\nAmmunition.\nThe simplest projectile was a stone, preferably well-rounded. Suitable ammunition is frequently from a river or a beach. The size of the projectiles can vary dramatically, from pebbles massing no more than to fist-sized stones massing or more. The use of such stones as projectiles is well attested in the ethnographic record.\nPossible projectiles were also purpose-made from clay; this allowed a very high consistency of size and shape to aid range and accuracy. Many examples have been found in the archaeological record.\nThe best ammunition was cast from lead. Leaden sling-bullets were widely used in the Greek and Roman world. For a given mass, lead, being very dense, offers the minimum size and therefore minimum air resistance. In addition, leaden sling-bullets are small and difficult to see in flight; their concentrated impact is also a better armour-piercer and better able to penetrate a body.\nIn some cases, the lead would be cast in a simple open mould made by pushing a finger or thumb into sand and pouring molten metal into the hole. However, sling-bullets were more frequently cast in two-part moulds. Such sling-bullets come in a number of shapes including an ellipsoidal form closely resembling an acorn; this could be the origin of the Latin word for a leaden sling-bullet: \"glandes plumbeae\" (literally 'leaden acorns') or simply \"glandes\" (meaning 'acorns', singular \"glans\").\nOther shapes include spherical and (by far the most common) biconical, which resembles the shape of the shell of an almond nut or a flattened American football.\nThe ancients do not seem to have taken advantage of the manufacturing process to produce consistent results; leaden sling-bullets vary significantly. The reason why the almond shape was favoured is not clear: it is possible that there is some aerodynamic advantage, but it seems equally likely that there is some more prosaic reason, such as the shape being easy to extract from a mould, or the fact that it will rest in a sling cradle with little danger of rolling out. It is possible as well that the almond, non-circular shape made the bullet spin in flight in a helicopter or disc like effect adding to the flight distance.\nAlmond-shaped leaden sling-bullets were typically long, wide, and weighed . Very often, symbols or writings were moulded into lead sling-bullets. Many examples have been found including a collection of about 80 sling-bullets from the siege of Perusia in Etruria from 41 BC, to be found in the museum of modern Perugia. Examples of symbols include a stylized lightning bolt, a snake, and a scorpion \u2013 reminders of how a sling might strike without warning. Writing might include the name of the owning military unit or commander or might be more imaginative: \"Take this\", \"Ouch\", \"get pregnant with this\" and even \"For Pompey's backside\" added insult to injury, whereas \"dexai\" ('take this' or 'catch!') is merely sarcastic. In Yavne, a sling bullet with the Greek inscription \"Victory of Heracles and Hauronas\" was discovered, the two gods were the patrons of the city during the Hellenistic period.\nJulius Caesar writes in \"De bello Gallico\", book 5, about clay shot being heated before slinging, so that it might set fire to thatch.\n\"Whistling\" bullets.\nSome bullets have been found with holes drilled in them. It was thought the holes were to contain poison. John Reid of the Trimontium Trust, finding holed Roman bullets excavated at the Burnswark hillfort, has proposed that the holes would cause the bullets to \"whistle\" in flight and the sound would intimidate opponents. The holed bullets were generally small and thus not particularly dangerous. Several could fit into a pouch and a single slinger could produce a terrorizing barrage. Experiments with modern copies demonstrate they produce a whooshing sound in flight.\nThe sling in medieval period.\nEurope.\nThe Bayeux Tapestry of the 1070s portrays the use of slings in a hunting context. Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor employed slingers during the Siege of Tortona in 1155 to suppress the garrison while his own men built siege engines. Indeed, slings seem to have been a fairly common weapon in Italy during the 11th and 12th centuries. Slings were also used by the Byzantines. On the Iberian Peninsula, the Spanish and Portuguese infantry favoured it against light and agile Moorish troops. The staff sling continued to be used in sieges and the sling was used as a part of large siege engines.\nThe Americas.\nThe sling was known throughout the Americas.\nSeveral North American Indigenous tribes used slings, particularly for hunting and sometimes in warfare. The Northern Paiute, also known as Paviotso, were known to use slings for hunting and in war, and the Yokuts used them, though primarily by boys. Additionally, some tribes like the O'odham and Ojibwa had slings that were used as toys, though it's unclear if these were the only uses or if they replaced slings in other capacities\nIn ancient Andean civilizations such as the Inca Empire, slings were made from llama wool. These slings typically have a cradle that is long and thin and features a relatively long slit. Andean slings were constructed from contrasting colours of wool; complex braids and fine workmanship can result in beautiful patterns. Ceremonial slings were also made; these were large, non-functional and generally lacked a slit. To this day, ceremonial slings are used in parts of the Andes as accessories in dances and in mock battles. They are also used by llama herders; the animals will move away from the sound of a stone landing. The stones are not slung to hit the animals, but to persuade them to move in the desired direction.\nThe sling was also used in the Americas for hunting and warfare. One notable use was in Incan resistance against the conquistadors. These slings were apparently very powerful; in \"\", author Charles C. Mann quoted a conquistador as saying that an Incan sling \"could break a sword in two pieces\" and \"kill a horse\". Some \nslings spanned as much as long and weighed an impressive .\nOceania.\nSlings were used extensively in many parts of Oceania. Several Pacific Islander groups are known to have utilized the sling as a weapon or tool. These include various Polynesian, Micronesian, and Melanesian tribes. Specifically, Polynesian groups like the Maori of New Zealand, the Hawaiians, and the Tongans, alongside Micronesian and Melanesian tribes, are documented as having used slings. The Maori, known for their rich cultural heritage, historically used slings for various purposes, including warfare and hunting. Native Hawaiians Slings were also part of the traditional weaponry of the Native Hawaiians. The Tongan people, renowned for their seafaring skills and warrior culture, employed slings in their arsenal.\nThe Chamorro reached a terrific competency with the weapon as witnessed by 17th century Belgian missionary, Pedro Coomans: \"Their offensive weapons include the sling, which they aim very skillfully at the head. Out of small ropes they weave a sort of net-bag, in which to carry stones with an oblong shape, some formed out of a marble stone, and others of clay, hardened in either the sun or fire. They whirl and shoot those so violently. Should it make an impact upon a more delicate part, like the heart, or the head, the man is flattened on the spot. Then, if envy would make them want to burn a house from a distance, they would stuff the perforated side of it with tow burning with a very ferocious fire, which, with a swift movement became a flame, and sail away to seek shelter in enemy houses.\" The sling stone (in its \"almond\"/ovoid shape) is a vital cultural artifact of Chamorro culture, enough so, that it was adopted for the Guamian flag and state seal.\nVariants.\nStaff sling.\nThe staff sling, also known as the stave sling, \"fustibalus\" (Latin), and \"fustibale\" (French), consists of a staff (a length of wood) with a short sling at one end. One cord of the sling is firmly attached to the stave and the other end has a loop that can slide off and release the projectile. Staff slings are extremely powerful because the stave can be made as long as two meters, creating a powerful lever. Ancient art shows slingers holding staff slings by one end, with the pocket behind them, and using both hands to throw the staves forward over their heads.\nThe staff sling has a similar or superior range to the shepherd's sling, and can be as accurate in practiced hands. It is generally suited for heavier missiles and siege situations as staff slings can achieve very steep trajectories for slinging over obstacles such as castle walls. The staff itself can become a close combat weapon in a melee. The staff sling is able to throw heavy projectiles a much greater distance and at a higher arc than a hand sling. Staff slings were in use well into the age of gunpowder as grenade launchers, and were used in ship-to-ship combat to throw incendiaries.\n\"Piao Shi\" (whirlwind stone).\n\"Piao Shi\" (\u98c3\u77f3, lit. 'whirlwind stone'), also known as \"Shou Pao\" (\u624b\u7832, lit. hand cannon) during the Song period, is the Chinese name for staff sling. It consists of a short cord tied to one end of a five chi bamboo pole, and is usually employed in siege defense alongside larger stone throwers. It is depicted and described in the \"Ji Xiao Xin Shu\" (\u7d00\u6548\u65b0\u66f8).\n\"Kestros\".\nThe \"kestros\" (also known as the \"kestrosphendone\", \"cestrus\", or \"cestrosphendone\") is a sling weapon mentioned by Livy and Polybius. It seems to have been a heavy dart flung from a leather sling. It was invented in 168 BC and was employed by some of the Macedonian troops of King Perseus in the Third Macedonian War.\nSiege engines.\nThe traction trebuchet was a siege engine which uses the power of men pulling on ropes or the energy stored in a raised weight to rotate what was, again, a staff sling. It was designed so that, when the throwing arm of the trebuchet had swung forward sufficiently, one end of the sling would automatically become detached and release the projectile. Some trebuchets were small and operated by a very small crew; however, unlike the onager, it was possible to build the trebuchet on a gigantic scale: such giants could hurl enormous rocks at huge ranges. Trebuchets are, in essence, mechanized slings.\nHand-trebuchet.\nThe hand-trebuchet () was a staff sling mounted on a pole using a lever mechanism to propel projectiles.\nToday.\nTraditional slinging is still practiced as it always has been in the Balearic Islands, and competitions and leagues are common. In the rest of the world, the sling is primarily a hobby weapon, and a growing number of people make and practice with them. In recent years 'slingfests' have been held in Wyoming, USA, in September 2007 and in Staffordshire, England, in June 2008.\nAccording to \"Guinness World Records\", the current record for the greatest distance achieved in hurling an object from a sling is , using a long sling and a dart, set by David Engvall at Baldwin Lake, California, on September 13, 1992.\nThe principles of the sling may find use on a larger scale in the future; proposals exist for tether propulsion of spacecraft, which functionally is an oversized sling to propel a spaceship.\nThe sling is used today as a weapon primarily by protestors, to launch either stones or incendiary devices, such as Molotov cocktails. Classic woolen slings are still in use in the Middle East by Arab nomads and Bedouins to ward off jackals and hyenas. International Brigades used slings to throw grenades during the Spanish Civil War. Similarly, the Finns made use of sling-launched Molotov cocktails in the Winter War against Soviet tanks. Slings were used during the various Palestinian riots against modern army personnel and riot police. They were also used in the 2008 disturbances in Kenya.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28348", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28348", "title": "St. Adalbert of Prague", "text": ""}
{"id": "28349", "revid": "50670324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28349", "title": "Stock car racing", "text": "Form of automobile racing\nStock car racing is a form of automobile racing run on oval tracks and road courses. It originally used production-model cars, hence the name \"stock car\", but is now run using cars specifically built for racing. Originating in the southern United States, its largest governing body is NASCAR, whose NASCAR Cup Series is the premier top-level series of professional stock car racing. Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and Chile also have forms of stock car racing in the Americas. Other countries, such as Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, have forms of stock car racing worldwide as well. Top-level races typically range between in length.\nTop-level stock cars exceed at speedway tracks and on superspeedway tracks such as Daytona International Speedway and Talladega Superspeedway.\nContemporary NASCAR-spec top-level cars produce maximum power outputs of 860\u2013900\u00a0hp from their naturally aspirated V8 engines. In October 2007 American race car driver Russ Wicks set a speed record for stock cars in a 2007-season Dodge Charger built to NASCAR specifications by achieving a maximum speed of at Bonneville Speedway. For the 2015 NASCAR Cup Series, power output of the competing cars ranged from 750 to 800\u00a0hp (560 to 600\u00a0kW).\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nIn the 1920s, moonshine runners during the Prohibition era would often have to outrun the authorities. To do so, they had to upgrade their vehicles\u2014while leaving them looking ordinary, so as not to attract attention. Eventually, runners started getting together with fellow runners and making runs together. They would challenge one another and eventually progressed to organized events in the early 1930s. The main problem racing faced was the lack of a unified set of rules among the different tracks. When Bill France Sr. saw this problem, he set up a meeting at the Streamline Hotel in order to form an organization that would unify the rules.\nWhen NASCAR was first formed by France in 1948 to regulate stock car racing in the U.S., there was a requirement that any car entered be made entirely of parts available to the general public through automobile dealers. Furthermore, the car models were required to have sold over 500 units to the public. This is referred to as \"homologation\", which other racing series has since adapted for their own rulesets. In NASCAR's early years, the cars were so \"stock\" that it was commonplace for the drivers to drive themselves to the competitions in the car that they were going to run in the race. While automobile engine technology had remained fairly stagnant in World War II, advanced aircraft piston engine development had provided a great deal of available data, and NASCAR was formed just as some of the improved technology was about to become available in production cars. Until the advent of the Trans-Am Series in 1967, NASCAR homologation cars were the closest thing that the public could buy that was actually very similar to the cars that were winning national races.\nThe 1949 Oldsmobile Rocket V-8 with a displacement of is widely recognized as the first postwar modern overhead valve (OHV) engine to become available to the public. The Oldsmobile was an immediate success in 1949 and 1950, and all the automobile manufacturers could not help noticing the higher sales of the Oldsmobile 88 to the buying public. The motto of the day became \"win on Sunday, sell on Monday.\" However, in spite of the fact that several competing engines were more advanced, the aerodynamic and low-slung Hudson Hornet managed to win in 1951, 1952, and 1953 with a inline six-cylinder that used an old-style flathead engine, proving there was more to winning than just a more powerful engine.\nAt the time, it typically took three years for a new design of car body or engine to end up in production and be available for NASCAR racing. Most cars sold to the public did not have a wide variety of engine choices, and the majority of the buying public at the time was not interested in the large displacement special edition engine options that would soon become popular. However, the end of the Korean War in 1953 started an economic boom, and then car buyers immediately began demanding more powerful engines.\nAlso in 1953, NASCAR recommended that the drivers add roll bars, but did not require them.\nIn 1957, several notable events happened. The Automobile Manufacturers Association banned manufacturers from using race wins in their advertising and giving direct support to race teams, as they felt it led to reckless street racing.\nHeyday.\nThe desire from fans and manufacturers alike for higher performance cars within the restrictions of homologation meant that carmakers began producing limited production \"special edition\" cars based on high production base models. It also became apparent that manufacturers were willing to produce increasingly larger engines to remain competitive (Ford had developed a 483 they hoped to race). For the 1963 season NASCAR engines were restricted to using a maximum displacement of 7.0 liters (427 cu.in.) and using only two valves per cylinder.\nAlso, even with heavy duty special editions sold to the public for homologation purposes, the race car rules were further modified, primarily in the interest of safety. This is because race drivers and their cars during this era were subjected to forces unheard of in street use, and require a far higher level of protection than is normally afforded by truly \"stock\" automobile bodies.\nIn 1963 Ford sold enough of their aerodynamic \"sport-roof\" edition Galaxies to the public so it would qualify as stock, and with the heavy-duty FE block bored and stroked to the new limit of 427, the top five finishers were all Fords. Chrysler had bored their 413 to create the \"Max Wedge\" 426, but it still could not compete with the Fords. General Motors' headquarters had genuinely tried to adhere to the 1957 ban, but their Chevrolet division had also constantly tried to work around it, because the other manufacturers had openly circumvented the ban. In 1963 GM gave in and openly abandoned compliance, and Chevrolet was allowed to produce the ZO6 427, but it did not immediately enjoy success.\nIn 1965 Ford adapted two single-overhead-cams to their FE 427 V8 to allow it to run at a higher RPM (called the Ford 427 Cammer). Ford started to sell \"cammers\" to the public to homologate it (mostly to dealer-sponsored privateer drag racers), but NASCAR changed the rules to specify that all NASCAR engines must use a single cam-in-block. But even without the cammer, the Ford FE 427 won in 1965.\nIn 1966 Chrysler sold enough of the 426 Hemis to make it available again, and they put it in their new Dodge Charger which had a low-drag rear window that was radically sloped. It was called a \"fast-back\", and because of this David Pearson was the series champion that year with Richard Petty dominating 1967, winning 27 of 48 races (including 10 in a row) in the boxier Plymouth Belvedere.\nThe 1969 season featured the Torino Cobra or Torino \"Talladega\" which had enough aerodynamic body improvements that it gave it a higher speed than the 1968 Torino, with no other changes. The Cobra, featuring extended nose and reshaped rockers, was renamed Talladega part way through the 1969 season when the Boss 429 replaced the 427. Starting in 1963 up till this point, Ford had won six straight Manufacturer Championships, and by the end of the 1969 season Ford would make it seven in a row. Richard Petty was tired of winning races but losing the championship, so after a private viewing of Ford's new Talladega and Boss 429 engine, he signed a lucrative deal with Ford.\nPrior to its first race at the Daytona 500, David Pearson's 427 powered Ford Torino Cobra set a new NASCAR record by being the first to exceed when he qualified at . When the race started Donnie Allison's Torino lead the majority of the race (84 laps). Towards the end of the race the Torino of LeeRoy Yarbrough chased down the Dodge of Charlie Glotzbach, who had an 11-second lead. It was the first Daytona 500 won on a last lap pass. Things got worse for Dodge when NASCAR, a few months later, finally allowed Ford to run its hemi-headed Boss 429 engine.\nWith Ford winning the majority of the races, Dodge was forced to develop a better car of their own. Using the Charger 500 as a basis, they added a pointed nose. This nose was almost a carbon copy of the nose on the 1962 Ford Mustang I prototype. This radical body shape required a wing to remain stable at speeds over . They named it the Dodge Daytona after the race they hoped to win. Even though it never won a Daytona 500 race, it was still a significant improvement over its predecessor the Dodge Charger 500.\nNASCAR feared that these increasing speeds significantly surpassed the abilities of the tire technology of the day, and it would undoubtedly increase the number of gruesome wrecks that were occurring. As a result, the 1970 Homologation rules were changed so that one car for every two U.S. dealers had to be built for sale to the public to qualify, hoping to delay the use of aero-bodies until tires could improve.\nFor the 1970 season Dodge raced the 1969 model Daytona, but Plymouth managed to build over 1,920 Plymouth Superbirds, which were similarly equipped to the Daytona. Petty came back to Plymouth in the plus Superbird, and Bobby Isaac won the season championship in a Daytona. NASCAR restricted all \"aero-cars\" including the Ford Talladega, Mercury Spoiler II, Charger 500, Dodge Daytona and Plymouth Superbird to a maximum engine displacement of for 1971. Almost all teams switched to non-aero bodystyles. NASCAR eventually adopted a restrictor plate to limit top speeds for the 7.0L engine as teams switched to small-block engines.\nNASCAR edited the rules in a way that they hoped would make the cars safer and more equal, so the race series would be more a test of the drivers, rather than a test of car technology.\nThe era drew to a conclusion in the 1970s. 1972 brought so many rule changes, it has prompted many to consider this year as the start of the modern era of NASCAR racing. In addition, R.J. Reynolds (the tobacco conglomerate) took over as the major sponsor of NASCAR racing (changing the name to the \"Winston Cup\") and they made a significantly larger financial contribution than previous sponsors. Richard Petty's personal sponsorship with STP also set new, higher standards for financial rewards to driving teams. The sudden infusion of noticeably larger amounts of money changed the entire nature of the sport.\nThe 1973 oil crisis meant that large displacement special edition homologation cars of all makes were suddenly sitting unsold. Through the balance of the 1970s until 1991, the factory stock sheetmetal over a racing frame meant the cars looked very much like their street version counterparts. It can be said that 1992, with the addition of grounded type spoilers and sleeker shape, marked the beginning for non-stock sheetmetal and from that point forward, stock cars were quickly allowed to differ greatly from anything available to the public. Modern racing \"stock\" cars are stock in name only, using a body template that is vaguely modeled after currently available automobiles. The chassis, running gear, and other equipment have almost nothing to do with anything in ordinary automobiles. NASCAR and the auto manufacturers have become aware of this with the Cup Series' Gen 4 car (1992-2007) and Car of Tomorrow (2007-2012), and for 2013 each brand (Chevrolet, Dodge, Ford, and Toyota) have redesigned their racing sheetmetal to more resemble the street models of their cars.\nTypes of cars.\nA stock car, in the original sense of the term, is an automobile that has not been modified from its original factory configuration. Later the term \"stock car\" came to mean any production-based automobile used in racing. This term is used to differentiate such a car from a \"race car\", a special, custom-built car designed only for racing purposes.\nThe degree to which the cars conform to standard model specs has changed over the years and varies from country to country. Today most American stock cars may superficially resemble standard American family sedans but are in fact silhouette cars: purpose-built racing machines built to a strict set of regulations governing the car design ensuring that the chassis, suspension, engine, etc. are architecturally identical to those in stock production vehicles. For example, NASCAR Cup Series race vehicles now require fuel injection. In the UK and New Zealand there is a racing formula called stock cars, but the cars are markedly different from any road car. In Australia there was a formula that was quite similar to NASCAR called AUSCAR.\nThe Racecar-Euro Series began in 2009 and was sanctioned by NASCAR as a touring series in 2012, currently operating as the NASCAR Whelen Euro Series.\nStreet stock and pure stock.\n\"True\" stock car racing, which consists of only street vehicles that can be bought by the general public, is sometimes now called \"street stock\", \"pure stock\", \"hobby stock\", \"showroom stock\", or \"U-car\" racing. In 1972, SCCA started its first showroom stock racing series, with a price ceiling on the cars of $3,000. Some modern showroom stock racing allows safety modifications done on showroom stock cars.\nSuper stock classes are similar to street stock, but allow for more modifications to the engine. Power output is usually in the range of 500\u2013550 horsepower (373\u2013410 kilowatts). Tire width is usually limited to .\nSome entry level classes are called \"street stock\", and are similar to what is often called \"banger racing\" in England.\nModifieds.\nModified stock cars resemble a hybrid of open wheel cars and stock cars. The rear wheels are covered by fenders but the front wheels and engine are left exposed. First popular in the United States after World War II, this type of racing was early-on characterized by its participants' modification of passenger cars in pursuit of higher speeds, hence the name. In many regions, particularly on the east coast, modified racing is considered the highest class of stock cars in local racing.\nNASCAR officially sanctions the NASCAR Whelen Modified Tour which is the oldest racing series sanctioned by NASCAR. The SMART Modified Tour, at one point was the NASCAR Whelen Southern Modified Tour, is another prominent modified tour.\nLate models.\nIn many areas of the country late models are usually the highest class of stock cars in local racing. Rules for construction of a late model car vary from region to region and even race track to race track. The most common variations (on paved tracks) include super late models (SLMs), pro Late models (PLMs), late model stock cars (LMSCs), and limited late models (LLMs). A late model may be a custom built machine, or a heavily modified streetcar. Individual sanctioning bodies (like NASCAR, ACT, PASS, UARA, ASA, CARS Tour, etc.) maintain their own late model rule books, and even individual racetracks can maintain their own rule books, meaning a late model that is legal in one series or at one track may not be legal at another without modifications. The national touring series, the NASCAR Late Model Sportsman Series, originated from local late model races in the east coast of the U.S. This division was later called the \"Busch Series\", the \"Nationwide Series\", and currently the \"Xfinity Series\" as its title sponsor changed.\nLate model racing has a very big following throughout the country. Many of the biggest late model races have very large purses, some equivalent to some NASCAR Truck and Xfinity Series races, that attract drivers from all over the country including Cup, Xfinity, and Truck drivers. Despite NASCAR officially sanctioning the NASCAR Advance Auto Parts Weekly Series as a national championship, series such as the CARS Tour, ASA, UARA, and the ACT draw the biggest attention and sanction most of the biggest races in the country.\nUnited States.\nNASCAR.\nNASCAR is currently the largest stock car racing governing body in the world. While NASCAR sanctions multiple series, it has three national championship touring series that are commonly referred to as the \"top 3\" series. In addition to the top three series, NASCAR also sanctions many regional and local series. NASCAR also sanctions three international series that race in Canada, Mexico, and Europe.\nNASCAR Cup Series.\nThe most prominent championship in stock car racing is the NASCAR Cup Series. It is the most popular racing series in the United States, drawing over 6\u00a0million spectators in 1997, an average live audience of over 190,000 people for each race.\nThe most famous event in the series is the Daytona 500, an annual race at the Daytona International Speedway. The series' second-biggest event is arguably The Brickyard 400, an annual race held at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the legendary home of the Indianapolis 500, an open-wheeled race. However, the event was excluded from the 2021 schedule in favor of a race on the track's road course. Together the Cup Series and Xfinity Series drew 8\u00a0million spectators in 1997, compared to 4\u00a0million for both American open-wheel series (CART and IRL), which merged in 2008 under the IRL banner. In 2002, 17 of the 20 US top sporting events in terms of attendance were stock car races. Only football drew more television viewers that year.\nNASCAR Xfinity Series.\nThe NASCAR Xfinity Series is the second tier series in the United States. It serves as the primary feeder series to the Cup Series, similar to Formula Two for Formula One, and Indy Lights for Indy Car. Races are commonly held as a support race to Cup Series events. Many current Cup Series drivers formerly competed in the Series before moving on to competing full-time in the Cup Series.\nThe Xfinity series typically features multiple Cup Series competitors competing alongside full time Xfinity drivers. There was some controversy as Cup Series drivers tended to be more successful than full-time Xfinity drivers. Cup drivers are not eligible to score points in the Xfinity series, and are limited to the number of races they are allowed to race in the Series.\nNASCAR Craftsman Truck Series.\nStarting in 1995, the NASCAR Truck Series is the third highest ranking stock car series in the United States. The series was the brainchild of then-NASCAR West Coast executive Ken Clapp, who was inspired by off-road truck racing. Unlike the other two national touring NASCAR series, the Truck Series race pickup truck styled bodies, though it is still considered a stock car series because of its similarity. Much like the Xfinity Series, the Truck Series often features Cup Series drivers competing for parts of the season.\nARCA.\nThe Automobile Racing Club of America was founded in 1953 as a Midwest regional series. In addition to the ARCA Menards Series, it formerly sanctioned the ARCA Midwest Tour, and the ARCA Lincoln Welders Truck Series from 1999 to 2016.\nNASCAR purchased ARCA in early 2018. For the 2020 season, the NASCAR K&amp;N Series East and West were rebranded under the ARCA banner as the ARCA Menards Series East and ARCA Menards Series West.\nOther series.\nOutside of NASCAR, there are a number of other national or regional stock-car sanctioning bodies in the United States. There are many organizations that cater to these local short tracks. The American Speed Association (ASA), Champion Racing Association (CRA), International Motor Contest Association (IMCA), United Auto Racing Association (UARA), Championship Auto Racing Series (CARS), American Canadian Tour (ACT), SMART Modified Tour, StockCar Racing League and the Pro All Star Series (PASS) are the most prominent sanctioning bodies. Many Cup, Xfinity, Truck, and ARCA Series drivers, especially recently, have raced in these series and many still do after reaching the highest level. The International Race of Champions (IROC) and Superstar Racing Experience (SRX) are usually perceived as being outside of the regular stock car racing scene because of their all-star grids.\nNew Zealand.\nStock car racing began in New Zealand during the 1950s, first race was at Aranui Speedway on November 27, 1954. It was brought to New Zealand after New Zealand Speedway riders witnessed the huge crowds that watched the races in Britain earlier that year. As with the UK, Stock car racing in New Zealand is a very different form of racing than that of the US. Stock car racing is a full-contact sport in New Zealand: as the rule book states, \"contact is not only permitted, it is encouraged\".\nCars are built to an extremely rigid design and feature strong steel guards around almost the entire car. \"Stockcars\" are divided into three classes: Superstocks, Stock cars, Ministocks (Ministocks predominantly being a non-contact youth class).\nSuperstocks are the top class and are typically powered by V8 engines up to which can produce over . The majority of races are of an individual nature however, unique to New Zealand stock car racing is the team racing format. Typically teams racing consists of two teams of four cars each that work together to win the race. Teams normally protect their \"runners\" while attempting to eliminate the opposing team, the races can be decided by a points format or first across the finish line.\nThe class most resembling the North American form of stock car racing are known as Saloon cars. Super Saloons are similar to dirt late models with the main differences being the bodies closer resemble production cars, use iron engines up to with no rear offset and run much larger sprint car tyres on the rear.\nAustralia.\nStock car racing in the NASCAR mould (AUSCAR) had a following in Australia during the mid-late 1980s and through the 1990s, but with the advent of the Supercars Championship, which took up the bulk of the competitors, sponsorship dollars on offer as well as major television time, the Australian Superspeedway series shut down after 2001.\nThe majority of the NASCAR and AUSCAR racing in Australia took place at the 1.801\u00a0km (1.119\u00a0mi), high-banked (24\u00b0) Calder Park Thunderdome in Melbourne. The Thunderdome, which was opened in 1987 and was built by multi-millionaire tyre retailer Bob Jane at a cost of A$54 million, was modeled on a scaled down version of the famous Charlotte Motor Speedway. Other tracks used included the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 mile (805 metre) Speedway Super Bowl at the Adelaide International Raceway (also owned by Jane, this was the only paved oval track in Australia other than the Thunderdome, though with only 7\u00b0 banking in the turns it was more of a traditional flat track), as well as road courses such as the Surfers Paradise Street Circuit (where the cars ran as a support category to the Gold Coast IndyCar Grand Prix), Oran Park in Sydney, and the famous Mount Panorama Circuit.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe term 'stock cars' in the UK refers to a specialized form of racing that bears little resemblance to any road car.\nStock car racing was brought to Britain in 1954. Taking place on existing greyhound or speedway tracks, the cars were mostly 'stock' cars from the 1930s with locked rear axle differentials and added armour. After the first couple of years 'specials' began to appear eventually making the 'stock' car name something of a misnomer. Since the early days of stock car racing in Britain the sport has developed into many different classes, from the destructive 'Banger' categories to the very sophisticated National Hot Rods. However, the name 'stock car' is usually reserved for that racing class which traces its roots back to these early days in the 1950s, BriSCA F1 Stock Cars, which were previously known as \"The Seniors\" or \"Senior Stock Cars\". Despite the physical demands of this full-contact sport, many competitors have been racing for 20 and even 30 years. For the first 10 years of the sport, stock cars were either adapted from road cars, or bore the recognizable bodywork of road cars. By the 1970s, chassis and bodywork had evolved into very specialized forms.\nIn 2001 the ASCAR Racing Series was formed and ran until 2008, the series was a \"NASCAR\" style racing series that was predominantly run at Rockingham Motor Speedway as well as briefly on the continent. The first season was won by John Mickel. Other notable champions were Nicolas Minassian and Ben Collins who also played as The Stig on Top Gear. The field was usually populated by professional or semi-professional stock car drivers, however notable drivers who were famous from other areas of motorsport either took part in single races or for one complete season, they included Colin McRae, Jason Plato, Matt Neal, Darren Manning, Max Papis, John Cleland and former NASCAR drivers Brandon Whitt and Randy Tolsma.\nThe modern BriSCA Formula 1 Stock Cars are a highly sophisticated purpose built race car with race-tuned V-8 engines developing , quick change axles and gearboxes and biased and staggered chassis and braking set up for constant left turning. However large bumpers were mandatory with contact very much encouraged to remove opponents. The sport can be seen at venues throughout Britain and Mainland Europe. A downsized version of the BriSCA Formula 1 Stock Cars, the smaller BriSCA Formula 2 Stock Cars, previously known as \"The Juniors\" or \"Junior Stock Cars\", are also very popular. these cars are powered by the 2 litre Ford 'Pinto' engine. There are also many other formulas running on the oval tracks throughout a season that starts around March/Easter and continues to October/November.\nIn the 2008 World Final, held at Ipswich, Andy Smith raced to victory becoming the 2008 BriSCA F1 Stock Car World Champion for the second time in his career, taking the crown from brother Stuart Smith Jnr. 2009 also saw Andy Smith win again this time at Kings Lynns Norfolk Arena. 2010 saw Andy Smith win for a 3rd consecutive time at Coventry, the same venue as his 1st win in 2006. The 2011 World Championship took place at Northampton on September 10 with 2 Paul Harrison the winner of the Gold Roof. The 2012 World Championship held at Skegness was won by 217 Lee Fairhurst. The 2013 World Championship will be held at King's Lynn on Saturday 21 September.\nIn 2008, Ian Thompson Jr. became the first driver from Northern Ireland to win the Brisca F2 Stock Car World title since 1972 when he took the honours at Bristol in 2008. However, it was in controversial circumstances after first across the line Gordon Moodie (Thomson Jr's brother-in-law) was disqualified from the race after being found with carburetor irregularities at post race scrutineering. This irregularity has since been proven to be a manufacturing fault with the control of the driver but the governing body have refused to reinstate Gordon Moodie as the winner in the record books. In 2009 the World Championship winner was Micky Brennan and in 2010 the World Championship winner was John Fortune. The 2011 World Championship Final took place at Kings Lynns Norfolk Arena on Saturday 17 September with 871 Mark Simpson winner of the Gold Roof. In 2012, the World Championship was won again by 968 Micky Brennan this time held at Barford. The 2013 World Championship weekend will be held over 2 days of racing on 14/15 September at Smeatharpe near Honiton in Devon.\nAnother open wheeled stock car formula that races in the UK are Spedeworth Superstox. Licensed by Spedeworth, as opposed to BriSCA, Superstox are similar to Formula Two Stock Cars with the main visual difference being a smaller wing on the roof. These cars are also powered by the 2 litre Ford 'Pinto' engine. The 2010 World Championship Final held at Ipswich was won by Colin Aylward. The 2011 World Championship Final was held at Londons Wimbledon Stadium on Sunday 23 October and won by 151 Nick Smith. The 2012 World Championship was again held at Ipswich and won by Scot 177 Stuart Gilchrist. The 2013 World Championship will be held at Lochgelly in Fife, Scotland, with the date tbc.\nAnother form of UK stock car racing is Saloon Stock Cars, regulated by the Saloon Stock Car Association. This formula is based on heavily armoured Ford Sierra, Ford Mondeo, Vauxhall Vectra cars purposely reconstructed for this full-contact class. The 2011 World Championship was held at Skegness in August with 677 Eddie Darby the winner of the Gold Roof for the next 12 months. The 2012 World Championship Final was held at Smeatharpe Raceway near Honiton in Devon in August 2012 and again won by 677 Eddie Darby. Other similar Stock Car classes are the 2 Litre Stock Cars licensed by Spedeworth and the 1300 Stock Cars licensed by several different promoters each to slightly differing rules although steps are currently being taken to standardise the specifications in order to make it a national class. The 2012 World Championship was won by 79 Barry Radcliffe at Ipswich. The 2013 World Championship will be held at King's Lynn on Saturday 17 August.\nCanada.\nStock Car Racing has existed in Canada as early as the 1950s in amateur format, although official structured competitions began with the foundation of CASCAR in 1981. The league went on for a few decades until 2006, when it was purchased by NASCAR and became the NASCAR Canada Series. Vehicle models used are typically from the makes of Chevrolet, Dodge, and Ford. The series runs a higher percentage of road and street courses compared to the top 4 NASCAR series in America. The competition has had a growing interest in the recent decades.\nOther regions.\nInternationally, stock car racing has not enjoyed the same success as within the United States and Canada. Brazil also has a successful stock car racing series, with starting grids of 30 or more cars, and two brands competing: Chevrolet and Toyota. Brazilian Stock Car also has two developing series. Despite the name, Brazilian stock car competitions are not held on oval tracks, thus they resemble more touring car racing than stock car racing the same can be said about Argentina's popular stock series, called Turismo Carretera.\nUnsuccessful efforts have been made in Australia, Chile, South Africa, and Japan as well.\nCareer paths.\nNASCAR drivers take various paths to the highest stock car divisions. Some start racing on dirt surfaces but all end up racing on asphalt surfaces as they progress in their career. They frequently start in karting or in cars that are completely stock except for safety modifications. They generally advance through intermediate or advanced local-level divisions. The highest local division, asphalt late model racing, is generally considered a requirement to advance to the next step, regional and national touring series.\nDirt track drivers follow the same general path. Their highest divisions are less well-known national touring late model series such as the World of Outlaws Late Model Series and regional touring series.\nCrossover drivers.\nSome drivers have entered stock car racing after starting on a very different career path. The most famous might well be Mario Andretti, who won the Indianapolis 500 (1969), NASCAR's Daytona 500 (1967), and the Formula One World Championship (1978). Juan Pablo Montoya had wins in all three series, with two Indy 500 wins (2000 and 2015), seven Formula One wins and two Sprint Cup wins (2007 and 2010). A. J. Foyt, with four Indianapolis 500 wins, seven IndyCar championships, and a victory in the 24 Hours of Le Mans on his resume, also won the Daytona 500 in 1972. Johnny Rutherford, a three-time winner at Indy, has the rare distinction of winning his first NASCAR start, a qualifying race for the 1963 Daytona 500. Dan Gurney, a leading 1960s Formula One driver and later one of the most successful constructors of Indy cars (as well as being Foyt's co-driver at Le Mans), excelled in NASCAR's road-course events, winning at Riverside five times between 1963 and 1968. A notable crossover oddity is the one-race NASCAR career of the colorful Formula One and sports car driver Innes Ireland: after retiring at the end of the 1966 season, he was invited by NASCAR czar Bill France to compete at Daytona, where he was running in the top ten when his engine blew on the 126th of 200 laps.\nMontoya initially surprised the auto racing community by leaving F1, but he was quickly followed by other drivers. Open wheel stars like Sam Hornish Jr., Patrick Carpentier, Dario Franchitti, Jacques Villeneuve, A. J. Allmendinger and Danica Patrick all made the move to the NASCAR Cup series, with varying degrees of success. While the so called open-wheel invasion has since faded, other drivers have attempted their hand at NASCAR including Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, Jenson Button, &amp; Kamui Kobayashi.\nNumerous sports cars and V8 Supercars racers have competed in NASCAR. Two-time Australian Supercars champion Marcos Ambrose competed in the NASCAR Cup Series from 2007 to 2014, winning two races, both at Watkins Glen. Rolex 24 winner Jordan Taylor substituted for Chase Elliott at COTA in 2023. Mike Rockenfeller as well. Will Brown, Shane van Gisbergen, and Brodie Kostecki have also recently made starts. \nOther drivers compete often in stock car racing but are well known for their success elsewhere. Ron Fellows and Boris Said are champion road racers and are often brought in by teams solely to compete in NASCAR's road course events, a title known as road course ringers. Robby Gordon was one of NASCAR's few remaining owner-drivers, but he is most famous for his numerous off-road championships and his three Baja 1000 wins.\nTracks.\nStock car races take place predominantly on oval tracks of 3 or 4 turns, with all turns to the left. Oval tracks are classified as \"short track\" (less than 1 mile), \"intermediate\" or \"speedway\" (1 to 2 miles) or \"superspeedway\" (over 2 miles). \"Road courses\" are any tracks having both left and right turns. Depending on the track, typical race speeds can vary from at Martinsville to over at Talladega. In 1987 Bill Elliott's qualifying time at Talladega brought about a change at superspeedways (Daytona and Talladega). Such high speeds and Bobby Allison's car going airborne into the catch-fence and injuring fans forced NASCAR to implement power-reducing measures, one of which was the mandated implement of below carburetor restrictor plates. This later became known as restrictor plate racing.\nOval circuits differ from the rough terrain and sharp turns of Rally, and the complicated twists and turns of Formula One tracks that put up to 5 or 6\u00a0\"g\" of horizontal stress on the driver's body. Stock cars are much heavier than Formula One cars, and as a result they are generally slower. Additionally, they cannot produce the g-forces of an open wheel car. A stock car's weak handling with high power output places more emphasis on car control.\nTactics.\nIn contrast with most forms of racing, minor car-to-car contact is generally accepted in stock car racing. This may happen in the form of forcing another vehicle out of the way, or pushing a competing vehicle forward for mutual benefit. Stock cars are generally built to be tolerant of superficial damage to bodywork, whereas open wheel designs can experience severe reductions in performance with even slight spoiler damage. On intermediate tracks and superspeedways, drafting is used to reduce the overall effect of drag. A driver accomplishes this by positioning the vehicle close to the one ahead of so as to benefit from the other's slipstream. Drafting was \"discovered\" by Junior Johnson during his winning performance at the 1960 Daytona 500.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28351", "revid": "87217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28351", "title": "Secondary conversion", "text": "Religious conversion due to relationship with another convert\nIn the sociology of religion, secondary conversion is the religious conversion of an individual that results from a relationship with another convert, rather than from any particular aspect of the new religion. For example, someone might join a religious group primarily because their spouse or partner has done so; such a person would be a secondary convert.\nSecondary conversion can greatly expand a movement's influence, particularly after a conquest, such as the Muslim Moorish conquest of Spain and Catholic Spain's conquests in Latin America.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28352", "revid": "46398950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28352", "title": "Sociology of religion", "text": "Sociology of religion is the study of the beliefs, practices and organizational forms of religion using the tools and methods of the discipline of sociology. This objective investigation may include the use both of quantitative methods (surveys, polls, demographic and census analysis) and of qualitative approaches (such as participant observation, interviewing, and analysis of archival, historical and documentary materials).\nModern sociology as an academic discipline began with the analysis of religion in \u00c9mile Durkheim's 1897 study of suicide rates among Catholic and Protestant populations, a foundational work of social research which served to distinguish sociology from other disciplines, such as psychology. The works of Karl Marx (1818\u20131883) and Max Weber (1864\u20131920) emphasized the relationship between religion and the economic or social structure of society. Contemporary debates have centered on issues such as secularization, civil religion, and the cohesiveness of religion in the context of globalization and multiculturalism. Contemporary sociology of religion may also encompass the sociology of irreligion (for instance, in the analysis of secular-humanist belief systems).\nThe sociology of religion is distinguished from the philosophy of religion in that it does not set out to assess the validity of religious beliefs. The process of comparing multiple conflicting dogmas may require what Peter L. Berger has described as inherent \"methodological atheism\".\nWhereas the sociology of religion broadly differs from theology in assuming indifference to the supernatural, theorists tend to acknowledge socio-cultural reification of religious practice.\nClassical sociology.\nClassical, seminal sociological theorists of the late 19th and early 20th century such as \u00c9mile Durkheim, Max Weber, and Karl Marx were greatly interested in religion and its effects on society. Like those of Plato and Aristotle from ancient Greece, and Enlightenment philosophers from the 17th through 19th centuries, the ideas posited by these sociologists continue to be examined today.\nDurkheim, Marx, and Weber had very complex and developed theories about the nature and effects of religion. Of these, Durkheim and Weber are often more difficult to understand, especially in light of the lack of context and examples in their primary texts. Religion was considered to be an extremely important social variable in the work of all three.\nKarl Marx.\nAccording to Kevin J. Christiano, \"Marx was the product of the Enlightenment, embracing its call to replace faith by reason and religion by science.\" But he \"did not believe in science for science's sake \u2026 he believed that he was also advancing a theory that would \u2026 be a useful tool \u2026 [in] effecting a revolutionary upheaval of the capitalist system in favor of socialism.\"\nAs such, the crux of his arguments was that humans are best guided by reason. Religion, Marx held, was a significant hindrance to reason, inherently masking the truth and misguiding followers. Marx viewed alienation as the heart of social inequality. The antithesis to this alienation is freedom. Thus, to propagate freedom means to present individuals with the truth and give them a choice to accept or deny it. In this, \"Marx never suggested that religion ought to be prohibited.\"\nCentral to Marx's theories was the oppressive economic situation in which he dwelt. With the rise of European industrialism, Marx and his colleague Friedrich Engels witnessed and responded to the growth of what he called \"surplus value\". Marx's view of capitalism saw rich capitalists getting richer and their workers getting poorer (the gap, the exploitation, was the \"surplus value\"). Not only were workers getting exploited, but in the process they were being further detached from the products they helped create. By simply selling their work for wages, \"workers simultaneously lose connection with the object of labor and become objects themselves. Workers are devalued to the level of a commodity\u00a0\u2013 a thing \u2026\" From this objectification comes alienation. The common worker is led to believe that he or she is a replaceable tool, and is alienated to the point of extreme discontent. Here, in Marx's eyes, religion enters. Capitalism utilizes our tendency towards religion as a tool or ideological state apparatus to justify this alienation. Christianity teaches that those who gather up riches and power in this life will almost certainly not be rewarded in the next (\"it is harder for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven than it is for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle \u2026\") while those who suffer oppression and poverty in this life while cultivating their spiritual wealth will be rewarded in the Kingdom of God. Hence Marx's famous line \u2013 \"religion is the opium of the people\", as it soothes them and dulls their senses to the pain of oppression. Some scholars have recently noted that this is a contradictory (or dialectical) metaphor, referring to religion as both an expression of suffering and a protest against suffering.\n\u00c9mile Durkheim.\n\u00c9mile Durkheim placed himself in the positivist tradition, meaning that he thought of his study of society as dispassionate and scientific. He was deeply interested in the problem of what held complex modern societies together. Religion, he argued, was an expression of social cohesion.\nIn the field work that led to his famous \"Elementary Forms of Religious Life\", Durkheim, a secular Frenchman, looked at anthropological data of Indigenous Australians. His underlying interest was to understand the basic forms of religious life for all societies. In \"Elementary Forms\", Durkheim argues that the totems the Aborigines venerate are actually expressions of their own conceptions of society itself. This is true not only for the Aborigines, he argues, but for all societies.\nReligion, for Durkheim, was not \"imaginary\", although he did deprive it of what many believers find essential. Religion is very real; it is an expression of society itself, and indeed, there is no society that does not have religion. We perceive as individuals a force greater than ourselves, which is our social life, and give that perception a supernatural face. We then express ourselves religiously in groups, which for Durkheim makes the symbolic power greater. Religion is an expression of our collective consciousness, which is the fusion of all of our individual consciousnesses, which then creates a reality of its own.\nIt follows, then, that less complex societies, such as the Australian Aborigines, have less complex religious systems, involving totems associated with particular clans. The more complex a particular society, the more complex the religious system is. As societies come in contact with other societies, there is a tendency for religious systems to emphasize universalism to a greater and greater extent. However, as the division of labour makes the individual seem more important (a subject that Durkheim treats extensively in his famous \"The Division of Labour in Society\"), religious systems increasingly focus on individual salvation and conscience.\nDurkheim's definition of religion, from \"Elementary Forms\", is as follows: \"A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden \u2013 beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them.\" This is a functional definition of religion, meaning that it explains what religion \"does\" in social life: essentially, it unites societies. Durkheim defined religion as a clear distinction between the sacred and the profane, in effect this can be paralleled with the distinction between God and humans.\nThis definition also does not stipulate what exactly may be considered sacred. Thus later sociologists of religion (notably Robert Neelly Bellah) have extended Durkheimian insights to talk about notions of civil religion, or the religion of a state. American civil religion, for example, might be said to have its own set of sacred \"things\": the flag of the United States, Abraham Lincoln, Martin Luther King Jr., etc. Other sociologists have taken Durkheim's concept of what religion is in the direction of the religion of professional sports, the military, or of rock music.\nMax Weber.\nMax Weber published four major texts on religion in a context of economic sociology and his rationalization thesis: \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\" (1905), ' (1915), ' (1915), and \"Ancient Judaism\" (1920).In his sociology, Weber uses the German term \"Verstehen\" to describe his method of interpretation of the intention and context of human action. Weber is not a positivist; he does not believe we can find out \"facts\" in sociology that can be causally linked. Although he believes some generalized statements about social life can be made, he is not interested in hard positivist claims, but instead in linkages and sequences, in historical narratives and particular cases.\nWeber argues for making sense of religious action on its own terms. A religious group or individual is influenced by all kinds of things, he says, but if they claim to be acting in the name of religion, we should attempt to understand their perspective on religious grounds first. Weber gives religion credit for shaping a person's image of the world, and this image of the world can affect their view of their interests, and ultimately how they decide to take action.\nFor Weber, religion is best understood as it responds to the human need for theodicy and soteriology. Human beings are troubled, he says, with the question of theodicy \u2013 the question of how the extraordinary power of a divine god may be reconciled with the imperfection of the world that he has created and rules over. People need to know, for example, why there is undeserved good fortune and suffering in the world. Religion offers people soteriological answers, or answers that provide opportunities for salvation \u2013 relief from suffering, and reassuring meaning. The pursuit of salvation, like the pursuit of wealth, becomes a part of human motivation.\nBecause religion helps to define motivation, Weber believed that religion (and specifically Calvinism) actually helped to give rise to modern capitalism, as he asserted in his most famous and controversial work, \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\".\nIn \"The Protestant Ethic\", Weber argues that capitalism arose in Europe in part because of how the belief in predestination was interpreted by everyday English Puritans. Puritan theology was based on the Calvinist notion that not everyone would be saved; there was only a specific number of the elect who would avoid damnation, and this was based sheerly on God's predetermined will and not on any action you could perform in this life. Official doctrine held that one could not ever really know whether one was among the elect.\nPractically, Weber noted, this was difficult psychologically: people were (understandably) anxious to know whether they would be eternally damned or not. Thus Puritan leaders began assuring members that if they began doing well financially in their businesses, this would be one unofficial sign they had God's approval and were among the saved \u2013 but only if they used the fruits of their labour well. This along with the rationalism implied by monotheism led to the development of rational bookkeeping and the calculated pursuit of financial success beyond what one needed simply to live \u2013 and this is the \"spirit of capitalism\". Over time, the habits associated with the spirit of capitalism lost their religious significance, and the rational pursuit of profit became an aim in its own right.\n\"The Protestant Ethic\" thesis has been much critiqued, refined, and disputed, but is still a lively source of theoretical debate in sociology of religion. Weber also did considerable work on world religions, including Hinduism and Buddhism.\nIn his \"magnum opus\" \"Economy and Society\" Weber distinguished three ideal types of religious attitudes:\nHe also separated magic as pre-religious activity.\nTheoretical perspectives.\nSymbolic anthropology and phenomenology.\nSymbolic anthropology and some versions of phenomenology argue that all humans require reassurance that the world is safe and ordered place \u2013 that is, they have a need for ontological security. Therefore, all societies have forms of knowledge that perform this psychological task. The inability of science to offer psychological and emotional comfort explains the presence and influence of non-scientific knowledge in human lives, even in rational world.\nFunctionalism.\nUnlike symbolic anthropology and phenomenology, functionalism points to the benefits for social organization which non-scientific belief systems provide and which scientific knowledge fails to deliver. Belief systems are seen as encouraging social order and social stability in ways that rationally based knowledge cannot. From this perspective, the existence of non-rational accounts of reality can be explained by the benefits they offer to society.\nAccording to functionalists, \"religion serves several purposes, like providing answers to spiritual mysteries, offering emotional comfort, and creating a place for social interaction and social control. \u2026 One of the most important functions of religion, from a functionalist perspective, is the opportunities it creates for social interaction and the formation of groups. It provides social support and social networking, offering a place to meet others who hold similar values and a place to seek help (spiritual and material) in times of need.\"\nRationalism.\nRationalists object to the phenomenological and functionalist approaches, arguing that these approaches fail to understand why believers in systems of non-scientific knowledge think that their ideas are right, even when science has shown them to be wrong. Rationalists say that one cannot explain forms of knowledge in terms of the beneficial psychological or societal effects that an outside observer may see them as producing and emphasize the importance of looking at the point of view of those who believe in them. People do not believe in God, practice magic, or think that witches cause misfortune because they think they are providing themselves with psychological reassurance, or to achieve greater social cohesion for their social groups.\nRationalists see the history of modern societies as the rise of scientific knowledge and the subsequent decline of non-rational belief. Some of these beliefs, such as magic and witchcraft, had disappeared, while others, such as religion, had become marginalized. This rationalist perspective has led to secularization theories of various kinds.\nTypology of religious groups.\nOne common typology among sociologists, religious groups are classified as ecclesias, denominations, sects, or cults (now more commonly referred to in scholarship as new religious movements). The church-sect typology has its origins in the work of Max Weber. There is a basic premise continuum along which religions fall, ranging from the protest-like orientation of sects to the equilibrium maintaining churches. This continuum includes several additional types. Note that sociologists give these words precise definitions which differ from how they are commonly used. In particular, sociologists use the words 'cult' and 'sect' without negative connotations, even though the popular use of these words is often pejorative.\nChurches are the religious bodies that coexist in a relatively low state of tension with their social surrounding. They have mainstream \"safe\" beliefs and practices relative to those of the general population. This type of religious bodies are more world affirming, so they try to peacefully coexist with the secular world and are low-tension organizations.\nSects are high-tension organizations that don't fit well within the existing social environment. They are usually most attractive to society's least privileged- outcasts, minorities, or the poor- because they downplay worldly pleasure by stressing otherworldly promises. When church leaders become too involved in secular issues, sects start to splinter off the existing church. They may end up forming their own sect and if over time the sect picks up a significant following, it almost inevitably transforms into its own church, ultimately becoming part of the mainstream.\nA cult is a religious movement that makes some new claim about the supernatural and therefore does not easily fit within the sect-church cycle. All religions began as cults, and their leaders offer new insights, claiming that they are the word of God. They are often high-tension movements that antagonize their social world and/or are antagonized by it.\nDenomination lies between the church and the sect on the continuum. They come into existence when churches lose their religious monopoly in a society. When churches or sects become denominations, there are also some changes in their characteristics.\nReligiosity.\nSome sociologists of religion explore the theoretical analysis of the sociological dimensions of religiosity. For example, Charles Y. Glock is best known for his five-dimensional scheme of the nature of religious commitment. His list consist of the following variables: belief, knowledge, experience, practice (sometimes subdivided into private and public ritual) and consequences. Glock's first four dimensions have proved widely useful in research, because generally, they are simple to measure survey research. Similarly, Mervin F. Verbit's contribution was a twenty four-dimensional religiosity measure which includes measuring religiosity through six different \"components\" of religiosity: ritual, doctrine, emotion, knowledge, ethics, community, and along four dimensions: content, frequency, intensity, centrality.\nSecularization and civil religion.\nSecularism is the general movement away from religiosity and spiritual belief towards a rational, scientific, orientation, a trend observed in Muslim and Christian industrialized nations alike. In the United States of America, many politicians, court systems, schools, and businesses embrace secularism. In relation to the processes of rationalization associated with the development of modernity, it was predicted in the works of many classical sociologists that religion would decline. They claimed that there would be a separation of religion from the institutions such as the state, economy, and family. Despite the claims of many classical theorists and sociologists immediately after World War II, many contemporary theorists have critiqued secularization thesis, arguing that religion has continued to play a vital role in the lives of individuals worldwide. In the United States, in particular, church attendance has remained relatively stable in the past 40 years. In Africa, the emergence of Christianity has occurred at a high rate. While Africa could claim roughly 10 million Christians in 1900, recent estimates put that number closer to 200 million. The rise of Islam as a major world religion, especially its new-found influence in the West, is another significant development. Peter Berger, an American sociologist, considers secularization is the result of a larger sociostructural crisis in religion is caused by pluralism. Pluralism is the presence and engaged coexistence of numerous distinct groups in one society. The United States is both highly religious and pluralistic, standing out among other industrialized and wealthy nations in this regard. In short, presupposed secularization as a decline in religiosity might seem to be a myth, depending on its definition and the definition of its scope. For instance, some sociologists have argued that steady church attendance and personal religious belief may coexist with a decline in the influence of religious authorities on social or political issues. Additionally, regular attendance or affiliation do not necessarily translate into a behavior according to their doctrinal teachings.\nReligious economy.\nAccording to Rodney Stark, David Martin was the first contemporary sociologist to reject the secularization theory outright. Martin even proposed that the concept of secularization be eliminated from social scientific discourse, on the grounds that it had only served ideological purposes and because there was no evidence of any general shift from a religious period in human affairs to a secular period.\nStark is well known for pioneering, with William Sims Bainbridge, a theory of religious economy, according to which societies that restrict supply of religion, either through an imposed state religious monopoly or through state-sponsored secularization, are the main causes of drops in religiosity. Correspondingly, the more religions a society has, the more likely the population is to be religious. This contradicts the older view of secularization which states that if a liberal religious community is tolerant of a wide array of belief, then the population is less likely to hold certain beliefs in common, so nothing can be shared and reified in a community context, leading to a reduction in religious observance. The religious economy model sparked a lively debate among sociologists of religion on whether market models fit religious practices and on the extents to which this model of religious behavior is specific to the United States.\nPeter Berger.\nPeter Berger observed that while researchers supporting the secularization theory have long maintained that religion must inevitably decline in the modern world, today, much of the world is as religious as ever. This points to the falsity of the secularization theory. On the other hand, Berger also notes that secularization may be indeed have taken hold in Europe, while the United States and other regions have continued to remain religious despite the increased modernity. Dr. Berger suggested that the reason for this may have to do with the education system; in Europe, teachers are sent by the educational authorities and European parents would have to put up with secular teaching, while in the United States, schools were for much of the time under local authorities, and American parents, however unenlightened, could fire their teachers. Berger also notes that unlike Europe, America has seen the rise of Evangelical Protestantism, or \"born-again Christians\".\nBryan Wilson.\nBryan R. Wilson a writer on secularization, explores life in societies dominated by scientific knowledge. His work follows Max Weber's view that modern societies prioritize rationality, focusing on technical efficiency and practical solutions over existential questions, leading to a disenchanted world. Wilson argues that non-scientific systems, especially religions, have seen an irreversible decline in influence. While some dispute the secularization thesis, claiming that traditional religions have been replaced by new sects, individual spirituality, or functional alternatives like nationalism, Wilson views the rise in diverse non-scientific belief systems as evidence of religion's diminished central role in modern society.\nErnest Gellner.\nUnlike Wilson and Weber, Ernest Gellner (1974) acknowledges that there are drawbacks to living in a world whose main form of knowledge is confined to facts we can do nothing about and that provide us with no guidelines on how to live and how to organize ourselves. In this regard, we are worse off than pre-modern people, whose knowledge, while incorrect, at least provided them with prescriptions for living. However, Gellner insists that these disadvantages are far outweighed by the huge technological advances modern societies have experienced as a result of the application of scientific knowledge.\nGellner doesn't claim that non-scientific knowledge is in the process of dying out. For example, he accepts that religions in various forms continue to attract adherents. He also acknowledges that other forms of belief and meaning, such as those provided by art, music, literature, popular culture (a specifically modern phenomenon), drug taking, political protest, and so on are important for many people. Nevertheless, he rejects the relativist interpretation of this situation \u2013 that in modernity, scientific knowledge is just one of many accounts of existence, all of which have equal validity. This is because, for Gellner, such alternatives to science are profoundly insignificant since they are technically impotent, as opposed to science. He sees that modern preoccupations with meaning and being as a self-indulgence that is only possible because scientific knowledge has enabled our world to advance so far. Unlike those in pre-modern times, whose overriding priority is to get hold of scientific knowledge in order to begin to develop, we can afford to sit back in the luxury of our well-appointed world and ponder upon such questions because we can take for granted the kind of world science has constructed for us.\nMichel Foucault.\nMichel Foucault was a post-structuralist who saw human existence as being dependent on forms of knowledge \u2013 discourses \u2013 that work like languages. Languages/discourses define reality for us. In order to think at all, we are obliged to use these definitions. The knowledge we have about the world is provided for us by the languages and discourses we encounter in the times and places in which we live our lives. Thus, who we are, what we know to be true, and what we think are discursively constructed.\nFoucault defined history as the rise and fall of discourses. Social change is about changes in prevailing forms of knowledge. The job of the historian is to chart these changes and identify the reasons for them. Unlike rationalists, however, Foucault saw no element of progress in this process. To Foucault, what is distinctive about modernity is the emergence of discourses concerned with the control and regulation of the body. According to Foucault, the rise of body-centered discourses necessarily involved a process of secularization. Pre-modern discourses were dominated by religion, where things were defined as good and evil, and social life was centered around these concepts. With the emergence of modern urban societies, scientific discourses took over, and medical science was a crucial element of this new knowledge. Modern life became increasingly subject to medical control \u2013 the medical gaze, as Foucault called it.\nThe rise to power of science, and of medicine in particular, coincided with a progressive reduction of the power of religious forms of knowledge. For example, normality and deviance became more of a matter of health and illness than of good and evil, and the physician took over from the priest the role of defining, promoting, and healing deviance.\nOther perspectives.\nBBC News reported on a study by physicists and mathematicians that attempted to use mathematical modelling (nonlinear dynamics) to predict future religious orientations of populations. The study suggests that religion is headed towards \"extinction\" in various nations where it has been on the decline: Australia, Austria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Switzerland. The model considers not only the changing number of people with certain beliefs, but also attempts to assign utility values of a belief in each nation.\nThomas Luckmann maintains that the sociology of religion should cease preoccupations with the traditional and institutionalized forms of religion. Luckmann points instead to the \"religious problem\" which is the \"problem of individual existence.\" This is the case as with the advent of modernity, religious meaning making has shifted more into the individual domain.\nGlobalization.\nThe sociology of religion continues to grow throughout the world, attempting to understand the relationship between religion and globalization. Two older approaches to globalization include modernization theory, a functionalist derivative, and world-systems theory, a Marxist approach. One of the differences between these theories is whether they view capitalism as positive or problematic. However, both assumed that modernization and capitalism would diminish the hold of religion.\nTo the contrary, as globalization intensified many different cultures started to look into different religions and incorporate different beliefs into society. New interpretations emerged that recognize the tensions. For example, according to Paul James and Peter Mandaville:\nReligion and globalization have been intertwined with each other since the early empires attempted to extend their reach across what they perceived to be world-space. Processes of globalization carried religious cosmologies \u2013 including traditional conceptions of universalism \u2013 to the corners of the world, while these cosmologies legitimated processes of globalization. This dynamic of inter-relation has continued to the present, but with changing and sometimes new and intensifying contradictions.\nLatin American Sociology of Religion.\nOlga Odgers notes that in recent decades, there have been important developments in Latin American writing within the subspecialty of the sociology of religion, as the field itself has also shifted from \"sociology about Latin American religion\" to a \"Latin American sociology of religion\", taking contemporary Latin American forms of religiosity as an empirical referent, then goes even further to propose interpretive frameworks and new methodologies that contribute to the understanding of religious phenomena at a global level.\nRoberto Blancarte, according to Odgers, identifies three main periods in the development of a Latin American sociology of religion:\nDue to its complex nature, several studies demonstrated growing interest in understanding the religious context in relation to the multiple global processes playing out across the subcontinent, such as marginalization, ethnicity, migration, aging, and education.\nReligion and the social landscape.\nNot only does religion shape large-scale social institutions such as government and social movements, it plays a part in families, race, gender, class, and age \u2013 things involved in everyday lives.\nFamilies.\nOne of the biggest indicators of religiosity in adulthood is the religious atmosphere within families and upbringing, given that religious beliefs and practices are passed on from generation to generation. Depending on the type of religion in the family, it can involve a different familial structure. For example, practising Catholics tend to have larger families\nsince the Catholic church is opposed to both contraception and abortion.\nChildren receive a religious legacy from their parents and from the society immediately surrounding them, through instruction and (intentionally or unintentionally) through the power of example that is shaped by values, personality, and interests. Their religious legacy may include induction into organizations and into civic or secular religions.\nTheir religious legacy is among the factors that condition people throughout their lives, although people as individuals have diverse reactions to their legacies. To outsiders who know them, people are identified in part by their religious legacy. For example, people born and raised in Hindu, Jewish, or American families have identities as Hindus, Jews, or Americans, independently of their beliefs or actions. People who do not embrace their religious legacy retain it nonetheless, and are characterized by terms such as lapsed, not observant, or unpatriotic. People who actually separate themselves from their religious legacy are termed apostates or traitors and may be subject to punishment.\nReligion and gender.\nResearch reports presented that women are universally more religious across all religions and cultures based largely on the fact that researchers are studying Western religions and cultures. In United States, Women are 60% likely to claim that \" religion is very important in their lives \", while men are reported only 47%. Women attend religious services at least once a week are 12% higher than men in United States.\nThis phenomenon is explained by the Nature argument, Nurture argument and Role identity. According to the Nature arguments, rational choice theorists argue that higher level of religiosity among women derives from risk-aversion. Rational choice theory argues that people naturally minimise costs and maximise benefits for themselves. Women are \" typically risk-averse\", therefore they will be more inclined towards practicing religion. According to the Nurture argument, Marta Trzebiatowska and Steve Bruce claimed that \" nothing in the biological make-up of men and women explains the gendered difference in religiosity\", the difference are better explained by a range of socialisation process. Example used are women's major role in family, childbirth, and death. These events keeps them \"closer to religion than man\".\nMarta Trzebiatowska and Steve Bruce argued there has been a time lag in how secularisation has affected men and women. As more and more women enter the work force, the religious gender gap is expected to disappear. Persuasive evidence across countries suggests that the gender gap can be explained in part by male and female identified role inside and outside of family and work. Women who work are more likely to feel they need to conform to the dominant secular ethos. Women who are at home focus on raising children and caring for sick and elderly family members which encourages stronger religious commitment.\nSome religions are gendered social institution. Traditionalist evangelicals present that wifely submission- wives should defer their husbands in family decision-making. Evangelical women, rather, claimed the weakness in men proves that both wife and husband should hold mutual submission.Both spouses follow Christ's model of self-sacrifice and an orientation to the other person in family decision-making.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28354", "revid": "10753531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28354", "title": "Samuel", "text": "Biblical prophet and seer\nSamuel is a figure who, in the narratives of the Hebrew Bible, plays a key role in the transition from the biblical judges to the United Kingdom of Israel under Saul, and again in the monarchy's transition from Saul to David. He is venerated as a prophet in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. In addition to his role in the Jewish Bible/ Old Testament, Samuel is mentioned in Jewish rabbinical literature, in the Christian New Testament, and in the second chapter of the Quran (although the text does not mention him by name). He is also treated in the fifth through seventh books of \"Antiquities of the Jews\", written by the Jewish scholar Josephus in the first century. He is first called \"the Seer\" in 1 Samuel 9:9.\nBiblical account.\nFamily.\nSamuel's mother was Hannah and his father was Elkanah. Elkanah lived at Ramathaim in the district of Zuph. His genealogy is also found in a pedigree of the Kohathites (1 Chronicles 6:3\u201315) and in that of Heman the Ezrahite, apparently his grandson (1 Chronicles 6:18\u201333).\nAccording to the genealogical tables in Chronicles, Elkanah was a Levite\u2014a fact not mentioned in the books of Samuel. The fact that Elkanah, a Levite, was denominated an Ephraimite is analogous to the designation of a Levite belonging to Judah (Judges 17:7, for example).\nAccording to 1 Samuel 1:1\u201328, Elkanah had two wives, Peninnah and Hannah. Peninnah had children; Hannah did not. Nonetheless, Elkanah favored Hannah. Jealous, Peninnah reproached Hannah for her lack of children, causing Hannah much heartache. Elkanah was a devout man and would periodically take his family on pilgrimage to the holy site of Shiloh.\nOn one occasion, Hannah went to the sanctuary and prayed for a child. In tears, she vowed that if she were granted a child, she would dedicate him to God as a nazirite. Eli, who was sitting at the foot of the doorpost in the sanctuary at Shiloh, saw her apparently mumbling to herself and thought she was drunk, but was soon assured of both her motivation and sobriety. Eli was the priest of Shiloh, and one of the last Israelite Judges before the rule of kings in ancient Israel. He had assumed the leadership after Samson's death. Eli blessed her and she returned home. Subsequently, Hannah became pregnant, later giving birth to Samuel, and praised God for his mercy and faithfulness.\nAfter the child was weaned, she left him in Eli's care, and from time to time she would come to visit her son.\nName.\nAccording to 1 Samuel 1:20, Hannah named Samuel to commemorate her prayer to God for a child. \"... [She] called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the Lord\" (KJV). From its appearance, the name Samuel (Hebrew: \u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05de\u05d5\u05bc\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc \"\u0160\u0259m\u016b\u02be\u0113l\", Tiberian: \"\u0160\u0103m\u016b\u02be\u0113l\") appears to be constructed from the Hebrew \u015a\u0101m\u016b (\u05e9\u05b8\u05c2\u05de\u05d5\u05bc) + \u02be\u0112l, meaning \"God has set\" or \"God has placed\". This meaning relating to the idea of God setting/placing a child in the womb, alongside Hannah dedicating Samuel as a Nazirite to God. The Hebrew \u015b\u0101m\u016b is also related to the Akkadian \u0161\u00e2m\u016b (\ud808\udeae\ud808\ude2c), which shares the same meaning. From the explanation given in 1 Samuel 1:20, however, it would seem to come from a contraction of the Hebrew \u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05d0\u05b4\u05dc\u05b0\u05ea\u05b4\u05bc\u05d9\u05d5 \u05de\u05b5\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (Modern: \"\u0160\u0259\u02be\u012blt\u012bv m\u0113\u02be\u0112l,\" Tiberian: \"\u0160\u012d\u02be\u012blt\u012bw m\u0113\u02be\u0112l\"), meaning \"I have asked/borrowed him from God\". Further shortened to \u05e9\u05b8\u05c1\u05d0\u05d5\u05bc\u05dc \u05de\u05b5\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (\"\u0160\u0101\u02be\u016bl m\u0113\u02be\u0112l, \"asked/borrowed from God\"\"), then finally contracted to \u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05de\u05d5\u05bc\u05d0\u05b5\u05dc (\"\u0160\u0259m\u016b\u02be\u0113l/\u0160\u0103m\u016b\u02be\u0113l\"). This meaning also relating to Hannah dedicating Samuel as a Nazirite to God as well.\nCalling.\nSamuel worked under Eli in the service of the shrine at Shiloh. One night, Samuel heard a voice calling his name. According to the first-century Jewish historian Josephus, Samuel was 12 years old. Samuel initially assumed it was coming from Eli and went to Eli to ask what he wanted. Eli, however, sent Samuel back to sleep. After this happened three times, Eli realised that the voice was the Lord's, and instructed Samuel on how to answer:\nIf He calls you, then you must say, \"Speak, Lord, for Your servant hears\".\nOnce Samuel responded, the Lord told him that the wickedness of the sons of Eli had resulted in their dynasty being condemned to destruction. In the morning, Samuel was hesitant about reporting the message to Eli, but Eli asked him to honestly recount to him what he had been told by the Lord. Upon receiving the communication, Eli merely said that the Lord should do what seems right unto him.\nSamuel grew up and \"all Israel from Dan to Beersheba\" came to know that Samuel was a trustworthy prophet of the Lord. Anglican theologian Donald Spence Jones comments that \"the minds of all the people were thus gradually prepared when the right moment came to acknowledge Samuel as a God-sent chieftain\".\nLeader.\nDuring Samuel's youth at Shiloh, the Philistines inflicted a decisive defeat against the Israelites at Eben-Ezer, placed the land under Philistine control, and took the sanctuary's Ark for themselves. Upon hearing the news of the capture of the Ark of the Covenant, and the death of his sons, Eli collapsed and died. When the Philistines had been in possession of the Ark for seven months and had been visited with calamities and misfortunes, they decided to return the Ark to the Israelites.\nAccording to Bruce C. Birch, Samuel was a key figure in keeping the Israelites' religious heritage and identity alive during Israel's defeat and occupation by the Philistines. \"[I]t may have been possible and necessary for Samuel to exercise authority in roles that would normally not converge in a single individual (priest, prophet, judge).\"\nAfter 20 years of oppression, Samuel, who had gained national prominence as a prophet (1 Samuel 3:20), summoned the people to the hill of Mizpah, and led them against the Philistines. The Philistines, having marched to Mizpah to attack the newly amassed Israelite army, were soundly defeated and fled in terror. The retreating Philistines were slaughtered by the Israelites. The text then states that Samuel erected a large stone at the battle site as a memorial, and there ensued a long period of peace thereafter.\nKing-Maker.\nSamuel initially appointed his two sons Joel and Abijah as his successors; however, just like Eli's sons, Samuel's proved unworthy for they accepted bribes and perverted judgement. The Israelites rejected them. Because of the external threat from other tribes, such as the Philistines, the tribal leaders decided that there was a need for a more unified, central government, and demanded Samuel appoint a king so that they could be like other nations. Samuel interpreted this as a personal rejection, and at first was reluctant to oblige, until reassured by a divine revelation. He warned the people of the potential negative consequences of such a decision. When Saul and his servant were searching for his father's lost donkeys, the servant suggested consulting the nearby Samuel. Samuel recognized Saul as the future king.\nJust before his retirement, Samuel gathered the people to an assembly at Gilgal, and delivered a farewell speech or coronation speech in which he emphasised how prophets and judges were more important than kings, that kings should be held to account, and that the people should not fall into idol worship, or worship of Asherah or of Baal. Samuel promised that God would subject the people to foreign invaders should they disobey. 1 Kings 11:5, 33, and 2 Kings 23:13 note that the Israelites fell into Asherah worship later on.\nCritic of Saul.\nWhen Saul was preparing to fight the Philistines, Samuel denounced him for proceeding with the pre-battle sacrifice without waiting for the overdue Samuel to arrive. He prophesied that Saul's rule would see no dynastic succession.\nSamuel also directed Saul to \"utterly destroy\" the Amalekites in fulfilment of the commandment in Deuteronomy 25:17\u201319:\n\"When the Lord your God has given you rest from your enemies all around, in the land which the Lord your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance, ... you will blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven\".\nDuring the campaign against the Amalekites, King Saul spared Agag, the king of the Amalekites, and the best of their livestock. Saul told Samuel that he had spared the choicest of the Amalekites' sheep and oxen, intending to sacrifice the livestock to the Lord. This was in violation of the Lord's command, as pronounced by Samuel, to \"... utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass\" (1 Samuel 15:3, KJV). Samuel confronted Saul for his disobedience and told him that God made him king, and God can unmake him king. Samuel then proceeded to execute Agag. Saul never saw Samuel alive again after this.\nSamuel then proceeded to Bethlehem and secretly anointed David as king. He would later provide sanctuary for David, when the jealous Saul first tried to have him killed.\nDeath.\nSamuel is described in the biblical narrative as being buried in Ramah. According to tradition, this burial place has been identified with Samuel's tomb in the West Bank village of Nabi Samwil.\nSome time after his death, Saul had the Witch of Endor conjure Samuel's spirit from Sheol in order to predict the result of an upcoming battle (1 Samuel 28:3\u201324). Samuel was angered by his recalling, and told Saul that the Lord had left him.\nRabbinical literature.\nWhile the Witch of Endor remains anonymous in the Biblical account, the rabbinical Midrash maintains that she was Zephaniah, the mother of Abner (Yal\u1e33, Sam. 140, from Pir\u1e33e R. El.). That a supernatural appearance is here described is inferred from the repeated emphasis laid on the statement that Samuel had died and had been buried (I Sam. xxv. 1, xxviii. 3), by which the assumption that Samuel was still living when summoned, is discredited (Tosef., So\u1e6dah, xi. 5). Still he was invoked during the first twelve months after his death, when, according to the Rabbis, the spirit still hovers near the body (Shab. 152b). In connection with the incidents of the story the Rabbis have developed the theory that the necromancer sees the spirit but is unable to hear his speech, while the person at whose instance the spirit is called hears the voice but fails to see; bystanders neither hear nor see (Yal\u1e33., l.c.; Reda\u1e33 and RaLBaG's commentaries). The outcry of the woman at the sight of Samuel was due to his rising in an unusual way\u2014upright, not, as she expected, in a horizontal position (comp. LXX. \u1f44\u03c1\u03b8\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd in verse 14).\nDocumentary hypothesis.\nBirth narrative.\nThe birth-narrative of the prophet Samuel is found at 1 Samuel 1:1-28. It describes how Samuel's mother Hannah requests a son from Yahweh, and dedicates the child to God at the shrine of Shiloh. The passage appears to make extensive play with the root-elements of Saul's name, and ends with the phrase \"hu sa'ul le-Yahweh\", \"he is dedicated to Yahweh.\" Hannah names the resulting son Samuel, giving as her explanation, \"because from God I requested him.\" Samuel's name, however, can mean \"name of God,\" (or \"Heard of God\" or \"Told of God\") and the etymology and multiple references to the root of the name would seem to fit Saul instead. Thus, several scholars argue that the narrative originally described the birth of Saul, and was given to Samuel to enhance the position of David and Samuel at the former king's expense. Alternatively, Nadav Na'aman argues that the verbal root \"sh-'-l\" is actually related to the name \"Shiloh\", the place where Samuel was born.\nNational prophet, local seer.\nSome authors see the biblical Samuel as combining descriptions of two distinct roles:\nSource-critical scholarship suggests that these two roles come from different sources, which later were spliced together to form the Book(s) of Samuel. The oldest is considered to be that marking Samuel as the local seer of Ramah, who willingly anointed Saul as king in secret, while the latter presents Samuel as a national figure, begrudgingly anointing Saul as king in front of a national assembly. This later source is generally known as the Republican source, since it denigrates the monarchy (particularly the actions of Saul) and favours religious figures, in contrast to the other main source\u2014the Monarchial source\u2014which treats it favourably. The Monarchial source would have Saul appointed king by public acclamation, due to his military victories, and not by Samuel's cleromancy. Another difference between the sources is that the Republican source treats the ecstatic prophets as somewhat independent from Samuel (1 Samuel 9:1ff) rather than having been led by him.\nThe passage in which Samuel is described as having exercised the functions of a (biblical) judge, during an annual circuit from Ramah to Bethel to Gilgal (the \"Gilgal\" between Ebal and Gerizim) to Mizpah and back to Ramah (), is foreshadowed by Deborah, who used to render judgments from a place beneath a palm between Ramah and Bethel. Source-critical scholarship often considers it to be a redaction aimed at harmonizing the two portrayals of Samuel.\nThe Book(s) of Samuel variously describe Samuel as having carried out sacrifices at sanctuaries, and having constructed and sanctified altars. According to the Priestly Code/Deuteronomic Code only Aaronic priests/Levites (depending on the underlying tradition) were permitted to perform these actions, and simply being a nazarite or prophet was insufficient. The books of Samuel and Kings offer numerous examples where this rule is not followed by kings and prophets, but some critical scholars look elsewhere seeking a harmonization of the issues. In the Book of Chronicles, Samuel is described as a Levite, rectifying this situation; however critical scholarship widely sees the Book of Chronicles as an attempt to redact the Book(s) of Samuel and of Kings to conform to later religious sensibilities. Since many of the Biblical law codes themselves are thought to postdate the Book(s) of Samuel (according to the Documentary Hypothesis), this would suggest Chronicles is making its claim based on religious motivations. According to most modern scholarship, the Levitical genealogy of 1 Chronicles 4 is not historical.\nDeuteronomistic Samuel.\nAccording to the documentary hypothesis of Biblical source criticism, which postulates that \"Deuteronomistic historians\" redacted the Former Prophets (Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel, and 1 and 2 Kings), the Deuteronomists idealized Samuel as a figure larger than life, like Joshua. For example, Samuel's father Elkanah is described as having originated from Zuph, specifically Ramathaim-Zophim, which was part of the tribal lands of Ephraim, while 1 Chronicles states that he was a Levite. Samuel is portrayed as a judge who leads the military, as the judges in the Book of Judges, and also who exercises judicial functions. In 1 Sam 12:6\u201317, a speech of Samuel that portrays him as the judge sent by God to save Israel may have been composed by the Deuteronomists. In 1 Samuel 9:6\u201320, Samuel is seen as a local \"seer\". According to documentary scholarship, the Deuteronomistic historians preserved this view of Samuel while contributing him as \"the first of prophets to articulate the failure of Israel to live up to its covenant with God.\" For the Deuteronomistic historians, Samuel would have been an extension of Moses and continuing Moses' function as a prophet, judge, and priest, which makes the nature of the historical Samuel uncertain.\nPerspectives on Samuel.\nJudaism.\nAccording to the Book of Jeremiah and one of the Psalms, Samuel had a high devotion to God. Classical Rabbinical literature adds that he was more than an equal to Moses, God speaking directly to Samuel, rather than Samuel having to attend the tabernacle to hear God. Samuel is also described by the Rabbis as having been extremely intelligent; he argued that it was legitimate for laymen to slaughter sacrifices, since the Halakha only insisted that the priests \"bring the blood\", Eli, who was viewed negatively by many Classical Rabbis, is said to have reacted to this logic of Samuel by arguing that it was technically true, but Samuel should be put to death for making legal statements while Eli (his mentor) was present.\nSamuel is also treated by the Classical Rabbis as a much more sympathetic character than he appears at face value in the Bible; his annual circuit is explained as being due to his wish to spare people the task of having to journey to him; Samuel is said to have been very rich, taking his entire household with him on the circuit so that he didn't need to impose himself on anyone's hospitality; when Saul fell out of God's favour, Samuel is described as having grieved copiously and having prematurely aged.\nHis yahrzeit is observed on the 28th day of Iyar.\nChristianity.\nFor Christians, Samuel is considered to be a prophet, judge, and wise leader of Israel, and treated as an example of fulfilled commitments to God. On the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Lutheran calendars, his feast day is August 20. He is commemorated as one of the Holy Forefathers in the Calendar of Saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 30. In the Coptic Orthodox Church, the commemoration of the departure of Samuel the Prophet is celebrated on 9 Paoni.\nHerbert Lockyer, minister and author, and others have seen in Samuel's combined offices of prophet, priest, and ruler a foreshadowing of Christ.\nIslam.\nSamuel () is seen as a prophet and seer in the Islamic faith. The narrative of Samuel in Islam focuses specifically on his birth and the anointing of Talut. Other elements from his narrative are in accordance with the narratives of other Prophets of Israel, as exegesis recounts Samuel's preaching against idolatry. He is not mentioned by name in the Qur'an, but may be alluded to in Surah Al-Baqara https://.\nIn the Islamic narrative, the Israelites after Moses wanted a king to rule over their country. Thus, God sent a prophet, Samuel, to anoint Talut as the first king for the Israelites. However, the Israelites mocked and reviled the newly appointed king, as he was not wealthy from birth (Q https://). But, assuming Talut to be Saul, in sharp contrast to the Hebrew Bible, the Qur'an praises Saul greatly, and mentions that he was gifted with great spiritual and physical strength. In the Qur'anic account, Samuel prophesies that the sign of Talut's kingship will be that the Ark of the Covenant will come back to the Israelites.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed.\n`Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, a central figure in the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith, mentions Samuel as an example of a genuine Prophet of the House of Israel, alongside Ezekiel.\nPortrayals.\nActors who have portrayed Samuel include Denis Quilley in the 1985 film \"King David\", Leonard Nimoy in the 1997 television film \"David\", Eamonn Walker in the 2009 television series \"Kings\", Mohammad Bakri in the 2016 television series \"Of Kings and Prophets,\" and Stephen Lang in the 2025 television series \"House of David\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
