{"id": "29269", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29269", "title": "Self-determination", "text": "Right of all people to freely participate in the political procedures of their government\n \nSelf-determination refers to a people's right to form its own political entity, and internal self-determination is the right to representative government with full suffrage.\nSelf-determination is a cardinal principle in modern international law, binding, as such, on the United Nations as an authoritative interpretation of the Charter's norms. The principle does not state how the decision is to be made, nor what the outcome should be (whether independence, federation, protection, some form of autonomy or full assimilation), and the right of self-determination does not necessarily include a right to an independent state for every ethnic group within a former colonial territory. Further, no right to secession is recognized under international law.\nThe concept emerged with the rise of nationalism in the 19th century and came into prominent use in the 1860s, spreading rapidly thereafter. During and after World War I, a general principle of self-determination was proclaimed by United States President Woodrow Wilson and others. Having announced his Fourteen Points on 8 January 1918, on 11 February 1918, Wilson stated: \"National aspirations must be respected; people may now be dominated and governed only by their own consent. 'Self determination' is not a mere phrase; it is an imperative principle of action.\" However, neither Wilson and Lloyd George nor Lenin and Trotsky considered the peoples of the Global South as the main target for their statements supporting self-determination. Nevertheless, their rhetoric resonated far beyond the European audiences they aimed to reach. During World War II, the principle was included in the Atlantic Charter, jointly declared on 14 August 1941 by Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States, and Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who pledged The Eight Principal points of the Charter. It was recognized as an international legal right after it was explicitly listed as a right in the UN Charter.\nImplementing the right to self-determination can be politically difficult, in part because there are multiple interpretations of what constitutes a people and which groups may legitimately claim the right to self-determination. As World Court judge Ivor Jennings put it: \"the people cannot decide until somebody decides who are the people\".\nHistory.\nPre-20th century.\nThe norm of self-determination can be traced to the American and French revolutions, and the emergence of nationalism. The European revolutions of 1848, the post-World War I settlement at Versailles, and the decolonization movement after World War II shaped and established the norm in international law. The American example has been seen as the earliest assertion of the right of national self-determination, although this was argued primarily in terms of resistance to a despotic ruler rather than appeals to a 'natural right' of peoples to determine their political fate, the latter emerging with the independence of Spanish colonies in Latin America.\nThese concepts were inspired particularly by earlier ideas from Hugo Grotius and Immanuel Kant, and by the mid-nineteenth century 'self-determination' had evolved into a weapon for revolutionary nationalism. Thomas Jefferson further promoted the notion that the will of the people was supreme, especially through authorship of the United States Declaration of Independence, which became an inspiration for European nationalist movements during the 19th century. The French Revolution legitimized the ideas of self-determination on that Old World continent.\nNationalist sentiments emerged inside traditional empires: Pan-Slavism in Russia; Ottomanism, Kemalist ideology and Arab nationalism in the Ottoman Empire; State Shintoism and Japanese identity in Japan; and Han identity in juxtaposition to the Manchurian ruling class in China. Meanwhile, in Europe itself, the rise of nationalism led to Italy, Greece, Hungary, Poland and Bulgaria all seeking or winning independence.\nKarl Marx and Friedrich Engels supported some of these nationalist movements, believing nationalism might be a \"prior condition\" to social reform and international alliances. In 1914 Vladimir Lenin wrote: \"[It] would be wrong to interpret the right to self-determination as meaning anything but the right to existence as a separate state.\"\nIn contrast, Rosa Luxemburg called a \"right of nations to self-determination\", valid for all countries and all times, \"nothing more than a metaphysical clich\u00e9\" that offers no \"practical solution of nationality problems\" and argued that the very concept of the nation as an \"homogenous social and political entity\" was derived from bourgeois ideology.\nWorld Wars I and II.\nEurope, Asia and Africa.\nWoodrow Wilson revived America's commitment to self-determination, at least for European states, during World War I. When the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia in the October Revolution, they called for Russia's immediate withdrawal as a member of the Allies of World War I. Lenin had used 'national self-determination' as a weapon against the Russian Empire, and after the Revolution the party supported the right of all nations, including colonies, to self-determination. The 1918 Constitution of the Soviet Union acknowledged the right of secession for its constituent republics.\nIn January 1918 Wilson issued his Fourteen Points of January 1918 which, among other things, called for adjustment of colonial claims, insofar as the interests of colonial powers had equal weight with the claims of subject peoples. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918 led to Soviet Russia's exit from the war and the nominal independence of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine, though in fact those territories were under German control. The end of the war led to the dissolution of the defeated Austro-Hungarian Empire and Czechoslovakia and the union of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs with the Kingdom of Serbia as new states out of the wreckage of the Habsburg empire. However, this imposition of states where some nationalities (especially Poles, Czechs, Serbs and Romanians) were given power over other nationalities who disliked and distrusted them was eventually used as a pretext for German aggression in World War II.\nThe League of Nations was established as the symbol of the emerging postwar order. One of its earliest tasks was to legitimize the territorial boundaries of the new nation-states created in the territories of the former Ottoman Empire, Asia, and Africa. The League was not consistent in how it applied the principle in the post-war peace treaties and, in many places, had to compensate with highly complex arrangements to ensure protection of minorities. Nor did the principle of self-determination extend so far as to end colonialism, under the reasoning that the local populations were not civilized enough the League of Nations was to assign each of the post-Ottoman, Asian and African states and colonies to a European power by the grant of a League of Nations mandate.\nOne of the German objections to the Treaty of Versailles was a somewhat selective application of the principle of self-determination, as the Republic of German-Austria, which included the Sudetenland, was seen as representing the will to join Germany in those regions, while the majority of people in Danzig wanted to remain within the \"Reich\". However, the Allies ignored the German objections. Wilson's 14 Points had called for Polish independence to be restored and Poland to have \"secure access to the sea\", which would imply that the German city of Danzig (modern Gda\u0144sk, Poland) be ceded to Poland. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, the Polish delegation asked Wilson to honor point 14 of the 14 points by transferring Danzig to Poland, arguing the city was Polish until 1793, and that Poland would not be economically viable without it. During the First Partition of Poland in 1772, the inhabitants of Danzig fought fiercely for it to remain a part of Poland, but as a result of the Germanisation process in the 19th century, 90% of its inhabitants were German by 1919, which led to the creation of the Free City of Danzig, a city-state in which Poland had certain special rights. Through the city of Danzig was 90% German and 10% Polish, the surrounding countryside around Danzig was overwhelmingly Polish, and the ethnically Polish rural areas included in the Free City of Danzig objected, arguing that they wanted to be part of Poland. Neither the Poles nor the Germans were happy with this compromise and the Danzig issue became a flash-point of German-Polish tension throughout the interwar period.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s there were some successful movements for self-determination in the beginnings of the process of decolonization. The Statute of Westminster granted independence to Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland, Australia, and the Union of South Africa after the British parliament declared itself incapable of passing laws over them without their consent. This statute built on the Balfour Declaration of 1926 which recognized the autonomy of these British dominions, representing the first phase of the creation of the British Commonwealth of Nations. Egypt, Afghanistan, and Iraq also achieved independence from Britain. Other efforts were unsuccessful, like the Indian independence movement. Meanwhile, Italy, Japan and Germany all initiated new efforts to bring certain territories under their control. In particular, the National Socialist Program invoked this right of nations, as it was publicly proclaimed on 24 February 1920 by Adolf Hitler.\nIn Asia, Japan became a rising power and gained more respect from Western powers after its victory in the Russo-Japanese War. Japan joined the Allied Powers in World War I and attacked German colonial possessions in the Far East, adding former German possessions to its own empire. In the 1930s, Japan gained significant influence in Inner Mongolia and Manchuria after it invaded Manchuria. It established Manchukuo, a puppet state in Manchuria and eastern Inner Mongolia. This was essentially the model Japan followed as it invaded other areas in Asia and established the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. Japan went to considerable trouble to argue that Manchukuo was justified by the principle of self-determination, claiming that people of Manchuria wanted to break away from China and asked the Kwantung Army to intervene on their behalf. However, the Lytton commission which had been appointed by the League of Nations to decide if Japan had committed aggression or not, stated the majority of people in Manchuria who were Han Chinese who did not wish to leave China.\nIn 1912, the Republic of China officially succeeded the Qing Dynasty, while Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Tuva proclaimed their independence. Independence was not accepted by the government of China. By the Treaty of Kyakhta (1915) Outer Mongolia recognized China's sovereignty. However, the Soviet threat of seizing parts of Inner Mongolia induced China to recognize Outer Mongolia's independence, provided that a referendum was held. The referendum took place on October 20, 1945, with (according to official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence.\nMany of East Asia's current disputes to sovereignty and self-determination stem from unresolved disputes from World War II. After its fall, the Empire of Japan renounced control over many of its former possessions including Korea, Sakhalin Island, and Taiwan. In none of these areas were the opinions of affected people consulted, or given significant priority. Korea was specifically granted independence but the receiver of various other areas was not stated in the Treaty of San Francisco, giving Taiwan \"de facto\" independence although its political status continues to be ambiguous.\nThe Cold War world.\nThe UN Charter and resolutions.\nIn 1941 Allies of World War II declared the Atlantic Charter and accepted the principle of self-determination. In January 1942 twenty-six states signed the Declaration by United Nations, which accepted those principles. The ratification of the United Nations Charter in 1945 at the end of World War II placed the right of self-determination into the framework of international law and diplomacy.\nOn 14 December 1960, the United Nations General Assembly adopted United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) subtitled \"Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples\", which supported the granting of independence to colonial countries and people by providing an inevitable legal linkage between self-determination and its goal of decolonisation. It postulated a new international law-based right of freedom to exercise economic self-determination. Article 5 states: Immediate steps shall be taken in Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, or all other territories which have not yet attained independence, to transfer all powers to the people of those territories, without any conditions or reservations, in accordance with their freely expressed will and desire, without any distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to enable them to enjoy complete independence and freedom.\nOn 15 December 1960 the United Nations General Assembly adopted United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), subtitled \"Principles which should guide members in determining whether or nor an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73e of the United Nations Charter in Article 3\", which provided that \"[t]he inadequacy of political, economic, social and educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext for delaying the right to self-determination and independence.\" To monitor the implementation of Resolution 1514, in 1961 the General Assembly created the Special Committee referred to popularly as the Special Committee on Decolonization to ensure decolonization complete compliance with the principles of self-determination in General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV).\nHowever, the charter and other resolutions did not insist on full independence as the best way of obtaining self-government, nor did they include an enforcement mechanism. Moreover, new states were recognized by the legal doctrine of uti possidetis juris, meaning that old administrative boundaries would become international boundaries upon independence if they had little relevance to linguistic, ethnic, and cultural boundaries. Nevertheless, justified by the language of self-determination, between 1946 and 1960, thirty-seven new nations in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East gained independence from colonial powers. The territoriality issue inevitably would lead to more conflicts and independence movements within many states and challenges to the assumption that territorial integrity is as important as self-determination.\nThe communist versus capitalist worlds.\nDecolonization in the world was contrasted by the Soviet Union's successful post-war expansionism. Tuva and several regional states in Eastern Europe, the Baltic, and Central Asia had been fully annexed by the Soviet Union during World War II. Now, it extended its influence by establishing the satellite states of Eastern Germany and the countries of Eastern Europe, along with support for revolutionary movements in China and North Korea. Although satellite states were independent and possessed sovereignty, the Soviet Union violated principles of self-determination by suppressing the Hungarian revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring Czechoslovak reforms of 1968. It invaded Afghanistan to support a communist government assailed by local tribal groups. However, Marxism\u2013Leninism and its theory of imperialism were also strong influences in the national emancipation movements of Third World nations rebelling against colonial or puppet regimes. In many Third World countries, communism became an ideology that united groups to oppose imperialism or colonization.\nSoviet actions were contained by the United States which saw communism as a menace to its interests. Throughout the cold war, the United States created, supported, and sponsored regimes with various success that served their economic and political interests, among them anti-communist regimes such as that of Augusto Pinochet in Chile and Suharto in Indonesia. To achieve this, a variety of means was implemented, including the orchestration of coups, sponsoring of anti-communist countries and military interventions. Consequently, many self-determination movements, which spurned some type of anti-communist government, were accused of being Soviet-inspired or controlled.\nAsia.\nIn Asia, the Soviet Union had already converted Mongolia into a satellite state but abandoned propping up the Second East Turkestan Republic and gave up its Manchurian claims to China. The new People's Republic of China had gained control of mainland China in the Chinese Civil War, later taking over independent Tibet. The Korean War shifted the focus of the Cold War from Europe to Asia, where competing superpowers took advantage of decolonization to spread their influence.\nIn 1947, India gained independence from the British Empire. The empire was in decline but adapted to these circumstances by creating the British Commonwealth\u2014since 1949 the Commonwealth of Nations\u2014which is a free association of equal states. As India obtained its independence, multiple ethnic conflicts emerged in relation to the formation of a statehood during the Partition of India which resulted in Islamic Pakistan and Secular India. Before the advent of the British, no empire based in mainland India had controlled any part of what now makes up the country's Northeast, part of the reason for the ongoing insurgency in Northeast India. In 1971 Bangladesh obtained independence from Pakistan.\nBurma (later Myanmar) also gained independence from the British Empire, but declined membership in the Commonwealth. In contrast, Ceylon (later Sri Lanka) and Malaya both joined the Commonwealth upon gaining independence from Britain, as well as the latter's successor states (Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei).\nIndonesia gained independence from the Dutch Empire in 1949 after the latter failed to restore colonial control. As mentioned above, Indonesia also wanted a powerful position in the region that could be lessened by the creation of united Malaysia. The Netherlands retained its New Guinea part from the previous Dutch East Indies, but Indonesia threatened to invade and annex it. A vote was supposedly taken under the UN sponsored Act of Free Choice to allow West New Guineans to decide their fate, although many dispute its veracity. Later, Portugal relinquished control over East Timor in the aftermath of Carnation Revolution in 1975, at which time Indonesia promptly invaded and annexed it. In 1999, Indonesian president B. J. Habibie was pressured by Australia and the United Nations to give East Timor independence. The people of former Indonesian East Timor were given a choice of either greater autonomy within Indonesia or independence. 78.5% of East Timorese voted for independence, rejecting Indonesia's special autonomy proposal.\nLaos and Cambodia both gained independence from the French Empire in 1953, although Vietnam's case was more complex than those of the other two former colonies of French Indochina. Despite Vietnam under the communist Viet Minh declaring independence from France in 1945, it had to fight the Southern Resistance War and later the First Indochina War against not just the French but also the anti-communist Western-backed State of Vietnam after 1949, until the decisive Battle of Dien Bien Phu guaranteed the international recognition of Vietnam in 1954 at the Geneva Conference, albeit partitioned between the South Vietnam (State of Vietnam, later the Republic of Vietnam) as well as the communist North Vietnam (Democratic Republic of Vietnam). It wouldn't be until 1975 that Vietnam would be reunified under the north's rule following the Vietnam War.\nAfter the Cold War.\nThe Cold War began to wind down after Mikhail Gorbachev assumed power as Soviet General Secretary in March 1985. With the cooperation of the U.S. President Ronald Reagan, Gorbachev wound down the size of the Soviet Armed Forces and reduced nuclear arms in Europe, while liberalizing the Soviet economy.\nIn the revolutions of 1989\u201390, the communist regimes of Soviet satellite states collapsed in rapid succession in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, and Mongolia. East and West Germany united, Czechoslovakia peacefully split into Czech Republic and Slovakia, while in the 1990s Yugoslavia began a violent break up into 6 states. Macedonia became an independent nation and broke off from Yugoslavia peacefully. Kosovo, which was previously an autonomous unit of Serbia declared independence in 2008, but has received less international recognition.\nIn December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as president and the Soviet Union dissolved relatively peacefully into fifteen sovereign republics, all of which rejected Communism and most of which adopted democratic reforms and free-market economies. Inside those new republics, four major areas have claimed their own independence, but not received widespread international recognition.\nAfter decades of civil war, Indonesia finally recognized the independence of East Timor in 2002. Likewise, decades of civil war in Sudan finally led to South Sudan becoming independent in 2011.\nIn 1949, the Communist Party won the Chinese Civil War and established the People's Republic of China in Mainland China. The Kuomintang-led Republic of China government retreated to Taipei, its jurisdiction now limited to Taiwan and several outlying islands. Since then, the People's Republic of China has been involved in disputes with the ROC over issues of sovereignty and the political status of Taiwan.\nAs noted, self-determination movements remain strong in some areas of the world. Some areas possess \"de facto\" independence, such as Taiwan, North Cyprus, Kosovo, and South Ossetia, but their independence is disputed by one or more major states. Significant movements for self-determination also persist for locations that lack \"de facto\" independence, such as East Turkistan (\"Xinjiang\"), Kurdistan, Balochistan, Chechnya, and Palestine.\nCurrent issues.\nSince the early 1990s, the legitimatization of the principle of national self-determination has led to an increase in the number of conflicts within states, as sub-groups seek greater self-determination and full secession, and as their conflicts for leadership within groups and with other groups and with the dominant state become violent. The international reaction to these new movements has been uneven and often dictated more by politics than principle. The 2000 United Nations Millennium Declaration failed to deal with these new demands, mentioning only \"the right to self-determination of peoples which remain under colonial domination and foreign occupation.\"\nIn an issue of \"Macquarie University Law Journal\" Associate Professor Aleksandar Pavkovic and Senior Lecturer Peter Radan outlined current legal and political issues in self-determination.\nDefining \"peoples\".\nThere is not a recognized legal definition of \"peoples\" in international law. Indeed, Ivor Jennings called Wilson's doctrine \"ridiculous\" because, though on the surface it seems reasonable to \"let the people decide\", in practice \"the people cannot decide until someone decides who are the people\".\nReviewing various international judgements and UN resolutions, Vita Gudeleviciute of Vytautas Magnus University Law School finds that, in cases of non-self-governing peoples (colonized and/or indigenous) and foreign military occupation, \"a people\" is defined as the entire population of the occupied territorial unit, no matter their other differences. Meanwhile, in cases where people lack representation by a state's government, the unrepresented become a defined as a separate people. Present international law does not recognize ethnic and other minorities as separate peoples, with the notable exception of cases in which such groups are systematically disenfranchised by the government of the state they live in.\nOther definitions offered are \"peoples\" as self-evident (from ethnicity, language, history, etc.), or defined by \"ties of mutual affection or sentiment\" (\"loyalty\", or by mutual obligations among peoples).\nProfessor Uriel Abulof suggests that self-determination entails the \"moral double helix\" of duality: 1. personal right to align with a people, and the people's right to determine their politics; and 2. and mutuality (the right is as much the other's as the self's). Thus, self-determination grants individuals the right to form \"a people,\" which then has the right to establish an independent state, as long as they grant the same to all other individuals and peoples.\nSelf-determination versus territorial integrity.\nNational self-determination appears to challenge the principle of territorial integrity (or sovereignty) of states as it is the will of the people that makes a state legitimate. This implies that people should be free to choose their own state and its territorial boundaries. However, there are far more self-identified nations than there are existing states and there is no legal process to redraw state boundaries according to the will of these peoples. According to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, the UN, ICJ and international law experts, there is no contradiction between the principles of self-determination and territorial integrity, with the latter taking precedence.\nAllen Buchanan, author of seven books on self-determination and secession, supports territorial integrity as a moral and legal aspect of constitutional democracy. However, he also advances a \"Remedial Rights Only Theory\" where a group has \"a general right to secede if and only if it has suffered certain injustices, for which secession is the appropriate remedy of last resort.\" He also would recognize secession if the state grants, or the constitution includes, a right to secede.\nVita Gudeleviciute holds that in cases of non-self-governing peoples and foreign military occupation the principle of self-determination trumps that of territorial integrity. In cases where people lack representation by a state's government, they also may be considered a separate people, but under current law cannot claim the right to self-determination. On the other hand, she finds that secession within a single state is a domestic matter not covered by international law. Thus, there are no on what groups may constitute a seceding people.\nA number of states have laid claim to territories, which they allege were removed from them as a result of colonialism. This is justified by reference to Paragraph 6 of UN Resolution 1514(XV), which states that any attempt \"aimed at partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter\". This, it is claimed, applies to situations where the territorial integrity of a state had been disrupted by colonisation, so that the people of a territory subject to a historic territorial claim are prevented from exercising a right to self-determination. This interpretation is rejected by many states, who argue that Paragraph 2 of UN Resolution 1514(XV) states that \"all peoples have the right to self-determination\" and Paragraph 6 cannot be used to justify territorial claims. The original purpose of Paragraph 6 was \"to ensure that acts of self-determination occur within the established boundaries of colonies, rather than within sub-regions\". Further, the use of the word \"attempt\" in Paragraph 6 denotes future action and cannot be construed to justify territorial redress for past action. An attempt sponsored by Spain and Argentina to qualify the right to self-determination in cases where there was a territorial dispute was rejected by the UN General Assembly, which re-iterated the right to self-determination was a universal right.\nMethods of increasing minority rights.\nIn order to accommodate demands for minority rights and avoid secession and the creation of a separate new state, many states decentralize or devolve greater decision-making power to new or existing subunits or autonomous areas.\nSelf-determination versus majority rule/equal rights.\nSelf-determination can be at odds with the principle of majority rule and equal rights, especially when there is a sizable minority group. In democratic societies, majority rule is often used to determine the outcome in electoral and voting processes. However, a major critique of majority rule is that it may result in the tyranny of the majority, especially in cases in which a simple majority is used in order to determine outcome. This flaw is particularly poignant when there is a large minority group whose interests are not being represented, and who may then seek to secede.\nThe right to self-determination by a minority has long been contested in democracies with majority rule. For instance, in his first inaugural speech Abraham Lincoln argued that:Plainly the central idea of secession is the essence of anarchy. A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people. Whoever rejects it does of necessity fly to anarchy or to despotism. Unanimity is impossible. The rule of a minority, as a permanent arrangement, is wholly inadmissible; so that, rejecting the majority principle, anarchy or despotism in some form is all that is left.However, liberal proponents for the right to self-determination by minority groups contradict this notion by arguing that, in cases where the minority is not able to become the majority, and that minority is territorially concentrated and does not want to be governed by the majority, it may serve the best interest of the state to allow the secession of this group.\nConstitutional law.\nMost sovereign states do not recognize the right to self-determination through secession in their constitutions. Many expressly forbid it. However, there are several existing models of self-determination through greater autonomy and through secession.\nIn liberal constitutional democracies the principle of majority rule has dictated whether a minority can secede. In the United States Abraham Lincoln acknowledged that secession might be possible through amending the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court in \"Texas v. White\" held secession could occur \"through revolution, or through consent of the States.\" The British Parliament in 1933 held that Western Australia only could secede from Australia upon vote of a majority of the country as a whole; the previous two-thirds majority vote for secession via referendum in Western Australia was insufficient.\nThe Chinese Communist Party followed the Soviet Union in including the right of secession in its 1931 constitution in order to entice ethnic nationalities and Tibet into joining. However, the Party eliminated the right to secession in later years and had anti-secession clause written into the Constitution before and after the founding the People's Republic of China. The 1947 Constitution of the Union of Burma contained an express state right to secede from the union under a number of procedural conditions. It was eliminated in the 1974 constitution of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (officially the \"Union of Myanmar\"). Burma still allows \"local autonomy under central leadership\".\nAs of 1996 the constitutions of Austria, Ethiopia, France, and Saint Kitts and Nevis have express or implied rights to secession. Switzerland allows for the secession from current and the creation of new cantons. In the case of proposed Quebec separation from Canada the Supreme Court of Canada in 1998 ruled that only both a clear majority of the province and a constitutional amendment confirmed by all participants in the Canadian federation could allow secession.\nThe 2003 draft of the European Union Constitution allowed for the voluntary withdrawal of member states from the union, although the State which wanted to leave could not be involved in the vote deciding whether or not they can leave the Union. There was much discussion about such self-determination by minorities before the final document underwent the unsuccessful ratification process in 2005.\nAs a result of the successful constitutional referendum held in 2003, every municipality in the Principality of Liechtenstein has the right to secede from the Principality by a vote of a majority of the citizens residing in this municipality.\nDrawing new borders.\nIn determining international borders between sovereign states, self-determination has yielded to a number of other principles. Once groups exercise self-determination through secession, the issue of the proposed borders may prove more controversial than the fact of secession. The bloody Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s were related mostly to border issues because the international community applied a version of uti possidetis juris in transforming the existing internal borders of the various Yugoslav republics into international borders, despite the conflicts of ethnic groups within those boundaries. In the 1990s indigenous populations of the northern two-thirds of Quebec province opposed being incorporated into a Quebec nation and stated a determination to resist it by force.\nThe border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Free State was based on the borders of existing counties and did not include all of historic Ulster (see Partition of Ireland). A Irish Boundary Commission was established to consider re-drawing it. Its proposals, which amounted to a small net transfer to the Free State, were leaked to the press and then not acted upon. The Commission Report was supressed and not published in full until 1969. In December 1925, the governments of the Irish Free State, Northern Ireland, and the United Kingdom agreed to accept the existing border.\nNotable cases.\nArtsakh.\nThe Republic of Artsakh (also known as the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic), in the Caucasus region, declared its independence in a 1991 referendum, which had an approval of 99% of voters; however, the breakaway state remained unrecognized by UN states and was disbanded on January 1, 2024, after Azerbaijan's military offensive and the evacuation of 99% of the population. It was a member of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations along with three other Post-Soviet disputed republics.\nAssyria.\nThe Assyrian independence movement is a political movement and nationalist desire of the Assyrian people to live in their traditional Assyrian homeland under the self-governance of an Assyrian state. The Assyrian territory is currently in parts of Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Turkey.\nAustralia.\nSelf-determination has become the topic of some debate in Australia in relation to Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders. In the 1970s, Aboriginal requested the right to administer their own remote communities as part of the homelands movement, also known as the outstation movement. These grew in number through the 1980s, but funding dried up in the 2000s.\nAzawad.\nThe traditional homeland of the Tuareg peoples was divided up by the modern borders of Mali, Algeria and Niger. Numerous rebellions occurred over the decades, but in 2012 the Tuaregs succeeded in occupying their land and declaring the independence of Azawad. However, their movement was hijacked by the Islamist terrorist group Ansar Dine.\nBasque Country.\nThe Basque Country (, , ) as a cultural region (not to be confused with the homonym Autonomous Community of the Basque country) is a European region in the western Pyrenees that spans the border between France and Spain, on the Atlantic coast. It comprises the autonomous communities of the Basque Country and Navarre in Spain and the Northern Basque Country in France.\nSince the 19th century, Basque nationalism has demanded the right of some kind of self-determination. This desire for independence is particularly stressed among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 1990, 2002 and 2006.\nSince self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, some Basques abstained and some voted against it in the referendum of December 6 of that year. It was approved by a clear majority at the Spanish level, and with 74.6% of the votes in the Basque Country. However, the overall turnout in the Basque Country was 45% when the Spanish overall turnover was 67.9%. The derived autonomous regime for the BAC was approved by Spanish Parliament and also by the Basque citizens in referendum. The autonomous statute of Navarre (\"Amejoramiento del Fuero\": \"improvement of the charter\") was approved by the Spanish Parliament and, like the statutes of 13 out of 17 Spanish autonomous communities, it did not need a referendum to enter into force.\n\"Euskadi Ta Askatasuna\" or ETA (; pronounced ), was an armed Basque nationalist, separatist and terrorist organization that killed more than 800 people. Founded in 1959, it evolved from a group advocating traditional cultural ways to a paramilitary group with the goal of Basque independence. Its ideology was Marxist\u2013Leninist.\nBiafra.\nThe Nigerian Civil War was fought between Biafran secessionists of the Republic of Biafra and the Nigerian central government. From 1999 to the present day, the indigenous people of Biafra have been agitating for independence to revive their country. They have registered a human rights organization known as Bilie Human Rights Initiative both in Nigeria and in the United Nations to advocate for their right to self-determination and achieve independence by the rule of law.\nCatalonia.\nAfter the 2012 Catalan march for independence, in which between 600,000 and 1.5 million citizens marched, the President of Catalonia, Artur Mas, called for new parliamentary elections on 25 November 2012 to elect a new parliament that would exercise the right of self-determination for Catalonia, a right not recognised under the Spanish Cortes Generales. The Parliament of Catalonia voted to hold a vote in the next four-year legislature on the question of self-determination. The parliamentary decision was approved by a large majority of MPs: 84 voted for, 21 voted against, and 25 abstained. The Catalan Parliament applied to the Spanish Parliament for the power to call a referendum to be devolved, but this was turned down. In December 2013 the President of the Generalitat Artur Mas and the governing coalition agreed to set the referendum for self-determination on 9 November 2014, and legislation specifically saying that the consultation would not be a \"referendum\" was enacted, only to be blocked by the Spanish Constitutional Court, at the request of the Spanish government. Given the block, the Government turned it into a simple \"consultation to the people\" instead.\nThe question in the consultation was \"Do you want Catalonia to be a State?\" and, if the answer to this question was yes, \"Do you want this State to be an independent State?\". However, as the consultation was not a formal referendum, these (printed) answers were just suggestions and other answers were also accepted and catalogued as \"other answers\" instead as null votes. The turnout in this consultation was about 2\u00b73m people out of 6\u00b72m people that were called to vote (this figure does not coincide with the census figure of 5\u00b73m for two main reasons: first, because organisers had no access to an official census due to the non-binding character of the consultation, and second, because the legal voting age was set to 16 rather than 18). Due to the lack of an official census, potential voters were assigned to electoral tables according to home address and first family name. Participants had to sign up first with their full name and national ID in a voter registry before casting their ballot, which prevented participants from potentially casting multiple ballots. The overall result was 80\u00b776% in favor of both questions, 11% in favor of the first question but not of the second questions, 4\u00b754% against both; the rest were classified as \"other answers\". The voter turnout was around 37% (most people against the consultation did not go to vote). Four top members of Catalonia's political leadership were barred from public office for having defied the Constitutional court's last-minute ban.\nAlmost three years later (1 October 2017), the Catalan government called a referendum for independence under legislation adopted in September 2017, despite this legislation had been suspended by the Constitutional Court for \"violating fundamental rights of citizens\", with the question \"Do you want Catalonia to become an independent state in the form of a Republic?\". On polling day, the Catalan regional police, which had been accused in the past of police brutality and impunity during the 15-M protests, prevented voting in over 500 polling stations without incidents. In some voting stations, the Catalan regional police did not intervene, while in other stations they directly confronted the Spanish CNP (National Police Corps) to allow voters to participate. The CNP confiscated ballot boxes and closed down 92, voting centres with violent truncheon charges. The opposition parties had called for non-participation. The turnout (according to the votes that were counted) was 2.3m out of 5.3m (43.03% of the census), and 90.18% of the ballots were in favour of independence. The turnout, ballot count and results were similar to those of the 2014 \"consultation\".\nChechnya.\nUnder Dzhokhar Dudayev, Chechnya declared independence as the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, using self-determination, Russia's history of bad treatment of Chechens, and a history of independence before invasion by Russia as main motives. Russia has restored control over Chechnya, but the separatist government functions still in exile, though it has been split into two entities: the Akhmed Zakayev-run secular Chechen Republic (based in Poland, the United Kingdom, and the United States), and the Islamic Caucasus Emirate.\nEast Turkistan.\nOn November 12, 1933, Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and Uzbeks declared independence, establishing the First East Turkestan Republic, and again on November 12, 1944, forming the socialist Second East Turkestan Republic. Their primary motivations included self-determination against a history of colonization and oppression by the Manchu Qing Dynasty. The People's Republic of China assumed control over East Turkistan in late 1949. There is a robust movement advocating East Turkistani sovereignty, challenging the Chinese occupation since 2004, namely the East Turkistan Government in Exile is at the forefront of the East Turkistan Independence Movement.\nEastern Ukraine.\nThere is an active secessionist movement based on the self-determination of the residents of the eastern part of Donetsk and the south-eastern part of the Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine. However, many in the international community assert that referendums held there in 2014 regarding independence from Ukraine were illegitimate and undemocratic. Similarly, there are reports that presidential elections in May 2014 were prevented from taking place in the two regions after armed gunmen took control of polling stations, kidnapped election officials, and stole lists of electors, thus denying the population the chance to express their will in a free, fair, and internationally recognised election. There are also arguments that the de facto separation of Eastern Ukraine from the rest of the country is not an expression of self-determination, but rather, motivated by revival of pro-Soviet sentiment and an invasion by neighbouring Russia, with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko claiming in 2015 that up to 9,000 Russian soldiers were deployed in Ukraine. Similarly, Russian President Vladimir Putin defended the annexation of Crimea by claiming it to be an act of self-determination of the Crimean people.\nEthiopia.\nThe Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is run as a federation of semi-self-governing nation states. The Constitution of Ethiopia firmly mentions the self-determining nature of its states. The actual implementation of its states self-governance is debate-able.\nFalkland Islands.\nSelf-determination is referred to in the Falkland Islands Constitution and is a factor in the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute. The population has existed for over nine generations, continuously for over 190 years. In the 2013 referendum, organised by the Falkland Islands Government, 99.8% voted to remain British. As administering power, the British Government deemed that transfer of sovereignty to Argentina would be counter to the Falkland Islander right to self-determination, since the majority of Falkland Island inhabitants wished to remain British.\nArgentina states the principle of self-determination is not applicable to the islands since the current inhabitants are not aboriginal and were brought to replace the Argentine population, which was expelled by an 'act of force', compelling the Argentinian inhabitants to directly leave the islands. This refers to the re-establishment of British rule in the year 1833 during which Argentina claims the existing population living in the islands was expelled. Argentina thus argues that, in the case of the Falkland Islands, the principle of territorial integrity should have precedence over self-determination. Historical records dispute Argentina's claims and whilst acknowledging the garrison was expelled note the existing civilian population remained at Port Louis. and there was no attempt to settle the islands until 1841.\nGibraltar.\nThe right to self-determination is referred to in the pre-amble of Chapter 1 of the Gibraltar constitution, and, since the United Kingdom also gave assurances that the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians would be respected in any transfer of sovereignty over the territory, is a factor in the dispute with Spain over the territory. The impact of the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians was seen in the 2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum, where Gibraltarian voters overwhelmingly rejected a plan to share sovereignty over Gibraltar between the UK and Spain. However, the UK government differs with the Gibraltarian government in that it considers Gibraltarian self-determination to be limited by the Treaty of Utrecht, which prevents Gibraltar achieving independence without the agreement of Spain, a position that the Gibraltarian government does not accept.\nThe Spanish government denies that Gibraltarians have the right to self-determination, considering them to be \"an artificial population without any genuine autonomy\" and not \"indigenous\". However, the Partido Andalucista has agreed to recognise the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians.\nHong Kong.\nBefore the United Nations's adoption of resolution 2908 (XXVII) on 2 November 1972, The People's Republic of China vetoed the former British colony of Hong Kong's right to self-determination on 8 March 1972. This sparked several nations' protest along with Great Britain's declaration on 14 December that the decision is invalid. \nDecades later, an independence movement, dubbed as the Hong Kong independence movement emerged in the now Communist Chinese controlled territory. It advocates the autonomous region to become a fully independent sovereign state.\nThe city is considered a special administrative region\u00a0(SAR) which, according to the PRC, enjoys a high degree of autonomy under the People's Republic of China (PRC), guaranteed under Article 2 of Hong Kong Basic Law[1] (which is ratified under the Sino-British Joint Declaration), since the handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to the PRC in 1997. Since the handover, many Hongkongers are increasingly concerned about Beijing's growing encroachment on the territory's freedoms and the failure of the Hong Kong government to deliver 'true' democracy.[2]\nThe 2014\u201315 Hong Kong electoral reform package deeply divided the city, as it allowed Hongkongers to have universal suffrage, but Beijing would have authority to screen the candidates to restrict the electoral method for the Chief Executive of Hong Kong\u00a0(CE), the highest-ranking official of the territory. This sparked the 79-day massive peaceful protests which was dubbed as the \"Umbrella Revolution\" and the pro-independence movement emerged on the Hong Kong political scene.[2]\nSince then, localism has gained momentum, particularly after the failure of the peaceful Umbrella Movement. Young localist leaders have led numerous protest actions against pro-Chinese policies to raise awareness of social problems of Hong Kong under Chinese rule. These include the sit-in protest against the Bill to Strengthen Internet Censorship, demonstrations against Chinese political interference in the University of Hong Kong, the Recover Yuen Long protests and the 2016 Mong Kok civil unrest. According to a survey conducted by the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in July 2016, 17.4% of respondents supported the city becoming an independent entity after 2047, while 3.6% stated that it is \"possible\".[3]\nIndigenous peoples.\nIndigenous peoples have claimed through the 2007 Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples the term peoples, and gaining with it the right to self-determination. Though it was also established that it is merely a right within existing sovereign states, after all peoples also need territory and a central government to reach sovereignty in international politics.\nIsrael.\nZionism is a nationalist ideology founded by Theodor Herzl which claims a right of historic entitlement by descent as a nation, to exercise self-determination for all Jewish people in the region of Palestine/ancient Israel/land of Israel. The successful implementation of this vision led to the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948.\nKashmir.\nThe insurgency in Kashmir against Indian rule has existed in various forms. A widespread armed insurgency started in Kashmir against India rule in 1989 after allegations of rigging by the Indian government in the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir state election. This led to some parties in the state assembly forming militant wings, which acted as a catalyst for the emergence of armed insurgency in the region. The conflict over Kashmir has resulted in tens of thousands of deaths.\nThe Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistan has been accused by India of supporting and training both pro-Pakistan and pro-independence militants to fight Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir, a charge that Pakistan denies. According to official figures released in the Jammu and Kashmir assembly, there were 3,400 disappearance cases and the conflict has left more than 47,000 to 100,000 people dead as of July 2009. However, violence in the state had fallen sharply after the start of a slow-moving peace process between India and Pakistan. After the peace process failed in 2008, mass demonstrations against Indian rule, and low-scale militancy emerged again.\nHowever, despite boycott calls by separatist leaders in 2014, the Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections saw highest voters turnout in last 25 years since insurgency erupted. As per the Indian government, it recorded more than 65% of voters turnout which was more than usual voters turnout in other state assembly elections of India. It considered as increase in faith of Kashmiri people in democratic process of India. However, activists say that the voter turnout is highly exaggerated and that elections are held under duress. Votes are cast because the people want stable governance of the state and this cannot be mistaken as an endorsement of Indian rule.\nKurdistan.\nKurdistan is a historical region primarily inhabited by the Kurdish people of the Middle East. The territory is currently part of Turkey, Iraq, Syria and Iran. There are Kurdish self-determination movements in each of the four states. Iraqi Kurdistan has to date achieved the largest degree of self-determination through the formation of the Kurdistan Regional Government, an entity recognised by the Iraqi Federal Constitution.\nAlthough the right of the creation of a Kurdish state was recognized following World War I in the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, the treaty was then annulled by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923). To date two separate Kurdish republics and one Kurdish Kingdom have declared sovereignty. The Republic of Ararat (A\u011fr\u0131 Province, Turkey), the Republic of Mehabad (West Azerbaijan Province, Iran) and the Kingdom of Kurdistan (Sulaymaniyah Governorate, Iraqi Kurdistan, Iraq), each of these fledgling states was crushed by military intervention. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan which currently holds the Iraqi presidency and the Kurdistan Democratic Party which governs the Kurdistan Regional Government both explicitly commit themselves to the development of Kurdish self-determination, but opinions vary as to the question of self-determination sought within the current borders and countries.\nEfforts towards Kurdish self-determination are considered illegal separatism by the governments of Turkey and Iran, and the movement is politically repressed in both states. This is intertwined with Kurdish nationalist insurgencies in Iran and in Turkey, which in turn justify and are justified by the repression of peaceful advocacy. In Syria, a self-governing local Kurdish-dominated polity was established in 2012, amongst the upheaval of the Syrian Civil War, but has not been recognized by any foreign state.\nNagalim.\nNaga refers to a vaguely defined conglomeration of distinct tribes living on the border of India and Burma. Each of these tribes lived in a sovereign village before the arrival of the British but developed a common identity as the area was Christianized. After the British left India, a section of Nagas under the leadership of Angami Zapu Phizo sought to establish a separate country for the Nagas. Phizo's group, the Naga National Council (NNC), claimed that 99. 9% of the Nagas wanted an independent Naga country according to a referendum conducted by it. It waged a secessionist insurgency against the Government of India. The NNC collapsed after Phizo got his dissenters killed or forced them to seek refuge with the Government. Phizo escaped to London, while NNC's successor secessionist groups continued to stage violent attacks against the Indian Government. The Naga People's Convention (NPC), another major Naga organization, was opposed to the secessionists. Its efforts led to the creation of a separate Nagaland state within India in 1963. The secessionist violence declined considerably after the Shillong Accord of 1975. However, three factions of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) continue to seek an independent country which would include parts of India and Burma. They envisage a sovereign, predominantly Christian nation called \"Nagalim\".\nNorth Borneo and Sarawak.\nAnother controversial episode with perhaps more relevance was the British beginning their exit from British Malaya. An experience concerned the findings of a \"United Nations Assessment Team\" that led the British territories of North Borneo and Sarawak in 1963 to determine whether or not the populations wished to become a part of the new Malaysia Federation. The United Nation Team's mission followed on from an earlier assessment by the British-appointed Cobbold Commission which had arrived in the territories in 1962 and held hearings to determine public opinion. It also sifted through 1600 letters and memoranda submitted by individuals, organisations and political parties. Cobbold concluded that around two thirds of the population favoured to the formation of Malaysia while the remaining third wanted either independence or continuing control by the United Kingdom. The United Nations team largely confirmed these findings, which were later accepted by the General Assembly, and both territories subsequently wish to form the new Federation of Malaysia. The conclusions of both the Cobbold Commission and the United Nations team were arrived at without any referendums self-determination being held. Unlike in Singapore, however, no referendum was ever conducted in Sarawak and North Borneo. they sought to consolidate several of the previous ruled entities then there was Manila Accord, an agreement between the Philippines, Federation of Malaya and Indonesia on 31 July 1963 to abide by the wishes of the people of North Borneo and Sarawak within the context of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), Principle 9 of the Annex taking into account referendums in North Borneo and Sarawak that would be free and without coercion. This also triggered the Indonesian confrontation because Indonesia opposed the violation of the agreements.\nNorthern Cyprus.\nCyprus was settled by Mycenaean Greeks in two waves in the 2nd millennium BC. As a strategic location in the Middle East, it was subsequently occupied by several major powers, including the empires of the Assyrians, Egyptians and Persians, from whom the island was seized in 333 BC by Alexander the Great. Subsequent rule by Ptolemaic Egypt, the Classical and Eastern Roman Empire, Arab caliphates for a short period and the French Lusignan dynasty. Following the death in 1473 of James II, the last Lusignan king, the Republic of Venice assumed control of the island, while the late king's Venetian widow, Queen Catherine Cornaro, reigned as figurehead. Venice formally annexed the Kingdom of Cyprus in 1489, following the abdication of Catherine. The Venetians fortified Nicosia by building the Walls of Nicosia, and used it as an important commercial hub.\nAlthough the Lusignan French aristocracy remained the dominant social class in Cyprus throughout the medieval period, the former assumption that Greeks were treated only as serfs on the island is no longer considered by academics to be accurate. It is now accepted that the medieval period saw increasing numbers of Greek Cypriots elevated to the upper classes, a growing Greek middle ranks, and the Lusignan royal household even marrying Greeks. This included King John II of Cyprus who married Helena Palaiologina.\nThroughout Venetian rule, the Ottoman Empire frequently raided Cyprus. In 1539 the Ottomans destroyed Limassol and so fearing the worst, the Venetians also fortified Famagusta and Kyrenia.\nHaving invaded in 1570, Turks controlled and solely governed all of the Cyprus island from 1571 until its leasing to the British Empire in 1878. Cyprus was placed under British administration based on Cyprus Convention in 1878 and formally annexed by Britain at the beginning of World War I in 1914. While Turkish Cypriots made up 18% of the population, the partition of Cyprus and creation of a Turkish state in the north became a policy of Turkish Cypriot leaders and the Republic of Turkey in the 1950s. Politically, there was no majority/minority relation between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots; and hence, in 1960, Republic of Cyprus was founded by the constituent communities in Cyprus (Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots) as a non-unitary state; the 1960 Constitution set both Turkish and Greek as the official languages. During 1963\u201374, the island experienced ethnic clashes and turmoil, following the Greek nationalists' coup to unify the island to Greece, which led to the eventual Turkish invasion in 1974. Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus was declared in 1983 and recognized only by Turkey. Monroe Leigh, 1990, The Legal Status in International Law of the Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot Communities in Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot regimes participating in these negotiations, and the respective communities which they represent, are presently entitled to exercise equal rights under international law, including rights of self-determination. Before the Turkey's invasion in 1974, Turkish Cypriots were concentrated in Turkish Cypriot enclaves in the island.\nNorthern Cyprus fulfills all the classical criteria of statehood. United Nations Peace Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) operates based on the laws of Northern Cyprus in north of Cyprus island. According to European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), the laws of Northern Cyprus is valid in the north of Cyprus. ECtHR did \"not\" accept the claim that the Courts of Northern Cyprus lacked \"independence and/or impartiality\". ECtHR directed all Cypriots to exhaust \"domestic remedies\" applied by Northern Cyprus before taking their cases to ECtHR. In 2014, United States' Federal Court qualified Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus as a \"democratic country\". In 2017, United Kingdom's High Court decided that \"There was no duty in UK law upon the UK's Government to refrain from recognising Northern Cyprus. The United Nations itself works with Northern Cyprus law enforcement agencies and facilitates cooperation between the two parts of the island.\" UK's High Court also dismissed the claim that \"cooperation between UK police and law agencies in northern Cyprus was illegal\".\nPalestine.\nPalestinian self-determination is the aspiration of some Palestinians and Palestinian nationalists for increased autonomy and sovereign independence, as well as to the international right of self-determination applied to Palestine. Such sentiments are features of both the one state solution and the two state solution. In the two state solution this usually denotes territorial integrity initiatives, such as resisting occupation in the West Bank, annexation efforts in East Jerusalem or freedom of movement along borders, as well the preservation of important sites such as al-Aqsa mosque.\nQuebec.\nIn Canada, many Francophone citizens in the Province of Quebec have wanted the province to separate from Confederation. The Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois has asserted Quebec's \"right to self-determination. \" There is debate on under which conditions would this right be realized. French-speaking Quebec nationalism and support for maintaining Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois culture would inspire Quebec nationalists, many of whom were supporters of the Quebec sovereignty movement during the late-20th century.\nSardinia.\nSardinian nationalism or Sardism (\"Sardismu\" in Sardinian; in Italian) is a social, cultural and political movement in Sardinia calling for the self-determination of the Sardinian people in a context of national devolution, further autonomy in Italy, or even outright independence from the latter. It also promotes the protection of the island's environment and the preservation of its cultural heritage.\nEven though the island has been characterized by periodical waves of ethnonationalist protests against Rome, the Sardinian movement has its origins on the left of the political spectrum; regionalism and attempts for Sardinian self-determination historically countered in fact the Rome-centric Italian nationalism and fascism (which eventually managed to contain the autonomist and separatist tendencies).\nScotland.\nScotland ceased to exist as a sovereign state in 1707, as did England, when the Acts of Union (1707) created the unified Kingdom of Great Britain, but has a long-standing Scottish independence movement, with polls suggesting in January 2020 that 52% of eligible voters would vote for an independent Scotland. The country's largest political party, the Scottish National Party, campaigns for Scottish independence. A referendum on independence was held in 2014, where it was rejected by 55% of voters. The Independence debate continued throughout the UK referendum on EU membership where the electorate in Scotland voted by 62% to remain a member of the EU, as did Northern Ireland. Results in England and Wales, however, led to the whole of the United Kingdom leaving the EU. In late 2019 the Scottish Government announced plans to demand a second referendum on Scottish Independence. This was given assent by the Scottish Parliament but, as of July 2022, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has refused to grant the Section 30 powers required to hold another referendum on the argument that both sides accepted beforehand that the 2014 vote would settle the matter for a generation.\nSouth Africa.\nSection 235 of the South African Constitution allows for the right to self-determination of a community, within the framework of \"the right of the South African people as a whole to self-determination\", and pursuant to national legislation. This section of the constitution was one of the negotiated settlements during the handing over of political power in 1994. Supporters of an independent Afrikaner homeland have argued that their goals are reasonable under this new legislation.\nSouth Tyrol.\nIn Italy, South Tyrol/Alto Adige was annexed after the First World War. The German-speaking inhabitants of South Tyrol are protected by the Gruber-De Gasperi Agreement, but there are still supporters of the self determination of South Tyrol, e.g. the party Die Freiheitlichen and the South Tyrolean independence movement. At the end of WWII, Italian resistance troops entered South Tyrol and took over the administration against the wishes of the South Tyrolean resistance movement. The Allies subsequently granted South Tyrol to Italy, with the British foreign minister remarking that \"in theory the Austrians have the better argument, however handing over the power stations of South Tyrol to them could openly give the Russians a helping hand with which they could pressurise Italy\". The Allies pushed Italy to grant the region a high degree of autonomy, culminating in the Gruber\u2013De Gasperi Agreement of 1946.\nSz\u00e9kely Land.\nFollowing the First World War, large areas of the Kingdom of Hungary were annexed by Romania. Some of these areas were inhabited by an ethnic Hungarian population called Sz\u00e9kelys. Ever since their homes were integrated into Romania, these people were trying to achieve some form of autonomy or self-governance.\nTibet.\nThere are several movements in advocacy of the Tibetan sovereignty from the Chinese occupation since 1950. The Tibetan Government in-Exile is a notable example.\nUnited States.\nThe colonization of the North American continent and its Native American population has been the source of legal battles since the early 19th century. Many Native American tribes were resettled onto separate tracts of land (reservations), which have retained a certain degree of autonomy within the United States. The federal government recognizes Tribal Sovereignty and has established a number of laws attempting to clarify the relationship among the federal, state, and tribal governments. The Constitution and later federal laws recognize the local sovereignty of tribal nations, but do not recognize full sovereignty equivalent to that of foreign nations, hence the term \"domestic dependent nations\" to qualify the federally recognized tribes.\nCertain Chicano nationalist groups seek to \"recreate\" an ethnic-based state to be called Aztl\u00e1n, after the legendary homeland of the Aztecs. It would comprise the Southwestern United States, historic territory of indigenous peoples and their descendants, as well as colonists and later settlers under the Spanish colonial and Mexican governments. Supporters of the proposed state of New Afrika argue that the history of African-Americans living in and making productive of several U.S. states in the Black Belt entitles them to establish an African-American republic in the area, alongside $400 billion as reparations for slavery.\nThere are several active Hawaiian autonomy or independence movements, each with the goal of realizing some level of political control over single or several islands. The groups range from those seeking territorial units similar to Indian reservations under the United States, with the least amount of independent control, to the Hawaiian sovereignty movement, which is projected to have the most independence. The Hawaiian Sovereignty movement seeks to revive the Hawaiian nation under the Hawaiian constitution.\nSince 1972, the U.N. Decolonization Committee has called for Puerto Rico's \"decolonization\" and for the US to recognize the island's right to self-determination and independence. In 2007 the Decolonization Subcommittee called for the United Nations General Assembly to review the political status of Puerto Rico, a power reserved by the 1953 Resolution. This followed the 1967 passage of a plebiscite act that provided for a vote on the status of Puerto Rico with three status options: continued commonwealth, statehood, and independence. In the first plebiscite, the commonwealth option won with 60.4% of the votes, but US congressional committees failed to enact legislation to address the status issue. In subsequent plebiscites in 1993 and 1998, the status quo was favored.\nIn a referendum that took place in November 2012, a majority of Puerto Rican residents voted to change the territory's relationship with the United States, with the statehood option being the preferred option. But a large number of ballots\u2014one-third of all votes cast\u2014were left blank on the question of preferred alternative status. Supporters of the commonwealth status had urged voters to blank their ballots. When the blank votes are counted as anti-statehood votes, the statehood option would have received less than 50% of all ballots received. As of January 2014, Washington has not taken action to address the results of this plebiscite.\nMany current U.S. state, regional and city secession groups use the language of self-determination. A 2008 Zogby International poll revealed that 22% of Americans believe that \"any state or region has the right to peaceably secede and become an independent republic.\" For instance, the League of the South is a group that seeks \"a free and independent Southern republic\" made up of the former Confederate States of America. It operated a short-lived Southern Party supporting the right of states to secede from the Union or to legally nullify federal laws.\nOn December 15, 2022, the U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of the Puerto Rico Status Act. The act sought to resolve Puerto Rico's status and its relationship to the United States through a binding plebiscite.\nSince the late 20th century, some states periodically discuss desires to secede from the United States. Unilateral secession was ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in \"Texas v. White\" (1869).\nWestern Sahara.\nThere is an active movement based on the self-determination of the Sahrawi people in the Western Saharan region. Morocco also claims the entire territory, and maintains control of about two-thirds of the region.\nWest Papua.\nThe self-determination of the West Papuan people has been violently suppressed by the Indonesian Government since the withdrawal of Dutch colonial rule under the Dutch New Guinea in 1962.\nWestern Cape.\nSince the late 2000s there has been growing calls for the people of the Western Cape province of South Africa to become an independent state. South Africa in its current form was created in 1910 after the South Africa Act 1909 was passed in the British parliament. The Cape Colony ceased to exist, however many of its unique political and cultural quirks such as the Cape Liberal Tradition nevertheless continued to exist. Recent polling has shown that over 46% of Western Cape voters back independence outright.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29271", "revid": "44288696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29271", "title": "Scale", "text": "Scale or scales may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29272", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29272", "title": "SpeechPathology", "text": ""}
{"id": "29273", "revid": "978841793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29273", "title": "Superset", "text": ""}
{"id": "29275", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29275", "title": "Southcentral Alaska", "text": "Region of the U.S. state of Alaska\nSouthcentral Alaska, also known as the Gulf Coast Region, is the portion of the U.S. state of Alaska consisting of the shorelines and uplands of the central Gulf of Alaska. More than half of the state's entire population lives in this region, concentrated in and around the city of Anchorage. The region is Alaska\u2019s best-connected region, with the Port of Anchorage, Ted Stevens, Anchorage International Airport, and the Alaska Railroad servicing the area.\nThe area includes Cook Inlet, the Matanuska-Susitna Valley, the Kenai Peninsula, Prince William Sound, and the Copper River Valley. Tourism, fisheries, and petroleum production are important economic activities.\nCities.\nThe major city is Anchorage. Other major towns include Palmer, Wasilla, Kenai, Soldotna, Homer, Seward, Valdez, and Cordova.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Southcentral Alaska is subarctic. Temperatures range from an average high of in July to an average low of in December. The hours of daylight per day vary from 20 hours in June and July to 6 hours in December and January. The coastal areas consist of temperate rainforests and alder shrublands. The interior areas are covered by boreal forests.\nMountains.\nThe terrain of Southcentral Alaska is shaped by seven mountain ranges:\nSouthcentral Alaska contains several dormant and active volcanoes. The Wrangell Volcanoes are older, lie in the East, and include Mount Blackburn, Mount Bona, Mount Churchill, Mount Drum, Mount Gordon, Mount Jarvis, Mount Sanford, and Mount Wrangell. The Cook Inlet volcanoes, located in the Tordrillo Mountains and at the north end of the Aleutian Range, are newer, lie in the West, and include Mount Redoubt, Mount Iliamna, Hayes Volcano, Mount Augustine, Fourpeaked Mountain, and Mount Spurr. Most recently, Augustine and Fourpeaked erupted in 2006, and Mount Redoubt erupted in March 2009, resulting in airplane flight cancellations."}
{"id": "29276", "revid": "1310261738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29276", "title": "Spinor", "text": "Non-tensorial representation of the spin group\nIn geometry and physics, spinors (pronounced \"spinner\" IPA ) are elements of a complex vector space that can be associated with Euclidean space. A spinor transforms linearly when the Euclidean space is subjected to a slight (infinitesimal) rotation, but unlike geometric vectors and tensors, a spinor transforms to its negative when the \nspace rotates through 360\u00b0 (see picture). It takes a rotation of 720\u00b0 for a spinor to go back to its original state. This property characterizes spinors: spinors can be viewed as the \"square roots\" of vectors (although this is inaccurate and may be misleading; they are better viewed as \"square roots\" of sections of vector bundles \u2013 in the case of the exterior algebra bundle of the cotangent bundle, they thus become \"square roots\" of differential forms).\nIt is also possible to associate a substantially similar notion of spinor to Minkowski space, in which case the Lorentz transformations of special relativity play the role of rotations. Spinors were introduced in geometry by \u00c9lie Cartan in 1913. In the 1920s physicists discovered that spinors are essential to describe the intrinsic angular momentum, or \"spin\", of the electron and other subatomic particles.\nSpinors are characterized by the specific way in which they behave under rotations. They change in different ways depending not just on the overall final rotation, but the details of how that rotation was achieved (by a continuous path in the rotation group). There are two topologically distinguishable classes (homotopy classes) of paths through rotations that result in the same overall rotation, as illustrated by the belt trick puzzle. These two inequivalent classes yield spinor transformations of opposite sign. The spin group is the group of all rotations keeping track of the class. It doubly covers the rotation group, since each rotation can be obtained in two inequivalent ways as the endpoint of a path. The space of spinors by definition is equipped with a (complex) linear representation of the spin group, meaning that elements of the spin group act as linear transformations on the space of spinors, in a way that genuinely depends on the homotopy class. In mathematical terms, spinors are described by a double-valued projective representation of the rotation group SO(3).\nAlthough spinors can be defined purely as elements of a representation space of the spin group (or its Lie algebra of infinitesimal rotations), they are typically defined as elements of a vector space that carries a linear representation of the Clifford algebra. The Clifford algebra is an associative algebra that can be constructed from Euclidean space and its inner product in a basis-independent way. Both the spin group and its Lie algebra are embedded inside the Clifford algebra in a natural way, and in applications the Clifford algebra is often the easiest to work with. A Clifford space operates on a spinor space, and the elements of a spinor space are spinors. After choosing an orthonormal basis of Euclidean space, a representation of the Clifford algebra is generated by gamma matrices, matrices that satisfy a set of canonical anti-commutation relations. The spinors are the column vectors on which these matrices act. In three Euclidean dimensions, for instance, the Pauli spin matrices are a set of gamma matrices, and the two-component complex column vectors on which these matrices act are spinors. However, the particular matrix representation of the Clifford algebra, hence what precisely constitutes a \"column vector\" (or spinor), involves the choice of basis and gamma matrices in an essential way. As a representation of the spin group, this realization of spinors as (complex) column vectors will either be irreducible if the dimension is odd, or it will decompose into a pair of so-called \"half-spin\" or Weyl representations if the dimension is even.\nIntroduction.\nWhat characterizes spinors and distinguishes them from geometric vectors and other tensors is subtle. Consider applying a rotation to the coordinates of a system. No object in the system itself has moved, only the coordinates have, so there will always be a compensating change in those coordinate values when applied to any object of the system. Geometrical vectors, for example, have components that will undergo \"the same\" rotation as the coordinates. More broadly, any tensor associated with the system (for instance, the stress of some medium) also has coordinate descriptions that adjust to compensate for changes to the coordinate system itself.\nSpinors do not appear at this level of the description of a physical system, when one is concerned only with the properties of a single isolated rotation of the coordinates. Rather, spinors appear when we imagine that instead of a single rotation, the coordinate system is gradually (continuously) rotated between some initial and final configuration. For any of the familiar and intuitive (\"tensorial\") quantities associated with the system, the transformation law does not depend on the precise details of how the coordinates arrived at their final configuration. Spinors, on the other hand, are constructed in such a way that makes them \"sensitive\" to how the gradual rotation of the coordinates arrived there: They exhibit path-dependence. It turns out that, for any final configuration of the coordinates, there are actually two (\"topologically\") inequivalent \"gradual\" (continuous) rotations of the coordinate system that result in this same configuration. This ambiguity is called the homotopy class of the gradual rotation. The belt trick (shown, in which both ends of the rotated object are physically tethered to an external reference) demonstrates two different rotations, one through an angle of 2\u03c0 and the other through an angle of 4\u03c0, having the same final configurations but different classes. Spinors actually exhibit a sign-reversal that genuinely depends on this homotopy class. This distinguishes them from vectors and other tensors, none of which can feel the class.\nSpinors can be exhibited as concrete objects using a choice of Cartesian coordinates. In three Euclidean dimensions, for instance, spinors can be constructed by making a choice of Pauli spin matrices corresponding to (angular momenta about) the three coordinate axes. These are 2\u00d72 matrices with complex entries, and the two-component complex column vectors on which these matrices act by matrix multiplication are the spinors. In this case, the spin group is isomorphic to the group of 2\u00d72 unitary matrices with determinant one, which naturally sits inside the matrix algebra. This group acts by conjugation on the real vector space spanned by the Pauli matrices themselves, realizing it as a group of rotations among them, but it also acts on the column vectors (that is, the spinors).\nMore generally, a Clifford algebra can be constructed from any vector space \"V\" equipped with a (nondegenerate) quadratic form, such as Euclidean space with its standard dot product or Minkowski space with its standard Lorentz metric. The space of spinors is the space of column vectors with formula_1 components. The orthogonal Lie algebra (i.e., the infinitesimal \"rotations\") and the spin group associated to the quadratic form are both (canonically) contained in the Clifford algebra, so every Clifford algebra representation also defines a representation of the Lie algebra and the spin group. Depending on the dimension and metric signature, this realization of spinors as column vectors may be irreducible or it may decompose into a pair of so-called \"half-spin\" or Weyl representations. When the vector space \"V\" is four-dimensional, the algebra is described by the gamma matrices.\nMathematical definition.\nThe space of spinors is formally defined as the fundamental representation of the Clifford algebra. (This may or may not decompose into irreducible representations.) The space of spinors may also be defined as a spin representation of the orthogonal Lie algebra. These spin representations are also characterized as the finite-dimensional projective representations of the special orthogonal group that do not factor through linear representations. Equivalently, a spinor is an element of a finite-dimensional group representation of the spin group on which the center acts non-trivially.\nOverview.\nThere are essentially two frameworks for viewing the notion of a spinor: the \"representation theoretic point of view\" and the \"geometric point of view\".\nRepresentation theoretic point of view.\nFrom a representation theoretic point of view, one knows beforehand that there are some representations of the Lie algebra of the orthogonal group that cannot be formed by the usual tensor constructions. These missing representations are then labeled the spin representations, and their constituents \"spinors\". From this view, a spinor must belong to a representation of the double cover of the rotation group SO(\"n\",formula_2), or more generally of a double cover of the generalized special orthogonal group SO+(\"p\",\u2009\"q\", formula_2) on spaces with a metric signature of (\"p\",\u2009\"q\"). These double covers are Lie groups, called the spin groups Spin(\"n\") or Spin(\"p\",\u2009\"q\"). All the properties of spinors, and their applications and derived objects, are manifested first in the spin group. Representations of the double covers of these groups yield double-valued projective representations of the groups themselves. (This means that the action of a particular rotation on vectors in the quantum Hilbert space is only defined up to a sign.)\nIn summary, given a representation specified by the data formula_4 where formula_5 is a vector space over formula_6 or formula_7 and formula_8 is a homomorphism formula_9, a spinor is an element of the vector space formula_5.\nGeometric point of view.\nFrom a geometrical point of view, one can explicitly construct the spinors and then examine how they behave under the action of the relevant Lie groups. This latter approach has the advantage of providing a concrete and elementary description of what a spinor is. However, such a description becomes unwieldy when complicated properties of the spinors, such as Fierz identities, are needed.\nClifford algebras.\nThe language of Clifford algebras (sometimes called geometric algebras) provides a complete picture of the spin representations of all the spin groups, and the various relationships between those representations, via the classification of Clifford algebras. It largely removes the need for \"ad hoc\" constructions.\nIn detail, let \"V\" be a finite-dimensional complex vector space with nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form \"g\". The Clifford algebra C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") is the algebra generated by \"V\" along with the anticommutation relation \"xy\" + \"yx\" = 2\"g\"(\"x\",\u2009\"y\"). It is an abstract version of the algebra generated by the gamma or Pauli matrices. If \"V\" = formula_11, with the standard form \"g\"(\"x\",\u2009\"y\") = \"x\"T\"y\" = \"x\"1\"y\"1 + ... + \"x\"\"n\"\"y\"\"n\" we denote the Clifford algebra by C\u2113\"n\"(formula_12). Since by the choice of an orthonormal basis every complex vector space with non-degenerate form is isomorphic to this standard example, this notation is abused more generally if dimformula_12(\"V\") = \"n\". If \"n\" = 2\"k\" is even, C\u2113\"n\"(formula_12) is isomorphic as an algebra (in a non-unique way) to the algebra Mat(2\"k\",\u2009formula_12) of 2\"k\"\u2009\u00d7\u20092\"k\" complex matrices (by the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem and the easy to prove fact that the Clifford algebra is central simple). If \"n\" = 2\"k\"\u2009+\u20091 is odd, C\u21132\"k\"+1(formula_12) is isomorphic to the algebra Mat(2\"k\",\u2009formula_12)\u2009\u2295\u2009Mat(2\"k\",\u2009formula_12) of two copies of the 2\"k\"\u2009\u00d7\u20092\"k\" complex matrices. Therefore, in either case C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") has a unique (up to isomorphism) irreducible representation (also called simple Clifford module), commonly denoted by \u0394, of dimension 2[\"n\"/2]. Since the Lie algebra so(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") is embedded as a Lie subalgebra in C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") equipped with the Clifford algebra commutator as Lie bracket, the space \u0394 is also a Lie algebra representation of so(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") called a spin representation. If \"n\" is odd, this Lie algebra representation is irreducible. If \"n\" is even, it splits further into two irreducible representations \u0394 = \u0394+\u2009\u2295\u2009\u0394\u2212 called the Weyl or \"half-spin representations\".\nIrreducible representations over the reals in the case when \"V\" is a real vector space are much more intricate, and the reader is referred to the Clifford algebra article for more details.\nSpin groups.\nSpinors form a vector space, usually over the complex numbers, equipped with a linear group representation of the spin group that does not factor through a representation of the group of rotations (see diagram). The spin group is the group of rotations keeping track of the homotopy class. Spinors are needed to encode basic information about the topology of the group of rotations because that group is not simply connected, but the simply connected spin group is its double cover. So for every rotation there are two elements of the spin group that represent it. Geometric vectors and other tensors cannot feel the difference between these two elements, but they produce \"opposite\" signs when they affect any spinor under the representation. Thinking of the elements of the spin group as homotopy classes of one-parameter families of rotations, each rotation is represented by two distinct homotopy classes of paths to the identity. If a one-parameter family of rotations is visualized as a ribbon in space, with the arc length parameter of that ribbon being the parameter (its tangent, normal, binormal frame actually gives the rotation), then these two distinct homotopy classes are visualized in the two states of the belt trick puzzle (above). The space of spinors is an auxiliary vector space that can be constructed explicitly in coordinates, but ultimately only exists up to isomorphism in that there is no \"natural\" construction of them that does not rely on arbitrary choices such as coordinate systems. A notion of spinors can be associated, as such an auxiliary mathematical object, with any vector space equipped with a quadratic form such as Euclidean space with its standard dot product, or Minkowski space with its Lorentz metric. In the latter case, the \"rotations\" include the Lorentz boosts, but otherwise the theory is substantially similar.\nSpinor fields in physics.\nThe constructions given above, in terms of Clifford algebra or representation theory, can be thought of as defining spinors as geometric objects in zero-dimensional space-time. To obtain the spinors of physics, such as the Dirac spinor, one extends the construction to obtain a spin structure on 4-dimensional space-time (Minkowski space). Effectively, one starts with the tangent manifold of space-time, each point of which is a 4-dimensional vector space with SO(3,1) symmetry, and then builds the spin group at each point. The neighborhoods of points are endowed with concepts of smoothness and differentiability: the standard construction is one of a fiber bundle, the fibers of which are affine spaces transforming under the spin group. After constructing the fiber bundle, one may then consider differential equations, such as the Dirac equation, or the Weyl equation on the fiber bundle. These equations (Dirac or Weyl) have solutions that are plane waves, having symmetries characteristic of the fibers, \"i.e.\" having the symmetries of spinors, as obtained from the (zero-dimensional) Clifford algebra/spin representation theory described above. Such plane-wave solutions (or other solutions) of the differential equations can then properly be called fermions; fermions have the algebraic qualities of spinors. By general convention, the terms \"fermion\" and \"spinor\" are often used interchangeably in physics, as synonyms of one-another.\nIt appears that all fundamental particles in nature that are spin-1/2 are described by the Dirac equation, with the possible exception of the neutrino. There does not seem to be any \"a priori\" reason why this would be the case. A perfectly valid choice for spinors would be the non-complexified version of C\u21132,2(formula_2), the Majorana spinor. There also does not seem to be any particular prohibition to having Weyl spinors appear in nature as fundamental particles.\nThe Dirac, Weyl, and Majorana spinors are interrelated, and their relation can be elucidated on the basis of real geometric algebra. Dirac and Weyl spinors are complex representations while Majorana spinors are real representations.\nWeyl spinors are insufficient to describe massive particles, such as electrons, since the Weyl plane-wave solutions necessarily travel at the speed of light; for massive particles, the Dirac equation is needed. The initial construction of the Standard Model of particle physics starts with both the electron and the neutrino as massless Weyl spinors; the Higgs mechanism gives electrons a mass; the classical neutrino remained massless, and was thus an example of a Weyl spinor. However, because of observed neutrino oscillation, it is now believed that they are not Weyl spinors, but perhaps instead Majorana spinors. It is not known whether Weyl spinor fundamental particles exist in nature.\nThe situation for condensed matter physics is different: one can construct two and three-dimensional \"spacetimes\" in a large variety of different physical materials, ranging from semiconductors to far more exotic materials. In 2015, an international team led by Princeton University scientists announced that they had found a quasiparticle that behaves as a Weyl fermion.\nSpinors in representation theory.\nOne major mathematical application of the construction of spinors is to make possible the explicit construction of linear representations of the Lie algebras of the special orthogonal groups, and consequently spinor representations of the groups themselves. At a more profound level, spinors have been found to be at the heart of approaches to the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem, and to provide constructions in particular for discrete series representations of semisimple groups.\nThe spin representations of the special orthogonal Lie algebras are distinguished from the tensor representations given by Weyl's construction by the weights. Whereas the weights of the tensor representations are integer linear combinations of the roots of the Lie algebra, those of the spin representations are half-integer linear combinations thereof. Explicit details can be found in the spin representation article.\nAttempts at intuitive understanding.\nThe spinor can be described, in simple terms, as \"vectors of a space the transformations of which are related in a particular way to rotations in physical space\". Stated differently:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSeveral ways of illustrating everyday analogies have been formulated in terms of the plate trick, tangloids and other examples of orientation entanglement.\nNonetheless, the concept is generally considered notoriously difficult to understand, as illustrated by Michael Atiyah's statement that is recounted by Dirac's biographer Graham Farmelo:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No one fully understands spinors. Their algebra is formally understood but their general significance is mysterious. In some sense they describe the \"square root\" of geometry and, just as understanding the square root of \u22121 took centuries, the same might be true of spinors.\nHistory.\nThe most general mathematical form of spinors was discovered by \u00c9lie Cartan in 1913. The word \"spinor\" was coined by Paul Ehrenfest in his work on quantum physics.\nSpinors were first applied to mathematical physics by Wolfgang Pauli in 1927, when he introduced his spin matrices. The following year, Paul Dirac discovered the fully relativistic theory of electron spin by showing the connection between spinors and the Lorentz group. By the 1930s, Dirac, Piet Hein and others at the Niels Bohr Institute (then known as the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University of Copenhagen) created toys such as Tangloids to teach and model the calculus of spinors.\nSpinor spaces were represented as left ideals of a matrix algebra in 1930, by Gustave Juvett and by Fritz Sauter. More specifically, instead of representing spinors as complex-valued 2D column vectors as Pauli had done, they represented them as complex-valued 2\u2009\u00d7\u20092 matrices in which only the elements of the left column are non-zero. In this manner the spinor space became a minimal left ideal in Mat(2,\u2009formula_12).\nIn 1947 Marcel Riesz constructed spinor spaces as elements of a minimal left ideal of Clifford algebras. In 1966/1967, David Hestenes replaced spinor spaces by the even subalgebra C\u211301,3(formula_2) of the spacetime algebra C\u21131,3(formula_2). As of the 1980s, the theoretical physics group at Birkbeck College around David Bohm and Basil Hiley has been developing algebraic approaches to quantum theory that build on Sauter and Riesz' identification of spinors with minimal left ideals.\nExamples.\nSome simple examples of spinors in low dimensions arise from considering the even-graded subalgebras of the Clifford algebra C\u2113\"p\",\u2009\"q\"(formula_2). This is an algebra built up from an orthonormal basis of \"n\" = \"p\"\u2009+\u2009\"q\" mutually orthogonal vectors under addition and multiplication, \"p\" of which have norm +1 and \"q\" of which have norm \u22121, with the product rule for the basis vectors\nformula_24\nTwo dimensions.\nThe Clifford algebra C\u21132,0(formula_2) is built up from a basis of one unit scalar, 1, two orthogonal unit vectors, \"\u03c3\"1 and \"\u03c3\"2, and one unit pseudoscalar \"i\" = \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2. From the definitions above, it is evident that (\"\u03c3\"1)2 = (\"\u03c3\"2)2 = 1, and (\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2)(\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2) = \u2212\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"2 = \u22121.\nThe even subalgebra C\u211302,0(formula_2), spanned by \"even-graded\" basis elements of C\u21132,0(formula_2), determines the space of spinors via its representations. It is made up of real linear combinations of 1 and \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2. As a real algebra, C\u211302,0(formula_2) is isomorphic to the field of complex numbers formula_12. As a result, it admits a conjugation operation (analogous to complex conjugation), sometimes called the \"reverse\" of a Clifford element, defined by\nformula_30\nwhich, by the Clifford relations, can be written\nformula_31\nThe action of an even Clifford element \"\u03b3\" \u2208 C\u211302,0(formula_2) on vectors, regarded as 1-graded elements of C\u21132,0(formula_2), is determined by mapping a general vector \"u\" = \"a\"1\"\u03c3\"1 + \"a\"2\"\u03c3\"2 to the vector\nformula_34\nwhere formula_35 is the conjugate of formula_36, and the product is Clifford multiplication. In this situation, a spinor is an ordinary complex number. The action of formula_36 on a spinor formula_38 is given by ordinary complex multiplication:\nformula_39\nAn important feature of this definition is the distinction between ordinary vectors and spinors, manifested in how the even-graded elements act on each of them in different ways. In general, a quick check of the Clifford relations reveals that even-graded elements conjugate-commute with ordinary vectors:\nformula_40\nOn the other hand, in comparison with its action on spinors formula_41, the action of formula_36 on ordinary vectors appears as the \"square\" of its action on spinors.\nConsider, for example, the implication this has for plane rotations. Rotating a vector through an angle of \"\u03b8\" corresponds to \"\u03b3\"2 = exp(\"\u03b8\u2009\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2), so that the corresponding action on spinors is via \"\u03b3\" = \u00b1\u2009exp(\"\u03b8\u2009\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2/2). In general, because of logarithmic branching, it is impossible to choose a sign in a consistent way. Thus the representation of plane rotations on spinors is two-valued.\nIn applications of spinors in two dimensions, it is common to exploit the fact that the algebra of even-graded elements (that is just the ring of complex numbers) is identical to the space of spinors. So, by abuse of language, the two are often conflated. One may then talk about \"the action of a spinor on a vector\". In a general setting, such statements are meaningless. But in dimensions 2 and 3 (as applied, for example, to computer graphics) they make sense.\nThree dimensions.\nThe Clifford algebra C\u21133,0(formula_2) is built up from a basis of one unit scalar, 1, three orthogonal unit vectors, \"\u03c3\"1, \"\u03c3\"2 and \"\u03c3\"3, the three unit bivectors \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2, \"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3, \"\u03c3\"3\"\u03c3\"1 and the pseudoscalar \"i\" = \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3. It is straightforward to show that (\"\u03c3\"1)2 = (\"\u03c3\"2)2 = (\"\u03c3\"3)2 = 1, and (\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2)2 = (\"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3)2 = (\"\u03c3\"3\"\u03c3\"1)2 = (\"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3)2 = \u22121.\nThe sub-algebra of even-graded elements is made up of scalar dilations,\nformula_50\nand vector rotations\nformula_51\nwhere\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\ncorresponds to a vector rotation through an angle \"\u03b8\" about an axis defined by a unit vector \"v\" = \"a\"1\"\u03c3\"1\u2009+\u2009\"a\"2\"\u03c3\"2\u2009+\u2009\"a\"3\"\u03c3\"3.\nAs a special case, it is easy to see that, if \"v\" = \"\u03c3\"3, this reproduces the \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2 rotation considered in the previous section; and that such rotation leaves the coefficients of vectors in the \"\u03c3\"3 direction invariant, since\nformula_52\nThe bivectors \"\u03c3\"2\"\u03c3\"3, \"\u03c3\"3\"\u03c3\"1 and \"\u03c3\"1\"\u03c3\"2 are in fact Hamilton's quaternions i, j, and k, discovered in 1843:\nformula_53\nWith the identification of the even-graded elements with the algebra formula_54 of quaternions, as in the case of two dimensions the only representation of the algebra of even-graded elements is on itself. Thus the (real) spinors in three-dimensions are quaternions, and the action of an even-graded element on a spinor is given by ordinary quaternionic multiplication.\nNote that the expression (1) for a vector rotation through an angle \u03b8, \"the angle appearing in \u03b3 was halved\". Thus the spinor rotation \"\u03b3\"(\"\u03c8\")\u2009=\u2009\"\u03b3\u03c8\" (ordinary quaternionic multiplication) will rotate the spinor \u03c8 through an angle one-half the measure of the angle of the corresponding vector rotation. Once again, the problem of lifting a vector rotation to a spinor rotation is two-valued: the expression (1) with (180\u00b0\u2009+\u2009\"\u03b8\"/2) in place of \"\u03b8\"/2 will produce the same vector rotation, but the negative of the spinor rotation.\nThe spinor/quaternion representation of rotations in 3D is becoming increasingly prevalent in computer geometry and other applications, because of the notable brevity of the corresponding spin matrix, and the simplicity with which they can be multiplied together to calculate the combined effect of successive rotations about different axes.\nExplicit constructions.\nA space of spinors can be constructed explicitly with concrete and abstract constructions. The\nequivalence of these constructions is a consequence of the uniqueness of the spinor representation of the complex Clifford algebra. For a complete example in dimension 3, see spinors in three dimensions.\nComponent spinors.\nGiven a vector space \"V\" and a quadratic form \"g\" an explicit matrix representation of the Clifford algebra C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") can be defined as follows. Choose an orthonormal basis \"e\"1 ... \"e\"\"n\" for \"V\" i.e. \"g\"(\"e\"\"\u03bc\"\"e\"\"\u03bd\") = \"\u03b7\"\"\u03bc\u03bd\" where \"\u03b7\"\"\u03bc\u03bc\" = \u00b11 and \"\u03b7\"\"\u03bc\u03bd\" = 0 for \"\u03bc\" \u2260 \"\u03bd\". Let \"k\" = \u230a\"n\"/2\u230b. Fix a set of 2\"k\"\u2009\u00d7\u20092\"k\" matrices \"\u03b3\"1 ... \"\u03b3\"\"n\" such that \"\u03b3\"\"\u03bc\"\"\u03b3\"\"\u03bd\" + \"\u03b3\"\"\u03bd\"\"\u03b3\"\"\u03bc\" = 2\"\u03b7\"\"\u03bc\u03bd\"1 (i.e. fix a convention for the gamma matrices). Then the assignment \"e\"\"\u03bc\" \u2192 \"\u03b3\"\"\u03bc\" extends uniquely to an algebra homomorphism C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") \u2192 Mat(2\"k\",\u2009formula_12) by sending the monomial \"e\"\"\u03bc\"1 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"e\"\"\u03bc\"\"k\" in the Clifford algebra to the product \"\u03b3\"\"\u03bc\"1 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"\u03b3\"\"\u03bc\"\"k\" of matrices and extending linearly. The space formula_56 on which the gamma matrices act is now a space of spinors. One needs to construct such matrices explicitly, however. In dimension 3, defining the gamma matrices to be the Pauli sigma matrices gives rise to the familiar two component spinors used in non relativistic quantum mechanics. Likewise using the 4 \u00d7 4 Dirac gamma matrices gives rise to the 4 component Dirac spinors used in 3+1 dimensional relativistic quantum field theory. In general, in order to define gamma matrices of the required kind, one can use the Weyl\u2013Brauer matrices.\nIn this construction the representation of the Clifford algebra C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\"), the Lie algebra so(\"V\",\u2009\"g\"), and the Spin group Spin(\"V\",\u2009\"g\"), all depend on the choice of the orthonormal basis and the choice of the gamma matrices. This can cause confusion over conventions, but invariants like traces are independent of choices. In particular, all physically observable quantities must be independent of such choices. In this construction a spinor can be represented as a vector of 2\"k\" complex numbers and is denoted with spinor indices (usually \"\u03b1\",\u2009\"\u03b2\",\u2009\"\u03b3\"). In the physics literature, such indices are often used to denote spinors even when an abstract spinor construction is used.\nAbstract spinors.\nThere are at least two different, but essentially equivalent, ways to define spinors abstractly. One approach seeks to identify the minimal ideals for the left action of C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") on itself. These are subspaces of the Clifford algebra of the form C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\")\"\u03c9\", admitting the evident action of C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") by left-multiplication: \"c\"\u2009: \"x\u03c9\" \u2192 \"cx\u03c9\". There are two variations on this theme: one can either find a primitive element \"\u03c9\" that is a nilpotent element of the Clifford algebra, or one that is an idempotent. The construction via nilpotent elements is more fundamental in the sense that an idempotent may then be produced from it. In this way, the spinor representations are identified with certain subspaces of the Clifford algebra itself. The second approach is to construct a vector space using a distinguished subspace of \"V\", and then specify the action of the Clifford algebra \"externally\" to that vector space.\nIn either approach, the fundamental notion is that of an isotropic subspace \"W\". Each construction depends on an initial freedom in choosing this subspace. In physical terms, this corresponds to the fact that there is no measurement protocol that can specify a basis of the spin space, even if a preferred basis of \"V\" is given.\nAs above, we let (\"V\",\u2009\"g\") be an \"n\"-dimensional complex vector space equipped with a nondegenerate bilinear form. If \"V\" is a real vector space, then we replace \"V\" by its complexification formula_57 and let \"g\" denote the induced bilinear form on formula_57. Let \"W\" be a maximal isotropic subspace, i.e. a maximal subspace of \"V\" such that \"g\"|\"W\" =\u20090. If \"n\" = \u20092\"k\" is even, then let \"W\"\u2032 be an isotropic subspace complementary to \"W\". If \"n\" = \u20092\"k\" + 1 is odd, let \"W\"\u2032 be a maximal isotropic subspace with \"W\" \u2229\u2009\"W\"\u2032 = 0, and let \"U\" be the orthogonal complement of \"W\"\u2009\u2295\u2009\"W\"\u2032. In both the even- and odd-dimensional cases \"W\" and \"W\"\u2032 have dimension \"k\". In the odd-dimensional case, \"U\" is one-dimensional, spanned by a unit vector \"u\".\nMinimal ideals.\nSince \"W\"\u2032 is isotropic, multiplication of elements of \"W\"\u2032 inside C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\") is skew. Hence vectors in \"W\"\u2032 anti-commute, and C\u2113(\"W\"\u2032,\u2009\"g\"|\"W\"\u2032) = C\u2113(\"W\"\u2032, 0) is just the exterior algebra \u039b\u2217\"W\"\u2032. Consequently, the \"k\"-fold product of \"W\"\u2032 with itself, \"W\"\u2032\"k\", is one-dimensional. Let \"\u03c9\" be a generator of \"W\"\u2032\"k\". In terms of a basis \"w\"\u20321, ..., \"w\"\u2032k of in \"W\"\u2032, one possibility is to set\nformula_59\nNote that \"\u03c9\"2 = 0 (i.e., \"\u03c9\" is nilpotent of order 2), and moreover, \"w\"\u2032\"\u03c9\" = 0 for all \"w\"\u2032 \u2208 \"W\"\u2032. The following facts can be proven easily:\nIn detail, suppose for instance that \"n\" is even. Suppose that \"I\" is a non-zero left ideal contained in C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\")\"\u03c9\". We shall show that \"I\" must be equal to C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\")\"\u03c9\" by proving that it contains a nonzero scalar multiple of \"\u03c9\".\nFix a basis \"w\"\"i\" of \"W\" and a complementary basis \"w\"\"i\"\u2032 of \"W\"\u2032 so that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"w\"\"i\"\"w\"\"j\"\u2032 +\"w\"\"j\"\u2032\"w\"\"i\" = \"\u03b4\"\"ij\", and\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;(\"w\"\"i\")2 = 0, (\"w\"\"i\"\u2032)2 = 0.\nNote that any element of \"I\" must have the form \"\u03b1\u03c9\", by virtue of our assumption that \"I\" \u2282 C\u2113(\"V\",\u2009\"g\")\u2009\"\u03c9\". Let \"\u03b1\u03c9\" \u2208 \"I\" be any such element. Using the chosen basis, we may write\nformula_60\nwhere the \"a\"\"i\"1...\"i\"\"p\" are scalars, and the \"B\"\"j\" are auxiliary elements of the Clifford algebra. Observe now that the product\nformula_61\nPick any nonzero monomial \"a\" in the expansion of \"\u03b1\" with maximal homogeneous degree in the elements \"w\"i:\nformula_62 (no summation implied),\nthen\nformula_63\nis a nonzero scalar multiple of \"\u03c9\", as required.\nNote that for \"n\" even, this computation also shows that\nformula_64\nas a vector space. In the last equality we again used that \"W\" is isotropic. In physics terms, this shows that \u0394 is built up like a Fock space by creating spinors using anti-commuting creation operators in \"W\" acting on a vacuum \"\u03c9\".\nExterior algebra construction.\nThe computations with the minimal ideal construction suggest that a spinor representation can\nalso be defined directly using the exterior algebra \u039b\u2217 \"W\" = \u2295\"j\" \u039b\"j\" \"W\" of the isotropic subspace \"W\".\nLet \u0394 = \u039b\u2217 \"W\" denote the exterior algebra of \"W\" considered as vector space only. This will be the spin representation, and its elements will be referred to as spinors.\nThe action of the Clifford algebra on \u0394 is defined first by giving the action of an element of \"V\" on \u0394, and then showing that this action respects the Clifford relation and so extends to a homomorphism of the full Clifford algebra into the endomorphism ring End(\u0394) by the universal property of Clifford algebras. The details differ slightly according to whether the dimension of \"V\" is even or odd.\nWhen dim(V) is even, \"V\" = \"W\" \u2295 \"W\"\u2032 where \"W\"\u2032 is the chosen isotropic complement. Hence any \"v\" \u2208 \"V\" decomposes uniquely as \"v\" = \"w\" + \"w\"\u2032 with \"w\" \u2208 \"W\" and \"w\"\u2032 \u2208 \"W\"\u2032. The action of v on a spinor is given by\nformula_65\nwhere \"i\"(\"w\"\u2032) is interior product with \"w\"\u2032 using the nondegenerate quadratic form to identify \"V\" with \"V\"\u2217, and \"\u03b5\"(\"w\") denotes the exterior product. This action is sometimes called the Clifford product. It may be verified that\nformula_66\nand so c respects the Clifford relations and extends to a homomorphism from the Clifford algebra to End(\u0394).\nThe spin representation \u0394 further decomposes into a pair of irreducible complex representations of the Spin group (the half-spin representations, or Weyl spinors) via\nformula_67\nWhen dim(\"V\") is odd, \"V\" = \"W\" \u2295 \"U\" \u2295 \"W\"\u2032, where \"U\" is spanned by a unit vector \"u\" orthogonal to \"W\". The Clifford action \"c\" is defined as before on \"W\" \u2295 \"W\"\u2032, while the Clifford action of (multiples of) \"u\" is defined by\nformula_68\nAs before, one verifies that \"c\" respects the Clifford relations, and so induces a homomorphism.\nHermitian vector spaces and spinors.\nIf the vector space \"V\" has extra structure that provides a decomposition of its complexification into two maximal isotropic subspaces, then the definition of spinors (by either method) becomes natural.\nThe main example is the case that the real vector space \"V\" is a hermitian vector space (\"V\",\u2009\"g\"), i.e., \"V\" is equipped with a complex structure \"J\" that is an orthogonal transformation with respect to the inner product \"g\" on \"V\". Then formula_57 splits in the \u00b1\"i\" eigenspaces of \"J\". These eigenspaces are isotropic for the complexification of \"g\" and can be identified with the complex vector space (\"V\",\u2009\"J\") and its complex conjugate (\"V\",\u2009\u2212\"J\"). Therefore, for a hermitian vector space (\"V\",\u2009\"g\") the vector space formula_70 (as well as its complex conjugate formula_71) is a spinor space for the underlying real euclidean vector space.\nWith the Clifford action as above but with contraction using the hermitian form, this construction gives a spinor space at every point of an almost Hermitian manifold and is the reason why every almost complex manifold (in particular every symplectic manifold) has a Spinc structure. Likewise, every complex vector bundle on a manifold carries a Spinc structure.\nClebsch\u2013Gordan decomposition.\nA number of Clebsch\u2013Gordan decompositions are possible on the tensor product of one spin representation with another. These decompositions express the tensor product in terms of the alternating representations of the orthogonal group.\nFor the real or complex case, the alternating representations are\nIn addition, for the real orthogonal groups, there are three characters (one-dimensional representations)\nThe Clebsch\u2013Gordan decomposition allows one to define, among other things:\nEven dimensions.\nIf \"n\"\u2009=\u20092\"k\" is even, then the tensor product of \u0394 with the contragredient representation decomposes as\nformula_72\nwhich can be seen explicitly by considering (in the Explicit construction) the action of the Clifford algebra on decomposable elements \"\u03b1\u03c9\"\u2009\u2297\u2009\"\u03b2\u03c9\"\u2032. The rightmost formulation follows from the transformation properties of the Hodge star operator. Note that on restriction to the even Clifford algebra, the paired summands \u0393\"p\" \u2295 \"\u03c3\"\u0393\"p\" are isomorphic, but under the full Clifford algebra they are not.\nThere is a natural identification of \u0394 with its contragredient representation via the conjugation in the Clifford algebra:\nformula_73\nSo \u0394\u2009\u2297\u2009\u0394 also decomposes in the above manner. Furthermore, under the even Clifford algebra, the half-spin representations decompose\nformula_74\nFor the complex representations of the real Clifford algebras, the associated reality structure on the complex Clifford algebra descends to the space of spinors (via the explicit construction in terms of minimal ideals, for instance). In this way, we obtain the complex conjugate \u0394 of the representation \u0394, and the following isomorphism is seen to hold:\nformula_75\nIn particular, note that the representation \u0394 of the orthochronous spin group is a unitary representation. In general, there are Clebsch\u2013Gordan decompositions\nformula_76\nIn metric signature (\"p\",\u2009\"q\"), the following isomorphisms hold for the conjugate half-spin representations\nUsing these isomorphisms, one can deduce analogous decompositions for the tensor products of the half-spin representations .\nOdd dimensions.\nIf \"n\"\u2009=\u20092\"k\" + 1 is odd, then\nformula_81\nIn the real case, once again the isomorphism holds\nformula_82\nHence there is a Clebsch\u2013Gordan decomposition (again using the Hodge star to dualize) given by\nformula_83\nConsequences.\nThere are many far-reaching consequences of the Clebsch\u2013Gordan decompositions of the spinor spaces. The most fundamental of these pertain to Dirac's theory of the electron, among whose basic requirements are\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29278", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29278", "title": "Safety engineering", "text": "Engineering discipline\nSafety engineering is an engineering discipline which assures that engineered systems provide acceptable levels of safety. It is strongly related to industrial engineering/systems engineering, and the subset system safety engineering. Safety engineering assures that a life-critical system behaves as needed, even when components fail.\nAnalysis techniques.\nAnalysis techniques can be split into two categories: qualitative and quantitative methods. Both approaches share the goal of finding causal dependencies between a hazard on system level and failures of individual components. Qualitative approaches focus on the question \"What must go wrong, such that a system hazard may occur?\", while quantitative methods aim at providing estimations about probabilities, rates and/or severity of consequences.\nThe complexity of the technical systems such as Improvements of Design and Materials, Planned Inspections, Fool-proof design, and Backup Redundancy decreases risk and increases the cost. The risk can be decreased to ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) or ALAPA (as low as practically achievable) levels.\nTraditionally, safety analysis techniques rely solely on skill and expertise of the safety engineer. In the last decade model-based approaches, like STPA (Systems Theoretic Process Analysis), have become prominent. In contrast to traditional methods, model-based techniques try to derive relationships between causes and consequences from some sort of model of the system.\nTraditional methods for safety analysis.\nThe two most common fault modeling techniques are called failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and fault tree analysis (FTA). These techniques are just ways of finding problems and of making plans to cope with failures, as in probabilistic risk assessment. One of the earliest complete studies using this technique on a commercial nuclear plant was the WASH-1400 study, also known as the Reactor Safety Study or the Rasmussen Report.\nFailure modes and effects analysis.\nFailure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a bottom-up, inductive analytical method which may be performed at either the functional or piece-part level. For functional FMEA, failure modes are identified for each function in a system or equipment item, usually with the help of a functional block diagram. For piece-part FMEA, failure modes are identified for each piece-part component (such as a valve, connector, resistor, or diode). The effects of the failure mode are described, and assigned a probability based on the failure rate and failure mode ratio of the function or component. This quantization is difficult for software ---a bug exists or not, and the failure models used for hardware components do not apply. Temperature and age and manufacturing variability affect a resistor; they do not affect software.\nFailure modes with identical effects can be combined and summarized in a Failure Mode Effects Summary. When combined with criticality analysis, FMEA is known as Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis or FMECA.\nFault tree analysis.\nFault tree analysis (FTA) is a top-down, deductive analytical method. In FTA, initiating primary events such as component failures, human errors, and external events are traced through Boolean logic gates to an undesired top event such as an aircraft crash or nuclear reactor core melt. The intent is to identify ways to make top events less probable, and verify that safety goals have been achieved.\nFault trees are a logical inverse of success trees, and may be obtained by applying de Morgan's theorem to success trees (which are directly related to reliability block diagrams).\nFTA may be qualitative or quantitative. When failure and event probabilities are unknown, qualitative fault trees may be analyzed for minimal cut sets. For example, if any minimal cut set contains a single base event, then the top event may be caused by a single failure. Quantitative FTA is used to compute top event probability, and usually requires computer software such as CAFTA from the Electric Power Research Institute or SAPHIRE from the Idaho National Laboratory.\nSome industries use both fault trees and event trees. An event tree starts from an undesired initiator (loss of critical supply, component failure etc.) and follows possible further system events through to a series of final consequences. As each new event is considered, a new node on the tree is added with a split of probabilities of taking either branch. The probabilities of a range of \"top events\" arising from the initial event can then be seen.\nOil and gas industry offshore (API 14C; ISO 10418).\nThe offshore oil and gas industry uses a qualitative safety systems analysis technique to ensure the protection of offshore production systems and platforms. The analysis is used during the design phase to identify process engineering hazards together with risk mitigation measures. The methodology is described in the American Petroleum Institute Recommended Practice 14C \"Analysis, Design, Installation, and Testing of Basic Surface Safety Systems for Offshore Production Platforms.\"\nThe technique uses system analysis methods to determine the safety requirements to protect any individual process component, e.g. a vessel, pipeline, or pump. The safety requirements of individual components are integrated into a complete platform safety system, including liquid containment and emergency support systems such as fire and gas detection.\nThe first stage of the analysis identifies individual process components, these can include: flowlines, headers, pressure vessels, atmospheric vessels, fired heaters, exhaust heated components, pumps, compressors, pipelines and heat exchangers. Each component is subject to a safety analysis to identify undesirable events (equipment failure, process upsets, etc.) for which protection must be provided. The analysis also identifies a detectable condition (e.g. high pressure) which is used to initiate actions to prevent or minimize the effect of undesirable events. A Safety Analysis Table (SAT) for pressure vessels includes the following details.\nOther undesirable events for a pressure vessel are under-pressure, gas blowby, leak, and excess temperature together with their associated causes and detectable conditions.\nOnce the events, causes and detectable conditions have been identified the next stage of the methodology uses a Safety Analysis Checklist (SAC) for each component. This lists the safety devices that may be required or factors that negate the need for such a device. For example, for the case of liquid overflow from a vessel (as above) the SAC identifies:\nThe analysis ensures that two levels of protection are provided to mitigate each undesirable event. For example, for a pressure vessel subjected to over-pressure the primary protection would be a PSH (pressure switch high) to shut off inflow to the vessel, secondary protection would be provided by a pressure safety valve (PSV) on the vessel.\nThe next stage of the analysis relates all the sensing devices, shutdown valves (ESVs), trip systems and emergency support systems in the form of a Safety Analysis Function Evaluation (SAFE) chart.\nX denotes that the detection device on the left (e.g. PSH) initiates the shutdown or warning action on the top right (e.g. ESV closure).\nThe SAFE chart constitutes the basis of Cause and Effect Charts which relate the sensing devices to shutdown valves and plant trips which defines the functional architecture of the process shutdown system.\nThe methodology also specifies the systems testing that is necessary to ensure the functionality of the protection systems.\nAPI RP 14C was first published in June 1974. The 8th edition was published in February 2017. API RP 14C was adapted as ISO standard ISO 10418 in 1993 entitled \"Petroleum and natural gas industries \u2014 Offshore production installations \u2014 Analysis, design, installation and testing of basic surface process safety systems.\" The latest edition of ISO 10418 was published in 2019.\nSafety certification.\nTypically, safety guidelines prescribe a set of steps, deliverable documents, and exit criterion focused around planning, analysis and design, implementation, verification and validation, configuration management, and quality assurance activities for the development of a safety-critical system. In addition, they typically formulate expectations regarding the creation and use of traceability in the project. For example, depending upon the criticality level of a requirement, the US Federal Aviation Administration guideline DO-178B/C requires traceability from requirements to design, and from requirements to source code and executable object code for software components of a system. Thereby, higher quality traceability information can simplify the certification process and help to establish trust in the maturity of the applied development process.\nUsually a failure in safety-certified systems is acceptable if, on average, less than one life per 109 hours of continuous operation is lost to failure.{as per FAA document AC 25.1309-1A} Most Western nuclear reactors, medical equipment, and commercial aircraft are certified to this level. The cost versus loss of lives has been considered appropriate at this level (by FAA for aircraft systems under Federal Aviation Regulations).\nPreventing failure.\nOnce a failure mode is identified, it can usually be mitigated by adding extra or redundant equipment to the system. For example, nuclear reactors contain dangerous radiation, and nuclear reactions can cause so much heat that no substance might contain them. Therefore, reactors have emergency core cooling systems to keep the temperature down, shielding to contain the radiation, and engineered barriers (usually several, nested, surmounted by a containment building) to prevent accidental leakage. Safety-critical systems are commonly required to permit no single event or component failure to result in a catastrophic failure mode.\nMost biological organisms have a certain amount of redundancy: multiple organs, multiple limbs, etc.\nFor any given failure, a fail-over or redundancy can almost always be designed and incorporated into a system.\nThere are two categories of techniques to reduce the probability of failure:\nFault avoidance techniques increase the reliability of individual items (increased design margin, de-rating, etc.).\nFault tolerance techniques increase the reliability of the system as a whole (redundancies, barriers, etc.).\nSafety and reliability.\nSafety engineering and reliability engineering have much in common, but safety is not reliability. If a medical device fails, it should fail safely; other alternatives will be available to the surgeon. If the engine on a single-engine aircraft fails, there is no backup. Electrical power grids are designed for both safety and reliability; telephone systems are designed for reliability, which becomes a safety issue when emergency (e.g. US 911) calls are placed.\nProbabilistic risk assessment has created a close relationship between safety and reliability. Component reliability, generally defined in terms of component failure rate, and external event probability are both used in quantitative safety assessment methods such as FTA. Related probabilistic methods are used to determine system Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF), system availability, or probability of mission success or failure. Reliability analysis has a broader scope than safety analysis, in that non-critical failures are considered. On the other hand, higher failure rates are considered acceptable for non-critical systems.\nSafety generally cannot be achieved through component reliability alone. Catastrophic failure probabilities of 10\u22129 per hour correspond to the failure rates of very simple components such as resistors or capacitors. A complex system containing hundreds or thousands of components might be able to achieve a MTBF of 10,000 to 100,000 hours, meaning it would fail at 10\u22124 or 10\u22125 per hour. If a system failure is catastrophic, usually the only practical way to achieve 10\u22129 per hour failure rate is through redundancy.\nWhen adding equipment is impractical (usually because of expense), then the least expensive form of design is often \"inherently fail-safe\". That is, change the system design so its failure modes are not catastrophic. Inherent fail-safes are common in medical equipment, traffic and railway signals, communications equipment, and safety equipment.\nThe typical approach is to arrange the system so that ordinary single failures cause the mechanism to shut down in a safe way (for nuclear power plants, this is termed a passively safe design, although more than ordinary failures are covered). Alternately, if the system contains a hazard source such as a battery or rotor, then it may be possible to remove the hazard from the system so that its failure modes cannot be catastrophic. The U.S. Department of Defense Standard Practice for System Safety (MIL\u2013STD\u2013882) places the highest priority on elimination of hazards through design selection.\nOne of the most common fail-safe systems is the overflow tube in baths and kitchen sinks. If the valve sticks open, rather than causing an overflow and damage, the tank spills into an overflow. Another common example is that in an elevator the cable supporting the car keeps spring-loaded brakes open. If the cable breaks, the brakes grab rails, and the elevator cabin does not fall.\nSome systems can never be made fail safe, as continuous availability is needed. For example, loss of engine thrust in flight is dangerous. Redundancy, fault tolerance, or recovery procedures are used for these situations (e.g. multiple independent controlled and fuel fed engines). This also makes the system less sensitive for the reliability prediction errors or quality induced uncertainty for the separate items. On the other hand, failure detection &amp; correction and avoidance of common cause failures becomes here increasingly important to ensure system level reliability.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29279", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29279", "title": "SIGGRAPH", "text": "Conference on computer graphics\nSIGGRAPH (Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques) is an annual conference centered around computer graphics organized by ACM, starting in 1974 in Boulder, CO. The main conference has always been held in North America; SIGGRAPH Asia, a second conference held annually, has been held since 2008 in countries throughout Asia, as well as twice in Australia.\nOverview.\nThe conference incorporates both academic presentations as well as an industry trade show. Other events at the conference include educational courses and panel discussions on recent topics in computer graphics and interactive techniques. \nSIGGRAPH Proceedings.\nThe SIGGRAPH conference proceedings, which are published in the \"ACM Transactions on Graphics\", has one of the highest impact factors among academic publications in the field of computer graphics. The paper acceptance rate for SIGGRAPH has historically been between 17% and 29%, with the average acceptance rate between 2015 and 2019 of 27%. The submitted papers are peer-reviewed under a process that was historically single-blind, but was changed in 2018 to double-blind. The papers accepted for presentation at SIGGRAPH are printed since 2003 in a special issue of the \"ACM Transactions on Graphics\" journal.\nPrior to 1992, SIGGRAPH papers were printed as part of the \"Computer Graphics\" publication; between 1993 and 2001, there was a dedicated \"SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings\" series of publications.\nAwards programs.\nSIGGRAPH has several awards programs to recognize contributions to computer graphics. The most prestigious is the Steven Anson Coons Award for Outstanding Creative Contributions to Computer Graphics. It has been awarded every two years since 1983 to recognize an individual's lifetime achievement in computer graphics.\nConference.\nThe SIGGRAPH conference experienced significant growth starting in the 1970s, peaking around the turn of the century. A second conference, SIGGRAPH Asia, started in 2008.\nSponsored Conference.\nSIGGRAPH sponsored a number of conferences related to the field of computer graphics, including the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation, the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Motion, Interaction and Games (formerly known as Motion in Games).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29280", "revid": "848299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29280", "title": "Solidarnosc", "text": ""}
{"id": "29284", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29284", "title": "Script kiddies", "text": ""}
{"id": "29285", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29285", "title": "Semtex", "text": "General purpose plastic explosive\nSemtex is a general-purpose plastic explosive containing RDX and PETN. It is used in commercial blasting, demolition, and in certain military applications.\nSemtex was developed and manufactured in Czechoslovakia, originally under the name B 1 and then under the \"Semtex\" designation since 1964, labeled as \"SEMTEX 1A\", since 1967 as \"SEMTEX H\", and since 1987 as \"SEMTEX 10\".\nOriginally developed for Czechoslovak military use and export, Semtex eventually became popular with armed groups and insurgents because, prior to the 2000s, it was extremely difficult to detect, as in the case of Pan Am Flight 103.\nComposition.\nThe composition of the two most common variants differ according to their use. The 1A (or 10) variant is used for mining, and is based mostly on crystalline PETN. The versions 1AP and 2P are formed as hexagonal booster charges; a special assembly of PETN and wax inside the charge assures high reliability for detonating cord or detonator. The H (or SE) variant is intended for explosion hardening.\nHistory.\nSemtex was invented in the late 1950s by Stanislav Brebera and Radim Fuk\u00e1tko, chemists at VCHZ Synthesia, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic). The explosive is named after Semt\u00edn, a suburb of Pardubice where the mixture was first manufactured starting in 1964. The plant was later renamed to become Explosia a.s., a subsidiary of Synthesia.\nSemtex was very similar to other plastic explosives, especially C-4, in being highly malleable; but it is usable over a greater temperature range than other plastic explosives, since it stays plastic between \u221240 and +60\u00a0\u00b0C. It is also waterproof. There are visual differences between Semtex and other plastic explosives, too: while C-4 is off-white in colour, Semtex is red or brick-orange.\nThe new explosive was widely exported, notably to the government of North Vietnam, which received 14 tons during the Vietnam War. However, the main consumer was Libya; about 700 tons of Semtex were exported to Libya between 1975 and 1981 by Omnipol. It has also been used by Islamic militants in the Middle East, and by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) and the Irish National Liberation Army in Northern Ireland. On 21 December 1988, 340 g (12 ounces) of Semtex brought down a Boeing 747 over Lockerbie, Scotland killing all 259 passengers and crew aboard the aircraft and 11 bystanders on the ground.\nSales declined after Semtex became closely associated with terrorist attacks. Rules governing the explosive's export were progressively tightened over the years, and since 2002 all of Explosia's trading has been controlled by a government ministry. As of 2001[ [update]], only approximately 10 tons of Semtex were produced annually, almost all for domestic use. \nAlso in response to international agreements, Semtex has a detection taggant added to produce a distinctive vapor signature to aid detection. First, ethylene glycol dinitrate was used, but was later switched to 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dinitrobutane (DMDNB) or \"p\"-mononitrotoluene (1-methyl-4-nitrobenzene), which is used currently. According to the manufacturer, the taggant agent was voluntarily being added by 1991, years before the protocol became compulsory. Batches of Semtex made before 1990, however, are untagged, though it is not known whether there are still major stocks of such old batches of Semtex. According to the manufacturer, even this untagged Semtex can now be detected. The shelf life of Semtex was reduced from ten years before the 1990s to five years now. Explosia states that there is no compulsory tagging allowing reliable post-detonation detection of a certain plastic explosive (such as incorporating a unique metallic code into the mass of the explosive), so Semtex is not tagged in this way.\nOn 25 May 1997, Bohumil \u0160ole, a scientist who claimed to have been involved with inventing Semtex, blew himself up with explosives at a spa in Jesen\u00edk. \u0160ole, 63, was being treated there for psychological problems. It was unclear what explosives were used. Twenty other people were hurt in the explosion, while six were seriously injured. According to the manufacturer, Explosia, he was not a member of the team that developed the explosive in the 1960s.\nAccording to the producer's 2017 catalog, several variants of Semtex are offered: Semtex 1A, Semtex 1H, Semtex 10, Semtex 10-SE, Semtex S 30, Semtex C-4, Semtex PW 4, and Semtex 90.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29286", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29286", "title": "Schedl", "text": "Schedl is a German surname. Notable people with the surname include: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Schedl. "}
{"id": "29287", "revid": "42303102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29287", "title": "Lehi (militant group)", "text": "Zionist paramilitary organization (1940\u20131948)\nLehi (; , sometimes abbreviated \"LHI\"), officially the Fighters for the Freedom of Israel () and often known pejoratively as the Stern Gang, was a Zionist paramilitary militant organization founded by Avraham (\"Yair\") Stern in Mandatory Palestine. Its avowed aim was to evict the British authorities from Palestine by use of violence, allowing unrestricted immigration of Jews and the formation of a Jewish state. It was initially called the National Military Organization in Israel, upon being founded in August 1940, but was renamed Lehi one month later. The group referred to its members as terrorists and admitted to having carried out acts of terrorism.\nLehi split from the Irgun militant group in 1940 in order to continue fighting the British during World War II. It initially sought an alliance with Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. Believing that Nazi Germany was a lesser enemy of the Jews than Britain, Lehi twice attempted to form an alliance with the Nazis, proposing a Jewish state based on \"nationalist and totalitarian principles, and linked to the German Reich by an alliance\". After Stern's death in 1942, the new leadership of Lehi began to move towards support for Joseph Stalin's Soviet Union and the ideology of National Bolshevism, which was considered an amalgam of both right and left. Regarding themselves as \"revolutionary Socialists\", the new Lehi developed a highly original ideology combining an \"almost mystical\" belief in Greater Israel with support for the Arab liberation struggle. This sophisticated ideology failed to gain public support and Lehi fared poorly in the first Israeli elections.\nIn April 1948, Lehi and the Irgun were jointly responsible for the massacre in Deir Yassin of at least 107 Palestinian Arab villagers, including women and children. Lehi assassinated Lord Moyne, British Minister Resident in the Middle East, and made many other attacks on the British in Palestine. On 29 May 1948, the government of Israel, having inducted its activist members into the Israel Defense Forces, formally disbanded Lehi, though some of its members carried out one more terrorist act, the assassination of Folke Bernadotte some months later, an act condemned by Bernadotte's replacement as mediator, Ralph Bunche. After the assassination, the new Israeli government declared Lehi a terrorist organization, arresting some 200 members and convicting some of the leaders. Just before the first Israeli elections in January 1949, a general amnesty to Lehi members was granted by the government. In 1980, Israel instituted a military decoration, an \"award for activity in the struggle for the establishment of Israel\", the Lehi ribbon. Former Lehi leader Yitzhak Shamir became Prime Minister of Israel in 1983.\nFounding of Lehi.\nLehi was created in August 1940 by Avraham Stern. Stern had been a member of the Irgun (\"Irgun Tsvai Leumi\" \u2013 \"National Military Organization\") high command. Zeev Jabotinsky, then the Irgun's supreme commander, had decided that diplomacy and working with Britain would best serve the Zionist cause. World War II was in progress, and Britain was fighting Nazi Germany. The Irgun suspended its underground military activities against the British for the duration of the war.\nStern argued that the time for Zionist diplomacy was over and that it was time for an armed struggle against the British. Like other Zionists, he objected to the White Paper of 1939, which restricted both Jewish immigration and Jewish land purchases in Palestine. For Stern, \"no difference existed between Hitler and Chamberlain, between Dachau or Buchenwald and sealing the gates of Eretz Israel.\"\nStern wanted to open Palestine to all Jewish refugees from Europe and considered this to be the most important issue of the day. Britain would not allow this. Therefore, he concluded, the \"Yishuv\" (Jews of Palestine) should fight the British rather than support them in the war. When the Irgun made a truce with the British, Stern left the Irgun to form his own group, which he called \"Irgun Tsvai Leumi B'Yisrael\" (\"National Military Organization in Israel\"), later \"Lohamei Herut Israel\" (\"Fighters for the Freedom of Israel\"). In September 1940, the organization was officially named \"Lehi\", the Hebrew acronym of the latter name.\nStern and his followers believed that dying for the \"foreign occupier\" who was obstructing the creation of the Jewish State was useless. They differentiated between \"enemies of the Jewish people\" (the British) and \"Jew haters\" (the Nazis), believing that the former needed to be defeated and the latter manipulated.\nIn 1940, the idea of the Final Solution was still \"unthinkable\", and Stern believed that Hitler wanted to make Germany \"judenrein\" through emigration, as opposed to extermination. In December 1940, Lehi contacted Germany with a proposal to aid German conquest in the Middle East in return for recognition of a Jewish state open to unlimited immigration.\nGoals and ideology.\nLehi had three main goals:\nLehi believed in its early years that its goals would be achieved by finding a strong international ally that would expel the British from Palestine, in return for Jewish military help; this would require the creation of a broad and organised military force \"demonstrating its desire for freedom through military operations.\"\nLehi also referred to themselves as 'terrorists' and may have been one of the last organizations to do so.\nAn article titled \"Terror\" in the Lehi underground newspaper \"He Khazit\" (\"The Front\") argued as follows:\nNeither Jewish ethics nor Jewish tradition can disqualify terrorism as a means of combat. We are very far from having any moral qualms as far as our national war goes. We have before us the command of the Torah, whose morality surpasses that of any other body of laws in the world: \"Ye shall blot them out to the last man.\"\nBut first and foremost, terrorism is for us a part of the political battle being conducted under the present circumstances, and it has a great part to play: speaking in a clear voice to the whole world, as well as to our wretched brethren outside this land, it proclaims our war against the occupier.\nWe are particularly far from this sort of hesitation in regard to an enemy whose moral perversion is admitted by all.\nThe article described the goals of terror:\nYitzhak Shamir, one of the three leaders of Lehi after Avraham Stern's assassination, argued for the legitimacy of Lehi's actions:\nThere are those who say that to kill Martin is terrorism, but to attack an army camp is guerrilla warfare and to bomb civilians is professional warfare. But I think it is the same from the moral point of view. Is it better to drop an atomic bomb on a city than to kill a handful of persons? I don't think so. But nobody says that President Truman was a terrorist. All the men we went for individually \u2013 Wilkin, Martin, MacMichael and others \u2013 were personally interested in succeeding in the fight against us.\nSo it was more efficient and more moral to go for selected targets. In any case, it was the only way we could operate, because we were so small. For us it was not a question of the professional honour of a soldier, it was the question of an idea, an aim that had to be achieved. We were aiming at a political goal. There are many examples of what we did to be found in the Bible \u2013 Gideon and Samson, for instance. This had an influence on our thinking. And we also learned from the history of other peoples who fought for their freedom \u2013 the Russian and Irish revolutionaries, Giuseppe Garibaldi and Josip Broz Tito.\nRelationship with fascism and socialism.\nUnlike the left-wing Haganah and right-wing Irgun, Lehi members were not a homogeneous collective with a single political, religious, or economic ideology. They were a combination of militants united by the goal of liberating the land of Israel from British rule. Most Lehi leaders defined their organization as an anti-imperialist movement and stated that their opposition to British colonial rule in Palestine was not based on a particular policy but rather on the presence of a foreign power over the homeland of the Jewish people.\nAvraham Stern defined the British Mandate as \"foreign rule\" regardless of British policies and took a radical position against such imperialism even if it were to be benevolent. In a pamphlet entitled \"18 Principles of Rebirth\", Stern noted the need to \"solve the problem\" of the \"alien population\" and called for the 'conquest' of Palestine. It also emphasized the need to gather the Jewish Diaspora into a new sovereign state, revive the Hebrew language as a spoken language, and build a Third Temple as a symbol of the 'new era'.\nIn the early years of the state of Israel, Lehi veterans could be found supporting nearly all political parties and some Lehi leaders founded a left-wing political party called the Fighters' List with Natan Yellin-Mor as its head. The party took part in the elections in January 1949 and won a single parliamentary seat. A number of Lehi veterans established the Semitic Action movement in 1956 which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East.\nSome writers have stated that Lehi's true goals were the creation of a totalitarian state. Perliger and Weinberg write that the organisation's ideology placed \"its world view in the quasi-fascist radical Right, which is characterised by xenophobia, a national egotism that completely subordinates the individual to the needs of the nation, anti-liberalism, total denial of democracy and a highly centralised government.\" Perliger and Weinberg state that most Lehi members were admirers of the Italian Fascist movement. According to Kaplan and Penslar, Lehi's ideology was a mix of fascist and communist thought combined with racism and universalism.\nOthers counter these claims. They note that when Lehi founder Avraham Stern went to study in fascist Italy, he refused to join the for foreign students, even though members got large reductions in tuition.\nPolitical racism.\nAccording to Yaacov Shavit, professor at the Department of Jewish History, Tel Aviv University, articles in Lehi publications contained references to a Jewish \"master race\", contrasting the Jews with Arabs who were seen as a \"nation of slaves\". American journalist Sasha Polakow-Suransky writes that \"Lehi was also unabashedly racist towards Arabs. Their publications described Jews as a master race and Arabs as a slave race.\" Lehi advocated mass expulsion of all Arabs from Palestine and Transjordan, or even their physical annihilation.\nIn contrast, a number of Lehi veterans, including co-leader Nathan Yellin-Mor, went on to establish the Semitic Action movement which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East. Yaakov Yardaur, another former Lehi militant, was a strong advocate for equal rights for Arab citizens of Israel.\nEvolution, tactics and organization.\nMany Lehi combatants had received military training. Some had attended the Military Engineers School in Civitavecchia, in Fascist Italy. Others received military training from instructors of the Polish Armed Forces in 1938\u20131939. This training was conducted in Trochenbrod (Zofi\u00f3wka) in Wo\u0142y\u0144 Voivodeship, Pod\u0119bin near \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and the forests around Andrych\u00f3w. They were taught how to use explosives. One of them reported later: \"Poles treated terrorism as a science. We have mastered mathematical principles of demolishing constructions made of concrete, iron, wood, bricks and dirt.\"\nThe group was initially unsuccessful. Early attempts to raise funds through criminal activities, including a bank robbery in Tel Aviv in 1940 and another robbery on 9 January 1942 in which Jewish passers-by were killed, brought about the temporary collapse of the group. An attempt to assassinate the head of the British secret police in Lod in which three police personnel were killed, two Jewish and one British, elicited a severe response from the British and Jewish establishments who collaborated against Lehi.\nStern's group was seen as a terrorist organisation by the British authorities, who instructed the Defence Security Office (the colonial branch of MI5) to track down its leaders. In 1942, Stern, after he was arrested, was shot dead in disputed circumstances by Inspector Geoffrey J. Morton of the CID. The arrest of several other members led momentarily to the group's eclipse, until it was revived after the September 1942 escape of two of its leaders, Yitzhak Shamir and Eliyahu Giladi, aided by two other escapees Natan Yellin-Mor (Friedman) and Israel Eldad (Sheib). (Giladi was later killed by Lehi under circumstances that remain mysterious.) Shamir's codename was \"Michael\", a reference to one of Shamir's heroes, Michael Collins. Lehi was guided by spiritual and philosophical leaders such as Uri Zvi Greenberg and Israel Eldad. After the killing of Giladi, the organization was led by a triumvirate of Eldad, Shamir, and Yellin-Mor.\nLehi adopted a non-socialist platform of anti-imperialist ideology. It viewed the continued British rule of Palestine as a violation of the Mandate's provision generally, and its restrictions on Jewish immigration to be an intolerable breach of international law. However they also targeted Jews whom they regarded as traitors, and during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War they joined in operations with the Haganah and Irgun against Arab targets, for example Deir Yassin.\nAccording to a compilation by Nachman Ben-Yehuda, Lehi was responsible for 42 assassinations, more than twice as many as the Irgun and Haganah combined during the same period. Of those Lehi assassinations that Ben-Yehuda classified as political, more than half the victims were Jews.\nLehi also rejected the authority of the Jewish Agency for Israel and related organizations, operating entirely on its own throughout nearly all of its existence.\nLehi prisoners captured by the British generally refused to employ lawyers in their defence. The defendants would conduct their own defence, and would deny the right of the military court to try them, saying that in accordance with the Hague Convention they should be accorded the status of prisoners of war. For the same reason, Lehi prisoners refused to plead for amnesty, even when it was clear that this would have spared them the death penalty. Moshe Barazani, a Lehi member, and Meir Feinstein, an Irgun member, took their own lives in prison with a grenade smuggled inside an orange so the British could not hang them.\nActivities and operations during World War II.\nWartime contacts with Italy and Nazi Germany.\nItaly.\nIn mid-1940, Stern became convinced that the Italians were interested in the establishment of a fascist Jewish state in Palestine. He conducted negotiations, he thought, with the Italians via an intermediary Moshe Rotstein, and drew up a document that became known as the \"Jerusalem Agreement\". In exchange for Italy's recognition of, and aid in obtaining, Jewish sovereignty over Palestine, Stern promised that Zionism would come under the aegis of Italian fascism, with Haifa as its base, and the Old City of Jerusalem under Vatican control, except for the Jewish quarter. In Heller's words, Stern's proposal would \"turn the 'Kingdom of Israel' into a satellite of the Axis powers.\"\nHowever, the \"intermediary\" Rotstein was in fact an agent of the Irgun, conducting a sting operation under the direction of the Irgun intelligence leader in Haifa, Israel Pritzker, in cooperation with the British. Secret British documents about the affair were uncovered by historian Eldad Harouvi (now director of the Palmach Archives) and confirmed by former Irgun intelligence officer Yitzhak Berman. When Rotstein's role later became clear, Lehi sentenced him to death and assigned Yaacov Eliav to kill him, but the assassination never took place. However, Pritzker was killed by Lehi in 1943.\nNazi Germany.\nLate in 1940, Lehi, having identified a common interest between the intentions of the new German order and Jewish national aspirations, proposed forming an alliance in World War II with Nazi Germany. The organization offered cooperation in the following terms: Lehi would rebel against the British, while Germany would recognize an independent Jewish state in Palestine/Eretz Israel, and all Jews leaving their homes in Europe, by their own will or because of government injunctions, could enter Palestine with no restriction of numbers. Late in 1940, Lehi representative Naftali Lubenchik went to Beirut to meet German official Werner Otto von Hentig. The Lehi documents outlined that its rule would be authoritarian and indicated similarities between the organization and Nazis. Israel Eldad, one of the leading members of Lehi, wrote about Hitler \"it is not Hitler who is the hater of the kingdom of Israel and the return to Zion, it is not Hitler who subjects us to the cruel fate of falling a second and a third time into Hitler's hands, but the British.\"\nStern also proposed recruiting 40,000 Jews from occupied Europe to invade Palestine with German support to oust the British. On 11 January 1941, Vice Admiral Ralf von der Marwitz, the German naval attach\u00e9 in Turkey, filed a report (the \"Ankara document\") conveying an offer by Lehi to \"actively take part in the war on Germany's side\" in return for German support for \"the establishment of the historic Jewish state on a national and totalitarian basis, bound by a treaty with the German Reich.\"\nAccording to Yellin-Mor:Lubenchik did not take along any written memorandum for the German representatives. Had there been a need for one, he would have formulated it on the spot, since he was familiar with the episode of the Italian \"intermediary\" and with the numerous drafts connected with it. Apparently one of von Hentig's secretaries noted down the essence of the proposal in his own words.According to Joseph Heller, \"The memorandum arising from their conversation is an entirely authentic document, on which the stamp of the 'IZL in Israel' is clearly embossed.\" Von der Marwitz delivered the offer, classified as secret, to the German Ambassador in Turkey and on 21 January 1941 it was sent to Berlin. There was never any response. A second attempt to contact the Nazis was made at the end of 1941, but it was even less successful. The emissary Yellin-Mor was arrested in Syria before he could carry out his mission.\nThis proposed alliance with Nazi Germany cost Lehi and Stern much support. The Stern Gang also had links with, and support from, the Vichy France S\u00fbret\u00e9's Lebanese offices. Even as the full scale of Nazi atrocities became more evident in 1943, Lehi refused to accept Hitler as the main foe (as opposed to Great Britain).\nAssassination of Lord Moyne.\nOn 6 November 1944, Lehi assassinated Lord Moyne, the British Minister Resident in the Middle East, in Cairo. Moyne was the highest ranking British official in the region. Yitzhak Shamir claimed later that Moyne was assassinated because of his support for a Middle Eastern Arab Federation and anti-Semitic lectures in which Arabs were held to be racially superior to Jews. The assassination rocked the British government, and outraged Winston Churchill, the British Prime Minister. The two assassins, Eliyahu Bet-Zuri and Eliyahu Hakim were captured and used their trial as a platform to make public their political propaganda. They were both found guilty and executed. In 1975, their bodies were returned to Israel, with Egypt exchanging them for 20 Arab prisoners, and given a state funeral. In 1982, postage stamps were issued for 20 Olei Hagardom, including Bet-Zouri and Hakim, in a souvenir sheet called \"Martyrs of the struggle for Israel's independence.\"\nPost war terrorist campaign and insurgency.\nAs a group that never had more than a few hundred members, Lehi relied on audacious but small-scale operations to drive its message home. They adopted the tactics of groups such as the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party in Czarist Russia, and the Irish Republican Army. To this end, Lehi conducted small-scale operations such as individual assassinations of British officials (notable targets included Lord Moyne, CID detectives, and Jewish \"collaborators\"), and random shootings against soldiers and police officers. Another strategy, adopted in 1946, was to send bombs in the mail to British politicians. Other actions included sabotaging infrastructure targets: bridges, railroads, telephone and telegraph lines, and oil refineries, as well as the use of vehicle bombs against British military, police, and administrative targets. Lehi financed its operations from private donations, extortion, and bank robbery. Its campaign of violence lasted from 1944 to 1948. Initially conducted together with the Irgun, it included a six-month suspension to avoid being targeted by the Haganah during the Hunting Season, and later operated jointly with the Haganah and Irgun under the Jewish Resistance Movement. After the Jewish Resistance Movement was dissolved, it operated independently as part of the general Jewish insurgency in Palestine.\nTel Aviv car park raid.\nOn 25 April 1946, a Lehi unit attacked a car park in Tel Aviv occupied by the British 6th Airborne Division. Under a barrage of heavy covering fire, Lehi fighters broke into the car park, shot soldiers they encountered at close range, stole rifles from arms racks, laid mines to cover the retreat, and withdrew. Seven soldiers were killed in the attack, which caused widespread outrage among the British security forces in Palestine. It resulted in retaliatory anti-Jewish violence by British troops and a punitive curfew imposed on Tel Aviv's roads and the closure of places of entertainment in the city by the British Army.\nBritish police station in Haifa.\nOn 12 January 1947, Lehi members drove a truckload of explosives into a British police station in Haifa, killing four and injuring 140, in what has been called 'the world's first true truck bomb'.\nOperations in Europe.\nFollowing the bombing of the British embassy in Rome, in October 1946, a series of operations against targets in the United Kingdom were launched. On 7 March 1947, Lehi's only successful operation in Britain was carried out when a Lehi bomb severely damaged the British Colonial Club, a London recreational facility for soldiers and students from Britain's colonies in Africa and the West Indies. On 15 April 1947 a bomb consisting of twenty-four sticks of explosives was planted in the Colonial Office, Whitehall. It failed to explode due to a fault in the timer. Five weeks later, on 22 May, five alleged Lehi members were arrested in Paris with bomb making material including explosives of the same type as found in London. On 2 June, two Lehi members, Betty Knouth and Yaakov Levstein, were arrested crossing from Belgium to France. Envelopes addressed to British officials, with detonators, batteries and a time fuse were found in one of Knouth's suitcases. The British Security Services identified Knouth as the person who planted the bomb in the Colonial Office. Shortly after their arrest, 21 letter bombs addressed to senior British figures were intercepted. The letters had been posted in Italy. The intended recipients included Bevin, Attlee, Churchill and Eden. Eden carried a letter bomb in his suitcase for a whole day, thinking it was a Whitehall pamphlet that he would read later in the day. He only realized it was a bomb after being warned by the police, who were informed by MI5.\nKnouth was also known as Gilberte/Elizabeth Lazarus. Levstein was travelling as Jacob Elias; his fingerprints connected him to the deaths of several Palestine Policemen as well as an attempt on the life of the British High Commissioner. In September 1947, a Belgian court sentenced Knouth to one year in prison and Levstein to eight months in prison for illegally transporting explosives with intent to commit a felony. In 1973, Margaret Truman wrote that letter bombs were also posted to her father, U.S. President Harry S. Truman, in 1947. Former Lehi leader Yellin-Mor admitted that letter bombs had been sent to British targets but denied that any had been sent to Truman.\nDeath threat against Hugh Trevor-Roper.\nShortly after the 1947 publication of \"The Last Days of Hitler\", Lehi issued a death threat against the author, Hugh Trevor-Roper, for his portrayal of Hitler, feeling that Trevor-Roper had attempted to exonerate the German populace from responsibility.\nCairo-Haifa train bombings.\nDuring the lead-up to the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Lehi mined the Cairo\u2013Haifa train several times. On 29 February 1948, Lehi mined the train north of Rehovot, killing 28 British soldiers and wounding 35. On 31 March, Lehi mined the train near Binyamina, killing 40 civilians and wounding 60.\nAttempted Nablus terror attack.\nShlomo Sand writes that as a method of applying pressure on Arab villagers to abandon their settlements, Lehi planned a terror attack on Nablus and its Arab city headquarters; Lehi fighter Elisha Ibzov (Avraham Cohen) was captured with a truck filled with explosives on his way to the city. Lehi fighters in return abducted four adult villagers and youth from al-Sheikh Muwannis with no connection to Ibzov's capture and threatened to kill them. As rumours spread that they were already murdered, panic set out in the villagers and the settlement became increasingly abandoned, despite the eventual release of the hostages\nDeir Yassin massacre.\nOne of the most widely known acts of Lehi was the attack on the Palestinian-Arab village of Deir Yassin.\nIn the months before the British evacuation from Palestine, the Arab League-sponsored Arab Liberation Army (ALA) occupied several strategic points along the road between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, cutting off supplies to the Jewish part of Jerusalem. One of these points was Deir Yassin. By March 1948, the road was cut off and Jewish Jerusalem was under siege. The Haganah launched Operation Nachshon to break the siege.\nOn 6 April, the Haganah attacked al-Qastal, a village two kilometres north of Deir Yassin, also overlooking the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv road.\nThen on 9 April 1948, about 120 Lehi and Irgun fighters, acting in cooperation with the Haganah, attacked and captured Deir Yassin. The attack was at night, the fighting was confused, and many civilian inhabitants of the village were killed. This action had great consequences for the war, and remains a cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre for Palestinians ever since.\nExactly what happened has never been established clearly. The Arab League reported a great massacre: 254 killed, with rape and lurid mutilations. Israeli investigations claimed the actual number of dead was between 100 and 120, and there were no mass rapes, but most of the dead were civilians and admitted some were killed deliberately. Lehi and Irgun both denied an organized massacre. Accounts by Lehi veterans such as Ezra Yakhin note that many of the attackers were killed or wounded, assert that Arabs fired from every building and that Iraqi and Syrian soldiers were among the dead, and even that some Arab fighters dressed as women.\nHowever, Jewish authorities, including Haganah, the Chief Rabbinate, the Jewish Agency, and David Ben-Gurion, also condemned the attack, lending credence to the charge of massacre. The Jewish Agency even sent a letter of condemnation, apology, and condolence to King Abdullah I of Jordan.\nBoth the Arab reports and Jewish responses had hidden motives: the Arab leaders wanted to encourage Palestinian Arabs to fight rather than surrender, to discredit the Zionists with international opinion, and to increase popular support in their countries for an invasion of Palestine. The Jewish leaders wanted to discredit Irgun and Lehi.\nIronically, the Arab reports backfired in one respect: frightened Palestinian Arabs did not surrender, but did not fight either \u2013 they fled, allowing Israel to gain much territory with little fighting and also without absorbing many Arabs.\nLehi similarly interpreted events at Deir Yassin as turning the tide of war in favour of the Jews. Lehi leader Israel Eldad later wrote in his memoirs from the underground period that \"without Deir Yassin the State of Israel could never have been established\".\nThe Deir Yassin story did not much sway international opinion. It did increase, not only support but pressure on Arab governments to intervene. Abdullah of Jordan was now compelled to join the invasion of Palestine after Israel's declaration of independence on 14 May.\nAssassination of Count Folke Bernadotte.\nAlthough Lehi had stopped operating nationally after May 1948, the group continued to function in Jerusalem. On 17 September 1948, Lehi assassinated UN mediator Count Folke Bernadotte. The assassination was directed by Yehoshua Zettler and carried out by a four-man team led by Meshulam Makover. The fatal shots were fired by Yehoshua Cohen. The Security Council described the assassination as a \"cowardly act which appears to have been committed by a criminal group of terrorists\".\nThree days after the assassination, the Israeli government passed the Ordinance to Prevent Terrorism and declared Lehi to be a terrorist organization. Many Lehi members were arrested, including leaders Nathan Yellin-Mor and Matityahu Shmulevitz who were arrested on 29 September. Eldad and Shamir managed to escape arrest. Yellin-Mor and Schmulevitz were charged with leadership of a terrorist organization and on 10 February 1949 were sentenced to 8 years and 5 years imprisonment, respectively. However the State (Temporary) Council soon announced a general amnesty for Lehi members and they were released.\nThe Lehi trial and the Fighters' Party.\nBetween 5 December 1948 and 25 January 1949, Yellin-Mor and Shmuelevitz were tried in a military court on terrorism charges. The prosecution accused them of the murder of Bernadotte, though they were not specifically charged with it. Senior officers of the IDF, including Yisrael Galili and David Shaltiel, told the court that Lehi had hindered, rather than assisted the fight against the British and the Arabs.\nWhile the trial was in progress, some of the Lehi leadership founded a USSR-leaning political party called the Fighters' List with Yellin-Mor as its leader. The party took part in the elections in January 1949 with Yellin-Mor and Shmuelevitz heading the list. The trial verdict was handed down on 10 February, soon after the Fighters' List had won one seat with only 1.2% of the vote. Yellin-Mor was sentenced to 8 years and Shmuelevitz to 5 years imprisonment, but the court agreed to remit the sentences if the prisoners agreed to a list of conditions. The Provisional State Council then authorised their pardon. The party disbanded after several years and did not contest the 1951 elections.\nIn 1956, some Lehi veterans established the Semitic Action movement, which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East.\nNot all Lehi alumni gave up political violence after independence: former members were involved in the activities of the Kingdom of Israel militant group, the 1957 assassination of Rudolf Kastner, and likely the 1952 attempted assassination of David-Zvi Pinkas.\nPublications.\nLehi produced a range of publications containing unabashedly racist literature referring to Jews as a \"master race\" and Arabs as a \"slave race\". Prominent publications included \"Hamaas\" (Ahe Action), a weekly publication, as well as the monthly \"HaKhazit\" (The Front), daily \"Mivrak\" (Telegram), and \"BaMahteret\" (Underground).\nService ribbon.\nIn 1980, Israel instituted the Lehi ribbon, red, black, grey, pale blue and white, which is awarded to former members of the Lehi underground who wished to carry it, \"for military service towards the establishment of the State of Israel\".\n\"Unknown Soldiers\" anthem.\nThe words and music of a song \"Unknown Soldiers\" (also translated \"Anonymous Soldiers\") were written by Avraham Stern in 1932 during the early days of the Irgun. It became the Irgun's anthem until the split with Lehi in 1940, after which it became the Lehi anthem.\nProminent members of Lehi.\nA number of Lehi's members went on to play important roles in Israel's public life.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29288", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29288", "title": "Server-side scripting", "text": "Technique used in web development\nServer-side scripting is a technique used in web development which involves employing scripts on a web server which produces a response customized for each user's (client's) request to the website. Scripts can be written in any of a number of server-side scripting languages that are available. Server-side scripting is distinguished from client-side scripting where embedded scripts, such as JavaScript, are run client-side in a web browser, but both techniques are often used together. The alternative to either or both types of scripting is for the web server itself to deliver a static web page.\nServer-side scripting is often used to provide a customized interface for the user. These scripts may assemble client characteristics for use in customizing the response based on those characteristics, the user's requirements, access rights, etc. Server-side scripting also enables the website owner to hide the source code that generates the interface, whereas, with client-side scripting, the user has access to all the code received by the client. A downside to the use of server-side scripting is that the client needs to make further requests over the network to the server in order to show new information to the user via the web browser. These requests can slow down the experience for the user, place more load on the server, and prevent the use of the application when the user is disconnected from the server.\nWhen the server serves data in a commonly used manner, for , according to the HTTP or FTP protocols, users may have their choice of a number of client programs (most modern web browsers can request and receive data using both of those protocols). In the case of more specialized applications, programmers may write their own server, client, and communications protocol, that can only be used with one another.\nPrograms that run on a user's local computer without ever sending or receiving data over a network are not considered clients, and so the operations of such programs would not be considered client-side operations.\nHistory.\nNetscape introduced an implementation of JavaScript for server-side scripting with Netscape Enterprise Server, first released in December, 1994 (soon after releasing JavaScript for browsers).\nServer-side scripting was later used in early 1996 by Fred Dufresne while developing the first website for Boston, MA television station WCVB. The technology is described in http://. The patent was issued in 1998 and is now owned by Open Invention Network (OIN). In 2010, OIN named Fred DuFresne a https:// for his work on server-side scripting.\nExplanation.\nIn the earlier days of the web, server-side scripting was almost exclusively performed by using a combination of C programs, Perl scripts, and shell scripts using the Common Gateway Interface (CGI). Those scripts were executed by the operating system, and the results were served back by the web server. Many modern web servers can directly execute on-line scripting languages such as ASP, JSP, Perl, PHP and Ruby either by the web server itself or via extension modules (e.g. mod_perl or mod_php) to the webserver. For example, WebDNA includes its own embedded database system. Either form of scripting (i.e., CGI or direct execution) can be used to build up complex multi-page sites, but direct execution usually results in less overhead because of the lower number of calls to external interpreters.\nDynamic websites sometimes use custom web application servers, such as Glassfish, Plack and Python's \"Base HTTP Server\" library, although some may not consider this to be server-side scripting. When using dynamic web-based scripting techniques, developers must have a keen understanding of the logical, temporal, and physical separation between the client and the server. For a user's action to trigger the execution of server-side code, for example, a developer working with classic ASP must explicitly cause the user's browser to make a request back to the webserver.\nServer-side scripts are completely processed by the servers instead of clients. When clients request a page containing server-side scripts, the application server processes the scripts and returns an HTML page to the client.\nServer-side rendering.\nWith the advent of single-page applications, an updated approach to server-side scripting was introduced, known as server-side rendering. With server-side rendering, static HTML can be sent from the server to the client, and client-side JavaScript then makes the web page dynamic by attaching event handlers to the HTML elements in a process called hydration. Examples of frameworks that support server-side rendering are Next.js, Nuxt.js, Angular.\nAn alternative to server-side rendering is static site generation. With server-side rendering, the page is generally assembled on the server once per each request. By contrast, with static site generation, the application generates all the static HTML pages at build time. These pre-built pages are then sent to the client at each request, without having to build them again. This leads to faster rendering times, since a new page doesn't have to be generated on every request; the server simply hands over a file it already generated in the past. The downside is that when some data on the page changes, it needs to be rebuilt. Examples of static site generation tools are Jekyll and Gatsby. Sites generated by static site generation tools are often hosted on Netlify, Vercel or GitHub pages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29290", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29290", "title": "Samuel Huntington", "text": "Samuel Huntington may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29292", "revid": "50795803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29292", "title": "Script", "text": "Script may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29293", "revid": "6462084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29293", "title": "Optical spectrometer", "text": "Instrument to measure the properties of visible light\nAn optical spectrometer (spectrophotometer, spectrograph or spectroscope) is an instrument used to measure properties of light over a specific portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, typically used in spectroscopic analysis to identify materials. The variable measured is most often the irradiance of the light but could also, for instance, be the polarization state. The independent variable is usually the wavelength of the light or a closely derived physical quantity, such as the corresponding wavenumber or the photon energy, in units of measurement such as centimeters, reciprocal centimeters, or electron volts, respectively.\nA spectrometer is used in spectroscopy for producing spectral lines and measuring their wavelengths and intensities. Spectrometers may operate over a wide range of non-optical wavelengths, from gamma rays and X-rays into the far infrared. If the instrument is designed to measure the spectrum on an absolute scale rather than a relative one, then it is typically called a spectrophotometer. The majority of spectrophotometers are used in spectral regions near the visible spectrum.\nA spectrometer that is calibrated for measurement of the incident optical power is called a spectroradiometer.\nIn general, any particular instrument will operate over a small portion of this total range because of the different techniques used to measure different portions of the spectrum. Below optical frequencies (that is, at microwave and radio frequencies), the spectrum analyzer is a closely related electronic device.\nSpectrometers are used in many fields. For example, they are used in astronomy to analyze the radiation from objects and deduce their chemical composition. The spectrometer uses a prism or a grating to spread the light into a spectrum. This allows astronomers to detect many of the chemical elements by their characteristic spectral lines. These lines are named for the elements which cause them, such as the hydrogen alpha, beta, and gamma lines. A glowing object will show bright spectral lines. Dark lines are made by absorption, for example by light passing through a gas cloud, and these absorption lines can also identify chemical compounds. Much of our knowledge of the chemical makeup of the universe comes from spectra.\nSpectroscopes.\nSpectroscopes are often used in astronomy and some branches of chemistry. Early spectroscopes were simply prisms with graduations marking wavelengths of light. Modern spectroscopes generally use a diffraction grating, a movable slit, and some kind of photodetector, all automated and controlled by a computer. Recent advances have seen increasing reliance of computational algorithms in a range of miniaturised spectrometers without diffraction gratings, for example, through the use of quantum dot-based filter arrays on to a CCD chip or a series of photodetectors realised on a single nanostructure.\nJoseph von Fraunhofer developed the first modern spectroscope by combining a prism, diffraction slit and telescope in a manner that increased the spectral resolution and was reproducible in other laboratories. Fraunhofer also went on to invent the first diffraction spectroscope. Gustav Robert Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discovered the application of spectroscopes to chemical analysis and used this approach to discover caesium and rubidium. Kirchhoff and Bunsen's analysis also enabled a chemical explanation of stellar spectra, including Fraunhofer lines.\nWhen a material is heated to incandescence it emits light that is characteristic of the atomic makeup of the material.\nParticular light frequencies give rise to sharply defined bands on the scale which can be thought of as fingerprints. For example, the element sodium has a very characteristic double yellow band known as the Sodium D-lines at 588.9950 and 589.5924 nanometers, the color of which will be familiar to anyone who has seen a low pressure sodium vapor lamp.\nIn the original spectroscope design in the early 19th century, light entered a slit and a collimating lens transformed the light into a thin beam of parallel rays. The light then passed through a prism (in hand-held spectroscopes, usually an Amici prism) that refracted the beam into a spectrum because different wavelengths were refracted different amounts due to dispersion. This image was then viewed through a tube with a scale that was transposed upon the spectral image, enabling its direct measurement.\nWith the development of photographic film, the more accurate spectrograph was created. It was based on the same principle as the spectroscope, but it had a camera in place of the viewing tube. In recent years, the electronic circuits built around the photomultiplier tube have replaced the camera, allowing real-time spectrographic analysis with far greater accuracy. Arrays of photosensors are also used in place of film in spectrographic systems. Such spectral analysis, or spectroscopy, has become an important scientific tool for analyzing the composition of unknown material and for studying astronomical phenomena and testing astronomical theories.\nIn modern spectrographs in the UV, visible, and near-IR spectral ranges, the spectrum is generally given in the form of photon number per unit wavelength (nm or \u03bcm), wavenumber (\u03bcm\u22121, cm\u22121), frequency (THz), or energy (eV), with the units indicated by the abscissa. In the mid- to far-IR, spectra are typically expressed in units of Watts per unit wavelength (\u03bcm) or wavenumber (cm\u22121). In many cases, the spectrum is displayed with the units left implied (such as \"digital counts\" per spectral channel).\nIn Gemology.\nGemologists frequently use spectroscopes to determine the absorption spectra of gemstones, thereby allowing them to make inferences about what kind of gem they are examining. A gemologist may compare the absorption spectrum they observe with a catalogue of spectra for various gems to help narrow down the exact identity of the gem.\nSpectrographs.\nA spectrograph is an instrument that separates light into its wavelengths and records the data. A spectrograph typically has a multi-channel detector system or camera that detects and records the spectrum of light.\nThe term was first used in 1876 by Dr. Henry Draper when he invented the earliest version of this device, and which he used to take several photographs of the spectrum of Vega. This earliest version of the spectrograph was cumbersome to use and difficult to manage. Jackson S. Richardson and Johnathon D. Hogan popularized the machine.\nThere are several kinds of machines referred to as \"spectrographs\", depending on the precise nature of the waves. The first spectrographs used photographic paper as the detector. The plant pigment phytochrome was discovered using a spectrograph that used living plants as the detector. More recent spectrographs use electronic detectors, such as CCDs which can be used for both visible and UV light. The exact choice of detector depends on the wavelengths of light to be recorded.\nA spectrograph is sometimes called polychromator, as an analogy to monochromator.\nStellar and solar spectrograph.\nThe star spectral classification and discovery of the main sequence, Hubble's law and the Hubble sequence were all made with spectrographs that used photographic paper. James Webb Space Telescope contains both a near-infrared spectrograph (NIRSpec) and a mid-infrared spectrograph (MIRI).\nEchelle spectrograph.\nAn echelle-based spectrograph uses two diffraction gratings, rotated 90 degrees with respect to each other and placed close to one another. Therefore, an entrance point and not a slit is used and a CCD-chip records the spectrum. Both gratings have a wide spacing, and one is blazed so that only the first order is visible and the other is blazed with many higher orders visible, so a very fine spectrum is presented to the CCD.\nSlitless spectrograph.\nIn conventional spectrographs, a slit is inserted into the beam to limit the image extent in the dispersion direction. A slitless spectrograph omits the slit; this results in images that convolve the image information with spectral information along the direction of dispersion. If the field is not sufficiently sparse, then spectra from different sources in the image field will overlap. The trade is that slitless spectrographs can produce spectral images much more quickly than scanning a conventional spectrograph. That is useful in applications such as solar physics where time evolution is important.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29294", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29294", "title": "IBM System/360", "text": "IBM computer family (1964\u20131977)\nThe IBM System/360 (S/360) is a family of computer systems announced by IBM on April 7, 1964, and delivered between 1965 and 1978. System/360 was the first family of computers designed to cover both commercial and scientific applications and a complete range of sizes from small, entry-level machines to large mainframes. The design distinguished between architecture and implementation, allowing IBM to release a suite of compatible designs at different prices. All but the only partially compatible Model 44 and the most expensive systems use microcode to implement the instruction set, which used 8-bit byte addressing with fixed-point binary, fixed-point decimal and hexadecimal floating-point calculations. The System/360 family introduced IBM's Solid Logic Technology (SLT), which packed more transistors onto a circuit card, allowing more powerful but smaller computers, but did not include integrated circuits, which IBM considered too immature.\nSystem/360's chief architect was Gene Amdahl and the project was managed by Fred Brooks, responsible to Chairman Thomas J. Watson Jr. The commercial release was piloted by another of Watson's lieutenants, John R. Opel, who managed the launch of IBM's System/360 mainframe family in 1964. The slowest System/360 model announced in 1964, the Model 30, could perform up to 34,500 instructions per second, with memory from 8 to 64\u00a0KB. High-performance models came later. The 1967 IBM System/360 Model 91 could execute up to 16.6 million instructions per second. The larger 360 models could have up to 8\u00a0MB of main memory, though that much memory was unusual; a large installation might have as little as 256\u00a0KB of main storage, but 512\u00a0KB, 768\u00a0KB or 1024\u00a0KB was more common. Up to 8 megabytes of slower (8 microsecond) Large Capacity Storage (LCS) was also available for some models.\nThe IBM 360 was extremely successful, allowing customers to purchase a smaller system knowing they could expand it, if their needs grew, without reprogramming application software or replacing peripheral devices. It influenced computer design for years to come; many consider it one of history's most successful computers. Application-level compatibility (with some restrictions) for System/360 software is maintained to the present day with the IBM Z mainframe servers.\nSystem/360 history.\nBackground.\nBy the early 1960s, IBM was struggling with the load of supporting and upgrading five separate lines of computers. These were aimed at different market segments and were entirely different from each other. A customer who purchased a machine to handle accounting, such as the IBM 1401, that was now looking for a machine for engineering calculations, such as the IBM 7040, had no reason to select IBM \u2013 the 7040 was incompatible with the 1401 and they might as well have been from different companies. Customers were frustrated that major investments, often entirely new machines and programs, were required when seemingly small performance improvements were needed.\nIn 1961, IBM assembled a task force to chart their developments for the 1960s, known as SPREAD, for Systems Programming, Research, Engineering and Development. In meetings at the New Englander Motor Hotel in Greenwich, Connecticut, SPREAD developed a new concept for the next generation of IBM machines. At the time, new technologies were coming into the market including the introduction of replacement of individual transistors with small-scale integrated circuits and the move to an 8-bit byte from the former 6-bit oriented words. These were going to lead to a new generation of machines, today known as the third generation, from all of the existing vendors.\nWhere SPREAD differed significantly from previous concepts was what features would be supported. Instead of machines aimed at different market niches, the new concept was effectively the union of all of these designs. A single instruction set architecture (ISA) included instructions for binary, floating-point, and decimal arithmetic, string processing, conversion between character sets (a major issue before the widespread use of ASCII) and extensive support for file handling, among many other features.\nThis would mean IBM would be introducing yet another line of machines, once again incompatible with their earlier machines. But the new systems would be able to run all of the programs that formerly required different machines. A concern was that there was a risk that their customers, facing the purchase of yet another new and incompatible platform, would simply choose some other vendor. Yet the concept steadily gained support, and six months after being formed, the company decided to implement the SPREAD concept.\nA new team was organized under the direction of Bob Evans, who personally persuaded CEO Thomas J. Watson Jr. to develop the new system. Gene Amdahl was the chief architect of the computers themselves, while Fred Brooks was the project lead for the software and Erich Bloch led the development of IBM's hybrid integrated circuit designs, Solid Logic Technology.\n\"Family\" concept.\nProducing a single system design with support for all of these features, at a price acceptable to low-end customers and with a performance level acceptable to high-end customers, would border on impossible. Instead, the SPREAD concept was based on the separation of the defined feature set from its internal operation, with a family of machines with different performance and different internal designs. \nSpecifically, depending on the machine, some components might not be directly implemented in hardware, and would instead be completed using small programs referred to as microcode or microprograms. These small programs, or subprograms, would be stored in read only memory (ROM) inside the machine. Some models use microcode in the central processing unit (CPU) to implement instructions while others use only hardware. Some models use cycle-stealing microcode in the CPU to implement I/O channels while others use only hardware in separate units. Today this approach is known as microcode.\nThis meant that a single lineup could have machines tailored to match the price and performance niches that formerly demanded entirely separate computer systems, where software was specific to each system. This flexibility greatly lowered barriers to entry. With most other vendors customers had to choose between machines they might outgrow or machines that were potentially too powerful and thus too costly. In practice, this meant that many companies simply did not buy computers. Now, a customer could purchase a machine that solved a particular requirement, knowing they could switch models as their needs changed, without losing support for the programs they were already running.\nFor instance, in the case of a firm that purchased an accounting system and was now looking to expand their computer support into engineering, this meant they could develop and test their engineering program on the machine they already used. If they ever needed more performance, they could purchase a machine with floating-point hardware, knowing that nothing else would change, it would simply get faster. Even the same peripherals could be used, allowing, for instance, data from the engineering system to be written to tape and then printed using a high-speed line printer already connected to their accounting system. Or they might replace the accounting system outright with a system with the performance to run both tasks.\nThe idea that a single design could address all the myriad ways that the machines could be used gave rise to the name, \"360\" is a reference to 360 degrees in a circle, and circles of machines and components featured prominently in IBM's advertising.\nModels.\nIBM initially announced a series of six computers and forty common peripherals. IBM eventually delivered fourteen models, including rare one-off models for NASA. The least expensive model was the Model 20 with as little as 4096 bytes of core memory, eight 16-bit registers instead of the sixteen 32-bit registers of other System/360 models, and an instruction set that was a subset of that used by the rest of the range.\nThe initial announcement in 1964 included Models 30, 40, 50, 60, 62, and 70. The first three were low- to middle-range systems aimed at the IBM 1400 series market. All three first shipped in mid-1965. The last three, intended to replace the 7000 series machines, never shipped and were replaced with the 65 and 75, which were first delivered in November 1965, and January 1966, respectively.\nLater additions to the low-end included models 20 (1966, mentioned above), 22 (1971), and 25 (1968). The Model 20 had several sub-models; sub-model 5 was at the higher end of the model. The Model 22 was a recycled Model 30 with minor limitations: a smaller maximum memory configuration, and slower I/O channels, which limited it to slower and lower-capacity disk and tape devices than on the 30.\nThe Model 44 (1966) was a specialized model, designed for scientific computing and for real-time computing and process control, featuring some additional instructions, and with all storage-to-storage instructions and five other complex instructions eliminated.\nA succession of high-end machines included the Model 67 (1966, mentioned below, briefly anticipated as the 64 and 66), 85 (1969), 91 (1967, anticipated as the 92), 95 (1968), and 195 (1971). The 85 design was intermediate between the System/360 line and the follow-on System/370 and was the basis for the 370/165. There was a System/370 version of the 195, but it did not include Dynamic Address Translation.\nThe implementations differed substantially, using different native data path widths, presence or absence of microcode, yet were extremely compatible. Except where specifically documented, the models were architecturally compatible. The 91, for example, was designed for scientific computing and provided out-of-order instruction execution (and could yield \"imprecise interrupts\" if a program trap occurred while several instructions were being read), but lacked the decimal instruction set used in commercial applications. New features could be added without violating architectural definitions: the 65 had a dual-processor version (M65MP) with extensions for inter-CPU signalling; the 85 introduced cache memory. Models 44, 75, 91, 95, and 195 were implemented with hardwired logic, rather than microcoded as all other models.\nThe Model 67, announced in August 1965, was the first production IBM system to offer dynamic address translation (virtual memory) hardware to support time-sharing. \"DAT\" is now more commonly referred to as an MMU. An experimental one-off unit was built based on a model 40. Before the 67, IBM had announced models 64 and 66, DAT versions of the 60 and 62, but they were almost immediately replaced with the 67 at the same time that the 60 and 62 were replaced with the 65. DAT hardware would reappear in the S/370 series in 1972, though it was initially absent from the series. Like its close relative, the 65, the 67 also offered dual CPUs.\nIBM stopped marketing all System/360 models by the end of 1977.\nBackward compatibility.\nIBM's existing customers had a large investment in software that ran on second-generation machines. Several System/360 models had the option of emulating the customer's existing computer using special hardware and microcode, and an emulation program that enabled existing programs to run on the new machine.\nCustomers initially had to halt the computer and load the emulation program.\nIBM later added features and modified emulator programs to allow emulation of the 1401, 1440, 1460, 1410 and 7010 under the control of an operating system.\nThe Model 85 and later System/370 maintained the precedent, retaining emulation options and allowing emulators to run under OS control alongside native programs.\nSuccessors and variants.\nSystem/360 (excepting the Models 20, 44 and 67) was replaced with the compatible System/370 range in 1970 and Model 20 users were targeted to move to the IBM System/3. (The idea of a major breakthrough with FS technology was dropped in the mid-1970s for cost-effectiveness and continuity reasons.) Later compatible IBM systems include the 4300 family, the 308x family, the 3090, the ES/9000 and 9672 families (System/390 family), and the IBM Z series.\nComputers that were mostly identical or compatible in terms of the machine code or architecture of the System/360 included Amdahl's 470 family (and its successors), Hitachi mainframes, the UNIVAC 9000 series, Fujitsu as the Facom, the RCA Spectra 70 series, and the English Electric System 4. The System 4 machines were built under license to RCA. RCA sold the Spectra series to what was then UNIVAC, where they became the UNIVAC Series 70. UNIVAC also developed the UNIVAC Series 90 as successors to the 9000 series and Series 70. The Soviet Union produced a System/360 clone named the ES EVM.\nThe IBM 5100 portable computer, introduced in 1975, offered an option to execute the System/360's APL.SV programming language through a hardware emulator. IBM used this approach to avoid the costs and delay of creating a 5100-specific version of APL.\nSpecial radiation-hardened and otherwise somewhat modified System/360s, in the form of the System/4 Pi avionics computer, are used in several fighter and bomber jet aircraft. In the complete 32-bit AP-101 version, 4 Pi machines were used as the replicated computing nodes of the fault-tolerant Space Shuttle computer system (in five nodes). The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration operated the IBM 9020, a special cluster of modified System/360s for air traffic control, from 1970 until the 1990s. (Some 9020 software is apparently still used via emulation on newer hardware.)\nTable of System/360 models.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n Model summary\n* Six of the twenty IBM System/360 models announced either were never shipped or were never released.\n* Fourteen of the twenty IBM System/360 models announced shipped.\nTechnical description.\nInfluential features.\nThe System/360 introduced a number of industry standards to the marketplace, such as:\nArchitectural overview.\nThe System/360 series computer architecture specification makes no assumptions on the implementation itself, but rather describes the interfaces and expected behavior of an implementation. The architecture describes mandatory interfaces that must be available on all implementations, and optional interfaces. Some aspects of this architecture are:\nSome of the optional features are:\nAll models of System/360, except for the Model 20 and Model 44, implemented that specification.\nBinary arithmetic and logical operations are performed as register-to-register and as memory-to-register/register-to-memory as a standard feature. If the Commercial Instruction Set option was installed, packed decimal arithmetic could be performed as memory-to-memory with some memory-to-register operations. The Scientific Instruction Set feature, if installed, provided access to four floating-point registers that could be programmed for either 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point operations. The Models 85 and 195 could also operate on 128-bit extended-precision floating-point numbers stored in pairs of floating-point registers, and software provided emulation in other models. The System/360 used an 8-bit byte, 32-bit word, 64-bit double-word, and 4-bit nibble. Machine instructions had operators with operands, which could contain register numbers or memory addresses. This complex combination of instruction options resulted in a variety of instruction lengths and formats.\nMemory addressing was accomplished using a base-plus-displacement scheme, with registers 1 through F (15). A displacement was encoded in 12 bits, thus allowing a 4096-byte displacement (0\u20134095), as the offset from the address put in a base register.\nRegister 0 could not be used as a base register nor as an index register (nor as a branch address register), as \"0\" was reserved to indicate an address in the first 4\u00a0KB of memory, that is, if register 0 was specified as described, the value 0x00000000 was implicitly input to the effective address calculation in place of whatever value might be contained within register 0 (or if specified as a branch address register, then no branch was taken, and the content of register 0 was ignored, but any side effect of the instruction was performed).\nThis specific behavior permitted initial execution of an interrupt routines, since base registers would not necessarily be set to 0 during the first few instruction cycles of an interrupt routine. It isn't needed for IPL (\"Initial Program Load\" or boot), as one can always clear a register without the need to save it.\nWith the exception of the Model 67, all addresses were real memory addresses. Virtual memory was not available in most IBM mainframes until the System/370 series. The Model 67 introduced a virtual memory architecture, which MTS, CP-67, and TSS/360 used\u2014but not IBM's mainline System/360 operating systems.\nThe System/360 machine-code instructions are 2 bytes long (no memory operands), 4 bytes long (one operand), or 6 bytes long (two operands). Instructions are always situated on 2-byte boundaries.\nOperations like MVC (Move-Characters) (Hex: D2) can only move at most 256 bytes of information. Moving more than 256 bytes of data required multiple MVC operations. (The System/370 series introduced a family of more powerful instructions such as the MVCL \"Move-Characters-Long\" instruction, which supports moving up to 16\u00a0MB as a single block.)\nAn operand is two bytes long, typically representing an address as a 4-bit nibble denoting a base register and a 12-bit displacement relative to the contents of that register, in the range 000\u2013FFF (shown here as hexadecimal numbers). The address corresponding to that operand is the contents of the specified general-purpose register plus the displacement. For example, an MVC instruction that moves 256 bytes (with length code 255 in hexadecimal as FF) from base register 7, plus displacement 000, to base register 8, plus displacement 001, would be coded as the 6-byte instruction \"D2FF 8001 7000\" (operator/length/address1/address2).\nThe System/360 was designed to separate the \"supervisor state\" from the \"problem state\". This provided a basic level of security and recoverability from programming errors. Problem (user) programs could not modify data or program storage associated with the supervisor state. Addressing, data, or operation exception errors made the machine enter the supervisor state through a controlled routine so the operating system could try to correct or terminate the program in error. Similarly, it could recover certain processor hardware errors through the \"machine check\" routines.\nChannels.\nPeripherals interfaced to the system via \"channels\". A channel is a specialized processor with the instruction set optimized for transferring data between a peripheral and main memory. In modern terms, this could be compared to direct memory access (DMA). The S/360 connects channels to control units with bus and tag cables; IBM eventually replaced these with Enterprise Systems Connection (ESCON) and Fibre Connection (FICON) channels, but well after the S/360 era.\nByte-multiplexor and selector channels.\nThere were initially two types of channels; byte-multiplexer channels (known at the time simply as \"multiplexor channels\"), for connecting \"slow speed\" devices such as card readers and punches, line printers, and communications controllers, and selector channels for connecting high speed devices, such as disk drives, tape drives, data cells and drums. Every System/360 (except for the Model 20, which was not a standard 360) has a byte-multiplexer channel and 1 or more selector channels, though the model 25 has just one channel, which can be either a byte-multiplexor or selector channel. The smaller models (up to the model 50) have integrated channels, while for the larger models (model 65 and above) the channels are large separate units in separate cabinets: the IBM 2870 is the byte-multiplexor channel with up to four selector sub-channels, and the IBM 2860 is up to three selector channels.\nThe byte-multiplexer channel is able to handle I/O to/from several devices simultaneously at the device's highest rated speeds, hence the name, as it multiplexed I/O from those devices onto a single data path to main memory. Devices connected to a byte-multiplexer channel are configured to operate in 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte, or \"burst\" mode. The larger \"blocks\" of data are used to handle progressively faster devices. For example, a 2501 card reader operating at 600 cards per minute would be in 1-byte mode, while a 1403-N1 printer would be in burst mode. Also, the byte-multiplexer channels on larger models have an optional selector subchannel section that would accommodate tape drives. The byte-multiplexor's channel address was typically \"0\" and the selector subchannel addresses were from \"C0\" to \"FF.\" Thus, tape drives on System/360 were commonly addressed at 0C0\u20130C7. Other common byte-multiplexer addresses are: 00A: 2501 Card Reader, 00C/00D: 2540 Reader/Punch, 00E/00F: 1403-N1 Printers, 010\u2013013: 3211 Printers, 020\u20130BF: 2701/2703 Telecommunications Units. These addresses are still commonly used in z/VM virtual machines.\nSystem/360 models 40 and 50 have an integrated 1052-7 console that is usually addressed as 01F, however, this was not connected to the byte-multiplexer channel, but rather, had a direct internal connection to the mainframe. The model 30 attached a different model of 1052 through a 1051 control unit. The models 60 through 75 also use the 1052\u20137.\nSelector channels enabled I/O to high speed devices. These storage devices were attached to a control unit and then to the channel. The control unit let clusters of devices be attached to the channels. On higher speed models, multiple selector channels, which could operate simultaneously or in parallel, improved overall performance.\nControl units are connected to the channels with \"bus and tag\" cable pairs. The bus cables carried the address and data information and the tag cables identified what data was on the bus. The general configuration of a channel is to connect the devices in a chain, like this: Mainframe\u2014Control Unit X\u2014Control Unit Y\u2014Control Unit Z. Each control unit is assigned a \"capture range\" of addresses that it services. For example, control unit X might capture addresses 40\u20134F, control unit Y: C0\u2013DF, and control unit Z: 80\u20139F. Capture ranges had to be a multiple of 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 devices and be aligned on appropriate boundaries. Each control unit in turn has one or more devices attached to it. For example, you could have control unit Y with 6 disks, that would be addressed as C0-C5.\nThere are three general types of bus-and-tag cables produced by IBM. The first is the standard gray bus-and-tag cable, followed by the blue bus-and-tag cable, and finally the tan bus-and-tag cable. Generally, newer cable revisions are capable of higher speeds or longer distances, and some peripherals specified minimum cable revisions both upstream and downstream.\nThe cable ordering of the control units on the channel is also significant. Each control unit is \"strapped\" as High or Low priority. When a device selection was sent out on a mainframe's channel, the selection was sent from X-&gt;Y-&gt;Z-&gt;Y-&gt;X. If the control unit was \"high\" then the selection was checked in the outbound direction, if \"low\" then the inbound direction. Thus, control unit X was either 1st or 5th, Y was either 2nd or 4th, and Z was 3rd in line. It is also possible to have multiple channels attached to a control unit from the same or multiple mainframes, thus providing a rich high-performance, multiple-access, and backup capability.\nTypically the total cable length of a channel is limited to 200 feet, less being preferred. Each control unit accounts for about 10 \"feet\" of the 200-foot limit.\nBlock multiplexer channel.\nIBM first introduced a new type of I/O channel on the Model 85 and Model 195, the 2880 block multiplexer channel, and then made them standard on the System/370. This channel allowed a device to suspend a channel program, pending the completion of an I/O operation and thus to free the channel for use by another device. A block multiplexer channel can support either standard 1.5\u00a0MB/s connections or, with the 2-byte interface feature, 3\u00a0MB/s; the latter use one tag cable and two bus cables. On the S/370 there is an option for a 3.0 MB/s data streaming channel with one bus cable and one tag cable.\nThe initial use for this was the 2305 fixed-head disk, which has 8 \"exposures\" (alias addresses) and rotational position sensing (RPS).\nBlock multiplexer channels can operate as a selector channel to allow compatible attachment of legacy subsystems.\nBasic hardware components.\nBeing uncertain of the reliability and availability of the then new monolithic integrated circuits, IBM chose instead to design and manufacture its own custom hybrid integrated circuits. These were built on 11\u00a0mm square ceramic substrates. Resistors were silk screened on and discrete glass encapsulated transistors and diodes were added. The substrate was then covered with a metal lid or encapsulated in plastic to create a \"Solid Logic Technology\" (SLT) module.\nA number of these https:// were then flip chip mounted onto a small multi-layer printed circuit \"SLT card\". Each card had one or two sockets on one edge that plugged onto pins on one of the computer's \"SLT boards\" (also referred to as a backplane). This was the reverse of how most other company's cards were mounted, where the cards had pins or printed contact areas and plugged into sockets on the computer's boards.\nUp to twenty SLT boards could be assembled side-by-side (vertically and horizontally, max 4 high by 5 wide) to form a \"logic gate\". Several gates mounted together constituted a box-shaped \"logic frame\". The outer gates were generally hinged along one vertical edge so they could be swung open to provide access to the fixed inner gates. The larger machines could have more than one frame bolted together to produce the final unit, such as a multi-frame Central Processing Unit (CPU).\nOperating system software.\nThe smaller System/360 models used the Basic Operating System/360 (BOS/360), Tape Operating System (TOS/360), or Disk Operating System/360 (DOS/360, which evolved into DOS/VS, DOS/VSE, VSE/AF, VSE/SP, VSE/ESA, and then z/VSE).\nThe larger models used Operating System/360 (OS/360). IBM developed several levels of OS/360, with increasingly powerful features: Primary Control Program (PCP), Multiprogramming with a Fixed number of Tasks (MFT), and Multiprogramming with a Variable number of Tasks (MVT). MVT took a long time to develop into a usable system, and the less ambitious MFT was widely used. PCP was used on intermediate machines too small to run MFT well, and on larger machines before MFT was available; the final releases of OS/360 included only MFT and MVT. For the System/370 and later machines, MFT evolved into OS/VS1, while MVT evolved into OS/VS2 (SVS) (Single Virtual Storage), then various versions of MVS (Multiple Virtual Storage) culminating in the current z/OS.\nWhen it announced the Model 67 in August 1965, IBM also announced TSS/360 (Time-Sharing System) for delivery at the same time as the 67. TSS/360, a response to Multics, was an ambitious project that included many advanced features. It had performance problems, was delayed, canceled, reinstated, and finally canceled again in 1971. Customers migrated to CP-67, MTS (Michigan Terminal System), TSO (Time Sharing Option for OS/360), or one of several other time-sharing systems.\nCP-67, the original virtual machine system, was also known as CP/CMS. CP/67 was developed outside the IBM mainstream at IBM's Cambridge Scientific Center, in cooperation with MIT researchers. CP/CMS eventually won wide acceptance, and led to the development of VM/370 (Virtual Machine) which had a primary interactive \"sub\" operating system known as VM/CMS (Conversational Monitoring System). This evolved into today's z/VM.\nThe Model 20 offered a simplified and rarely used tape-based system called TPS (Tape Processing System), and DPS (Disk Processing System) that provided support for the 2311 disk drive. TPS could run on a machine with 8\u00a0KB of memory; DPS required 12\u00a0KB, which was pretty hefty for a Model 20. Many customers ran quite happily with 4\u00a0KB and CPS (Card Processing System). With TPS and DPS, the card reader was used to read the Job Control Language cards that defined the stack of jobs to run and to read in transaction data such as customer payments. The operating system was held on tape or disk, and results could also be stored on the tapes or hard drives. Stacked job processing became an exciting possibility for the small but adventurous computer user.\nA little-known and little-used suite of 80-column punched-card utility programs known as Basic Programming Support (BPS) (jocularly: Barely Programming Support), a precursor of TOS, was available for smaller systems.\nComponent names.\nIBM created a new naming system for the new components created for System/360, although well-known old names, like IBM 1403 and IBM 1052, were retained. In this new naming system, components were given four-digit numbers starting with 2. The second digit described the type of component, as follows:\nPeripherals.\nIBM developed a new family of peripheral equipment for System/360, carrying over a few from its older 1400 series. Interfaces were standardized, allowing greater flexibility to mix and match processors, controllers and peripherals than in the earlier product lines.\nIn addition, System/360 computers could use certain peripherals that were originally developed for earlier computers. These earlier peripherals used a different numbering system, such as the IBM 1403 chain printer. The 1403, an extremely reliable device that had already earned a reputation as a workhorse, was sold as the 1403-N1 when adapted for the System/360.\nAlso available were optical character recognition (OCR) readers IBM 1287 and IBM 1288 which could read Alpha Numeric (A/N) and Numeric Hand Printed (NHP/NHW) Characters from Cashier's rolls of tape to full legal size pages. At the time this was done with very large optical/logic readers. Software was too slow and expensive at that time.\nModels 65 and below sold with an IBM 1052\u20137 as the console typewriter. The 360/85 with feature 5450 uses a display console that was not compatible with anything else in the line; the later 3066 console for the 370/165 and 370/168 use the same basic display design as the 360/85.\nThe IBM System/360 models 91 and 195 use a graphical display similar to the IBM 2250 as their primary console.\nAdditional operator consoles were also available. Certain high-end machines could optionally be purchased with a 2250 graphical display, costing upwards of US$100,000; smaller machines could use the less expensive 2260 display or later the 3270.\nDirect access storage devices (DASD).\nThe first disk drives for System/360 were IBM 2302s and IBM 2311s. The first drum for System/360 was the IBM 7320.\nThe 156\u00a0kbit/s 2302 was based on the earlier 1302 and was available as a model 3 with two 112.79\u00a0MB modules or as a model 4 with four such modules.\nThe 2311, with a removable 1316 disk pack, was based on the IBM 1311 and had a theoretical capacity of 7.2\u00a0MB, although actual capacity varied with record design. (When used with a 360/20, the 1316 pack was formatted into fixed-length 270 byte sectors, giving a maximum capacity of 5.4MB.)\nIn 1966, the first 2314s shipped. This device had up to eight usable disk drives with an integral control unit; there were nine drives, but one was reserved as a spare. Each drive used a removable 2316 disk pack with a capacity of nearly 28\u00a0MB. The disk packs for the 2311 and 2314 were \"physically\" large by today's standards \u2014 e.g., the 1316 disk pack was about in diameter and had six platters stacked on a central spindle. The top and bottom outside platters did not store data. Data were recorded on the inner sides of the top and bottom platters and both sides of the inner platters, providing 10 recording surfaces. The 10 read/write heads moved together across the surfaces of the platters, which were formatted with 203 concentric tracks. To reduce the amount of head movement (seeking), data was written in a virtual cylinder from inside top platter down to inside bottom platter. These disks were not usually formatted with fixed-sized sectors as are today's hard drives (though this \"was\" done with CP/CMS). Rather, most System/360 I/O software could customize the length of the data record (variable-length records), as was the case with magnetic tapes.\nSome of the most powerful early System/360s used high-speed head-per-track drum storage devices. The 3,500\u00a0RPM 2301, which replaced the 7320, was part of the original System/360 announcement, with a capacity of 4\u00a0MB. The 303.8\u00a0kbit/s IBM 2303 was announced on January 31, 1966, with a capacity of 3.913\u00a0MB. These were the only drums announced for System/360 and System/370, and their niche was later filled by fixed-head disks.\nThe 6,000\u00a0RPM 2305 appeared in 1970, with capacities of 5\u00a0MB (2305\u20131) or 11\u00a0MB (2305\u20132) per module. Although these devices did not have large capacity, their speed and transfer rates made them attractive for high-performance needs. A typical use was overlay linkage (e.g. for OS and application subroutines) for program sections written to alternate in the same memory regions. Fixed-head disks and drums were particularly effective as paging devices on the early virtual memory systems. The 2305, although often called a \"drum\" was actually a head-per-track disk device, with 12 recording surfaces and a data transfer rate up to 3\u00a0MB/s.\nRarely seen was the IBM 2321 Data Cell, a mechanically complex device that contained multiple magnetic strips to hold data; strips could be randomly accessed, placed upon a cylinder-shaped drum for read/write operations; then returned to an internal storage cartridge. The IBM Data Cell [noodle picker] was among several IBM trademarked \"speedy\" mass online direct-access storage peripherals (reincarnated in recent years as \"virtual tape\" and automated tape librarian peripherals). The 2321 file had a capacity of 400\u00a0MB, at the time when the 2311 disk drive only had 7.2\u00a0MB. The IBM Data Cell was proposed to fill cost/capacity/speed gap between magnetic tapes\u2014which had high capacity with relatively low cost per stored byte\u2014and disks, which had higher expense per byte. Some installations also found the electromechanical operation less dependable and opted for less mechanical forms of direct-access storage.\nThe Model 44 was unique in offering an integrated single-disk drive as a standard feature. This drive used the 2315 \"ramkit\" cartridge and provided 1,171,200 bytes of storage.\nMagnetic Tape drives.\nThe 2400-series of 1/2\" magnetic tape units consisted of the 2401 and 2402 Models 1-6 Magnetic Tape Units, the 2403 Models 1-6 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, the 2404 Models 1-3 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, and the 2803/2804 Models 1 and 2 Tape Control Units. The later 2415 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, introduced in 1967 contained two, four, or six tape drives and a control in a single unit, and was slower and cheaper. The 2415 drives and control were not marketed separately. With System/360, IBM switched from IBM 7-track to 9-track tape format. Some 2400-series drives could be purchased that read and wrote 7-track tapes for compatibility with the older IBM 729 tape drives. In 1968, the IBM 2420 tape system was released, offering much higher data rates, self-threading tape operation and 1600bpi packing density. It remained in the product line until 1979.\nRemaining machines.\nDespite having been sold or leased in very large numbers for a mainframe system of its era, only a few of System/360 computers remain\u2014mainly as non-operating property of museums or collectors. Examples of existing systems include:\nA running list of remaining System/360s that are more than just 'front panels' can be found at http://.\nGallery.\nThis gallery shows the operator's console, with register value lamps, toggle switches (middle of pictures), and \"emergency pull\" switch (upper right of pictures) of the various models.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29295", "revid": "980399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29295", "title": "Standardized testing", "text": ""}
{"id": "29298", "revid": "44328505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29298", "title": "Spouse", "text": "Partner in a marriage or similar union\nA spouse is a significant other in a marriage. A female spouse is called a wife while a male spouse is called a husband. \nMarried.\nThe legal status of a spouse, and the specific rights and obligations associated with that status, vary significantly among the jurisdictions of the world. These regulations are usually described in family law statutes. However, in many parts of the world, where civil marriage is not that prevalent, there is instead customary marriage, which is usually regulated informally by the community. In many parts of the world, spousal rights and obligations are related to the payment of bride price, dowry or dower. Historically, many societies have given sets of rights and obligations to male marital partners that have been very different from the sets of rights and obligations given to female marital partners. In particular, the control of marital property, inheritance rights, and the right to dictate the activities of children of the marriage, have typically been given to male marital partners. However, this practice was curtailed to a great deal in many countries in the twentieth century, and more modern statutes tend to define the rights and duties of a spouse without reference to gender. Among the last European countries to establish full gender equality in marriage were Switzerland. In 1985, a referendum guaranteed women legal equality with men within marriage. The new reforms came into force in January 1988. Although married women in France obtained the right to work without their husbands' permission in 1965, and the paternal authority of a man over his family was ended in 1970 (before that parental responsibilities belonged solely to the father who made all legal decisions concerning the children), it was only in 1985 that a legal reform abolished the stipulation that the husband had the sole power to administer the children's property. in the 1980s. In various marriage laws around the world, however, the husband continues to have authority; for instance the Civil Code of Iran states at Article 1105: \"In relations between husband and wife; the position of the head of the family is the exclusive right of the husband\".\nDepending on jurisdiction, the refusal or inability of a spouse to perform the marital obligations may constitute a ground for divorce, legal separation or annulment. The latter two options are more prevalent in countries where the dominant religion is Roman Catholicism, some of which introduced divorce only recently (i.e. Italy in 1970, Portugal in 1975, Brazil in 1977, Spain in 1981, Argentina in 1987, Paraguay in 1991, Colombia in 1991, Ireland in 1996, Chile in 2004 and Malta in 2011). In recent years, many Western countries have adopted no-fault divorce. In some parts of the world, the formal dissolution of a marriage is complicated by the payments and goods which have been exchanged between families (this is common where marriages are arranged). This often makes it difficult to leave a marriage, especially for the woman: in some parts of Africa, once the bride price has been paid, the wife is seen as belonging to the husband and his family; and if she wants to leave, the husband may demand back the bride price that he had paid to the girl's family. The girl's family often cannot or does not want to pay it back.\nRegardless of legislation, personal relations between spouses may also be influenced by local culture and religion.\nMinimum age.\nThere is often a minimum legal marriageable age. The United Nations Population Fund stated the following:\n\"In 2010, 158 countries reported that 18 years was the minimum legal age for marriage for women without parental consent or approval by a pertinent authority. However, in 146 countries, state or customary law allows girls younger than 18 to marry with the consent of parents or other authorities; in 52 countries, girls under age 15 can marry with parental consent. In contrast, 18 is the legal age for marriage without consent among males in 180 countries. Additionally, in 105 countries, boys can marry with the consent of a parent or a pertinent authority, and in 23 countries, boys under age 15 can marry with parental consent.\"\nProcreation.\nIn Western countries, spouses sometimes choose not to have children. In some parts of the world, there is greater expectations that heterosexual couples will procreate, such is the case in northern Ghana. For example, the payment of the bride signifies a woman's requirement to bear children, and women using birth control are at risks of threats and coercion.\nSelection.\nThere are many ways in which a spouse is chosen, which vary across the world, and include love marriage, arranged marriage, and forced marriage. The latter is in some jurisdictions a void marriage or a voidable marriage. Forcing someone to marry is also a criminal offense in some countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29299", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29299", "title": "Sexuality (disambiguation)", "text": "Human sexuality is the capacity to have erotic experiences and responses.\nSexuality may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29301", "revid": "50569576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29301", "title": "Semiotics", "text": "Study of signs\nSemiotics is the study of signs. It is an interdisciplinary field that examines what signs are, how they form sign systems, and how individuals use them to communicate meaning. Its main branches are syntactics, which addresses formal relations between signs, semantics, which addresses the relation between signs and their meanings, and pragmatics, which addresses the relation between signs and their users. Semiotics is related to linguistics but has a broader scope that includes nonlinguistic signs, such as maps and clothing. \nSigns are entities that stand for something else, like the word \"cat\", which stands for a carnivorous mammal. They can take many forms, such as sounds, images, written marks, and gestures. Iconic signs operate through similarity. For them, the sign vehicle resembles the referent, such as a portrait of a person. Indexical signs are based on a direct physical link, such as smoke as a sign of fire. For symbolic signs, the relation between sign vehicle and referent is conventional or arbitrary, which applies to most linguistic signs. Models of signs analyze the basic components of signs. Ferdinand de Saussure's dyadic model identifies a perceptible image and a concept as the core elements, whereas Charles Sanders Peirce's triadic model distinguishes a sign vehicle, a referent, and an effect in the interpreter's mind.\nSign systems are structured networks of interrelated signs, such as the English language. Semioticians study how signs combine to form larger expressions, called texts. They explore how the message of a text depends on the meanings of the signs composing it and how contextual factors and tropes influence this process. They also investigate the codes employed to communicate meaning, including conventional codes, such as the color code of traffic signals, and natural codes, such as DNA encoding hereditary information.\nSemiotics has diverse applications because of the pervasive nature of signs. Many semioticians study cultural products, such as literature, art, and media, investigating both the elements used to express meaning and the subtle ideological messages they convey. The psychological activities associated with sign use are another research topic. Biosemiotics extends the scope of inquiry beyond human communication, examining sign processes within and between animals, plants, and other organisms. Semioticians typically adjust their research approach to their specific domain without a single methodology adopted by all subfields. Although the roots of semiotic research lie in antiquity, it was not until the late 19th and early 20th centuries that semiotics emerged as an independent field of inquiry.\nDefinitions and related fields.\nSemiotics is the study of signs or of how meaning is created and communicated through them. Also called \"semiology\", it examines the nature of signs, their organization into signs systems, like language, and the ways individuals interpret and use them. Semiotics has wide-reaching applications because of the pervasive nature of signs, affecting how individuals experience phenomena, communicate ideas, and interact with the world.\nThese applications make it an interdisciplinary field, originating in philosophy and linguistics and closely related to disciplines like psychology, anthropology, aesthetics, sociology, and education sciences. Because most sciences rely on sign processes in some form, semiotics is sometimes characterized as a meta-discipline that provides a general approach for the analysis of signs across domains. It is controversial whether semiotics is itself a science since there are no universally accepted theoretical assumptions or methods on which semioticians agree. Semiotics has also been characterized as a theory, a doctrine, a movement, or a discipline. Apart from its interdisciplinary applications, pure semiotics is typically divided into three branches: semantics, syntactics, and pragmatics, studying how signs relate to objects, to each other, and to sign users, respectively.\nSemiotic inquiry overlaps in various ways with linguistics and communication theory. It shares with linguistics the interest in the analysis of sign systems, examining the meanings of words, how they are combined to form sentences, and how they convey messages in concrete contexts. A key difference is that linguistics focuses on language, while semiotics also studies non-linguistic signs, such as images, gestures, traffic signs, and animal calls. Communication theory studies how individuals encode, convey, and interpret both linguistic and non-linguistic messages. It typically focuses on technical aspects of how messages are transmitted, usually between distinct organisms. Semiotics, by contrast, concentrates on the meaning of messages and the creation of meaning, including the role of non-communicative signs. For example, semioticians also study naturally occurring biological signs, like disease symptoms, and signs based on inanimate relations, such as smoke as a sign of fire.\nThe term \"semiotics\" derives from the Greek word (), originally associated with the study of disease symptoms. Proposing a new field of inquiry of signs, John Locke suggested the Greek term as its name. The first use of the English term \"semiotics\" dates to the 1670s. Semiotics became a distinct field of inquiry following the works of the philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce and the linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, the founders of the discipline.\nSigns.\nA sign is an entity that stands for something else. For example, the word \"cat\" is a sign that stands for a small domesticated carnivorous mammal. Signs direct the attention of interpreters away from themselves and toward the entities they represent. They can take many forms, such as words, images, sounds, and odours. Similarly, they can refer to many types of entities, including physical objects, events, or places, psychological feelings, and abstract ideas. They help people recognize patterns, predict outcomes, make plans, communicate ideas, and understand the world.\nSemioticians distinguish different elements of signs. The sign vehicle is the physical form of the sign, such as sound waves or printed letters on a page, whereas the referent is the object it stands for. The precise number and nature of these elements is disputed and different models of signs propose distinct analyses. The referent of a sign can itself be a sign, leading to a chain of signification. For instance, the expression \"red rose\" is a sign for a particular type of flower, which can itself act as a sign of love.\nSemiosis is the capacity or activity of comprehending and producing signs. Also characterized as the action of signs, it involves the interplay between sign vehicle and referent as organisms interpret meaning within a given context. Different types of semiosis are distinguished by the type of organisms engaging in the sign activity, such as the contrast between anthroposemiosis involving humans, zo\u00f6semiosis involving other animals, and phytosemiosis involving plants.\nMeaning, sense, and reference.\nThe meaning of a sign is what is generated in the process of semiosis. Meaning is typically analyzed into two aspects: sense and reference. This distinction is also known by the terms \"connotation\" and \"denotation\" as well as \"intension\" and \"extension\". The reference of a sign is the object for which it stands. For example, the reference of the term \"morning star\" is the planet Venus. The sense of a sign is the way it stands for the object or the mode in which the object is presented. For instance, the terms \"morning star\" and \"evening star\" have the same reference since they point to the same object. However, their meanings are not identical since they differ on the level of sense by presenting this object from distinct perspectives.\nVarious theories of meaning have been proposed to explain its nature and identify the conditions that determine the meanings of signs. Referential or extensional theories define meaning in terms of reference, for example, as the signified object or as a context-dependent function that points to objects. Ideational or mentalist theories interpret the meaning of a sign in relation to the mental states of language users, for example, as the ideas it evokes. Pragmatic theories describe meaning based on behavioral responses and use conditions.\nTypes and sign relations.\nSemioticians distinguish various types of signs, often based on the sign relation or how the sign vehicle is connected to the referent. A type is a general pattern or universal class, corresponding to shared features of individual signs. Types contrast with tokens, which are individual instances of a type. For example, the word \"banana\" encompasses six letter tokens (\"b\", \"a\", \"n\", \"a\", \"n\", and \"a\"), which belong to three distinct types (\"b\", \"a\", and \"n\").\nA historically influential classification of sign types relies on the contrast between conventional and natural signs. Conventional signs depend on culturally established norms and intentionality to establish the link between sign vehicle and referent. For example, the meaning of the term \"tree\" is fixed by social conventions associated with the English language rather than a natural connection between the term and actual trees. Natural signs, by contrast, are based on a substantial link other than conventions. For instance, the footprint of a bear signifies the presence of a bear as a result of the bear's movement rather than a matter of convention. In modern semiotics, the distinction between natural and conventional signs has been replaced by the threefold classification into icons, indices, and symbols, initially proposed by Peirce.\nIcons are signs that operate through similarity: sign vehicles resemble or imitate the referents to which they are linked. They include direct physical similarity, such as a life-like portrait depicting a person, but also encompass more abstract resemblance, such as metaphors and diagrams. Icons are also used in animal communication. For instance, ants of the species \"Pogonomyrmex badius\" use a smell-based warning signal that resembles the type of danger with a correspondence between intensity and duration of signal and danger.\nIndices are signs that operate through a direct physical link. Typically, the referent is the cause of the sign vehicle. For example, smoke indicates the presence of fire because it is a physical effect produced by the fire itself. Similarly, disease symptoms are signs of the disease causing them and a thermometer's gauge reading indicates the temperature responsible. Other material links besides a direct cause-effect relation are also possible such as a directional signpost physically pointing the path to a nearby campsite.\nSymbols are signs that operate through convention-based associations. For them, the relation between sign vehicle and referent is arbitrary. It arises from social agreements, which an individual needs to learn in order to decode the meaning. Examples are the numeral \"2\", the colors on traffic lights, and national flags.\nThe categories of icon, index, and symbol are not exclusive, and the same sign may belong to more than one. For example, some road warning signs combine iconic elements, like an image of falling rocks to indicate rockslide, with symbolic elements, such as a red triangle to signal danger. Various other categories are discussed in the academic literature. Thomas Sebeok expands the icon-index-symbol classification by adding three more categories: signals are signs that typically trigger behavioral responses in the receiver; symptoms are automatic, non-arbitrary signs; names are extensional signs that identify one specific individual. Other categorizations of signs are based on the channel of transmission, the intentions of the communicators, vagueness, ambiguity, reliability, complexity, and type of referent.\nModels.\nModels of signs seek to identify the essential components of signs. Many models have been proposed and most introduce a unique terminology for the different components although they often share substantial conceptual overlap. A common classification distinguishes between dyadic and triadic models.\nDyadic models assert that signs have essentially two components, a sign vehicle and its meaning. An influential dyadic model was proposed by Saussure, who names the components \"signifier\" and \"signified\". The signifier is a sensible image, whereas the signified is a concept or an idea associated with this form. For Saussure, the sign is a relation that connects signifier and signified, functioning as a bridge from a sensory form to a concept. He understands both signifier and signified as psychological elements that exist in the mind. As a result, the meaning of signs is limited to the realm of ideas and does not directly concern the external objects to which signs refer. Focusing on language as a general model of signs, Saussure argued that the relation between signifier and signified is arbitrary, meaning that any sensible image could in principle be paired with any concept. He held that individual signs need to be understood in the context of sign systems, which organize and regulate the arbitrary connections.\nVarious interpreters of Saussure's model, such as Louis Hjelmslev and Roman Jakobson, rejected the purely psychological interpretation of signs. For them, signifiers are material forms that can be seen or heard, not mental images of material forms. Similarly, critics have objected to the idea that the relation between signs and signifiers are always arbitrary, pointing to iconic and indexical signs as counterexamples.\nTriadic models assert that signs have three components. An influential triadic model proposed by Peirce argues that the third component is required to account for the individual that interprets signs, implying that there is no meaning without interpretation. According to Peirce, a sign is a relation between representamen, object, and interpretant. The representamen is a perceptible entity, the object is the referent for which the representamen stands, and the interpretant is the effect produced in the mind of the interpreter.\nPeirce distinguishes various aspects of these components. The immediate object is the object as the sign presents it\u2014a mental representation. The dynamic object, by contrast, is the actual entity as it really is, which anchors the meaning of the sign. The immediate interpretant is the sign's potential meaning, whereas the dynamic interpretant is the sign's actual effect or the understanding it produces. The final interpretant is the ideal meaning that would be reached after an exhaustive inquiry. Peirce emphasizes that semiosis or meaning-making is a continuously evolving process. Analyzing Peirce's model, Umberto Eco talks of an \"unlimited semiosis\" in which the interpretation of one sign leads to more signs, resulting in an endless chain of signification.\nAnother triadic model, proposed by Charles Kay Ogden and I. A. Richards, distinguishes between symbol, thought, and referent. Known as the semiotic triangle, it asserts that the connection between symbol and referent is not direct but requires the mediation of thought to establish the link.\nSign systems.\nA sign system is a complex of relations governing how signs are formed, combined, and interpreted, such as a specific language. Signs usually occur in the context of a sign system, and some semiotic theories assert that isolated signs have little meaning apart from their systemic relations to other signs.\nSign elements and texts.\nSign systems often rely on basic constituents or sign elements to compose signs. For example, alphabetic writing systems use letters as sign elements to construct words, while Morse code uses dots and dashes. Letters are essential for differentiating word meanings, like the contrast between the words \"cat\", \"rat\", and \"hat\" based on their initial letter. The basic sign elements usually do not have a meaning of their own unless combined in systematic ways.\nA text is a large sign composed of several smaller signs according to a specific code. Unlike basic sign elements, the units composing a text are themselves meaningful. The meaning of a text, called its \"message\", depends on its components. However, it is usually not a mere aggregate of their isolated meanings, but shaped by their interaction and organization. In addition to linguistic texts, such as a novel or a mathematical formula, there are also non-linguistic texts, such as a diagram, a poster, or a musical composition consisting of several movements. The capacity to create and understand texts, known as \"textuality\", is also present in some non-human animals. For example, honey bees perform a complex dance combining diverse features to communicate information about their environment to other bees.\nThe meaning of a text can depend on and refer to other texts\u2014a feature called \"intertextuality\". Semioticians distinguish several aspects of texts. Paratext encompasses elements that frame or surround a text, such as titles, headings, acknowledgments, footnotes, and illustrations. Architext refers to the general categories to which a text belongs, such as its genre, style, medium, and authorship. A metatext is a text that comments on another text. A hypotext is a text that serves as the basis of another text, such as a novel that has a sequel or is parodied in another work. In such cases, the derivative text that refers to the earlier work is the hypertext.\nStructural relations between signs.\nThe signs in a sign system are connected through several structural relations, like the contrast between syntagmatic and paradigmatic relations. Syntagmatic relations govern how individual signs or sign elements can be combined to form larger expressions. For example, sentences are linear arrangements of words, and syntagmatic relations govern which words can be combined to produce grammatically correct sentences. Similarly, a dinner menu is a sequence of courses with syntagmatic relations governing their arrangement, like beginning with a starter, followed by a main course and a dessert. Some sign systems use non-linear arrangements, such as traffic signs combining the shape of a sign with the symbol it shows.\nParadigmatic relations are links between signs that belong to the same structural category. They specify which elements can occupy a particular position and can substitute for each other without breaking the system's rules. For example, in the sentence \"The man sleeps.\", the word \"man\" stands in paradigmatic relations to words like \"woman\", \"child\", and \"person\" because substituting them also results in a correct sentence. For the dinner menu, the same holds for the different options for the dessert, such as cake, ice cream, and fruit salad. In the case of traffic signs, there are paradigmatic relations between the shape options, such as triangle and circle. The meaning of the chosen paradigmatic option is influenced by the absent options, which form a background of meaningful alternatives. In natural language, these alternatives are typically related to specific word classes. For instance, when a particular word position in a sentence calls for a verb then the paradigmatic options consist of verbs.\nAnother form of semiotic analysis examines sign pairs consisting of opposites where two signs denote contrasting features and exclude each other, like the pairs good/bad, hot/cold, and new/old. Some contrasts involve a continuous scale with intermediate levels, like fast/slow, whereas others are polar oppositions without degrees in between, such as alive/dead. Early structuralist philosophy is associated with the idea that meaning arises primarily from binary oppositions. The semiotic square, proposed by Algirdas Greimas, offers a more fine-grained differentiation. It relates a sign, such as \"rich\", to three contrasting terms: its contradictory (\"not rich\"), its contrary (\"poor\"), and the contradictory of its contrary (\"not poor\").\nAnother structural feature is asymmetric sign pairs where one item is unmarked and the other marked. The unmarked sign is the generic and neutral expression often taken for granted, whereas the marked sign is specialized and denotes additional features. The unmarked term is more commonly used and is typically privileged as the default or norm. Examples are the pairs dog/bitch, day/night, he/she, and right/left. This asymmetry is of particular interest to the semiotic study of culture as a guide to implicit background assumptions and power relations. For example, patriarchal societies tend to use unmarked forms for masculine terms, while unmarked forms for feminine terms are more common in matriarchal societies.\nTropes.\nSemioticians study associative mechanisms through which a sign acquires alternative meanings by interacting with other signs. This change in meaning can occur in cases where the literal meaning of a sign is inadequate or absurd, leading to a shift toward a figurative meaning. For example, the term \"snake\" literally refers to a limbless reptile but has a different meaning in the sentence \"The professor is a snake.\"\nThe mechanisms through which this shift in meaning happens are called \"tropes\". Discussions of tropes sometimes focus on four master tropes as the basis of most others: metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, and irony. A metaphor is an analogy in which attributes from one entity are carried over to another, such as associating the snake-like attributes of being sneaky and cold-blooded with a professor. A metonymy is a way of referring to one object by naming another closely related thing, like speaking of a king as \"the crown\". Similarly, a synecdoche is a way of referring to one object by naming one of its parts, like speaking of one's car as \"my wheels\". The trope of irony works through dissimilarity, literally expressing the opposite of what is meant, such as remarking \"Great job!\" after a horrible failure.\nSemiotic tropes are primarily discussed in relation to linguistic sign systems, where they are also known as \"figures of speech\". However, their underlying mechanisms also affect non-linguistic sign systems. For example, an advertisement for an airline may juxtapose the landing of a plane with the tranquil touchdown of a swan as a pictorial metaphor for grace and reliability. Comics often rely on pictorial metonymies to express emotions, like a raised fist to stand for anger. In photography, close-ups can function as synecdoches by presenting the whole through a part. In film, one type of audiovisual irony presents a horrific visual scene accompanied by incongruously cheerful music.\nCodes.\nA code is a sign system used to communicate. It includes a set of signs, the meaning relations among them, and the rules for combining them to create and interpret messages. Digital codes rely on clear and precise distinctions of how signs are formed and combined, as in written language. They contrast with analog codes, which use continuous variations to convey meaning, such as seamless gradations of color in painting. Simple codes include only few basic elements and relations, as in the color code of traffic signals. Complex codes, like the English language, can encompass countless elements as well as syntactic and sociocultural norms involved in meaning-making. Conventional codes are human-made constructs, including aesthetic codes used in the creation of artworks, like music and painting. They contrast with natural codes, like DNA, which functions as a biochemical information system encoding hereditary information through nucleotide sequences.\nSemioticians analyze codes along several dimensions, such as the domain and context they operate in, the sensory channel they rely on, and the function they perform. Some codes focus on the precise expression of knowledge, such as mathematical formulas, while others govern cultural and behavioral norms, including conventions of politeness and ceremonial practices. A code can have domain-specific subcodes that refine its scope of meaning or regulate usage in particular settings. Codes and subcodes are not static frameworks but can evolve as new conventions or technologies emerge.\nCode also plays a central role in models of communication\u2014conceptual representations of the main components of communication. Many include the idea that a sender conveys a message through a channel to a receiver, who interprets it and may respond with feedback. Encoding is the process of expressing meaning in the form of a message using the system of a specific code. Decoding is the reverse process of interpreting the message to understand its meaning. In some cases, different codes can be used to express the same message. Similarly, messages can sometimes be translated from one code into another, such as transcribing a written text into Morse code.\nDiscourse is the social use of language or other codes, taking place at a specific moment in a particular context. Discourse analysis examines how meaning arises in a discourse, considering the communicators and their respective roles, as well as the influences of context and institutional backgrounds.\nSemioticians are also interested in how codes reflect and shape human perception of the world. By influencing perception, codes can affect behavior by making individuals aware of possible courses of action. The controversial Whorfian hypothesis suggests that language shapes thought by providing fundamental categories of understanding, with the potential consequence that speakers of different languages think differently.\nCore branches.\nGeneral semiotics studies the nature of signs and their operation within sign systems in the widest sense, independent of the domains to which they belong. It contrasts with applied semiotics, which examines signs in particular domains or from discipline-specific perspectives. An influential categorization, proposed by Morris, divides general semiotics into three branches: syntactics, semantics, and pragmatics.\nSyntactics studies formal relations between signs. It investigates how signs combine to form compound signs and which rules govern this process. For example, the rules of grammar in natural languages specify how words may be arranged to form sentences and how different arrangements influence meaning. As a result of the syntactic rules of the English language, the expression \"elephants are big\" is grammatically correct, whereas \"elephants big are\" is not. Syntactics is not limited to language and includes the study of non-linguistic compound signs, such as the arrangement of visual elements in geographic maps.\nSemantics studies the relation between signs and what they stand for, examining how signs refer to concrete things and abstract ideas. It typically focuses on the general meaning of a sign rather than its meaning in a particular context. Semantics addresses the meaning of both basic and compound signs. In the linguistic domain, it includes lexical semantics, which explores word meaning, and phrasal semantics, which studies sentence meaning. Other areas include animal semantics, which investigates, for example, how animal warning calls stand for predators.\nPragmatics studies the relation between signs and sign users. It examines how individuals produce and interpret signs in concrete contexts, applying syntactic insights into formal structures and semantic insights into general meaning to real-life situations. The pragmatic dimension of sign use in communication encompasses aspects such as social conventions and expectations, speaker intention, audience, and other contextual factors. For example, it depends on the concrete situation whether the expression \"she found a mole\" refers to the discovery of an animal, a skin mark, or a spy.\nVarious academic discussions address the relation between the three branches, such as their relative importance or hierarchy. Historically, syntactics and semantics have received more attention than pragmatics, particularly in the study of linguistic sign systems. One reason for this preferential treatment is the idea that sign usage is largely determined by what signs mean and how they can be combined. As a result, pragmatics has often been regarded as a secondary discipline, reserved for diverse problems that could not be adequately addressed from the perspectives of the other two disciplines. However, this marginal treatment of pragmatics is questioned in the contemporary discourse. Some proposals reverse the priority and see pragmatics as the primary discipline. One reason is the idea that syntactics and semantics are abstractions that cannot be scientifically studied on their own without examining actual sign use.\nApplications.\nBiology.\nWhile traditional semiotics focuses on human communication and culture, biosemiotics integrates this perspective with biology. It studies how living beings produce and interpret signs through channels such as vision, sound, movement, and chemical cues like smell. It does not restrict sign processes to conscious mental activities and explicitly includes nonintentional processes within its scope. Biosemiotics has branches dedicated to different types of organisms, such as zoosemiotics (animals), phytosemiotics (plants), bacteriosemiotics (bacteria), mycosemiotics (fungi), and protistosemiotics (protists). Anthroposemiotics, which addresses humans, is sometimes included in zoosemiotics or treated as a distinct branch.\nThe scope of biosemiotics covers semiotic activities on different levels of organization, ranging from cellular information processes to communication between distinct individuals. At the microlevel, there are sign activities within individual organisms. For example, genes encode information about hereditary traits, and diverse biological processes decode and activate this information. Similarly, hormones function as signaling molecules that control physiological functions by conveying information over long distances in the body. Biosemioticians also study how nerve cells communicate with each other and how neurotransmitters regulate this process. This topic is more closely examined by neurosemiotics, which investigates neural processes involved in sign interpretation and meaning-making.\nAt the macrolevel, there are sign processes between distinct organisms. They happen primarily between individuals of the same species as forms of cooperation or coordination. For example, birds use calls to attract mates, warn of predators, and maintain territorial boundaries. Similar semiotic processes also happen in the plant kingdom, such as airborne chemicals released by maple trees as a warning signal of herbivore attacks. In some cases, communication happens between members of distinct species. For instance, flowers use symmetrical shapes and vivid colors as signs to guide insects to nectar. Because of the pervasive nature of sign processes, biosemioticians typically argue that semiosis is not a rare phenomenon limited to specific biological niches but an intrinsic feature of life in general.\nCulture.\nSeveral branches of applied semiotics study cultural phenomena, which encompass systems of beliefs, values, norms, and practices shared in society. The semiotics of culture analyzes sign systems used in cultural practices by examining the meanings and ideological assumptions they embody. It integrates findings from fields such as psychology, anthropology, archaeology, linguistics, and neuroscience. It addresses both the fundamental characteristics of culture in general and the distinctive features of specific cultural formations, such as myths, aesthetics, cuisine, clothing, rituals, and artifacts. On a more general level, the semiotics of culture explores how culture differs from nature and which processes are responsible for the emergence of cultural formations. Social semiotics, a related field, studies sign practices as social phenomena in cultural contexts. It also investigates the social construction of reality. This includes semiotic practices that establish social meanings, categories, and norms shaping how people perceive the world and what they take for granted. Related fields include semiotic anthropology, which analyzes how sign systems reproduce, transmit, and change culture, and ethnosemiotics, which examines and compares semiotic phenomena in specific ethnic groups.\nSemioticians have been particularly interested in cultural myths, which they understand as structures of meaning that codify ideologies. In this sense, myths are not only a specific genre of literature but encompass widely shared views about human nature or the world. For example, pervasive ideological myths in Western culture include the idea of progress, which frames history as a linear series of improvements, and individualism, which conceives individuals as autonomous and self-reliant agents. Myths help people make sense of experience and guide behavior through common frameworks that conceptualize phenomena. Semiotic analysis sees myths as secondary sign systems that use other signs as vehicles to convey their ideas, often in the form of metaphors. For instance, the image of a child represents a child on the literal level. However, it can at the same time embody a myth of childhood associated with innocence and purity, motivating social arrangements associated with protection and parenting. Semioticians analyze this secondary level of signification across diverse media, such as literature, film, and advertising.\nIn specific areas of culture, semiotics examines the codes and conventions they employ and the meanings they produce. The semiotics of clothing studies clothing as a nonverbal sign system. Clothes are often implicitly interpreted as signs of the personality and social status of the wearer, covering features such as gender, age, and political beliefs. Different social occasions are associated with distinct dress codes, such as uniforms for sport, the military, and religious rituals. Similarly, the semiotics of food analyzes food items as bearers of cultural meanings. It explores how culinary practices reflect social organization and belief systems, like cooking methods, table etiquette, taboos against eating certain items, the cultural roles of fasting and feasting, and food symbolism. Research topics in popular internet culture include the codes and conventions of emojis and internet memes.\nLiterature.\nText semiotics studies the meanings of linguistic texts. It typically focuses on larger fragments of discourse, leaving the analysis of smaller units, like phonemes, to linguistics. Text semiotics plays a central role in literary criticism by exploring the codes, conventions, and tropes employed in literary texts. It situates these insights within broader cultural and semiotic frameworks.\nCentral schools of thought in text semiotics include structuralism and poststructuralism. Structuralism assumes that structural relations within sign systems are the primary source of meaning and understanding. It examines how texts employ these patterns, such as binary oppositions between good and evil or nature and culture, often with the goal of identifying ideological biases. Post-structuralism argues that sign systems are self-referential and cannot provide a stable representation of reality. The post-structuralist method of deconstruction aims to reveal contradictions and ambiguities within texts, for example, by showing how a text unintentionally undermines a binary opposition on which it relies. \nA historically influential tradition in text semiotics is hermeneutics\u2014the study of interpretation. Hermeneutics originates in the examination of mythological and religious texts. It was used by medieval Christian philosophers to decode the theological and moral doctrines of the Bible, for instance, by distinguishing literal from spiritual meanings and analyzing symbolic structures associated with allegories. Modern hermeneutics extends these practices to secular texts. The hermeneutic circle is a central concept in this field. It is the idea that understanding involves a circular movement in which preconceptions guide interpretation and interpretation shapes preconceptions. It is sometimes explained as an interplay where understanding the text as a whole depends on understanding its parts and vice versa. It is debated whether there is a single correct interpretation of every text or whether incompatible interpretations can be valid at the same time. \nNarratology is a branch of semiotics that studies narrative texts, such as tales and stories. It assumes that there is a universal narrative code of the different elements found in narratives, meaning that individual texts only express variations of the same underlying code. For example, according to Algirdas Julien Greimas's actantial model, these elements include a subject, such as the hero of the story, an entity that they desire, and an opponent or obstacle to their goal. Other research directions in text semiotics are stylistics and rhetorics, which compare different styles and explore how texts persuade.\nArts and media.\nSemiotics has diverse applications in the analysis of art and other media, ranging from film and music to advertising and video games. The field of media semiotics studies how meaning is produced, interpreted, and shared in media, such as newspapers, radio, television, and the internet. Understood in the widest sense, it encompasses all channels of everyday communication, including shop signs and posters.\nIn the visual arts, semioticians examine how meaning is created through aspects such as color, shape, texture, composition, and perspective. For example, colors can express different moods, emotions, and atmospheres, such as warm and soft colors in contrast to cold and harsh ones. Colors can also have culture-specific symbolic meanings, such as pink signifying femininity. Semioticians are further interested in the representational dimension of images, studying how they may act as icons that represent their motive through similarity. In photography, images may additionally function as indexical signs because of the causal connection between the depicted object and the photograph.\nMusical semiotics studies music as a meaning-making process involving signifiers and signifieds. There is substantial disagreement about the extent to which music is a semiotic activity. Some theoretical attempts treat sounds as individual signs and compositions as compound signs or messages, while others argue that sounds and compositions signify nothing beyond themselves. Another research approach investigates the cultural significance of music, for example, how musical styles, like heavy metal, reggae, and classical music, are associated with different subcultures and lifestyles.\nFilm semiotics analyzes films as sign activities, exploring how visual and auditory codes interact. Some theorists compare films to language, arguing that individual shots act as words and that montages, which combine several shots, correspond to sentences. A key difference to many other forms of language is that film involves asymmetrical communication since there is usually no direct way for spectators to respond to messages. The semiotics of architecture, another field, examines how buildings communicate meaning, including their practical functions, historical heritage, and social significance.\nThe semiotics of advertising studies how advertisements use and combine signs to influence consumers. Advertisements typically combine linguistic and non-linguistic codes. For instance, print ads typically use language for the brand name and verbal commentary, while visual elements convey non-verbal messages to the target audience. In many cases, the core message, related to the economic reality of selling a product, is not stated explicitly. Instead, an indirect message is used to make the product appealing.\nComputer games integrate elements from many other media and combine them with an interactive dimension. They include diverse sign elements, for example, to explain how to interact with the virtual world, set goals, provide feedback, and establish a narrative.\nCognition.\nCognitive semiotics is an interdisciplinary field that examines how mental processes contribute to meaning-making. It integrates insights of diverse disciplines, covering semiotics, cognitive science, linguistics, anthropology, psychology, and philosophy. Cognitive semioticians study sign activity from complementary perspectives: the subjective first-person perspective, the intersubjective second-person perspective, and the objective third-person perspective. While acknowledging the validity of each perspective in its respective area, the field privileges first-person and second-person methods as offering more direct access to the mental dimension of meaning. For example, it relies on the phenomenological description to analyze how sign processes shape experience. By examining how meaning operates in the mind, it contrasts with certain aspects of biosemiotics that address sign processes without mental activity, like in genetics. \nCognitive semioticians typically understand mind and cognition in terms of practical engagement with the world rather than theoretical attempts to model or depict it. They argue that meaning includes representation as one way of engaging with the world, but is not limited to it. Their primary focus is on non-representational forms of meaning, such as habits, values, and other ways how individuals attune to their environment. From this perspective, sign structures are understood as processes that shape habits and dispositions to act in different circumstances, emphasizing that meaning is a dynamic process rather than a static product. The theory of finite semiotics explains semiosis as an effect of the finite nature of the human mind that occurs as an individual passes from one cognitive state to another.\nOthers.\nIn the field of non-verbal communication, semioticians investigate the exchange of information without linguistic sign systems. For example, body language includes signifying practices like raising a thumb and other gestures, as well as facial expressions like laughing and frowning. Other types of non-verbal communication encompass touching behavior, like shaking hands or kissing, and the use of personal space, such as the distance between speakers to express their degree of familiarity. Paralanguage encompasses non-verbal elements of linguistic messages. For instance, pitch and loudness in a conversation can express emotion or emphasis without stating them explicitly.\nSemiotics has various applications in psychoanalysis. Sigmund Freud proposed a theory of dream interpretation to understand and resolve psychological conflicts. He argued that dream elements act as symbols that stand for unconscious desires and fears. For example, dreams of losing a tooth can signify castration or fear of impotence. Semiotics also plays a central role in the psychoanalytic theory of Jacques Lacan, who argued that the unconscious is structured like a language.\nIn the field of computing, semiotics has been used to describe programming languages and analyze human\u2013computer interaction. There are also attempts to develop formal theories of semiotics, allowing computational processes to perform semiotic analyses. Cybersemiotics, another approach, combines biosemiotics with cybernetics to provide a unified framework of semiotic processes across biological, social, and technological domains.\nEdusemiotics is a research movement that conceptualizes semiotic activity as the foundation of educational theory. For instance, it understands teaching and learning as sign processes. Semioethics is a critical approach that examines the ethical dimension of sign activities. It seeks to diagnose problems that arise in the context of global communication. Medical semiotics studies how disease symptoms, such as pain, dizziness, and fever, indicate medical conditions. Legal semiotics investigates sign activities in legal practice, including the interpretation of evidence, testimony, and legal texts.\nMethods.\nSemioticians use diverse methods to analyze and compare signs and sign systems. Different domains of signs and perspectives of inquiry typically call for distinct techniques depending on the forms of representation and modes of meaning-making under study. As a result, there is no universally adopted methodology but only an interdisciplinary, loosely connected set of approaches. Within a given domain, semioticians typically seek to determine what meaning is produced, why it emerges the way it does, and how it is encoded.\nStructural analysis examines the structural framework of texts and sign systems, exploring the syntagmatic and paradigmatic relations underlying signification. The commutation test is an influential tool for structural analysis. It explores how the meanings of linguistic and non-linguistic texts are shaped by their components and what roles specific signs play in this process. It proceeds by changing certain elements of a text, either actually or as a thought experiment, and assesses whether or how this change affects the overall meaning. For example, in the analysis of an advertisement, a semiotician may probe whether the overall message changes if a woman is shown using the product instead of a man. If it does then gender is a signifying element. The way how the overall message changes provides insights into the semiotic role of the changed aspect. The commutation test can be applied to a wide range of elements or features, such as shape, size, color, camera angle, typeface, age, class, and ethnicity. Instead of replacing one element with another, other versions of the commutation test add or remove elements to explore, for instance, what draws attention by its absence or what is taken for granted.\nIn the study of cultural sign systems, semioticians often focus on hidden meanings and connotations, such as ideological messages and power dynamics that influence meaning-making without being immediately apparent to observers. This dimension can be studied in diverse ways, such as comparing marked and unmarked terms to reveal how cultural norms privilege certain meanings and marginalize others. Critical discourse analysis has a similar goal, seeking to understand how texts and social reality shape each other. It is particularly interested in how ideologies and power relations are reproduced in discourse, for example, by analyzing how political actors depict immigrants as threats to promote restrictive immigration policies.\nAnother approach to semiotics focuses on the historical dimension of sign systems and semiotic practices. It examines how they came into existence and evolved, studying how the relevant codes and media developed and how new conventions and genres emerged. The historical inquiry also considers the effects of technological developments, for instance, by tracing how the invention of the printing press and the internet have shaped the way people engage with written texts.\nAlthough qualitative investigation is the dominant approach in semiotics, some researchers also use quantitative methods. For example, many forms of content analysis examine objective patterns found in an individual document or an entire discourse and employ statistical analysis to discover systematic patterns in sign usage. Applied to the news coverage of a violent incident, a content analyst may gather statistical information about how often the perpetrators are described as \"rebels\" rather than \"terrorists\". Quantitative data on its own is usually not sufficient to explain complex semiotic processes, which is why content analysis is typically combined with other approaches.\nIn applied semiotics, researchers often tailor their approach to the specific area of signs under investigation. For instance, biosemioticians may adapt concepts intended for linguistic analysis to biological codes like DNA. In some cases, this requires conceptual modifications, for example, when terms like \"interpretation\" are applied to sign processes without a conscious subject.\nHistory.\nThe study of signs has its origin in antiquity. Early approaches examined concrete patterns that indicate underlying conditions or future outcomes, such as medical diagnosis and divination. Some Mesopotamian tablets from the 3rd millennium BCE document this practice, such as the interpretation of the moon's visibility as a sign of an impending drought. In ancient Greek thought, Hippocrates (460\u2013377 BCE) and later Galen of Pergamum (c.\u2009129\u2013216 CE) investigated medical signs as indications of underlying diseases, establishing \"semeiosis\" or symptomatology as a branch of medicine. In philosophy, Plato (427\u2013347 BCE) explored whether the relation between linguistic signs and their referents is natural or conventional. His student Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) distinguished verbal from nonverbal signs. He argued that verbal signs represent mental states, which refer to external things, while nonverbal signs guide inference to expand knowledge. Starting in the 3rd century BCE, the Stoics defended a triadic model of signs, understanding sign vehicle and referent as material objects linked through nonmaterial meaning. In the same period, the Epicureans proposed a dyadic model, emphasizing a direct connection between sign vehicle and referent without meaning as a separate component to link them. Philodemus (c.\u2009110\u201340 BCE) provided a detailed overview of discussions about the Epicurean theory of signs, such as whether signs function as inferences from the known to the unknown.\nIn ancient India, various schools of Hinduism examined semiotic phenomena. Nyaya studied the relations between names, things, and knowledge, while M\u012bm\u0101\u1e43s\u0101 addressed the connection between word meaning and sentence meaning. The philosopher Bhart\u1e5bhari (4th\u20135th century CE) developed and compared theories of meaning, arguing that sentences are the primary bearers of meaning. He asserted that cognition depends on linguistic categorization, for example, that names make it possible to individuate and perceive distinct objects. Semiotic thought is also present in Buddhist philosophy. The Mahayana-sutra-alamkara-karika, a text from the 4th century CE, explored the spiritual role of semiosis, suggesting that the soteriological goal is to transform cognition in such a way that semiotic activity ceases. In ancient China, Mohism understood sign use as the practical skill of drawing distinctions and argued that public, intersubjective standards ground meaning. The School of Names explored the relation between names and things. They practiced a method of public disputation, for example, to decide whether two names refer to the same thing or to different things.\nAs a forerunner of semiotics in the medieval period, Augustine (354\u2013430) drew on Stoic, Epicurean, and Christian ideas to develop one of the first systematic theories of signs. He examined the relations between signs, meanings, and interpreters. Augustine's theory included non-linguistic signs based on the distinction between natural and conventional signs. Boethius (480\u2013528) analyzed sign activity as a chain of signification: writing refers to speech, speech expresses mental concepts, and mental concepts represent external things. Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142) studied non-linguistic sign processes, such as images and conventional gestures. The most detailed medieval account of signs was proposed by Roger Bacon (c.\u20091214\u20131293), who understood signs as triadic relations between sign vehicle, represented thing, and interpreter. He developed a complex classification that distinguishes between natural signs and signs directed by the soul, with several subtypes in each category. The Modist grammarians proposed that all languages share a universal grammar that reflects the shared structure of modes of being, understanding, and signifying. William of Sherwood (c.\u20091200\u20131272), Peter of Spain (c.\u20091210\u20131277), and William of Ockham (c.\u20091285\u20131349) formulated contextual theories of meaning and reference. In the Islamic world, philosophers explored semiotic topics from a religious perspective. They addressed the problem of how to interpret signs of Allah in the Quran and whether to describe Allah by affirming or negating attributes. Influential theorists were al-Kindi, al-Farabi, and Avicenna.\nIn the early modern period, John Poinsot (1589\u20131644) integrated ideas of Thomas Aquinas (1225\u20131274) to investigate how signs mediate between objective reality and subjective experience. The Port-Royal school, another tradition, formulated a mind-based theory of signs. It argued that signs consist of two ideas: one for the representing entity and one for the represented entity. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646\u20131716) understood signs as visible marks that stand for ideas. He saw them as indispensable tools of thought, enabling operations on complex semantic concepts without apprehending them in full. John Locke (1632\u20131704) proposed a general science or doctrine of signs to examine the link between knowledge and representation. He distinguished two types of signs: ideas are signs of things, and words are signs of ideas, effectively functioning as signs of signs. Christian Wolff (1679\u20131754) and Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728\u20131777) both developed theories of signs while focusing on how knowledge depends on sign activity.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, semiotics emerged as a distinct field of inquiry. The twin origins of this process lie in the works of the philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839\u20131914) and the linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857\u20131913), who separately articulated the foundational principles of the discipline. Peirce developed a triadic model, understanding signs as relations that can apply to any sign vehicle that is interpreted to stand for something else. He distinguished different types of relations between sign vehicle and referent and used this distinction to classify signs as indices, icons, and symbols. As a pragmatist, Peirce focused on the effects of sign processes while emphasizing the dynamic nature of meaning. Charles W. Morris (1901\u20131979) popularized Peircean semiotics and integrated it with behaviorism. He conceptualized syntactics, semantics, and pragmatics as the main branches of the field.\nSaussure proposed a dyadic model that understands signs as relations in the mind between a sensible form and a concept. He emphasized the arbitrary nature of this relation and explored how signs form sign systems, such as language. Saussure distinguished synchronic or static from diachronic or historical aspects of language. He formulated the foundations of structuralism to investigate how differences between signs, such as binary oppositions, are the primary mechanism of meaning. Based on Saussure's structuralism, Louis Hjelmslev (1899\u20131965) developed glossematics, which divides language into basic units defined only by the formal functions they play in a sign system. Focused on articulating a general semiotics, Algirdas Julien Greimas (1917\u20131992) expanded glossematics and applied it to narratology, aiming to discern a universal code underlying narrative texts. Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss (1908\u20132009) employed the principles of structural semiotics to engage in ethnology, analyzing myths and cultural practices as sign systems that reveal how different cultures make sense of the world. Roland Barthes (1915\u20131980) used the theories of Saussure and Hjelmslev to study literature and media, covering signifying processes in myths, theology, pictures, advertising, and fashion. In these fields, he often examined how connotations encode subtle ideological messages.\nUsing the phenomenological method, Edmund Husserl (1859\u20131938) studied the nature of signs and meaning through the description of experience. He contrasted the direct awareness of objects in perception with the indirect awareness of objects that refer to something other than themselves. In psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud (1856\u20131939) interpreted dream elements as signs of unconscious desires. Jacques Lacan (1901\u20131981) expanded Freud's ideas, analyzing the structure of the unconscious as a sign system. Drawing on psychoanalysis and feminism, Julia Kristeva (1941\u2013present) has explored the problem of intertextuality and conceptualized the semiotic and the symbolic as two contrasting dimensions of signification.\nJakob von Uexk\u00fcll (1864\u20131944) pioneered the study of animal and plant semiosis. He understood the interaction between organism and environment as a process of sign exchange in which individuals respond to cues that are relevant to their species-specific needs and capacities. Uexk\u00fcll argued that different species inhabit distinct perceptual worlds based on their selective interpretation of cues. Thomas A. Sebeok (1920\u20132001) relied on Uexk\u00fcll's ideas to establish biosemiotics as a branch of semiotics, covering sign processes within and between organisms, such as animals, plants, and fungi.\nRoman Jakobson (1896\u20131982) contributed to various schools of thought, including Russian formalism, the Prague School, and the Copenhagen School. Adopting structuralism, he reinterpreted Saussure's dyadic model and later incorporated Peircean ideas, such as an emphasis on contextual factors. Yuri Lotman (1922\u20131993) engaged in cultural semiotics, analyzing cultural formations in terms of models that showcase distinctive features of their origin culture. Umberto Eco (1932\u20132016) understood semiotics as the study of communicative processes in culture, focusing the field on conventional codes. He explored the idea of unlimited semiosis, according to which the interpretation of signs is an open-ended process leading to further signs. Jacques Derrida (1930\u20132004) was an influential proponent of poststructuralism. He developed the method of deconstruction to discover internal ambiguities and contradictions within texts. The second half of the 20th century saw the emergence of many journals dedicated to semiotics, while international institutions, such as the International Association for Semiotic Studies, were established.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29302", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29302", "title": "Soviet aircraft carrier Varyag", "text": ""}
{"id": "29305", "revid": "49765849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29305", "title": "Sojourner Truth", "text": "African-American activist (1797\u20131883)\nSojourner Truth (; born Isabella Bomefree; c.\u20091797\u00a0\u2013 November 26, 1883) was an American abolitionist and activist for African-American civil rights, women's rights, and alcohol temperance. Truth was born into slavery in Swartekill, New York, but escaped with her infant daughter to freedom in 1826. After going to court to recover her son in 1828, she became the first black woman to win such a case against a white man.\nShe gave herself the name Sojourner Truth in 1843 after she became convinced that God had called her to leave the city and go into the countryside \"testifying to the hope that was in her.\" Her best-known speech was delivered extemporaneously, in 1851, at the Ohio Women's Convention in Akron, Ohio. The speech became widely known during the Civil War by the title \"Ain't I a Woman?\", a variation of the original speech that was published in 1863 as being spoken in a stereotypical Black dialect, then more commonly spoken in the South. Sojourner Truth, however, grew up speaking Dutch as her first language.\nDuring the Civil War, Truth helped recruit Black men into the Union army; after the war, she tried unsuccessfully to secure land grants from the federal government for formerly enslaved people (summarized as the promise of \"forty acres and a mule\"). She continued to fight on behalf of women and African Americans until her death. As her biographer Nell Irvin Painter wrote, \"At a time when most Americans thought of slaves as male and women as white, Truth embodied a fact that still bears repeating: Among the blacks are women; among the women, there are blacks.\"\nA memorial bust of Truth was unveiled in 2009 in Emancipation Hall in the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center. She is the first African American woman to have a statue in the Capitol building. In 2014, Truth was included in \"Smithsonian\" magazine's list of the \"100 Most Significant Americans of All Time\".\nEarly years.\nSojourner Truth once estimated that she was born between 1797 and 1800. Truth was one of the 10 or 12 children born to James and Elizabeth Bomefree (later also given as Baumfree). Her father was a slave captured from what became Ghana, while her mother \u2013 nicknamed \"Mau-Mau Bet\" \u2013 was the daughter of slaves captured from the area of Guinea. Her father was nicknamed \"Bomefree\" (which, according to Truth, was Dutch for \"tree\"; compare boom \"boom\", \"tree\") due to his tall stature. Colonel Hardenbergh bought James and Elizabeth Bomefree from slave traders and kept their family at his estate in a big hilly area called by the Dutch name Swartekill (just north of modern Rifton), in the town of Esopus, New York, north of New York City. When she was an infant, her five year old brother and three year old sister were sold to a different estate. Her family would recount memories of the children sold into slavery, and her mother taught the children to pray. Her first language was Dutch, and she continued to speak with a Dutch accent for the rest of her life. Charles Hardenbergh inherited his father's estate and continued to own slaves as a part of that estate's property.\nWhen Charles Hardenbergh died in 1806, nine-year-old Truth (known as Belle), was sold at an auction with a flock of sheep for $100 (~$ in 2024) to John Neely, near Kingston, New York. Until that time, Truth spoke only Dutch, and after learning English, she spoke with a Dutch accent and not a stereotypical dialect. She later described Neely as cruel and harsh, relating how he beat her daily and once even with a bundle of rods. In 1808 Neely sold her for $105 (~$ in 2024) to tavern keeper Martinus Schryver of Port Ewen, New York, who owned her for 18 months. Schryver then sold Truth in 1810 to John Dumont of West Park, New York.\nDumont raped her repeatedly, and considerable tension existed between Truth and Dumont's wife, Elizabeth Waring Dumont, who harassed her and made her life more difficult. Around 1815, Truth met and fell in love with a slave named Robert from a neighboring farm. Robert's owner (Charles Catton, Jr., a landscape painter) forbade their relationship; he did not want the slaves he owned to have children with people he did not own because he would not own the children. One day Robert sneaked over to see Truth. When Catton and his son found him, they savagely beat Robert until Dumont finally intervened. Truth never saw Robert again after that day and he died a few years later. The experience haunted Truth throughout her life. Truth eventually married an older enslaved man named Thomas. She bore five children: James, her firstborn, who died in childhood; Diana (1815), the result of a rape by John Dumont; and Peter (1821), Elizabeth (1825), and Sophia (c.\u20091826), all born after she and Thomas united.\nFreedom.\nIn 1799, the State of New York began to legislate the abolition of slavery, although the process of emancipating slaves in New York was not complete until July 4, 1827. Dumont had promised to grant Truth her freedom a year before the state emancipation, \"if she would do well and be faithful\". However, he changed his mind, claiming a hand injury had made her less productive. She was infuriated but continued working, spinning of wool, to satisfy her sense of obligation to him.\nLate in 1826, Truth escaped to freedom with her infant daughter, Sophia. She had to leave her other children behind because they were not legally freed in the emancipation order until they had served as bound servants into their twenties. She later said, \"I did not run off, for I thought that wicked, but I walked off, believing that to be all right.\"\nShe found her way to the home of Isaac and Maria Van Wagenen in New Paltz, who took her and her baby in. Isaac offered to buy her services for the remainder of the year (until the state's emancipation took effect), which Dumont accepted for $20. She lived there until the New York State Emancipation Act was approved a year later.\nTruth learned that her son Peter, then five years old, had been sold by Dumont and then illegally resold to an owner in Alabama. With the help of the Van Wagenens, she took the issue to the New York Supreme Court. Using the name Isabella van Wagenen, she filed a suit against Peter's new owner Solomon Gedney. In 1828, after months of legal proceedings, she got back her son, who had been abused by his owners. Truth became one of the first black women to go to court against a white man and win the case. The court documents related to this lawsuit were rediscovered by the staff at the New York State Archives c.\u20092022.\nIn 1827, she became a Christian and participated in the founding of the Methodist church of Kingston, New York.\nIn 1829, she moved to New York City and joined the John Street Methodist Church (Zion African Methodist Episcopal Church).\nIn 1833, she was hired by Robert Matthews, also known as the Prophet Matthias, leader of a sect who identified with Judaism, went to work for him as a housekeeper in the communal settlement, and became a member of the group. In 1834, Matthews and Truth were charged with the murder of Elijah Pierson, but were acquitted due to lack of evidence and Truth's presentation of several letters confirming her reliability as a servant. The trial then focused on the reported beating of Matthews' daughter, of which he was found guilty and sentenced to three months and an additional thirty days for contempt of court. This event prompted Truth to leave the sect in 1835. Afterwards, she retired to New York City until 1843.\nIn 1839, Truth's son Peter took a job on a whaling ship called the \"Zone of Nantucket\". From 1840 to 1841, she received three letters from him, though in his third letter he told her he had sent five. Peter said he also never received any of her letters. When the ship returned to port in 1842, Peter was not on board and Truth never heard from him again.\nThe result of freedom.\nThe year 1843 was a turning point for her. On June 1, Pentecost Sunday, she changed her name to Sojourner Truth. She chose the name because she heard the Spirit of God calling on her to preach the truth. She told her friends: \"The Spirit calls me, and I must go\", and left to make her way traveling and preaching about the abolition of slavery. Taking along only a few possessions in a pillowcase, she traveled north, working her way up through the Connecticut River Valley, towards Massachusetts.\nAt that time, Truth began attending Millerite Adventist camp meetings. Millerites followed the teachings of William Miller of New York, who preached that Jesus would appear in 1843\u20131844, bringing about the end of the world. Many in the Millerite community greatly appreciated Truth's preaching and singing, and she drew large crowds when she spoke. Like many others disappointed when the anticipated second coming did not arrive, Truth distanced herself from her Millerite friends for a time.\nIn 1844, she joined the Northampton Association of Education and Industry in Florence, Massachusetts. Founded by abolitionists, the organization supported women's rights and religious tolerance as well as pacifism. There were, in its four-and-a-half-year history, a total of 240 members, though no more than 120 at any one time. They lived on , raising livestock, running a sawmill, a gristmill, and a silk factory. Truth lived and worked in the community and oversaw the laundry, supervising both men and women. While there, Truth met William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and David Ruggles. Encouraged by the community, Truth delivered her first anti-slavery speech that year.\nIn 1845, she joined the household of George Benson, the brother-in-law of William Lloyd Garrison. In 1846, the Northampton Association of Education and Industry disbanded, unable to support itself. In 1849, she visited John Dumont before he moved west.\nTruth started dictating her memoirs to her friend Olive Gilbert and in 1850 William Lloyd Garrison privately published her book, \"The Narrative of Sojourner Truth: a Northern Slave\". That same year, she purchased a home in Florence for $300 and spoke at the first National Women's Rights Convention in Worcester, Massachusetts. In 1854, with proceeds from sales of the narrative and \"cartes-de-visite\" captioned, \"I sell the shadow to support the substance\", she paid off the mortgage held by her friend from the community, Samuel L. Hill.\n\"Ain't I a Woman?\".\nIn 1851, Truth joined George Thompson, an abolitionist and speaker, on a lecture tour through central and western New York State. In May, she attended the Ohio Women's Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio, where she delivered her famous extemporaneous speech on women's rights, later known as \"Ain't I a Woman?\". Her speech demanded equal human rights for all women. She also spoke as a former enslaved woman, combining calls for abolitionism with women's rights, and drawing from her strength as a laborer to make her equal rights claims.\nThe convention was organized by Hannah Tracy and Frances Dana Barker Gage, who both were present when Truth spoke. Different versions of Truth's words have been recorded, with the first one published a month later in the \"Anti-Slavery Bugle\" by Rev. Marius Robinson, the newspaper owner and editor who was in the audience. Robinson's recounting of the speech included no instance of the question \"Ain't I a Woman?\", nor did any of the other newspapers reporting of her speech at the time. Twelve years later, in May 1863, Gage published another, very different, version. In it, Truth's speech pattern appeared to have characteristics of Black slaves located in the southern United States, and the speech was vastly different from the one Robinson had reported. Gage's version of the speech became the most widely circulated version, and is known as \"Ain't I a Woman?\" because that question was repeated four times. It is highly unlikely that Truth's own speech pattern was like this, as she was born and raised in New York, and she spoke only upper New York State low-Dutch until she was nine years old.\nIn the version recorded by Rev. Marius Robinson, Truth said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I want to say a few words about this matter. I am a woman's rights. [\"sic\"] I have as much muscle as any man, and can do as much work as any man. I have plowed and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed, and can any man do more than that? I have heard much about the sexes being equal. I can carry as much as any man, and can eat as much too, if I can get it. I am as strong as any man that is now. As for intellect, all I can say is, if a woman have a pint, and a man a quart \u2013 why can't she have her little pint full? You need not be afraid to give us our rights for fear we will take too much, \u2013 for we can't take more than our pint'll hold. The poor men seems to be all in confusion, and don't know what to do. Why children, if you have woman's rights, give it to her and you will feel better. You will have your own rights, and they won't be so much trouble. I can't read, but I can hear. I have heard the Bible and have learned that Eve caused man to sin. Well, if woman upset the world, do give her a chance to set it right side up again. The Lady has spoken about Jesus, how he never spurned woman from him, and she was right. When Lazarus died, Mary and Martha came to him with faith and love and besought him to raise their brother. And Jesus wept and Lazarus came forth. And how came Jesus into the world? Through God who created him and the woman who bore him. Man, where was your part? But the women are coming up blessed be God and a few of the men are coming up with them. But man is in a tight place, the poor slave is on him, woman is coming on him, he is surely between a hawk and a buzzard.\nIn contrast to Robinson's report, Gage's 1863 version included Truth saying her 13 children were sold away from her into slavery. Truth is widely believed to have had five children, with one sold away, and was never known to boast more children. Gage's 1863 recollection of the convention conflicts with her own report directly after the convention: Gage wrote in 1851 that Akron in general and the press, in particular, were largely friendly to the woman's rights convention, but in 1863 she wrote that the convention leaders were fearful of the \"mobbish\" opponents. Other eyewitness reports of Truth's speech told a calm story, one where all faces were \"beaming with joyous gladness\" at the session where Truth spoke; that not \"one discordant note\" interrupted the harmony of the proceedings. In contemporary reports, Truth was warmly received by the convention-goers, the majority of whom were long-standing abolitionists, friendly to progressive ideas of race and civil rights. In Gage's 1863 version, Truth was met with hisses, with voices calling to prevent her from speaking. Other interracial gatherings of black and white abolitionist women had in fact been met with violence, including the burning of Pennsylvania Hall.\nAccording to Frances Gage's recount in 1863, Truth argued, \"That man over there says that women need to be helped into carriages, and lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody helps\u00a0\"me\"\u00a0any best place.\u00a0\"And ain't I a woman?\"\" Truth's \"Ain't I a Woman\" showed the lack of recognition that black women received during this time and whose lack of recognition will continue to be seen long after her time. \"Black women, of course, were virtually invisible within the protracted campaign for woman suffrage\", wrote Angela Davis, supporting Truth's argument that nobody gives her \"any best place\"; and not just her, but black women in general.\nOver the next 10 years, Truth spoke before dozens, perhaps hundreds, of audiences. From 1851 to 1853, Truth worked with Marius Robinson, the editor of the Ohio \"Anti-Slavery Bugle\", and traveled around that state speaking. In 1853, she spoke at a suffragist \"mob convention\" at the Broadway Tabernacle in New York City; that year she also met Harriet Beecher Stowe. In 1856, she traveled to Battle Creek, Michigan, to speak to a group called the Friends of Human Progress.\nOther speeches.\nNorthampton Camp Meeting \u2013 1844, Northampton, Massachusetts: At a camp meeting where she was participating as an itinerant preacher, a band of \"wild young men\" disrupted the camp meeting, refused to leave, and threatened to burn down the tents. Truth caught the sense of fear pervading the worshipers and hid behind a trunk in her tent, thinking that since she was the only black person present, the mob would attack her first. However, she reasoned with herself and resolved to do something: as the noise of the mob increased and a female preacher was \"trembling on the preachers' stand\", Truth went to a small hill and began to sing \"in her most fervid manner, with all the strength of her most powerful voice, the hymn on the resurrection of Christ\". Her song, \"It was Early in the Morning\", gathered the rioters to her and quieted them. They urged her to sing, preach, and pray for their entertainment. After singing songs and preaching for about an hour, Truth bargained with them to leave after one final song. The mob agreed and left the camp meeting.\nAbolitionist Convention \u2013 1840s, Boston, Massachusetts: William Lloyd Garrison invited Sojourner Truth to give a speech at an annual antislavery convention. Wendell Phillips was supposed to speak after her, which made her nervous since he was known as such a good orator. So Truth sang a song, \"I Am Pleading for My people\", which was her own original composition sung to the tune of \"Auld Lang Syne\".\nMob Convention \u2013 September 7, 1853: At the convention, young men greeted her with \"a perfect storm\", hissing and groaning. In response, Truth said, \"You may hiss as much as you please, but women will get their rights anyway. You can't stop us, neither\". Sojourner, like other public speakers, often adapted her speeches to how the audience was responding to her. In her speech, Sojourner speaks out for women's rights. She incorporates religious references in her speech, particularly the story of Esther. She then goes on to say that, just as women in scripture, women today are fighting for their rights. Moreover, Sojourner scolds the crowd for all their hissing and rude behavior, reminding them that God says to \"Honor thy father and thy mother\".\nAmerican Equal Rights Association \u2013 May 9\u201310, 1867: Her speech was addressed to the American Equal Rights Association, and divided into three sessions. Sojourner was received with loud cheers instead of hisses, now that she had a better-formed reputation established. \"The Call\" had advertised her name as one of the main convention speakers. For the first part of her speech, she spoke mainly about the rights of black women. Sojourner argued that because the push for equal rights had led to black men winning new rights, now was the best time to give black women the rights they deserve too. Throughout her speech she kept stressing that \"we should keep things going while things are stirring\" and fears that once the fight for colored rights settles down, it would take a long time to warm people back up to the idea of colored women's having equal rights.\nIn the second sessions of Sojourner's speech, she used a story from the Bible to help strengthen her argument for equal rights for women. She ended her argument by accusing men of being self-centered, saying: \"Man is so selfish that he has got women's rights and his own too, and yet he won't give women their rights. He keeps them all to himself.\" For the final session of Sojourner's speech, the center of her attention was mainly on women's right to vote. Sojourner told her audience that she owned her own house, as did other women, and must, therefore, pay taxes. Nevertheless, they were still unable to vote because they were women. Black women who were enslaved were made to do hard manual work, such as building roads. Sojourner argues that if these women were able to perform such tasks, then they should be allowed to vote because surely voting is easier than building roads.\nEighth Anniversary of Negro Freedom \u2013 New Year's Day, 1871: On this occasion the Boston papers related that \"...seldom is there an occasion of more attraction or greater general interest. Every available space of sitting and standing room was crowded\". She starts off her speech by giving a little background about her own life. Sojourner recounts how her mother told her to pray to God that she may have good masters and mistresses. She goes on to retell how her masters were not good to her, about how she was whipped for not understanding English, and how she would question God why he had not made her masters be good to her. Sojourner admits to the audience that she had once hated white people, but she says once she met her final master, Jesus, she was filled with love for everyone. Once enslaved folks were emancipated, she tells the crowd she knew her prayers had been answered.\nThat last part of Sojourner's speech brings in her main focus. Some freed enslaved people were living on government aid at that time, paid for by taxpayers. Sojourner announces that this is not any better for those colored people than it is for the members of her audience. She then proposes that black people are given their own land. Because a portion of the South's population contained rebels that were unhappy with the abolishment of slavery, that region of the United States was not well suited for colored people. She goes on to suggest that colored people be given land out west to build homes and prosper on.\nSecond Annual Convention of the American Woman Suffrage Association \u2013 Boston, 1871: In a brief speech, Truth argued that women's rights were essential, not only to their own well-being, but \"for the benefit of the whole creation, not only the women, but all the men on the face of the earth, for they were the mother of them\".\nOn a mission.\nTruth dedicated her life to fighting for a more equal society for African Americans and for women, including abolition, voting rights, and property rights. She was at the vanguard of efforts to address intersecting social justice issues. As historian Martha Jones wrote, \"[w]hen Black women like Truth spoke of rights, they mixed their ideas with challenges to slavery and to racism. Truth told her own stories, ones that suggested that a women's movement might take another direction, one that championed the broad interests of all humanity.\"\nTruth\u00a0\u2013 along with Stephen Symonds Foster and Abby Kelley Foster, Jonathan Walker, Marius Robinson, and Sallie Holley\u00a0\u2013 reorganized the Michigan Anti-Slavery Society in 1853 in Adrian, Michigan. The state society was founded in 1836 in Ann Arbor, Michigan.\nIn 1856, Truth bought a neighboring lot in Northampton, but she did not keep the new property for long. On September 3, 1857, she sold all her possessions, new and old, to Daniel Ives and moved to Battle Creek, Michigan, where she rejoined former members of the Millerite movement who had formed the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Antislavery movements had begun early in Michigan and Ohio. Here, she also joined the nucleus of the Michigan abolitionists, the Progressive Friends, some who she had already met at national conventions. From 1857 to 1867 Truth lived in the village of Harmonia, Michigan, a Spiritualist utopia. She then moved into nearby Battle Creek, Michigan, living at her home on 38 College St. until her death in 1883. According to the 1860 census, her household in Harmonia included her daughter, Elizabeth Banks (age 35), and her grandsons James Caldwell (misspelled as \"Colvin\"; age 16) and Sammy Banks (age 8).\nTruth helped recruit black men into the Union army during the Civil War. Her grandson, James Caldwell, enlisted in the 54th Massachusetts Regiment. In 1864, Truth was employed by the National Freedman's Relief Association in Washington, D.C., where she worked diligently to improve conditions for African-Americans. In October of that year, she was invited to the White House by President Abraham Lincoln. In 1865, while working at the Freedman's Hospital in Washington, Truth rode in the streetcars to help force their desegregation.\nTruth is credited with writing a song, \"\", for the 1st Michigan Colored Regiment; it was said to be composed during the war and sung by her in Detroit and Washington, D.C. It is sung to the tune of \"John Brown's Body\" or \"The Battle Hymn of the Republic\". Although Truth claimed to have written the words, it has been disputed (see \"Marching Song of the First Arkansas\").\nIn 1867, Truth moved from Harmonia to Battle Creek. In 1868, she traveled to western New York and visited with Amy Post, and continued traveling all over the East Coast. At a speaking engagement in Florence, Massachusetts, after she had just returned from a very tiring trip, when Truth was called upon to speak she stood up and said, \"Children, I have come here like the rest of you, to hear what I have to say.\"\nIn 1870, Truth tried to secure land grants from the federal government to former enslaved people, a project she pursued for seven years without success. While in Washington, D.C., she had a meeting with President Ulysses S. Grant in the White House. In 1872, she returned to Battle Creek, became active in Grant's presidential re-election campaign, and even tried to vote on Election Day, but was turned away at the polling place.\nTruth spoke about abolition, women's rights, prison reform, and preached to the Michigan Legislature against capital punishment. Not everyone welcomed her preaching and lectures, but she had many friends and staunch support among many influential people at the time, including Amy Post, Parker Pillsbury, Frances Gage, Wendell Phillips, William Lloyd Garrison, Laura Smith Haviland, Lucretia Mott, Ellen G. White, and Susan B. Anthony.\nIllness and death.\nTruth was cared for by two of her daughters in the last years of her life. Several days before Sojourner Truth died, a reporter came from the \"Grand Rapids Eagle\" to interview her. \"Her face was drawn and emaciated and she was apparently suffering great pain. Her eyes were very bright and mind alert although it was difficult for her to talk.\"\nTruth died early in the morning on November 26, 1883, at her Battle Creek home. On November 28, 1883, her funeral was held at the Congregational-Presbyterian Church officiated by its pastor, the Reverend Reed Stuart. Some of the prominent citizens of Battle Creek acted as pall-bearers; nearly one thousand people attended the service. Truth was buried in the city's Oak Hill Cemetery.\nFrederick Douglass offered a eulogy for her in Washington, D.C. \"Venerable for age, distinguished for insight into human nature, remarkable for independence and courageous self-assertion, devoted to the welfare of her race, she has been for the last forty years an object of respect and admiration to social reformers everywhere.\"\nLegacy.\nMonuments and statues.\nThere have been many memorials erected in honor of Sojourner Truth, commemorating her life and work. These include memorial plaques, busts, and full-sized statues.\nMichigan.\nThe first historical marker honoring Truth was established in Battle Creek in 1935, when a stone memorial was placed in Stone History Tower, in Monument Park. The State of Michigan further recognized her legacy by naming highway M-66 in Calhoun County the Sojourner Truth Memorial Highway, running from the county line south of Athens to Morgan Road in Pennfield Township, northeast of Battle Creek.\n1999 marked the estimated bicentennial of Sojourner's birth. To honor the occasion, a larger-than-life sculpture of Sojourner Truth by Tina Allen was added to Monument Park in Battle Creek. The 12-foot tall Sojourner monument is cast in bronze.\nOhio.\nIn 1981, an Ohio Historical Marker was unveiled on the site of the Universalist \"Old Stone\" Church in Akron where Sojourner Truth gave her \"Ain't I a Woman?\" speech on May 29, 1851. Sojourner Truth Legacy Plaza, which includes a statue of her by sculptor and Akron native Woodrow Nash, opened in Akron in 2024.\nNew York.\nIn 1862, American sculptor William Wetmore Story completed a marble statue, inspired by Sojourner Truth, named \"The Libyan Sibyl\". The work won an award at the London World Exhibition. The original sculpture was gifted to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in New York City, by the Erving Wolf Foundation in 1978.\nIn 1983, a plaque honoring Sojourner Truth was unveiled in front of the historic Ulster County Courthouse in Kingston, New York. The plaque was given by the Sojourner Truth Day Committee to commemorate the centennial of her death.\nIn 1990, New York Governor Mario Cuomo presented a two-foot statue of Sojourner Truth, made by New York sculptor Ruth Inge Hardison, to Nelson Mandela during his visit to New York City.\nIn 1998, on the 150th anniversary of the Seneca Falls Convention, a life-sized, terracotta statue of Truth by artists A. Lloyd Lillie, Jr., and Victoria Guerina was unveiled at the Women's Rights National Historical Park visitor center. Although Truth did not attend the convention, the statue marked Truth's famous 1851 speech in Akron, Ohio, and recognized her important role in the fight for women's suffrage.\nIn 2013, a bronze statue of Truth as an 11-year-old girl was installed at Port Ewen, New York, where Truth lived for several years while still enslaved. The sculpture was created by New Paltz, New York, sculptor Trina Green.\nIn 2015, the Klyne Esopus Museum installed a historical marker in Ulster Park, New York commemorating Truth's walk to freedom in 1826. She walked about 14 miles from Esopus, up what is now Floyd Ackert Road, to Rifton, New York.\nIn 2020, a statue was unveiled at the Walkway Over the Hudson park in Highland, New York. It was created by Yonkers sculptor Vinnie Bagwell, commissioned by the New York State Women's Suffrage Commission. The statue includes text, braille, and symbols. The folds of her skirt act as a canvas to depict Sojourner's life experiences, including images of a young enslaved mother comforting her child, a slavery sale sign, images of her abolitionist peers, and a poster for a women's suffrage march.\nOn August 26, 2020, on the 100th anniversary of the passage of the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, a statue honoring Truth, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony was unveiled in Central Park in New York City. The sculpture, entitled \"Women's Rights Pioneers Monument\", was created by American artist Meredith Bergmann. It is the first sculpture in Central Park to depict historical women. A statue to the fictional character Alice in Wonderland is the only other female figure depicted in the park. Original plans for the memorial included only Stanton and Anthony, but after critics raised objections to the lack of inclusion of women of color, Truth was added to the design.\nOn February 28, 2022, New York Governor Kathy Hochul dedicated Sojourner Truth State Park near the site of her birthplace.\nCalifornia.\nIn 1999, \"Sojourner\", a Mexican limestone statue of Sojourner Truth by sculptor Elizabeth Catlett, was unveiled in Sacramento, California on the corner of K and 13th Street. It was vandalized in 2013, where it was found smashed into pieces.\nA bronze statue by San Diego sculptor Manuelita Brown was dedicated on January 22, 2015, on the campus of the Thurgood Marshall College of Law, of the University of California, San Diego, California. The artist donated the sculpture to the college.\nMassachusetts.\nIn 2002, the Sojourner Truth Memorial statue by Oregon sculptor Thomas \"Jay\" Warren was installed in Florence, Massachusetts, in a small park located on Pine Street and Park Street, on which she lived for ten years.\nWashington, D.C..\nIn 2009, a bust of Sojourner Truth was installed in the U.S. Capitol. The bust was sculpted by noted artist Artis Lane. It is in Emancipation Hall of the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center. With this installation, Truth became the first black woman to be honored with a statue in the Capitol building.\nAdditional recognition.\nIn regard to the magazine \"Ms.\", which began in 1972, Gloria Steinem has stated, \"We were going to call it \"Sojourner\", after Sojourner Truth, but that was perceived as a travel magazine.\nTruth was posthumously inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, New York, in 1981. She was also inducted to the Michigan Women's Hall of Fame, in Lansing, Michigan. She was part of the inaugural class of inductees when the museum was established in 1983.\nThe U.S. Postal Service issued a commemorative, 22-cent postage stamp honoring Sojourner Truth in 1986. The original artwork was created by Jerry Pinkney, and features a double portrait of Truth. The stamp was part of the Black Heritage series. The first day of issue was February 4, 1986.\nTruth was included in a monument of \"Michigan Legal Milestones\" erected by the State Bar of Michigan in 1987, honoring her historic court case.\nThe calendar of saints of the Episcopal Church remembers Sojourner Truth annually, together with Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Amelia Bloomer and Harriet Ross Tubman, on July 20. The calendar of saints of the Lutheran Church remembers Sojourner Truth together with Harriet Tubman on March 10.\nIn 1997, The NASA Mars Pathfinder mission's robotic rover was named \"Sojourner\". The following year, S.T. Writes Home appeared on the web offering \"Letters to Mom from Sojourner Truth\", in which the Mars Pathfinder Rover at times echoes its namesake.\nIn 2002, Temple University scholar Molefi Kete Asante published a list of 100 Greatest African Americans, which includes Sojourner Truth.\nIn 2009 Truth was inducted into the National Abolition Hall of Fame, in Peterboro, New York.\nIn 2014, the asteroid 249521 Truth was named in her honor.\nTruth was included in the Smithsonian Institution's list of the \"100 Most Significant Americans\", published 2014.\nThe U.S. Treasury Department announced in 2016 that an image of Sojourner Truth will appear on the back of a newly designed $10 bill along with Lucretia Mott, Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Alice Paul and the 1913 Woman Suffrage Procession. Designs for new $5, $10 and $20 bills were originally scheduled to be unveiled in 2020 in conjunction with the 100th anniversary of American women winning the right to vote via the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin announced that plans for the $20 redesign, which was to feature Harriet Tubman, have been postponed.\nOn September 19, 2016, the U.S. Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus announced the name of the last ship of a six unit construction contract as USNS \"Sojourner Truth\" (T-AO 210). This ship will be part of the latest \"John Lewis\"-class of Fleet Replenishment Oilers named in honor of U.S. civil and human rights heroes currently under construction at General Dynamics NASSCO in San Diego, CA.\nA Google Doodle was featured on February 1, 2019, in honor of Sojourner Truth. The doodle was showcased in Canada, United States, United Kingdom, Switzerland, Israel, Ireland and Germany.\nFor their first match of March 2019, the women of the United States women's national soccer team each wore a jersey with the name of a woman they were honoring on the back; Christen Press chose the name of Sojourner Truth.\nMetro-North Railroad named one of its Shoreliner II passenger cars \u2013 No.6188 \u2013 in honor of Sojourner Truth.\nWorks of art.\nIn 1892, Albion artist Frank Courter was commissioned by Frances Titus to paint the meeting between Truth and President Abraham Lincoln that occurred on October 29, 1864.\nIn 1945, Elizabeth Catlett created a print entitled \"I'm Sojourner Truth\" as part of a series honoring the labor of black women. The print is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art's collection. She would later create a full-size statue of Truth, which was displayed in Sacramento, California.\nIn 1958, African-American artist John Biggers created a mural called the \"Contribution of Negro Woman to American Life and Education\" as his doctoral dissertation. It was unveiled at the Blue Triangle Community Center (former YWCA) \u2013 Houston, Texas and features Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, and Phillis Wheatley.\nInspired by the work of pioneer women's historian Gerda Lerner, feminist artist Judy Chicago (Judith Sylvia Cohen) created a collaborative masterpiece \u2013 \"The Dinner Party\", a mixed-media art installation, between 1974 and 1979. The Sojourner Truth placesetting is one of 39. \"The Dinner Party\" is gifted by the Elizabeth Sackler Foundation to the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art, Brooklyn Museum \u2013 New York in 2000.\nFeminist theorist and author bell hooks titled her first major work after Truth's \"Ain't I a Woman?\" speech. The book was published in 1981.\nAfrican-American composer Gary Powell Nash composed \"In Memoriam: Sojourner Truth,\" in 1992.\"\nThe Broadway musical \"The Civil War\", which premiered in 1999, includes an abridged version of Truth's \"Ain't I a Woman?\" speech as a spoken-word segment. On the 1999 cast recording, the track was performed by Maya Angelou.\nIn 2018, a crocheted mural, \"Sojourner Truth: Ain't I A Woman?\", was hung on display at the Akron Civic Theatre's outer wall at Lock 3 Park in Ohio. It was one of four projects in New York and North Carolina as part of the \"Love Across the U.S.A.\", spearheaded by fiber artist OLEK.\nOrganizations.\nStudy clubs.\nStarting in 1895, numerous black civic associations adopted the name Sojourner Truth Club or similar titles to honor her.\nExamples listing club names, places, years founded:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29306", "revid": "36384157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29306", "title": "STOVL", "text": ""}
{"id": "29307", "revid": "38745438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29307", "title": "Russian aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov", "text": "Heavy aircraft-carrying missile cruiser of the Russian Navy\nAdmiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza Kuznetsov (, \"Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov\") is an aircraft carrier (heavy aircraft cruiser in Russian classification) which has served as the flagship of the Russian Navy, although she has been out of service since 2017. She was built by the Black Sea Shipyard, the sole manufacturer of Soviet aircraft carriers, in Nikolayev within the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (Ukrainian SSR) and launched in 1985, becoming fully operational in the Russian Navy in 1995. The initial name of the ship was Riga; she was launched as Leonid Brezhnev, embarked on sea trials as Tbilisi, before she was finally named after Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Nikolay Gerasimovich Kuznetsov.\nShe was originally commissioned in the Soviet Navy, and was intended to be the lead ship of the two-ship . However, her sister ship \"Varyag\" was still incomplete when the Soviet Union was disbanded in 1991. The second hull was eventually sold by Ukraine to China, completed at Dalian and commissioned as . The retirement of the smaller carriers in the 1990s has left \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" as the sole carrier in the Russian Navy.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" has been out of service since March 2017. The modernization, overhaul and repair process has been hampered by accidents, embezzlement of funds, and other setbacks. After the floating drydock sank in Kola Bay (Murmansk) in an accident that killed one worker in October 2018, the ship was towed to Sevmorput Yard No 35. In another mishap in December 2019, a major fire killed at least one worker and injured ten others. In June 2022, the ship was transferred to a drydock at the 35th Ship Repair Plant in Murmansk, where she remained until February 2023. It was estimated that repairs would be completed and the ship would be transferred back to the Russian Navy in 2024, but this was delayed to at least 2025. In September 2024, her crew were reassigned to a combat unit in Ukraine. , she still remains out of service which leaves the Russian Navy without an operational aircraft carrier.\nIn July 2025, it was reported that work on \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" had been suspended and that the ship may be dismantled or sold.\nDesign.\nThe design of \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" class implies a mission different from that of the United States Navy's carriers. The term used by her builders to describe the Russian ships is (TAVKR) \u2013 \"heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser\" \u2013 intended to support and defend strategic missile-carrying submarines, surface ships, and naval missile-carrying aircraft of the Russian Navy.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s main fixed-wing aircraft is the multi-role Sukhoi Su-33. She can perform air superiority, fleet defence, and air support missions and can also be used for direct fire support of amphibious assault, reconnaissance and placement of naval mines. The carrier also carries the Kamov Ka-27 and Kamov Ka-27S helicopters for anti-submarine warfare, search and rescue, and small transport.\nFor take-off of fixed-wing aircraft, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" has a ski-jump at the end of her bow. When taking off, aircraft accelerate toward and up the ski-jump using their afterburners. This results in the aircraft leaving the deck at a higher angle and elevation than on an aircraft carrier with a flat deck and catapults. The ski-jump take-off is less demanding on the pilot's body, since the acceleration is lower, but results in a clearance speed of only requiring an aircraft design which will not stall at those speeds.\nThe \"cruiser\" role is facilitated by \"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s complement of 12 long-range surface-to-surface anti-ship P-700 Granit (NATO reporting name: SS-N-19 Shipwreck) cruise missiles, resulting in the ship's Russian type designator of \"heavy aircraft-carrying missile cruiser\".\nUnlike most western naval ships that use gas turbines or nuclear power, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" is a conventionally powered ship that uses mazut as a fuel, often leading to a visible trail of heavy black smoke that can be seen at a great distance. Russian naval officials have said that the failure to properly preheat the heavy mazut fuel prior to entering the combustion chamber may contribute to the heavy smoke trail associated with the ship.\nTransiting the Turkish Straits.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s designation as an aircraft-carrying cruiser is important under the Montreux Convention, as it allows the ship to transit the Turkish Straits. The Convention prohibits countries from sending an aircraft carrier heavier than 15,000 tons through the Straits. Since the ship was built in the Ukrainian SSR, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would have been stuck in the Black Sea if Turkey had refused permission to pass into the Mediterranean Sea. However, the Convention does not limit the displacement of capital ships operated by Black Sea powers. Turkey allowed \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" to transit the Straits, and no signatory to the Montreux Convention ever issued a formal protest of her classification as an aircraft-carrying cruiser.\nHistory.\n1982\u20131991: construction and dispute of ownership.\n\"Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza Kuznetsov\", constructed at Chernomorskiy Shipyard, also known as Nikolayev South Shipyard, in Nikolayev within the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was launched in 1985, and became fully operational in 1995. An official ceremony marking the start of construction took place on 1 September 1982; in fact she was laid down in 1983. The vessel was first named \"Riga\", then the name was changed to \"Leonid Brezhnev\", this was followed by \"Tbilisi\". Finally, on 4 October 1990, she was renamed \"Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza N.G. Kuznetsov\", referred to in short as \"Admiral Kuznetsov\". The ship was 71% complete by mid-1989. In November 1989 she undertook her first aircraft operations.\nAfter the 1991 Soviet coup d'\u00e9tat attempt and the independence of Ukraine, Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk sent a telegram to the ship's commander Viktor Yarygin, declaring that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" was Ukrainian property, and that the ship should remain in Sevastopol until the Ukrainian government made a decision on her fate. Deputy commander of the Northern Fleet Yuri Ustimenko urgently arrived from the Arctic to pre-empt the Ukrainian government and gave the order for \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" to sail to Vidyayevo so the ship could remain in the Soviet fleet. In December 1991, she sailed from the Black Sea to join the Northern Fleet.\n1995\u20131996 deployment.\nFrom 23 December 1995 through 22 March 1996 \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" made her first 90-day Mediterranean deployment with 13 Su-33, 2 Su-25 UTG, and 11 helicopters aboard. The deployment of the Russian navy's flagship was undertaken to mark the 300th anniversary of the establishment of the Russian navy in October 1996. The deployment was to allow the carrier, which was accompanied by a frigate, destroyer and oiler, to adapt to the Mediterranean climate and to perform continuous flight operations until 21:00 each day, as the Barents Sea only receives about one hour of sunlight during that time of year. During that period the carrier lay at anchor off the port of Tartus, Syria. Her aircraft often made flights close to the Israeli shore line and were escorted by Israeli F-16s. During the deployment, a severe water shortage occurred due to evaporators breaking down.\n1997\u20131998 overhaul.\nThe ship was immobilized in a Northern Fleet shipyard at the end of 1997 after repairs had been halted due to a lack of funding. After the overhaul was completed, the ship returned to active service in the Northern fleet on 3 November 1998.\n2000\u20132006.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" remained in port for two years before preparing for another Mediterranean deployment scheduled for the winter of 2000\u20132001. This deployment was canceled due to the explosion and sinking of the nuclear-powered submarine . \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" participated in the \"Kursk\" rescue and salvage operations in late 2000. Plans for further operations were postponed or cancelled. In late 2003 and early 2004, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" went to sea for inspection and sea trials. In October 2004, the ship participated in a fleet exercise of the Russian Navy in the Atlantic Ocean. During a September 2005 exercise, a Su-33 accidentally fell from the carrier into the Atlantic Ocean. On 27 September 2006, it was announced that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would return to service in the Northern Fleet by the year's end, following another modernization to correct some technical issues. Admiral Vladimir Masorin, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Navy, also stated that Su-33 fighters assigned to her would return after undergoing their own maintenance and refits.\n2007\u20132008 deployment.\nFrom 5 December 2007 through 3 February 2008 \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" made her second Mediterranean deployment. On 11 December 2007, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" passed by Norwegian oil platforms in the North Sea, outside Bergen, Norway. Su-33 fighters and Kamov helicopters were launched from \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" while within international waters; Norwegian helicopter services to the rigs were halted due to the collision risk with the Russian aircraft. \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" later participated in an exercise on the Mediterranean Sea, together with 11 other Russian surface ships and 47 aircraft, performing three tactical training missions using live and simulated air and surface missile launches. \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" and her escorts returned to Severomorsk on 3 February 2008. Following maintenance, she returned to sea on 11 October 2008 for the Stability 2008 strategic exercises held in the Barents Sea. On 12 October 2008, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev visited the ship during the exercise.\n2008\u20132009 deployment.\nFrom 5 December 2008 through 2 March 2009, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" made her third Mediterranean deployment. On 5 December 2008, the carrier and several other vessels left Severomorsk for the Atlantic for a combat training tour, including joint drills with Russia's Black Sea Fleet and visits to several Mediterranean ports. On 7 January 2009, a small fire broke out onboard \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" while anchored off Turkey. The fire, caused by a short circuit, led to the death of one crew member by carbon monoxide poisoning. On 16 February 2009, she was involved in a large oil spill, along with other Russian naval vessels, while refuelling off the south coast of Ireland. On 2 March 2009, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" returned to Severomorsk, and in September 2010, she left dry dock after scheduled repairs and preparations for a training mission in the Barents Sea, later that month.\n2011\u20132012 deployment.\nThe Russian Main Navy Staff announced that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would begin a deployment to the Atlantic and Mediterranean in December 2011. In November 2011, it was announced that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would lead a squadron to Russia's naval facility in Tartus.\nA Russian naval spokesman announced via the \"Izvestia\" daily that \"The call of the Russian ships in Tartus should not be seen as a gesture towards what is going on in Syria... This was planned already in 2010 when there were no such events there\" noting that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would also be making port calls in Beirut, Genoa and Cyprus. On 29 November 2011, Army General Nikolay Makarov, Chief of the Russian General Staff, said that Russian ships in the Mediterranean were due to exercises rather than events in Syria, and noted that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s size does not allow her to moor in Tartus.\nOn 6 December 2011, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" and her escort ships departed the Northern Fleet home base in Severomorsk for a Mediterranean deployment to exercise with ships from the Russian Baltic and Black Sea Fleets. On 12 December 2011, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" and her escorts, were spotted northeast of Orkney off the coast of northern Scotland, the first such time she had deployed near the UK. shadowed the group for a week; due to severe weather, the group took shelter in international waters in the Moray Firth, some from the UK coast. \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" then sailed around the top of Scotland and into the Atlantic past western Ireland, where she conducted flight operations with her Sukhoi Su-33 'Flanker' jets and Kamov Ka-27 helicopters in international airspace. On 8 January 2012, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" anchored near shore outside Tartus while other ships from her escort entered the port to use the leased Russian naval support facility to replenish their supplies, after which all ships continued their deployment on 9 January. In February 2012, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" returned to her home base of Severomorsk, having lost propulsion during the return voyage in the Bay of Biscay. The tugboat took the vessel in tow and aided \"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s return.\n2013\u20132014 deployment.\nOn 1 June 2013, it was announced that the ship would return to the Mediterranean by the end of the year, and on 17 December, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" departed her home base for the Mediterranean. On 1 January 2014, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" celebrated New Year's Day while at anchor in international waters of the Moray Firth off northeast Scotland. The anchorage allowed replenishment of ship's supplies and respite for the crew from stormy weather off the southwest coast of Norway. She then proceeded to the Mediterranean Sea, docking in Cyprus on 28 February. In May 2014, the ship and her task group: the \"Kirov\"-class nuclear-powered cruiser \"Petr Velikiy\"; tankers \"Sergey Osipov\", \"Kama\" and \"Dubna\"; the ocean-going tug \"Altay\" and the \"Minsk\" (part of the Black Sea Fleet), passed the UK while sailing for home. Despite financial and technical problems, resulting in limited operations for the ship, it was expected that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would remain in active service until at least 2030.\n2016\u20132017 deployment.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" set sail on 15 October 2016 from Severomorsk for the Mediterranean, accompanied by seven other vessels of the Russian Navy including the nuclear-powered battlecruiser Pyotr Velikiy and two s. The carrier was accompanied by an ocean-going tugboat as a precaution due to potential propulsion failure. The carrier air wing included six to eight Sukhoi Su-33 fighters, four MiG-29KR/KUBR multi-role aircraft, Ka-52K \"Katran\" navalised attack helicopters, Ka-31R \"Helix\" AEW&amp;C helicopters and Ka-27PS \"Helix-D\" search and rescue helicopters. All the Su-33 aircraft had been upgraded with the Gefest SVP-24 bombsights for free-fall bombs, giving them a limited ground-attack capability. Analysts suggested that a lack of trained pilots restricted the number of fixed-wing aircraft that could be deployed from the carrier.\nIn the largest Russian military deployment since the Cold War, the carrier battle group sailed through the English Channel on 21 October. The Royal Navy responded to this test by sending two of its own ships to escort the Russian warships. On 26 October 2016 the ship was reported to have passed through the Strait of Gibraltar and refuelled at sea off North Africa the following day. On 3 November 2016 the carrier battle group paused off the east coast of Crete. On 14 November 2016 a MiG-29K crashed into the sea after taking off from the carrier. The pilot ejected safely from the plane and was rescued by helicopter. The plane had run out of fuel waiting to land while the crew was attempting to repair a broken arresting cable. The carrier commander could have diverted the aircraft to land at a nearby airbase, but hesitated in the hope that the arresting gear would be repaired in time.\nOn 15 November 2016 \u2014 as part of a large-scale engagement \u2014 \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" launched Su-33 strikes against the positions of terrorist groups Islamic State and Al-Nusra in the provinces of Idlib and Homs in Syria. This was the first time the aircraft carrier had ever participated in combat operations. The Russian Defence Ministry later reported that at least 30 militants had been killed as a result of those strikes, including three field commanders, among them Abul Baha al-Asfari, leader of Al-Nusra reserve forces in the provinces of Homs and Aleppo. Al-Asfari had also planned and led several insurgent attacks on the city of Aleppo. The Su-33s reportedly used precision-guided munitions. On 3 December 2016 an Su-33 crashed into the sea after attempting to land on the carrier. The pilot was safely recovered by a search and rescue helicopter. Later it was revealed that the arresting gear mechanism had failed to hold the aircraft, and was damaged in the attempt. Following this second incident, the air wing was transferred to shore at Khmeimim Air Base near Latakia to continue military operations while the carrier's arresting gear issues were addressed.\nIn early January 2017 it was announced that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" and her battlegroup would be ceasing operations in Syria and returning to Russia as part of a scaling back of Russian involvement in the conflict. During her deployment off Syria, aircraft from \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" carried out 420 combat missions, hitting 1,252 hostile targets. On 11 January 2017, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" was conducting live-fire training exercises in the Mediterranean off the coast of Libya. The Russian defence ministry announced that on 11 January, \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" was visited by Libya's military leader Khalifa Haftar, who had a video conference with Russian defence minister Sergey Shoygu while on board.\nOn 20 January \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" was sighted passing west through the Strait of Gibraltar and six days later, she was escorted back along the English Channel by three Eurofighter Typhoons of the Royal Air Force and the Type 23 frigate . It arrived back in Severomorsk on 9 February. On 23 February 2017 President Vladimir Putin said that the ship's deployment to the Mediterranean had been his personal initiative.\n2017\u2013present: overhaul.\n\"Admiral Kuznetsov\" started an overhaul and modernization program in the first quarter of 2017 to extend her service life by 25 years. The ship was to undergo modernization at the 35th Ship Repair Plant in Murmansk between 2018 and 2021, upgrading the ship's power plant and electronics systems.\nOn 30 October 2018, the ship was damaged when Russia's biggest floating drydock, , sank, causing one of its 70-ton cranes to crash onto the ship's flight deck, leaving behind a hole. One person was reported missing and four were injured as the drydock sank in Kola Bay. The ship was in the process of being removed from the dock when the incident occurred and was towed to a nearby yard after the incident. The cost of repairing the damage was estimated to be RUB 70million (about US$1million). The fallen crane was removed by the end of 2018.\nIn late May 2019, repair work of the aircraft carrier was underway. That same month, it was also announced that two graving docks in Murmansk would be merged and enlarged to accommodate the ship, the work taking a year and a half. In December 2019, a major fire broke out on board the ship as work continued on the ship's refit. Two people died and more than a dozen were injured in the fire, and damage to the ship was estimated at US$8million.\nIn June 2021, Vladimir Korolev, Vice President of the United Shipbuilding Corporation announced that the overhaul and upgrade of \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" was expected to be completed by the first half of 2023. The avionics, flight deck with the ski jump, electric equipment, and the power plant were expected to be replaced as part of this process. The carrier would also receive a new fully domestic takeoff and landing control system, with the onboard airpower remaining the same. Due to the lack of a large enough drydock, a new drydock was being constructed in Murmansk. In November 2021 it was reported that \"bad weather\" had caused significant delays to repair work which might push back the completion of the refit by more than one year.\nThe ship was finally dry-docked on 20 May 2022. By 27 July 2022, the drydock had been drained, allowing repairs on the aircraft carrier to commence. On 15 August 2022, the head of the United Shipbuilding Corporation confirmed that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would be handed over to the Russian Navy in the first quarter of 2024, and that the ship is expected to remain in service for at least another 25 years. On 22 December 2022, as the ship was being prepared to leave drydock, another fire occurred. The fire was extinguished, and no casualties were reported. On 25 January 2023, it was reported that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" would leave the drydock in February 2023. The aircraft carrier was removed from the drydock on 21 February 2023, although it was initially reported that the operation had been suspended due to heavy fog.\nPrior to the December 2022 fire the overhaul of the carrier was projected to last into 2024.\nIn September 2024, an OSINT analysis revealed that \"Admiral Kuznetsov\"'s crew of approximately 1,500 sailors were reassigned to the Russian Army for combat duty in Ukraine. This fueled speculation that there is no plan to make \"Admiral Kuznetsov\" seaworthy again. As of July 2025, it was reported that repair and modernization work on the carrier had been suspended and that Russian Defence Ministry is considering scrapping the vessel due to the ship's age and condition and the mounting cost of its overhaul. The same month, UK Defence Journal reported public comments by Admiral Sergei Avakyants, former head of Russia's Pacific Fleet, suggesting institutional support for the decision to retire the carrier. He described classic aircraft carriers as expensive and inefficient in modern conflict scenarios, arguing that unmanned systems and robotic platforms are the future.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29308", "revid": "44639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29308", "title": "Scottish Football League Teams", "text": ""}
{"id": "29311", "revid": "8373762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29311", "title": "Subaru Forester", "text": "Compact crossover SUV\nThe is a compact crossover SUV that has been manufactured by Subaru since 1997. The first generation was built on the platform of the Impreza in the style of a taller station wagon, a style that continued to the second generation, while the third-generation model onwards moved towards a crossover SUV design. A performance model was available for the second-generation Forester in Japan as the Forester STi.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFirst generation (SF; 1997).\nThe Forester was first introduced as the Streega concept at the 1995 Tokyo Motor Show and became available for sale in Japan in February 1997, reaching the U.S. market later that year for the 1998 model year. As one of the first crossover SUVs, it was reportedly inspired by Volkswagen. Built in the style of a station wagon, the Forester featured a taller stance, higher H-point seating, and a standard all-wheel drive drivetrain. Subaru marketed it with the slogan \"SUV tough, Car Easy\". It utilized the Impreza platform but was powered by the larger 2.5-liter DOHC EJ25D engine from the Subaru Outback, producing 123 kW (165 hp) at 5,600 rpm and 220 Nm (162 lb-ft) of torque at 4,000 rpm.\nJapan.\nIn its domestic market, the Forester replaced the Impreza Gravel Express, known in the US as the Subaru Outback Sport. However, the Outback Sport remained in production for the U.S. market. The Forester appeared after the introduction of the Nissan Rasheen in Japan with a similar appearance, and the Forester's Japanese competitors include the Toyota RAV4, Mitsubishi RVR, and the Suzuki Grand Vitara. Because of the Forester's low center of gravity, it meets the United States federal safety standards for passenger vehicles and does not require a \"risk of rollover\" warning label on the driver's visor. Size- and price-wise, it fits between the shared Impreza platform and the larger Legacy.\nThe automatic transmissions used on AWD-equipped vehicles will normally send 60% of the engine's torque to the front wheels and 40% to the rear wheels, using a computer-controlled, continuously variable, multi-plate transfer clutch. When the transmission detects a speed difference between the front and rear axle sets, the transmission progressively sends power to the rear wheels. Under slip conditions, it can achieve an equal split in front and rear axle speeds.\nWhen accelerating or driving uphill, the vehicle's weight shifts rearward, reducing front-wheel traction, causing the transmission to automatically send torque to the rear wheels to compensate. When braking or driving downhill, the vehicle's weight shifts towards the front, reducing rear-wheel traction. The transmission again compensates by sending torque to the front wheels for better steering control and braking performance. If the automatic is placed in reverse or first gear, the transmission divides the torque 50/50 to both front and rear wheels. The manual transmission cars are set up with a near 50/50 torque split as a base setting, and it varies from there. Essentially, manual cars are set up with more bias towards the rear than automatic cars.\nAustralia.\nThere was a change in body styling for all 2001\u20132002 models, and the 2001/2002 GT spec also had a change in engine management and power output was increased from 125 to .\nUnited States.\nThe U.S. market first got the car starting in the late 1997 as a 1998 model. The 1998 had the 2.5-liter DOHC (EJ25D) engine, and in 1999+ models changed to a 2.5-liter SOHC naturally aspirated engine (no turbocharged engines). In 2000, for MY2001, Subaru updated the exterior with a modest facelift to the front, rear, sides, and the interior's dashboard.\nThe trim levels were the basic model \"L\" and the fully equipped \"S\" for the USA versions.\nForester L came with a high level of standard equipment, including ABS, air conditioning, power windows, power locks, cruise control, digital temperature gauge, multi-reflector halogen headlights, fog lights, roof rack, rear window defogger, trailer harness connector, reclining front bucket seats with adjustable lumbar support, tilt steering, tinted glass, AM/FM/cassette stereo with its antenna laminated in the left-rear quarter window. Notably new in 2001 were the three-point seatbelts for all five seating positions, including force limiters in front and height-adjustable shoulder belt anchors for front and rear outboard positions, plus rear seat headrests for all three seating positions.\nForester S adds a viscous limited-slip differential for the 2000 Model Year, rear disc brakes, 16 \u00d7 6.5-inch alloy wheels with 215/60R16 tires (the L uses 15 \u00d7 6-inch steel wheels), upgraded moquette upholstery, heated front seats with net storage pockets in back, dual vanity mirrors, heated side-view mirrors, heated windshield wipers, and keyless entry. New equipment for 2001 included Titanium pearl paint for the bumpers and cladding; six-disc in-dash CD sound system; leather-wrapped steering wheel, shift knob, and handbrake handle; variable intermittent wipers with de-icers and driver's side fin; and the five-spoke alloy wheels. Some models were equipped with the optional premium package on the Forester S, including monotone paint (Sedona Red Pearl), power moonroof, front side-impact airbags, and gold accent wheels. Other options were the automatic transmission, chrome tailpipe cover, and auto-dimming rear-view mirror with compass.\nSecond generation (SG; 2002).\nThe second generation was introduced as a 2003 model at the 2002 Chicago Auto Show, based on the new Impreza platform, featuring several fine-tune improvements over the past model. The 2003 Forester features weight-saving refinements such as an aluminum hood, perforated rails, and a hydro-formed front sub-frame. The most noticeable change was the offering of 2.5 L versions (normally aspirated and turbocharged) and in the U.S. the introduction of the turbocharged 2.5-liter model.\nIn the United States, the naturally aspirated X (previously L) and XS (previously S) were released in 2003. In 2004, the turbocharged XT trim was released in the USA. However, a turbocharged version was available since the late 1990s elsewhere in the world. The X and XS models feature a 2.5\u00a0L SOHC EJ253 engine, while the XT model features a 2.5\u00a0L turbocharged DOHC engine. Both engines have timing belt (camshaft). The XT model uses the same Mitsubishi Motors TD04 turbocharger used in the Subaru Impreza WRX. All Forester 2.5\u00a0L engines are of the interference engine type. The flat engine can be mounted lower in the car and gives the Forester a lower center of gravity than other 4x4s or soft roaders. The two-liter gasoline boxer-four engined version is reported to do of fuel in town.\nStarting with the 2004 XT, the turbocharged version had Active valve control system cylinder heads. The i-AVLS (active valve lift system) became standard on the naturally aspirated version of the Forester in 2006. This increased horsepower and torque figures to 173 HP and 166\u00a0ft-lbs. The 2006 XT received a higher compression ratio to 8.4:1 from 8.2:1. This increased the XT's power to 230 HP and 235\u00a0ft-lbs.\nFor the 2006 model year, Subaru gave the SG Forester a facelift, using redesigned headlights, tail lights, hood, grille, front bumper, and side mouldings.\nSafety.\nMY03-04 Models has a 4-Star ANCAP safety rating. MY05 Forester Model had a mid-life update, which increased its ANCAP safety rating to 5 Stars.\nIn 2006, the turbocharged engine (powering the Forester XT) was awarded International Engine of the Year. This engine is also used in the Subaru Impreza WRX, as well as the re-badged Saab 9-2X Aero.\nMaintenance.\nAll of the 2.5-liter 4-cylinder engines for this generation have a timing belt made of rubber and cord. A belt must be replaced at . These engines are interference engines, meaning that if the timing belt breaks or stretches, the pistons will hit the valves, requiring an engine teardown, and a likely rebuild. Also, if this belt is replaced around 105,000 miles, it is a good idea to change the water pump, thermostat, belt tensioner and all the idler pulleys for this belt. The water pump and thermostat are behind this belt. In Australia for the Series II (MY06) cars, Subaru changed the recommended service interval for the timing belt replacement from 100,000 kilometers to 125,000 kilometers. The 2.5-liter 4-cylinder engine in the first-generation Foresters featured head gaskets which were prone to premature failure. For 2003 and later, this problem was addressed with a revised, higher performing design, but is still a problem.\nUnited States.\nFor the U.S. market, the car was offered with either the 2.5 SOHC naturally aspirated engine, or the 2.5 DOHC turbocharged version added in 2004. In 2005, the L.L. Bean edition was added. In 2006, the styling was updated, Active valve lift system was added to non-turbo engines to improve power and efficiency, the XS model was deleted, and the Premium model was added. In 2007, a bottle holder was added to front door panels, the 'Sports' trim level was added, which changed some interior and exterior features and added the VDT/VDC transmission to the XT Sports turbo Automatic model. In 2008, TPMS was added, the L.L. Bean model deleted rear load-leveling suspension but gained a radio upgrade, and the XT Turbo Limited models got the VDT/VDC Auto transmission.\nAustralia.\nThe Forester had three main models available in Australia until July 2005, which are X, XS and XT. Both the X and XS are equipped with the naturally aspirated 2.5 L engine producing , while the XT received the turbo engine with a higher output of . From the Series II which was released in August 2005, the engine was upgraded to for the X and XS and for the XT grade.\nFollowing a General Motors (GM) and Subaru tie-up in 1999, GM considered rebadging the Forester as a Holden in the Australian market as the brand lacked an SUV offering. In exchange, GM would provide Subaru the Holden VY Ute. Subaru considered naming the rebadged Ute the Subaru Brumby. According to former Subaru Australia managing director Nick Senior, the plan was called off due to objection from Subaru Australia.\nIndia.\nThe Forester was sold in India by General Motors India as the Chevrolet Forester. Introduced in 2003, it was the first Chevrolet-badged model released in India, as previous GM models are badged as Opels. Sales of the Chevrolet Forester ended in 2007 since General Motors no longer holds an ownership stake in Subaru's parent company, Fuji Heavy Industries.\nChina.\nA look-alike was produced by Yema Auto and known as the Yema F99 in China. It was a similar design to the pre-facelifted model. Production ran from 2012 to 2014. The engine was a 1.5l 4 cylinder mated to a 5-speed manual gearbox. The car was not related to the Forester even though they look very similar. The Forester was imported to China from 2004 until 2007 in the following models:\n2004 Version sold in China:\n2006 Version (Facelift) sold in China:\n2007 Version (Facelift) sold in China:\nForester STi (SF and SG; 2004).\nIn 2004, Subaru launched the Forester STi for the Japanese market only. A \"sportier\" version of the standard second-gen (SG) Forester, the Forester STi incorporated most of the running components from the WRX STi, with several other changes. It was never sold outside of Japan.\nThe Forester STi exterior was modified with additions such as a redesigned front fascia with new headlights, front bumper, grille and \"STi\" badged covered fog lights, like those seen on the Impreza WRX STi. The rear fascia was also redesigned with revised taillights, a revised rear bumper, and an added rear spoiler.\nMultiple changes were made to the engine and the mechanical components of the Forester to create the Forester STi. They include the engine, which received a 2.5-liter turbocharged flat-four [block designated EJ255, not from the WRX STi which used a block designated EJ257], making and 186\u00a0lb-ft of torque. While the block was not shared with the STI, the Forester STI shared the STI\u2019s better breathing manifold, painted in matt crinkle red, allowing it to produce more power and torque than other 2.5l EJ255 engined SG9 Foresters sold in AU/NZ from 2003-2008. \nA much stronger six-speed manual gearbox, from the WRX STI, a larger intercooler, and a low-back-pressure exhaust system were also added. The top three ratios of the gearbox are 14 percent taller to match the engine's torque curve, raising the vehicle\u2019s top speed and allowing more relaxed highway cruising at lower rpm. As the result, the 2006 Forester STi accelerates from in 5.2 seconds, in 5.4 seconds, and does the quarter mile in 14.1 seconds at . It can reach a top speed of and has a power to weight ratio of 174\u00a0hp per ton.\nTo cope with the extra power made by the new engine, the Forester STi got many upgraded suspension components including STi sport springs, revised struts at each corner, and bigger anti-roll bars and cross-members. These changes resulted in a 1.2 inch lower ride height and improved resistance to torsional forces. Rolling resistance was also improved, but the higher center of gravity of the Forester still remained. The Forester STi is also equipped with a new steering rack with a quicker ratio that leads to a more deliberate turn-in.\nThe Forester STi got 18-inch, 10-spoke alloy wheels with 225/45R-18 Bridgestone Potenza tires. Four-piston Brembo brakes, painted red, are employed on the front wheels, and two-piston Brembo are used at the rear, enhanced braking performance and lowering stopping distances and fade resistance under heavy use. It also has special STi bucket seats, unique to the Forester STI, trimmed in dark grey cloth, deeply moulded for much stronger hip and torso support. A smaller leather MOMO steering wheel, and a weighted, leather shift knob with red stitching and a H-pattern 6-speed shift map.\nThird generation (SH; 2008).\nThe third-generation Forester began to move away from a traditional wagon design towards becoming a crossover SUV. It was larger in nearly every dimension and featured a sloping roofline with more cargo space. Subaru unveiled the model year 2008 Forester in Japan on December 25, 2007. The North American version made its debut at the 2008 North American International Auto Show in Detroit.\nStyling was by Subaru Chief Designer Mamoru Ishii. The dimensions derive from engineers using the basic body structure of the Japanese-spec Impreza wagon with the rear platform of the U.S.-spec Impreza sedan. The Forester's wheelbase was increased , with overall increases of in length, in width and in height.\nThe independent double-wishbone rear suspension was redesigned for better handling and a smoother ride. A \"Sportshift\" mode was added to the four-speed computer-controlled automatic transmission. The in-dash, touch-screen satellite navigation system became Bluetooth compatible, and integrated with a premium stereo. A six-speaker surround sound enhancement was optional.\nThe new model added to the Forester's wheelbase, improving interior space and cargo room ( expandable to ). Ground clearance was .\nEurope.\nThe Forester was available in Europe from 2008 with either the 2.0-liter EJ20 () 196 Nm gasoline engine with Active Valve Control System (AVCS) matched to either five-speed manual or four-speed automatic gearbox, or an all-new diesel-powered horizontally opposed Subaru EE boxer engine, and six-speed manual gearbox. The new model was introduced at the 2008 Paris Motor Show in October. The diesel engine produces a power output of and 350 Nm. The EE20 diesel engine in the Euro 4 guise was plagued by crankshaft failure caused by cracks forming when operated in cold climate. Although Subaru never acknowledged this defect, the engine was reworked for the Euro 5 model in 2011 to fix this problem.\nIn the UK, the gasoline-powered Forester was offered in the popular X and XS models, while the trim levels for the diesel models were X, XC, and XS NavPlus.\nIn Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine 2.5 and 2.5 Turbo engines were also available.\nIn the Netherlands, the Forester is offered with gasoline or diesel engines. The gasoline engine can also be fitted with an additional liquefied petroleum gas installation (LPG), an aftermarket installation provided directly through dealerships. The available equipment levels are Intro (gasoline engine only), Comfort, Luxury, Premium, and XT (gasoline engine turbo). Maximum towing abilities for the gasoline or gasoline with LPG are 2000\u00a0kg (manual) or 1500\u00a0kg (auto), while the manual-only diesel can tow 2000\u00a0kg.\nAustralia.\nThere were seven specifications with various trim and performance levels:\nOf note is a serious head gasket problem that Subaru has not resolved. Mostly oil and coolant leaks, with cross-cylinder failure being the worst. It can be fixed with aftermarket gaskets, though this is an expensive, engine-out job.\nSummary of standard trim and equipment over different Australian models.\nUnited States.\nThe Forester trim levels were the 2.5X Limited, the 2.5X Premium, the 2.5X, and the 2.5XT Limited and 2.5XT Premium both with turbo. The interior color was either black or light gray, with three upholstery selections, including leather. Nine exterior colors were offered, with four colors in a pearlescent appearance.\nStarting July 2009, Subaru no longer offered a special-edition L.L. Bean trim level on the Forester. The Subaru Elaion is a modified Subaru Forester which was built by Subaru and Elaion (Repsol-YPF).\nThe USA 2.5X model was certified PZEV emissions (rated instead of ), with a badge attached to the rear of the vehicle on the bottom right-hand side of the tailgate. All other USA models were certified LEV2. The PZEV Forester was available for sale in all fifty states, unlike other manufacturers who only sold PZEV-certified vehicles in states that had adopted California emission standards. The naturally aspirated engine runs on unleaded gasoline rated at 87\u00a0octane; the turbo engine (EJ255) requires premium fuel rated minimum 91\u00a0octane.\nSafety equipment included front airbags with side curtain airbags and front passenger-side airbags (for a total of six airbags) and brake assist that detects panic-braking situations and applies maximum braking force more quickly. The five-speed manual transmission was equipped with Incline Start Assist.\nSome of the standard equipment found on the 2.5X included Subaru's VDC (Vehicle Dynamics Control), 16\u00a0inch steel wheels, and an auxiliary audio jack for MP3 players. Optional equipment included 17\u00a0inch alloy wheels, panoramic moonroof, heated front seats, and heated side-view mirrors. The L.L. Bean edition added automatic climate control, leather upholstery, an upgraded stereo with six speakers and a six-disc in-dash CD changer over the four-speaker stereo with single-disc CD player, and an in-dash navigation system, as well as L.L. Bean signature floor mats and rear cargo tray.\nThe 2.5 XT came with the premium stereo standard, as well as 17-inch alloy wheels, and the panoramic moonroof. The 2.5 XT Limited added leather upholstery with heated front seats, in-dash navigation, a rear spoiler, and automatic climate control. For 2009, XT models came only with a four-speed automatic with Sport Shift.\nForester XTI concept.\nThe Forester XTI concept vehicle used the 2.5-liter inter-cooled turbo engine from the Subaru WRX STI, six-speed manual transmission, 18 \u00d7 8-inch S204 forged alloy wheels with Yokohama Advan Neova 255/40R18 performance tires, adjustable coil-over suspension, Brembo brakes with four-piston front calipers, 2-piston rear calipers, SuperSport ABS and Electronic Brake-force Distribution (EBD), leather and Alcantara sport seats, a special instrument cluster, front dash, and center console and leather-wrapped steering wheel. Engine is rated and torque.\nThe vehicle was unveiled in the 2008 SEMA Show.\nMountain Rescue Vehicle.\nSubaru produced a specialized vehicle for the National Ski Patrol based on the 2.5XT turbo. It includes diamond plate floor, rear steel walls, a 9,500-pound winch and a roof-mounted toboggan. The vehicle was unveiled in the 2008 SEMA Show.\nFacelift.\nIn 2010 (U.S. model year 2011), the Subaru Forester received a minor facelift featuring a new grille insert and several small changes in various trim levels. A new 2.5X Touring trim level was also introduced above the 2.5X Limited. The 2.5X Touring trim added HID lighting, a rearview camera, dual-zone climate control, and silver roof rails. 2.5XT models got a slightly larger rear roof spoiler.\nSubaru also quietly switched to the all-new 2.5L DOHC FB25 third-generation boxer engine in naturally aspirated Forester models. The new engine made the same as the outgoing EJ253, but torque increased by . Fuel economy improved by 1 mpg EPA city/highway to 21/27. 2.5XT models retained the 2.5L DOHC EJ255 turbo engine.\nFourth generation (SJ; 2012).\nThe fourth-generation Forester was unveiled at the November 2012 Guangzhou Motor Show, followed by the 2013 New York International Auto Show.\nThe fourth-generation model had a major revamp of interior comfort. The passenger seat is higher, the sound system has been upgraded, the rear bench seats are higher and the console is re-positioned for the person riding in the center. The manual transmission models were also upgraded to a six-speed transmission instead of the previous generation's five-speed transmission.\nChanges to the line-up include:\nJapan models went on sale in November 2012. Early models include the 2.0i, 2.0i-L, 2.0i-L EyeSight, 2.0i-S EyeSight, 2.0XT (280 PS), and the 2.0XT EyeSight (280 PS). The 2.0i engine models include six-speed manual (2.0i, 2.0i-L) or Lineartronic CVT transmission; 2.0XT (280 PS) engine models include Lineartronic CVT transmission.\nAsian models went on sale in March 2013 as the 2014 model year. Early models include 2.0i-L, 2.0i Premium and 2.0XT. Association of Southeast Asian Nations production of the Subaru Forester began in February 2016. Malaysia-based Tan Chong Motor Assemblies assembled approximately 10,000 Forester units annually for Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia respectively.\nUS models went on sale in March 2013 as 2014 model year vehicles. Early models include 2.5i in base, Premium, Limited and top-line Touring versions, and performance-oriented turbocharged 2.0XT (253 PS) in Premium and Touring versions. Base and Premium model 2014 Foresters can be equipped with the manual six-speed transmission or the Lineartronic CVT. All other models are equipped with the Lineartronic CVT. An option on Limited/Touring 2.5i and Premium/Touring 2.0XT is new X-Mode control and Hill Descent Control (HDC) features. These are not available on other models.\nThe 2014 Forester has a new feature called X Mode that allows owners to go through more extreme conditions both on the road and off. The concept is that any driver, regardless of skill level, can drive safely on wet roads or muddy areas. It works by monitoring wheel-slip on all four wheels; should one or more wheels begin to slip, X Mode kicks in and applies the brakes to the affected wheel which results in a transfer of power to the opposite wheel. After it is engaged by a simple push button, X Mode stays engaged up until the vehicle's speed is about then disengages itself.\nIt has been awarded \"Motor Trend\"'s 2009 and 2014 SUV of the Year and The Car Connection's Best Car To Buy 2014.\nSafety.\nAccording to IIHS (Insurance Institute for Highway Safety), the 2014 Forester achieved Good crash test ratings in Small Overlap Front, Moderate Overlap Front, Side, Roof Strength, and Head Restraining &amp; Seats categories. The Forester had not been rated Good in the Small Overlap Front test until modifications were made for the 2014 model year. The small overlap test, introduced in 2012 by the IIHS, simulates a frontal collision on 25 percent of the driver's side front corner. Since its adoption, the IIHS has noticed several automakers making non-symmetrical modifications to their vehicles. Another small overlap test was conducted on a number of vehicles, including a 2014 Forester, but was conducted on the passenger side instead. The crash test showed substantially more intrusion into the passenger side than into the driver's side of the Forester, it would have been rated Marginal.\nEyeSight Driver Assist System.\nThe 2014 top-of-the-line Touring model Forester in the U.S. offers Subaru's EyeSight driver assist technology that uses stereoscopic CCD cameras mounted on either side of the rearview mirror. Eyesight offers several driver assist technologies/features which include:\nThe system can be manually turned on or off. Being an optical, instead of radar, based system, it has limitations in limited visibility situations; driving into the sun, fog, or where the windshield is not cleared (snow, mud, etc.) may cause the system to disengage.\nFacelift.\nThe facelifted fourth-generation Forester was revealed in October 2015 ahead of the 2015 Tokyo Motor Show. Changes include new LED projector headlights with C-shaped positioning lights, new taillights, a redesigned grille and a reprofiled front bumper.\nSubaru also introduced improvements to the Forester's AWD chassis and NVH. It also feature greater front cross member rigidity and optimization of the rear trailing link bushings which result in better steering response and straight-line stability. The turbo model gets Active Torque Vectoring. Ride comfort has been improved with optimized dampers and spring rates, while thicker door glass, stronger sealing, additional under-floor insulation and improvements to the Lineartronic CVT gearbox result in quieter ride. The FB 2.0-liter naturally aspirated flat-four gasoline engine with has been given more efficient combustion and reduced friction for better fuel efficiency with no loss of performance.\nThe Forester uses color cameras for the EyeSight system with a wider and longer field of view. Alongside EyeSight which was upgraded to Version 3, Subaru offered a Rear Vehicle Detection package that includes Blind Spot Detection, Lane Change Assist and Rear Cross Traffic Alert. The stereo cameras of Eyesight also double up as the eyes for Adaptive Driving Beam.\nIn the U.S., the facelift was introduced in April 2016 for the 2017 model year.\nFifth generation (SK; 2018).\nThe fifth-generation Forester was presented on March 28, 2018, at the New York International Auto Show. Like contemporary Subaru models, the fifth-generation model moved the Forester to the Subaru Global Platform. The new platform is said to provide greater handling capability, agility, ride comfort and crash protection. It is also claimed to be inherently resistant to noise, vibration and harshness (NVH).\nThe fifth-generation Forester incorporates Subaru's recent design language, marketed as \"Dynamic x Solid\". Interior space has been increased with the redesign, by lengthening the wheelbase by . Rear legroom has grown by , while head, hip and shoulder room have also increased, improving the overall cabin space. Wider rear door openings and a steeper C-pillar allow for easier entry and egress and also makes installing a child seat easier.\nThe reworked front seats are claimed to be more comfortable on long trips. Subaru also included an electric parking brake which frees up center console space. Cargo space in the trunk is larger with with the 60:40-split rear seats folded \u2013 an increase of \u2013 and the maximum width of the tailgate opening is wider at .\nNorth America.\nInitial trim levels available in the U.S. and Canada are Base, Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring. All Foresters sold in the U.S. come standard with Subaru's Eyesight Driver Assist Technology. Subaru DriverFocus Distraction Mitigation System comes standard on the Touring trim in the U.S., which provides an alert when it detects the driver is distracted or is drowsy. In addition, the DriverFocus system is able to recognize five different drivers and will set seat and mirror positions and climate control settings accordingly.\nAs standard, the Forester comes with the Starlink Multimedia system with a 6.5-inch touchscreen.\nIn North America, the model is only available with one engine type: Subaru's new \"FB25 DI\". The engine is a naturally aspirated, direct injection flat (boxer) 4 cylinder producing at 5800 rpm and at 4400\u00a0rpm, with the Lineartronic CVT as the sole transmission option.\nAll fifth-generation Foresters have one of three versions of Subaru's Symmetrical All Wheel Drive system. The trim levels in North America determines which system is installed. The Base trim received a Variable Torque Distribution (VTD) using electronically controlled clutches to control torque split. Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring trims receive the driver-selectable X-Mode system with Hill Descent Control, which optimizes engine, transmission, AWD system and Vehicle Dynamics Control for maximum traction on slippery conditions. A new dual-mode version with Snow/Dirt and Deep Snow/Mud modes is fitted on Sport, Limited and Touring variants. All models provide a nominal torque split biased 60 front to 40 rear.\nForester e-Boxer.\nSubaru introduced the e-Boxer hybrid powertrain for the European-market Forester and XV at the Geneva Motor Show in March 2019; the e-Boxer integrates an electric motor into the Lineartronic CVT to improve fuel economy and increase power.\nThe e-Boxer powertrain features a modified FB20 rated at at 5,600\u20136,000\u00a0rpm and of torque at 4,000\u00a0rpm. Like the first-generation XV Crosstrek Hybrid, the Forester e-Boxer adds a single electric motor rated at maximum output. The battery for the traction motor is placed above the rear axle, improving the front/rear weight balance.\nForester Sport.\nA Forester Sport with a \"CB18\" 1.8-liter direct injection turbocharged flat-4 engine was introduced in October 2020 for the Japanese domestic market. The engine produces at 5,200-5,600 rpm and at 1,600-3,600 rpm. This engine is also present in the JDM Subaru Levorg. With the introduction of the Sport, the \"FB20D e-BOXER\" became the standard engine across the rest of the Forester line in Japan. As of July 2021[ [update]], there are no reports whether other markets will receive the \"CB18\".\nThe Forester Sport is identified by its black grille as well as grey-painted fog lamps covers, side mirrors and rocker panels. The Sport also is equipped with a set of dark 18-inch wheels, while the rear fascia adds additional trim around the tailgate window. It is also equipped with dual exhaust outlets, which are part of a redesigned and sportier lower apron.\nFacelift.\nThe facelifted model was released for North America in September 2021 for the 2022 model year. It had a new front end as well as a slightly tweaked rear bumper while the powertrain was unchanged. All Forester models have Subaru's updated fourth-generation eyesight driver-assist system. An off-road-focused Wilderness model was also introduced.\nForester Wilderness.\nAlongside the facelift model, Subaru released a new model called the Forester Wilderness for the North American market. It is intended to be a more off-road-oriented version of the Forester, and is positioned between the Limited and Touring trim levels in the Forester lineup. Visually, the Forester has more body cladding, and on the inside, copper-colored accents. It features a lift for a total of of ground clearance, the Wilderness also has all-terrain tires, a higher final drive ratio (4.11 vs. 3.70), and a stronger roof rack than previous models. Subaru's StarTex water-repellent seats are also standard.\nThe Wilderness is powered by the same 2.5-liter \"FB25D\" naturally aspirated four cylinder engine powering other North American market Foresters. The Wilderness uses an Enhanced Dual-Function X-Mode version. The X-Mode is upgraded and re-tuned, with settings for snow, dirt, deep snow and mud. Additional wheel-slip is allowed to occur, which provides an advantage in harsh driving conditions.\nForester STI Sport.\nSubaru released a special model known as the Forester STI Sport in July 2023 for the Chinese market. The 2.0-liter \"FB20\" H4 and 2.5-liter \"FB25 DI\" H4 engines are available paired to the Lineartronic CVT as standard. Three trim levels are available known as STI Sport, STI Sport Plus and STI Sport Plus Special Edition.\nSafety.\nIIHS.\nThe 2019 model year Forester was awarded \"Top Safety Pick+\" by IIHS.\nSixth generation (SL; 2024).\nThe sixth-generation Forester was revealed at the Los Angeles Auto Show on November 16, 2023. The Forester is still based on the Subaru Global Platform with 10% greater rigidity, exterior has design elements borrowed from other Subaru vehicles, the interior features a portrait 11.6-inch touchscreen standard on all trims except for the base model and a higher-mounted dashboard for increased space, and the 2.5-liter FB25 was carried over from the previous generation.\nForester Wilderness.\nThe off-road focused Wilderness model was revealed on February 6, 2025 for the North American market and scheduled to go on sale in late 2025 for the 2026 model year. Mechanical changes for the Wilderness model includes ground clearance, 17-inch Wilderness-exclusive alloy wheels equipped with Yokohama Geolander All-Terrains tires, improved approach, breakover, and departure angles, a revised Lineartronic CVT transmission with a shorter final drive ratio and paired with advanced X-MODE Dual Mode with Snow/Dirt and Deep Snow/Mud modes, revised Subaru Symmetrical All-Wheel Drive system, and an upgraded transmission cooler with a maximum towing capacity of and a temperature sensor on the rear differential. The exterior of the Wilderness model includes anodized copper accents on the bumpers, body cladding trim pieces, hexagonal LED fog lights, standard roof rails with a static load capacity of , and underbody protection. Inside, the Wilderness model features a 12.3-inch digital instrument cluster with Wilderness-exclusive graphics, anodized copper accents for the interior, and StarTex synthetic leather upholstery.\nMarkets.\nAmericas.\nMexico.\nThe sixth-generation Forester went on sale in Mexico on July 3, 2025, with three variants: Sport, Touring and e-Boxer Hybrid. For powertrains, the Sport and Touring variants use the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline while the e-Boxer Hybrid variant use the 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid.\nNorth America.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was released in North America in the second quarter of 2024 for the 2025 model year, in Base, Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring trim levels. In Canada, the same five trims are known as Convenience, Touring, Sport, Limited and Premier, respectively. For the North American market, it is powered by the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline powertrain.\nThe Forester Hybrid went on sale in February 2025 for the 2025 model year, powered by the 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid, it is available in Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring trims.\nAsia.\nIndonesia.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in Indonesia on July 23, 2025 at the 32nd Indonesia International Motor Show, as the first ASEAN country to market the sixth-generation Forester. It is available in the sole variant powered by the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline.\nJapan.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was released in Japan on April 17, 2025, with three variants: Sport, X-Break S:HEV and Premium S:HEV. All three variants have the option of the Subaru EyeSight (EX) system. For powertrains, the Forester is available with 1.8-liter CB18 turbocharged gasoline and 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid (S:HEV) powertrains. In the Japanese market, the Forester is available with an external airbag designed specifically for cyclists, a world's first feature in the automotive industry, that deploys the airbag near the top of the hood.\nMalaysia.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in Malaysia on October 30, 2025. Fully imported from Japan, it is available in the sole variant: 2.5i-S EyeSight powered by the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline.\nPhilippines.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in the Philippines on September 27, 2025. It is available in a sole variant: e-Boxer Hybrid powered by a 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid.\nThailand.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in Thailand on October 3, 2025. Fully imported from Japan, it is available in the sole variant: 2.5 i-S EyeSight powered by the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline.\nEurope.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was released in the European market in October 2024, it is powered by the 2.0-liter FB20D e-Boxer gasoline mild hybrid powertrain.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in Australia on May 28, 2025, with four variants: Standard, Premium, Sport and Touring. For engines, it is available with either 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline and 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid powertrains.\nNew Zealand.\nThe sixth-generation Forester went on sale in New Zealand on June 5, 2025 with customer deliveries commenced in July 2025. It is available with three trim levels: Standard, Sport and Touring. For powertrains, all three trims were available with either 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline and 2.5-liter FB25D gasoline hybrid powertrains.\nSouth Africa.\nThe sixth-generation Forester was launched in South Africa on August 28, 2025, with four trim levels: Field, Touring, Sport and Premium, it is powered by the 2.5-liter FB25 gasoline.\nSafety.\nIIHS.\nThe 2025 model year Forester was awarded \"Top Safety Pick\" by IIHS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29312", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29312", "title": "St Helena", "text": ""}
{"id": "29313", "revid": "20549476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29313", "title": "Second-system effect", "text": "Project management phenomenon\nThe second-system effect or second-system syndrome is the tendency of small, elegant, and successful systems to be succeeded by over-engineered, bloated systems, due to inflated expectations and overconfidence.\nThe phrase was first used by Fred Brooks in his book \"The Mythical Man-Month\", first published in 1975. It described the jump from a set of simple operating systems on the IBM 700/7000 series to OS/360 on the 360 series, which happened in 1964.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29314", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29314", "title": "Symphonic rock", "text": ""}
{"id": "29316", "revid": "49720507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29316", "title": "Sandinista National Liberation Front", "text": "Nicaraguan socialist political party founded in 1961\n \nThe Sandinista National Liberation Front (, FSLN) is a socialist political party in Nicaragua. Its members are called Sandinistas () in both English and Spanish. The party is named after Augusto C\u00e9sar Sandino, who led the Nicaraguan resistance against the United States occupation of Nicaragua in the 1930s.\nThe FSLN overthrew Anastasio Somoza Debayle in the 1979 Nicaraguan Revolution, ending the Somoza dynasty, and established a revolutionary government in its place. Having seized power, the Sandinistas ruled Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, first as part of a Junta of National Reconstruction. Following the resignation of centrist members from this Junta, the FSLN took exclusive power in March 1981. They instituted literacy programs, nationalization, land reform, and devoted significant resources to healthcare, but came under international criticism for human rights abuses, including mass execution and oppression of indigenous peoples. They were also criticized for mismanaging the economy and overseeing runaway inflation.\nA US-backed group, known as the Contras, was formed in 1981 to overthrow the Sandinista government and was funded and trained by the Central Intelligence Agency. The United States sought to place economic pressure on the Sandinista government by imposing a full trade embargo and by planting underwater mines in Nicaragua's ports. In 1984, free and fair elections were held, but were boycotted by opposition parties. The FSLN won the majority of the votes, and those who opposed the Sandinistas won approximately a third of the seats. The civil war between the Contras and the government continued until 1989. After revising the constitution in 1987, and after years of fighting the Contras, the FSLN lost the 1990 election to Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in an election marked by US interference, but retained a plurality of seats in the legislature.\nThe FSLN is now Nicaragua's dominant party. Since the 2006 Nicaraguan general election when Daniel Ortega was reelected President of Nicaragua, Ortega and the FSLN have centralized power and overseen democratic backsliding in Nicaragua. In October 2009, the Supreme Court, which has a majority of Sandinista judges, overturned presidential term limits that were set by the constitution. Ortega and the FSLN were reelected in the presidential elections of 2011, 2016, and 2021, although these elections have been denounced entirely by international observers. The party is firmly controlled by Ortega.\nHistory.\nOrigin of the term Sandinista.\nThe Sandinistas took their name from Augusto C\u00e9sar Sandino (1895\u20131934), the leader of Nicaragua's nationalist rebellion against the US occupation of the country during the early 20th century (ca. 1922\u20131934). The suffix \"-ista\" is the Spanish equivalent of \"-ist\".\nSandino was assassinated in 1934 by the Nicaraguan National Guard (), the US-equipped police force of Anastasio Somoza, whose family ruled the country from 1936 until they were overthrown by the Sandinistas in 1979.\nPrecursor to Revolution (1933\u20131961).\nThe second U.S. intervention in Nicaragua ended when Juan Bautista Sacasa of the Liberal Party won the elections. By 1 January 1933 there wasn't a single US soldier left on Nicaraguan soil, however in 1930 the US had formed a group for national security known as the National Guard. The National Guard remained after the exit of the U.S. under the leadership of Anastasio Somoza Garcia who was supported by the U.S. On 21 February 1934, Somoza, using the National Guard, assassinated Sandino who opposed and fought against US intervention. This was the first act of a series that Somoza, with help from the U.S., would take that would culminate in his election as president in 1936. The result of his election was the start of the U.S. sponsored dictatorship of the Somoza family.\nDuring the 1960s, leftist ideas began spreading worldwide, sparking independence movements in different colonial territories. On 1 January 1959 in Havana, Cuban revolutionaries fought against dictator Fulgencio Batista. In Algeria the Algerian National Liberation Front was founded to fight against French colonial control. In Nicaragua, different movements that opposed the Somoza dynasty began to unite, forming the Nicaraguan National Liberation Front which would later be renamed the Sandinista National Liberation Front.\nThe economic situation of Nicaragua in the mid-20th century had deteriorated as the prices of agricultural exports such as cotton and coffee dropped. Politically, the conservative party of Nicaragua split and one of the factions, the Zancudos, began collaborating with the Somoza regime.\nAnastasio Somoza Garcia was assassinated by poet Rigoberto Lopez Perez in 1956.\nIn 1957 Carlos Fonseca Amador, Silvio Mayorga, Tom\u00e1s Borge, Oswaldo Madriz y Heriberto Carrillo formed the first cell of the Nicaraguan Revolutionary Committee who identified with the issues of the proletariat. Later that October, the Mexican cell was formed with members such as Ed\u00e9n Pastora G\u00f3mez, Juan Jos\u00e9 Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez, Roger Hern\u00e1ndez, Porfirio Molina y Pedro Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ednez Alvarado.\nIn October 1958 Ramon Raudales began his guerilla war against the Somoza dynasty beginning the armed conflict.\nJune 1959 the event known as \"El Chaparral\" occurred in Honduran territory bordering Nicaragua. The guerrilla fighters \"Rigoberto L\u00f3pez P\u00e9rez\" under the command of Rafael Somarriba (in which Carlos Fonseca was integrated) was found and annihilated by the Honduran Army in coordination with the intelligence services of the Nicaraguan National Guard.\nAfter \"El Chaparral\", several more armed rebellions took place. In August the journalist Manuel D\u00edaz y Sotelo died; in September Carlos \"Chale\" Haslam died; in December Heriberto Reyes (Colonel of the ) died. The following year the events of \"El Dorado\" (February 28, 1960) took place where several events occurred leading to several deaths including Luis Morales, Julio Alonso Leclair (head of the September 15 column), Manuel Baldiz\u00f3n and Erasmo Montoya.\nThe conventional opposition, up to that point led by the Nicaraguan Communist Party, had not been able to form a common front against the dictatorship. The opposition to the dictatorship was established around various student organizations. Among its leaders, Carlos Fonseca Amador in the early 1960s.\nAt the start of 1961 the New Nicaragua Movement (NNM) was founded by prominent leaders in education like Carlos Fonseca, Silvio Mayorga, Tom\u00e1s Borge, Gordillo, Navarro y Francisco Buitrago; prominent leaders on workers issues such as Jose Benito Escobar; countryside leaders like Germ\u00e1n Pomares and small business leaders such as Julio Jerez Su\u00e1rez. Legendary guerilla veteran Santos Lopez, who fought with Augusto Cesar Sandino, also participated in the NNM.\nThe New Nicaragua Movement was established in three cities Managua, Leon and Estel\u00ed, however they were generally stationed in Honduras. Their first public activity was held in March 1961, in support of the Cuban revolution and in protest of the position that the Nicaraguan government held with Cuba. The NNM later dissolved to make way for the National Liberation Front.\nThe New Nicaragua Movement soon dissolved with its members forming the National Liberation Front, FLN.\nFounding (1961\u20131970).\nThe FSLN originated in the milieu of various oppositional organizations, youth and student groups in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The university of L\u00e9on, and the National Autonomous University of Nicaragua (UNAN) in Managua were two of the principal centers of activity. Inspired by the Revolution and the FLN in Algeria, the FSLN was founded in 1961 by Carlos Fonseca, Silvio Mayorga, Tom\u00e1s Borge, Casimiro Sotelo and others as \"The National Liberation Front\" (FLN). Only Borge lived long enough to see the Sandinista victory in 1979.\nA congress or assembly is not formed between all the prominent leaders of the various groups as the preparation would have required a prior theoretical process in order to create them. As a result, the FSLN was not prepared for its own formation. Different discussions took place within the group as they came to a consensus on political ideas. Even in 1963, while still under the name of FLN, there was a lack of internal coherence in political ideas (this can be seen in the publication of the newspaper Trinchera). The first few years were carried by some basic shared values of all the forces that were being integrated. Some of these basic shared ideas was to imitate the success of the Cuban Revolution, the ineffectiveness of the conventional opposition to the Somoza regime and the need to remain independent of them (referring to the from the conservative, liberal and communist parties), the need for a revolutionary movement that would use the armed struggle as opposition to the Somoza dictatorship, and after some discussion, identification with Sandino's struggle. It was not until 1969 that any programmatic document was published.\nThe Sandinista National Liberation Front was supposedly founded in a meeting in Tegucigalpa (Honduras) between Carlos Fonseca, Tom\u00e1s Borge, and Silvio Mayorga. It's even been said that the meeting was held on July 19, 1961. In reality, there is no documentary reference that supports this affirmation, with the first news of this meeting and date surfacing after the revolutionary triumph of 1979.\nThe term \"Sandinista\" was adopted two years later, establishing continuity with Sandino's movement, and using his legacy to develop the newer movement's ideology and strategy. By the early 1970s, the FSLN was launching limited military initiatives.\nRise (1970\u20131976).\nOn December 23, 1972, a magnitude 6.2 earthquake leveled the capital city, Managua. The earthquake killed 10,000 of the city's 400,000 residents and left another 50,000 homeless. About 80% of Managua's commercial buildings were destroyed. President Anastasio Somoza Debayle's National Guard embezzled much of the international aid that flowed into the country to assist in reconstruction, and several parts of downtown Managua were never rebuilt. The president gave reconstruction contracts preferentially to family and friends, thereby profiting from the quake and increasing his control of the city's economy. By some estimates, his personal wealth rose to US$400 million in 1974.\nIn December 1974, a guerrilla group affiliated with FSLN directed by Eduardo Contreras and Germ\u00e1n Pomares seized government hostages at a party in the house of the Minister of Agriculture in the Managua suburb Los Robles, among them several leading Nicaraguan officials and Somoza relatives. The siege was carefully timed to take place after the departure of the US ambassador from the gathering. At 10:50 pm, a group of 15 young guerrillas and their commanders, Pomares and Contreras, entered the house. They killed the minister, who tried to shoot them, during the takeover. The guerrillas received US$2 million ransom, and had their official communiqu\u00e9 read on the radio and printed in the newspaper \"La Prensa\".\nOver the next year, the guerrillas got 14 Sandinista prisoners released from jail, and with them were flown to Cuba. One of the released prisoners was Daniel Ortega, who later became president of Nicaragua. The group also lobbied for an increase in wages for National Guard soldiers to 500 c\u00f3rdobas ($71 at the time). The Somoza government responded with further censorship, intimidation, torture, and murder.\nIn 1975, Somoza imposed a state of siege, censoring the press, and threatening all opponents with internment and torture. Somoza's National Guard also increased its violence against people and communities suspected of collaborating with the Sandinistas. Many of the FSLN guerrillas were killed, including its leader and founder Carlos Fonseca in 1976. Fonseca had returned to Nicaragua in 1975 from his exile in Cuba to try to reunite factions that existed in the FSLN. He and his group were betrayed by someone who informed the National Guard that they were in the area. The guerrilla group was ambushed, and Fonseca was wounded in the process. The next morning the National Guard executed Fonseca.\nSplit (1977\u20131978).\nAfter the FSLN's defeat at the battle of Pancas\u00e1n in 1967, it adopted the \"Prolonged Popular War\" (\"Guerra Popular Prolongada\", GPP) theory as its strategic doctrine. The GPP was based on the \"accumulation of forces in silence\": while the urban organization recruited on the university campuses and robbed money from banks, the main cadres were to permanently settle in the north central mountain zone. There they would build a grassroots peasant support base in preparation for renewed rural guerrilla warfare.\nAs a consequence of the repressive campaign of the National Guard, in 1975 a group within the FSLN's urban mobilization arm began to question the GPP's viability. In the view of the young orthodox Marxist intellectuals, such as Jaime Wheelock, economic development had turned Nicaragua into a nation of factory workers and wage-earning farm laborers. Wheelock's faction was known as the \"Proletarian Tendency\".\nShortly after, a third faction arose within the FSLN. The \"Insurrectional Tendency\", also known as the \"Third Way\" or \"Terceristas\", led by Daniel Ortega, his brother Humberto Ortega, and Mexican-born Victor Tirado Lopez, was more pragmatic and called for tactical, temporary alliances with non-communists, including the right-wing opposition, in a popular front against the Somoza regime. By attacking the Guard directly, the Terceristas would demonstrate the regime's weakness and encourage others to take up arms.\nIn October 1977, a group of prominent Nicaraguan professionals, business leaders, and clergymen allied with the Terceristas to form \"El Grupo de los Doce\" (The Group of Twelve) in Costa Rica. The group's main idea was to organize a provisional government in Costa Rica. The Terceristas' new strategy also included unarmed strikes and rioting by labor and student groups coordinated by the FSLN's \"United People's Movement\" (Movimiento Pueblo Unido \u2013 MPU).\nInsurrection (1978).\nOn January 10, 1978, Pedro Joaqu\u00edn Chamorro, the editor of the opposition newspaper \"La Prensa\" and leader of the \"Democratic Union of Liberation\" (Uni\u00f3n Democr\u00e1tica de Liberaci\u00f3n \u2013 UDEL), was assassinated. His assassins were not identified at the time, but evidence implicated Somoza's son and other members of the National Guard. Spontaneous riots followed in several cities, while the business community organized a general strike demanding Somoza's resignation.\nThe Terceristas carried out attacks in early February in several Nicaraguan cities. The National Guard responded by further increasing repression and using force to contain and intimidate all government opposition. The nationwide strike that paralyzed the country for ten days weakened private enterprises and most of them decided to suspend their participation in less than two weeks. Meanwhile, Somoza asserted his intention to stay in power until the end of his presidential term in 1981. The United States government showed its displeasure with Somoza by suspending all military assistance to the regime, but continued to approve economic assistance to the country for humanitarian reasons.\nIn August, the Terceristas took hostages. Twenty-three Tercerista commandos led by Ed\u00e9n Pastora seized the entire Nicaraguan congress and took nearly 1,000 hostages, including Somoza's nephew Jos\u00e9 Somoza Abrego and cousin Luis Pallais Debayle. Somoza gave in to their demands and paid a $500,000 ransom, released 59 political prisoners (including GPP chief Tom\u00e1s Borge), broadcast a communiqu\u00e9 with FSLN's call for general insurrection and gave the guerrillas safe passage to Panama.\nA few days later six Nicaraguan cities rose in revolt. Armed youths took over the highland city of Matagalpa. Tercerista cadres attacked Guard posts in Managua, Masaya, Le\u00f3n, Chinandega and Estel\u00ed. Large numbers of semi-armed civilians joined the revolt and put the Guard garrisons of the latter four cities under siege. The September Insurrection of 1978 was subdued at the cost of several thousand, mostly civilian, casualties. Members of all three factions fought in these uprisings, which began to blur the divisions and prepare the way for unified action.\nReunification (1979).\nIn early 1979, President Jimmy Carter and the United States ended support for the Somoza government, but did not want a left-wing government to take power in Nicaragua. This was a crucial moment for what many historians call \"Latin America's Cold War\", as the Somoza regime fell apart without assistance from the United States. The moderate \"Broad Opposition Front\" (\"Frente Amplio Opositor\" \u2013 FAO), which opposed Somoza, was made up of a conglomeration of dissidents within the government as well as the \"Democratic Union of Liberation\" (UDEL) and the \"Twelve\", representatives of the Terceristas (whose founding members included Casimiro A. Sotelo, later to become Ambassador to the U.S. and Canada representing the FSLN). The FAO and Carter came up with a plan to remove Somoza from office but give the FSLN no government power. The FAO's efforts lost political legitimacy, as the grassroots support of the FSLN wanted more structural changes and was opposed to \"Somocism without Somoza\".\nThe \"Twelve\" abandoned the coalition in protest and formed the \"National Patriotic Front\" (\"Frente Patriotico Nacional\" \u2013 FPN) together with the \"United People's Movement\" (MPU). This strengthened the revolutionary organizations as tens of thousands of youths joined the FSLN and the fight against Somoza. A direct consequence of the spread of the armed struggle in Nicaragua was the official reunification of the FSLN that took place March 7, 1979. Nine men, three from each tendency, formed the National Directorate that led the reunited FSLN: Daniel Ortega, Humberto Ortega and V\u00edctor Tirado (Terceristas); Tom\u00e1s Borge, Bayardo Arce Casta\u00f1o, and Henry Ruiz (GPP faction); and Jaime Wheelock, Luis Carri\u00f3n and Carlos N\u00fa\u00f1ez.\nNicaraguan Revolution.\nThe FSLN evolved from one of many opposition groups to a leadership role in the overthrow of the Somoza regime. By mid-April 1979, five guerrilla fronts opened under the FSLN's joint command, including an internal front in Managua. Young guerrilla cadres and the National Guardsmen were clashing almost daily in cities throughout the country. The Final Offensive's strategic goal was the division of the enemy's forces. Urban insurrection was the crucial element because the FSLN could never hope to outnumber or outgun the National Guard.\nOn June 4, the FSLN called a general strike, to last until Somoza fell and an uprising was launched in Managua. On June 16, the formation of a provisional Nicaraguan government in exile, consisting of a five-member Junta of National Reconstruction, was announced and organized in Costa Rica. The members of the new junta were Daniel Ortega (FSLN), Mois\u00e9s Hass\u00e1n (FPN), Sergio Ram\u00edrez (the \"Twelve\"), Alfonso Robelo (MDN) and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the widow of \"La Prensa\"'s director Pedro Joaqu\u00edn Chamorro. By the end of that month, with the exception of the capital, most of Nicaragua was under FSLN control, including Le\u00f3n and Matagalpa, Nicaragua's two largest cities after Managua.\nOn July 9, the provisional government in exile released a government program in which it pledged to organize an effective democratic regime, promote political pluralism and universal suffrage, and ban ideological discrimination, except for those promoting the \"return of Somoza's rule\". On July 17, Somoza resigned, handed over power to Francisco Urcuyo, and fled to Miami. While initially seeking to remain in power to serve out Somoza's presidential term, Urcuyo ceded his position to the junta and fled to Guatemala two days later.\nOn July 19, the 18th anniversary of the foundation of the FSLN, the FSLN army entered Managua, culminating the first goal of the revolution. The war left 30,000\u201350,000 dead and 150,000 Nicaraguans in exile. The five-member junta entered Managua the next day and assumed power, reiterating its pledge to work for political pluralism, a mixed economic system, and a nonaligned foreign policy.\nSandinista rule (1979\u20131990).\nThe Sandinistas inherited a country with a debt of US$1.6 billion, an estimated 30,000 to 50,000 war dead, 600,000 homeless, and a devastated economic infrastructure. To begin establishing a new government, they created a Council (or ) of National Reconstruction, made up of five appointed members. Three of the appointed members\u2014Sandinista militants Daniel Ortega, Mois\u00e9s Hass\u00e1n, and novelist Sergio Ram\u00edrez (a member of Los Doce \"the Twelve\")\u2014belonged to the FSLN. Two opposition members, businessman Alfonso Robelo, and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro (the widow of Pedro Joaqu\u00edn Chamorro), were also appointed. Only three votes were needed to pass law.\nThe FSLN also established a Council of State, subordinate to the junta, which was composed of representative bodies. But the Council of State gave political parties only 12 of 47 seats; the rest were given to Sandinista organizations. Of the 12 seats reserved for political parties, only three were not allied with the FSLN. Due to the rules governing the Council of State, in 1980 both non-FSLN junta members resigned. Nevertheless, as of the 1982 State of Emergency, opposition parties were no longer given representation in the council. The preponderance of power also remained with the Sandinistas through their mass organizations, including the Sandinista Workers' Federation (), the Luisa Amanda Espinoza Nicaraguan Women's Association (), the National Union of Farmers and Ranchers (), and most importantly the Sandinista Defense Committees (CDS). The Sandinista-controlled mass organizations were extremely influential over civil society and saw their power and popularity peak in the mid-1980s.\nUpon assuming power, the FSLN's official political platform included nationalization of property owned by the Somozas and their supporters; land reform; improved rural and urban working conditions; free unionization for all workers, both urban and rural; price fixing for commodities of basic necessity; improved public services, housing conditions, education; abolition of torture, political assassination and the death penalty; protection of democratic liberties; equality for women; non-aligned foreign policy; and formation of a \"popular army\" under the leadership of the FSLN and Humberto Ortega.\nThe FSLN's literacy campaign sent teachers into the countryside; within six months, half a million people had been taught rudimentary reading, bringing the national illiteracy rate down from over 50% to just under 12%. Over 100,000 Nicaraguans participated as literacy teachers. One of the literacy campaign's aims was to create a literate electorate that could make informed choices in the promised elections. The success of the literacy campaign was recognized by UNESCO with a Nadezhda Krupskaya International Prize, although the actual success of this literary campaign, and its long-term impact, have been called into question.\nThe FSLN also created neighborhood groups similar to the Cuban Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, called Sandinista Defense Committees ( or CDS). Especially in the early days following Somoza's overthrow, the CDSes served as \"de facto\" units of local governance. Their obligations included political education, organizing Sandinista rallies, distributing food rations, organizing neighborhood/regional cleanup and recreational activities, policing to control looting, and apprehending counter-revolutionaries. The CDSes organized civilian defense efforts against Contra activities and a network of intelligence systems in order to apprehend their supporters. These activities led critics of the Sandinistas to argue that the CDS was a system of local spy networks for the government used to stifle political dissent, and the CDS did hold limited powers\u2014such as the ability to suspend privileges such as driver licenses and passports\u2014if locals refused to cooperate with the government. After the initiation of heavier U.S. military involvement in the Nicaraguan conflict the CDS was empowered to enforce wartime bans on political assembly and association with other political parties (i.e., parties associated with the Contras).\nBy 1980, conflicts began to emerge between the Sandinista and non-Sandinista members of the governing junta. Violeta Chamorro and Alfonso Robelo resigned from the junta in 1980, and rumors began that members of the Ortega junta would consolidate power among themselves. These allegations spread, and rumors intensified that it was Ortega's goal to turn Nicaragua into a state modeled after Cuban socialism. In 1979 and 1980, former Somoza supporters and ex-members of Somoza's National Guard formed irregular military forces, while the original core of the FSLN began to splinter. Armed opposition to the Sandinista government eventually divided into two main groups: The Fuerza Democr\u00e1tica Nicarag\u00fcense (FDN), a U.S.-supported army formed in 1981 by the CIA, U.S. State Department, and former members of the Somoza-era Nicaraguan National Guard; and the Alianza Revolucionaria Democratica (ARDE) Democratic Revolutionary Alliance, a group that had existed since before the FSLN and was led by Sandinista founder and former FSLN supreme commander Ed\u00e9n Pastora, a.k.a. \"Commander Zero\". Milpistas, former anti-Somoza rural militias, eventually formed the largest pool of recruits for the Contras. Although independent and often in conflict with each other, these guerrilla bands\u2014along with several others\u2014all became known as Contras (short for \u2014counter-revolutionaries).\nThe opposition militias were initially organized and largely remained segregated according to regional affiliation and political backgrounds. They conducted attacks on economic, military, and civilian targets. During the Contra war, the Sandinistas arrested suspected members of the Contra militias and censored publications they accused of collaborating with the enemy, such as the U.S., the FDN, and ARDE.\nState of Emergency (1982\u20131988).\nIn March 1982 the Sandinistas declared an official State of Emergency. They argued that this was a response to attacks by counter-revolutionary forces. The State of Emergency lasted six years, until January 1988, when it was lifted.\nUnder the new \"Law for the Maintenance of Order and Public Security\" the \"Tribunales Populares Anti-Somocistas\" allowed for the indefinite holding of suspected counter-revolutionaries without trial. The State of Emergency, however, most notably affected rights and guarantees contained in the \"Statute on Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans\". Many civil liberties were curtailed or canceled such as the freedom to organize demonstrations, the inviolability of the home, freedom of the press, freedom of speech, and the freedom to strike.\nAll independent news program broadcasts were suspended. In total, twenty-four programs were cancelled. In addition, Sandinista censor Nelba Cecilia Bland\u00f3n issued a decree ordering all radio stations to take broadcasts from government radio station La Voz de La Defensa de La Patria every six hours.\nThe rights affected also included certain procedural guarantees in the case of detention including habeas corpus. The State of Emergency was not lifted during the 1984 elections. There were many instances where rallies of opposition parties were physically broken up by Sandinista Youth or pro-Sandinista mobs. Opponents to the State of Emergency argued its intent was to crush resistance to the FSLN. James Wheelock justified the actions of the Directorate by saying \"...\u00a0We are annulling the license of the false prophets and the oligarchs to attack the revolution.\"\nSome emergency measures were taken before 1982. In December 1979 special courts called \"Tribunales Especiales\" were established to speed up the processing of 7,000-8,000 National Guard prisoners. These courts operated through relaxed rules of evidence and due process and were often staffed by law students and inexperienced lawyers. However, the decisions of the \"Tribunales Especiales\" were subject to appeal in regular courts. Many of the National Guard prisoners were released immediately due to lack of evidence. Others were pardoned or released by decree. By 1986 only 2,157 remained in custody and only 39 were still being held in 1989 when they were released under the Esquipulas II agreement.\nOn October 5, 1985, the Sandinistas broadened the 1982 State of Emergency and suspended many more civil rights. A new regulation also forced any organization outside of the government to first submit any statement it wanted to make public to the censorship bureau for prior approval.\nThe FSLN lost power in the presidential election of 1990 when Daniel Ortega was defeated in an election for the Presidency of Nicaragua by Violeta Chamorro.\nSandinistas vs. Contras.\nUpon assuming office in 1981, U.S. President Ronald Reagan condemned the FSLN for joining with Cuba in supporting \"Marxist\" revolutionary movements in other Latin American countries such as El Salvador. His administration authorized the CIA to begin financing, arming and training rebels, most of whom were the remnants of Somoza's National Guard, as anti-Sandinista guerrillas that were branded \"counter-revolutionary\" by leftists ( in Spanish). This was shortened to \"Contras\", a label the force chose to embrace. Ed\u00e9n Pastora and many of the indigenous guerrilla forces, who were not associated with the \"Somocistas\", also resisted the Sandinistas.\nThe Contras operated out of camps in the neighboring countries of Honduras to the north and Costa Rica (see Ed\u00e9n Pastora cited below) to the south. As was typical in guerrilla warfare, they were engaged in a campaign of economic sabotage in an attempt to combat the Sandinista government and disrupted shipping by planting underwater mines in Nicaragua's Corinto harbour, an action condemned by the International Court of Justice as illegal. The U.S. also sought to place economic pressure on the Sandinistas, and, as with Cuba, the Reagan administration imposed a full trade embargo.\nThe Contras also carried out a systematic campaign to disrupt the social reform programs of the government. This campaign included attacks on schools, health centers and the majority of the rural population that was sympathetic to the Sandinistas. Widespread murder, rape, and torture were also used as tools to destabilize the government and to \"terrorize\" the population into collaborating with the Contras. Throughout this campaign, the Contras received military and financial support from the CIA and the Reagan Administration. This campaign has been condemned internationally for its many human rights violations. Contra supporters have often tried to downplay these violations, or countered that the Sandinista government carried out much more. In particular, the Reagan administration engaged in a campaign to alter public opinion on the Contras that has been termed \"white propaganda\". In 1984, the International Court of Justice judged that the United States Government had been in violation of International law when it supported the Contras.\nAfter the U.S. Congress prohibited federal funding of the Contras through the Boland Amendment in 1983, the Reagan administration continued to back the Contras by raising money from foreign allies and covertly selling arms to Iran (then engaged in a war with Iraq), and channelling the proceeds to the Contras (see the Iran\u2013Contra affair). When this scheme was revealed, Reagan admitted that he knew about Iranian \"arms for hostages\" dealings but professed ignorance about the proceeds funding the Contras; for this, National Security Council aide Lt. Col. Oliver North took much of the blame.\nSenator John Kerry's 1988 U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations report on links between the Contras and drug imports to the US concluded that \"senior U.S. policy makers were not immune to the idea that drug money was a perfect solution to the Contras' funding problems\". According to the National Security Archive, Oliver North had been in contact with Manuel Noriega, the US-backed president of Panama. The Reagan administration's support for the Contras continued to stir controversy well into the 1990s. In August 1996, \"San Jose Mercury News\" reporter Gary Webb published a series titled \"Dark Alliance\", linking the origins of crack cocaine in California to the CIA-Contra alliance. Webb's allegations were repudiated by reports from the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"The New York Times\", and \"The Washington Post\", and the \"San Jose Mercury News\" eventually disavowed his work. An investigation by the United States Department of Justice also stated that their \"review did not substantiate the main allegations stated and implied in the Mercury News articles\". Regarding the specific charges towards the CIA, the DOJ wrote \"the implication that the drug trafficking by the individuals discussed in the \"Mercury News\" articles was connected to the CIA was also not supported by the facts\". The CIA also investigated and rejected the allegations.\nThe Contra war unfolded differently in the northern and southern zones of Nicaragua. Contras based in Costa Rica operated on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast, which is sparsely populated by indigenous groups including the Miskito, Sumo, Rama, Garifuna, and Mestizo. Unlike Spanish-speaking western Nicaragua, the Caribbean Coast also has lots of speakers of indigenous languages and English-based creoles, and was largely ignored by the Somoza regime. The \"coste\u00f1os\" did not participate in the uprising against Somoza and viewed Sandinismo with suspicion from the outset.\nElections.\n1984 election.\nWhile the Sandinistas encouraged grassroots pluralism, they were perhaps less enthusiastic about national elections. They argued that popular support was expressed in the insurrection and that further appeals to popular support would be a waste of scarce resources. International pressure and domestic opposition eventually pressed the government toward a national election. Tom\u00e1s Borge warned that the elections were a concession, an act of generosity and of political necessity. On the other hand, the Sandinistas had little to fear from the election given the advantages of incumbency and the restrictions on the opposition, and they hoped to discredit the armed efforts to overthrow them.\nA broad range of political parties, ranging in political orientation from far-left to far-right, competed for power. Following promulgation of a new populist constitution, Nicaragua held national elections in 1984. Independent electoral observers from around the world\u2014including groups from the UN as well as observers from Western Europe\u2014claimed that the elections had been fair. Several groups, however, disputed this, including UNO, a broad coalition of anti-Sandinista activists, COSEP, an organization of business leaders, the Contra group \"FDN\", organized by former Somozan-era National Guardsmen, landowners, businessmen, peasant highlanders, and what some claimed as their patron, the U.S. government.\nAlthough initially willing to stand in the 1984 elections, the UNO, headed by Arturo Cruz (a former Sandinista), declined participation in the elections based on their own objections to the restrictions placed on the electoral process by the State of Emergency and the official advisement of President Ronald Reagan's State Department, who wanted to de-legitimize the election process. Among other parties that abstained was COSEP, who had warned the FSLN that they would decline participation unless freedom of the press was reinstituted. Coordinadora Democr\u00e1tica (CD) also refused to file candidates and urged Nicaraguans not to take part in the election. The Independent Liberal Party (PLI), headed by Virgilio Godoy Reyes, announced its refusal to participate in October. Consequently, when the elections went ahead the U.S. raised objections based upon political restrictions instituted by the State of Emergency (e.g., censorship of the press, cancellation of habeas corpus, and the curtailing of free assembly).\nDaniel Ortega and Sergio Ram\u00edrez were elected president and vice-president, and the FSLN won an overwhelming 61 out of 96 seats in the new National Assembly, having taken 67% of the vote on a turnout of 75%. Despite international validation of the elections by multiple political and independent observers (virtually all from among U.S. allies), the United States refused to recognize the elections, with President Ronald Reagan denouncing the elections as a sham. Daniel Ortega began his six-year presidential term on January 10, 1985. After the United States Congress turned down continued funding of the Contras in April 1985, the Reagan administration ordered a total embargo on United States trade with Nicaragua the following month, accusing the Sandinista government of threatening United States security in the region.\n1990 election.\nThe elections of 1990, which had been mandated by the constitution passed in 1987, saw the Bush administration funnel $49.75 million of 'non-lethal' aid to the Contras, as well as $9 million to the opposition UNO\u2014equivalent to $2 billion worth of intervention by a foreign power in a US election at the time, and proportionately five times the amount George Bush had spent on his own election campaign. When Violeta Chamorro visited the White House in November 1989, the US pledged to maintain the embargo against Nicaragua unless Violeta Chamorro won.\nThere were reports of intimidation and violence during the election campaign by the contras, with a Canadian observer mission claiming that 42 people were killed by the contras in \"election violence\" in October 1989. Sandinistas were also accused of intimidation and violence during the election campaign. According to the Puebla Institute, by mid-December 1989, seven opposition leaders had been murdered, 12 had disappeared, 20 had been arrested, and 30 others assaulted. In late January 1990, the OAS observer team reported that \"a convoy of troops attacked four truckloads of UNO sympathizers with bayonets and rifle butts, threatening to kill them.\"\nYears of conflict had left 50,000 casualties and $12 billion of damages in a society of 3.5 million people and an annual GNP of $2 billion. After the election, a survey was taken of voters: 75.6% agreed that if the Sandinistas had won, the war would never have ended. 91.8% of those who voted for the UNO agreed with this (William I Robinson, op cit). The Library of Congress Country Studies on Nicaragua states:\nDespite limited resources and poor organization, the UNO coalition under Violeta Chamorro directed a campaign centered around the failing economy and promises of peace. Many Nicaraguans expected the country's economic crisis to deepen and the Contra conflict to continue if the Sandinistas remained in power. Chamorro promised to end the unpopular military draft, bring about democratic reconciliation, and promote economic growth. In the February 25, 1990, elections, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro carried 55 percent of the popular vote against Daniel Ortega's 41 percent.\nOpposition (1990\u20132006).\nIn 1987, due to a stalemate with the Contras, the Esquipulas II treaty was brokered by Costa Rican President \u00d3scar Arias S\u00e1nchez. The treaty's provisions included a call for a cease-fire, freedom of expression, and national elections. After the February 26, 1990 elections, the Sandinistas lost and peacefully passed power to the National Opposition Union (UNO), an alliance of 14 opposition parties ranging from the conservative business organization COSEP to Nicaraguan communists. UNO's candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, replaced Daniel Ortega as president of Nicaragua.\nReasons for the Sandinista loss in 1990 are disputed. Defenders of the defeated government assert that Nicaraguans voted for the opposition due to the continuing U.S. economic embargo and potential Contra threat. Others have alleged that the United States threatened to continue to support the Contras and continue the civil war if the regime was not voted out of power.\nAfter their loss, the Sandinista leaders held most of the private property and businesses that had been confiscated and nationalized by the FSLN government. This process became known as the \"pi\u00f1ata\" and was tolerated by the new Chamorro government. Ortega also claimed to \"rule from below\" through groups he controls such as labor unions and student groups.\nOrtega remained the head of the FSLN, but his brother Humberto resigned from the party and remained at the head of the Sandinista Army, becoming a close confidante and supporter of Chamorro. The party also experienced internal divisions, with prominent Sandinistas such as Ernesto Cardenal and Sergio Ram\u00edrez resigning to protest what they described as heavy-handed domination of the party by Daniel Ortega. Ram\u00edrez also founded a separate political party, the Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS); his faction came to be known as the , who favor a more social democratic approach than the \"ortodoxos\", or hardliners. In the 1996 Nicaraguan election, Ortega and Ram\u00edrez both campaigned unsuccessfully as presidential candidates on behalf of their respective parties, with Ortega receiving 43% of the vote while Arnoldo Alem\u00e1n of the Constitutional Liberal Party received 51%. The Sandinistas won second place in the congressional elections, with 36 of 93 seats.\nOrtega was re-elected as leader of the FSLN in 1998. Municipal elections in November 2000 saw a strong Sandinista vote, especially in urban areas, and former Tourism Minister Herty Lewites was elected mayor of Managua. This result led to expectations of a close race in the presidential elections scheduled for November 2001. Daniel Ortega and Enrique Bola\u00f1os of the Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC) ran neck-and-neck in the polls for much of the campaign, but in the end the PLC won a clear victory. The results of these elections were that the FSLN won 42.6% of the vote for parliament (versus 52.6% for the PLC), giving them 41 out of the 92 seats in the National Assembly (versus 48 for the PLC). In the presidential race, Ortega lost to Bola\u00f1os 46.3% to 53.6%.\nDaniel Ortega was once again re-elected as leader of the FSLN in March 2002 and re-elected as president of Nicaragua in November 2006.\nReturn to government.\nIn 2006, Daniel Ortega was elected president with 38% of the vote (see 2006 Nicaraguan general election). This occurred despite the fact that the breakaway Sandinista Renovation Movement continued to oppose the FSLN, running former Mayor of Managua Herty Lewites as its candidate for president. However, Lewites died several months before the elections.\nThe FSLN also won 38 seats in the congressional elections, becoming the party with the largest representation in parliament. The split in the Constitutionalist Liberal Party helped to allow the FSLN to become the largest party in Congress. The Sandinista vote was also split between the FSLN and MRS, but the split was more uneven, with limited support for the MRS. The vote for the two liberal parties combined was larger than the vote for the two Sandinista parties. In 2010, several liberal congressmen raised accusations about the FSLN presumably attempting to buy votes in order to pass constitutional reforms that would allow Ortega to run for office for the 6th time since 1984. In 2011, Ortega was re-elected as president.\nOrtega was allowed by Nicaraguan Supreme Court to run again as president, despite having already served two mandates, in a move which was strongly criticized by the opposition. The Supreme Court also banned the leader of the Independent Liberal Party Eduardo Montealegre from running in the election. Ortega was re-elected as president, amid claims of electoral fraud; data about turnout were unclear: while the Supreme Electoral Council claimed a turnout of 66% of voters, the opposition claimed only 30% of voters actually went to the polls.\n2018\u201320 protests.\nThe year 2018 was marked by particular unrest in Nicaragua that had not been seen in the country in three decades. It came in two different phases, with initial unrest in the context of a fire at the Indio Ma\u00edz Biological Reserve in the R\u00edo San Juan department (which came to an end when rain abruptly put the fire out), leading on to an outbreak of violence a few weeks later after social security reforms were announced by the government.\nDuring this unrest there were many deaths linked to the violence, as well as many instances of torture, sexual assaults, death threats, ransacking and burning of buildings and violence against journalists. Opposition figures argued that the government was responsible for the violence, a view supported by some press outlets and NGOs such as Amnesty International. Many opposition figures and independent journalists have been arrested and police raids of opposition forces and independent media have occurred frequently.\nOn September 29, 2018, President Ortega declared that the protests were illegal, stating that demonstrators would \"respond to justice.\" The United Nations condemned the actions as being a violation of human rights regarding freedom of assembly.\nCarlos Fernando Chamorro, son of former president Violeta Chamorro and editor of \"Confidencial\", left the country after his office was subject to police search in December 2018.\nIn December 2018, the government revoked the licenses of five human rights organizations, closed the offices of the cable news and online show \"Confidencial\", and beat journalists when they protested.\nThe Confidential newspaper and other media were seized and taken by the government of Daniel Ortega Several service stations of the Puma brand were closed on the afternoon, December 20, by representatives of the Nicaraguan Energy Institute (INE), a state entity that has the mandate to regulate, among others, the hydrocarbons sector. Puma Energy entered the Nicaraguan oil and fuel derivatives market at the end of March 2011, when it bought the entire network of Esso stations in Nicaragua, as part of a regional operation that involved the purchase of 290 service stations and eight storage terminals of fuel in four countries of Central America.\nOn December 21, 2018, the Nicaraguan police raided the offices of the 100% News Channel. They arrested Miguel Mora, owner of the Canal; Luc\u00eda Pineda, Head of Press of 100% Noticias and Ver\u00f3nica Ch\u00e1vez, wife of Miguel Mora and host of the Ellas Lo Dicen Program. Subsequently, Ver\u00f3nica Ch\u00e1vez was released. Miguel Mora and Lucia Pineda were accused of terrorist crimes and provoking hatred and discrimination between the police and Sandinistas.\nOn January 30, 2019, the FSLN was expelled from the Socialist International, which cited \"gross violations of human rights and democratic values committed by the government of Nicaragua\". The ruling Democratic Revolutionary Party of Panama, also a member of the Socialist International, rejected the expulsion of the FSLN and threatened to leave the International, saying that it has abandoned its principles and made a decision regarding Latin America without consulting the Latin American parties, and referred to a \"history of brotherhood in the struggle for social justice in Central America\" between the two parties.\nIdeology.\nThrough the media and the works of FSLN leaders such as Carlos Fonseca, the life and times of Augusto C\u00e9sar Sandino became its unique symbol in Nicaragua. The ideology of Sandinismo gained momentum in 1974, when a Sandinista-initiated hostage situation resulted in the Somoza government adhering to FSLN demands and publicly printing and airing work on Sandino in well known newspapers and media outlets.\nDuring the struggle against Somoza, the FSLN leaders' internal disagreements over strategy and tactics were reflected in three main factions:\nNevertheless, while ideologies varied between FSLN leaders, all leaders essentially agreed that Sandino provided a path for the Nicaragua masses to take charge, and the FSLN would act as the legitimate vanguard. The extreme end of the ideology links Sandino to Roman Catholicism and portrays him as descending from the mountains in Nicaragua knowing he would be betrayed and killed. Generally however, most Sandinistas associated Sandino on a more practical level, as a heroic and honest person who tried to combat the evil forces of imperialist national and international governments that existed in Nicaragua's history.\nAn important part of the Sandinista ideology is Christian socialism and liberation theology. This connection was so strong that Catholic priest Ernesto Cardenal who served as the Minister of Culture in the Sandinista government, remarked: \"I think Nicaraguans who separate Christianity from Revolution are mistaken. Here they are the same thing.\" In response to the growing radicalization and opposition to Somoza amongst the Church, the FSLN incorporated a Catholic message into its program; this was augmented by left-wing Catholic organizations such as the Movimiento Cristiano Revolucionario joining the FSLN, whose members would assume high responsibilities within the Sandinista government. Sandinista activists infiltrated folk and religious imagery - on one such instance, they distributed paintings of the resurrection of Christ, where Christ appeared in a black and red cape (Sandinista colours), which bore the letters FSLN. As the FSLN lacked party structures which could be used for organizing, they relied on friendly clergymen instead; according to Peter Marchetti, this relationship became so intimate that \"the parish replaced Lenin's idea of a cell\". Sandinista Minister of Education Carlos T\u00fcnnerman argued that Sandinismo \"is deeply rooted in Christianity\" and \"came about through a process of Christian self-reflection\".\nAs Sandinistas relied on churches to build their structures, their ideological relationship to Catholicism was not just based on mutual support, but on active incorporation of Political Catholicism. Sandinista musician Carlos Mej\u00eda Godoy composed \"Misa Campesina Nicaraguense\" (Nicaraguan peasant mass) which replaced the traditional mass in Nicaraguan churches, with Catholic hymns praising \"worker Christ\". The FSLN provided churches with decals of Virgin Mary and Catholic saints next to portraits of Augusto Sandino, Che Guevara and Camilo Torres Restrepo. Sandinistas openly promoted the Catholic concept of \"preferential option for the poor\", and the Secretary-General of FSLN Carlos Fonseca remarked: \"Since I began working with the Sandinista Front I have never\u2014never! at any moment met anything which contradicts my Christian faith, nor which clashes with my Christian morality. Never. Just the opposite. For me the Sandinista Front has been the channel that has enabled me to live my Christian faith more authentically, that is, with actions.\" Sandinismo offered a blend of the Marxist notion of class struggle and liberation theology, presenting their ideology as an 'extension' of Catholicism. Tom\u00e1s Borge argued that the Sandinista revolution \"was on behalf of all human beings, but as with Christ above all for the poor.\"\nDespite the left-wing revolutionary rhetoric of the party, critics allege Ortega has more recently allied with the business class and enacted what critical scholars characterize as crony capitalism.\nPrinciples of government.\nFor purposes of making sense of how to govern, the FSLN drew four fundamental principles from the work of Carlos Fonseca and his understanding of the lessons of Sandino. According to Bruce E. Wright, \"the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction agreed, under Sandinista leadership, that these principles had guided it in putting into practice a form of government that was characterized by those principles.\" It is generally accepted that these following principles have evolved the \"ideology of Sandinismo\". Three of these (excluding popular participation, which was presumably contained in Article 2 of the Constitution of Nicaragua) were to ultimately be guaranteed by Article 5 of the Constitution of Nicaragua. They are as follows:\nBruce E. Wright claims that \"this was a crucial contribution from Fonseca's work that set the template for FSLN governance during the revolutionary years and beyond\".\nPolicies and programs.\nForeign policy.\nCuban assistance.\nBeginning in 1967, the Cuban General Intelligence Directorate, or DGI, had begun to establish ties with Nicaraguan revolutionary organizations. By 1970 the DGI had managed to train hundreds of Sandinista guerrilla leaders and had vast influence over the organization. After the successful ousting of Somoza, DGI involvement in the new Sandinista government expanded rapidly. An early indication of the central role that the DGI would play in the Cuban-Nicaraguan relationship is a meeting in Havana on July 27, 1979, at which diplomatic ties between the two countries were re-established after more than 25 years. Juli\u00e1n L\u00f3pez D\u00edaz, a prominent DGI agent, was named Ambassador to Nicaragua. Cuban military and DGI advisors, initially brought in during the Sandinista insurgency, would swell to over 2,500 and operated at all levels of the new Nicaraguan government.\nThe Cubans would like to have helped more in the development of Nicaragua towards socialism. Following the US invasion of Grenada, countries previously looking for support from Cuba saw that the United States was likely to take violent action to discourage this.\nCuban assistance after the revolution.\nThe early years of the Nicaraguan revolution had strong ties to Cuba. The Sandinista leaders acknowledged that the FSLN owed a great debt to the socialist island. Once the Sandinistas assumed power, Cuba gave Nicaragua military advice, as well as aid in education, health care, vocational training and industry building for the impoverished Nicaraguan economy. In return, Nicaragua provided Cuba with grains and other foodstuffs to help Cuba overcome the effects of the US embargo.\nRelationship with eastern bloc intelligence agencies.\nPre-Revolution.\nAccording to Cambridge University historian Christopher Andrew, who undertook the task of processing the Mitrokhin Archive, Carlos Fonseca Amador, one of the original three founding members of the FSLN had been recruited by the KGB in 1959 while on a trip to Moscow. This was one part of Aleksandr Shelepin's 'grand strategy' of using national liberation movements as a spearhead of the Soviet Union's foreign policy in the Third World, and in 1960 the KGB organized funding and training for twelve individuals that Fonseca handpicked. These individuals were to be the core of the new Sandinista organization. In the following several years, the FSLN tried with little success to organize guerrilla warfare against the government of Luis Somoza Debayle. After several failed attempts to attack government strongholds and little initial support from the local population, the National Guard nearly annihilated the Sandinistas in a series of attacks in 1963. Disappointed with the performance of Shelepin's new Latin American \"revolutionary vanguard\", the KGB reconstituted its core of the Sandinista leadership into the ISKRA group and used them for other activities in Latin America.\nAccording to Andrew, Mitrokhin says during the following three years the KGB handpicked several dozen Sandinistas for intelligence and sabotage operations in the United States. Andrew and Mitrokhin say that in 1966, this KGB-controlled Sandinista sabotage and intelligence group was sent to northern Mexico near the US border to conduct surveillance for possible sabotage.\nIn July 1961 during the Berlin Crisis of 1961 KGB chief Alexander Shelepin sent a memorandum to Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev containing proposals to create a situation in various areas of the world which would favor dispersion of attention and forces by the US and their satellites, and would tie them down during the settlement of the question of a German peace treaty and West Berlin. It was planned, inter alia, to organize an armed mutiny in Nicaragua in coordination with Cuba and with the \"Revolutionary Front Sandino\". Shelepin proposed to make appropriations from KGB funds in addition to the previous assistance $10,000 for purchase of arms.\nKhrushchev sent the memo with his approval to his deputy Frol Kozlov and on August 1 it was, with minor revisions, passed as a CPSU Central Committee directive. The KGB and the Soviet Ministry of Defense were instructed to work out more specific measures and present them for consideration by the Central Committee.\nCooperation with foreign intelligence agencies during the 1980s.\nOther researchers have documented the contribution made from other Warsaw Pact intelligence agencies to the fledgling Sandinista government including the East German Stasi, by using recently declassified documents from Berlin as well as from former Stasi spymaster Markus Wolf who described the Stasi's assistance in the creation of a secret police force modeled on East Germany's.\nEducational assistance.\nCuba was instrumental in the Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign. Nicaragua was a country with a very high rate of illiteracy, but the campaign succeeded in lowering the rate from 50% to 12%. The revolution in Cuban education since the ousting of the US-backed Batista regime not only served as a model for Nicaragua but also provided technical assistance and advice. Cuba played an important part in the Campaign, providing teachers on a yearly basis after the revolution. Prevost states that \"Teachers were not the only ones studying in Cuba, about 2,000 primary and secondary students were studying on the Isle of Youth and the cost was covered by the host country (Cuba)\".\n1980 literacy campaign.\nThe goals of the 1980 Literacy Campaign were socio-political, strategic as well as educational. It was the most prominent campaign with regards to the new education system. Illiteracy in Nicaragua was reduced, and it has been claimed that overall illiteracy went down from 50% to 13%, although this figure has been called into question. One of the government's major concerns was the previous education system under the Somoza regime which did not see education as a major factor on the development of the country. As mentioned in the Historical Program of the FSLN of 1969, education was seen as a right and the pressure to stay committed to the promises made in the program was even stronger. 1980 was declared the \"Year of Literacy\" and the major goals of the campaign that started only 8 months after the FSLN took over. This included the eradication of illiteracy and the integration of different classes, races, gender and age. Political awareness and the strengthening of political and economic participation of the Nicaraguan people was also a central goal of the Literacy Campaign. The campaign was a key component of the FSLN's cultural transformation agenda.\nThe basic reader which was disseminated and used by teacher was called \"Dawn of the People\" based on the themes of Sandino, Carlos Fonseca, and the Sandinista struggle against imperialism and defending the revolution. Political education was aimed at creating a new social values based on the principles of Sandinista socialism, such as social solidarity, worker's democracy, egalitarianism, and anti-imperialism.\nHealth care.\nHealth conditions in Somoza era Nicaragua were abysmal according to a report published in the New England Journal of Medicine. Vaccine coverage of babies under a year old was 88% immunised against polio and 78% against measles in 1983. Despite the turmoil caused by the Contra War under-fire mortality was reduced by approximately half during this period.\nIn this area Cuba played a role by again offering expertise to Nicaragua. Over 1,500 Cuban doctors worked in Nicaragua and provided more than five million consultations. Cuban personnel were essential in the elimination of polio, the decrease in whooping cough, rubella, measles and the lowering of the infant mortality rate. Gary Prevost states that Cuban personnel made it possible for Nicaragua to have a national health care system that reached the majority of its citizens.\nVocational assistance.\nCuba has participated in the training of Nicaraguan workers in the use of new machinery imported to Nicaragua. The Nicaraguan revolution caused the United States to oppose the country's government; therefore the Sandinistas would not receive any aid from the United States. The United States embargo against Nicaragua, imposed by the Reagan administration in May 1985, made it impossible for Nicaragua to receive spare parts for US-made machines, so this led Nicaragua to look to other countries for help. Cuba was the best choice because of the shared language and proximity and also because it had imported similar machinery over the years. Nicaraguans went to Cuba for short periods of three to six months and this training involved close to 3,000 workers. Countries such as the UK, sent farm equipment to Nicaragua.\nIndustry and infrastructure.\nCuba helped Nicaragua in large projects such as building roads, power plants and sugar mills. Cuba also attempted to help Nicaragua build the first overland route linking Nicaragua's Atlantic and Pacific coasts. The road was meant to traverse 420 kilometres (260\u00a0mi) of jungle, but completion of the road and usage was hindered by the Contra war, and it was never completed.\nAnother significant feat was the building of the Tipitapa-Malacatoya sugar mill. It was completed and inaugurated during a visit by Fidel Castro in January 1985. The plant used the newest technology available and was built by workers trained in Cuba. Also during this visit Castro announced that all debts incurred on this project were absolved. Cuba also provided technicians to aid in the sugar harvest and assist in the rejuvenation of several old sugar mills. Cubans also assisted in building schools and similar projects.\nMinistry of Culture.\nAfter the Nicaraguan revolution, the Sandinista government established a Ministry of Culture in 1980. The ministry was spearheaded by Ernesto Cardenal, a poet and priest. The ministry was established in order to socialize the modes of cultural production. This extended to art forms including dance, music, art, theatre and poetry. The project was created to democratize culture on a national level. The aim of the ministry was to \"democratize art\" by making it accessible to all social classes as well as protecting the right of the oppressed to produce, distribute and receive art. In particular, the ministry was devoted to the development of working class and \"campesino\", or peasant culture. Therefore, the ministry sponsored cultural workshops throughout the country until October 1988 when the Ministry of Culture was integrated into the Ministry of Education because of financial troubles.\nThe objective of the workshops was to recognize and celebrate neglected forms of artistic expression. The ministry created a program of cultural workshops known as, \"Casas de Cultura and Centros Populares de Cultura\". The workshops were set up in poor neighbourhoods and rural areas and advocated universal access and consumption of art in Nicaragua. The ministry assisted in the creation of theatre groups, folklore and artisanal production, song groups, new journals of creation and cultural criticism, and training programs for cultural workers. The ministry created a Sandinista daily newspaper named \"Barricada\" and its weekly cultural addition named \"Ventana\" along with the \"Television Sandino, Radio Sandino\" and the Nicaraguan film production unit called the INCINE. There were existing papers which splintered after the revolution and produced other independent, pro-Sandinista newspapers, such as \"El Nuevo Diario\" and its literary addition \"Nuevo Amanecer Cultural\". Editorial Nueva Nicaragua, a state publishing house for literature, was also created. The ministry collected and published political poetry of the revolutionary period, known as testimonial narrative, a form of literary genre that recorded the experiences of individuals in the course of the revolution.\nThe ministry developed a new anthology of Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo, a Nicaraguan poet and writer, established a Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo prize for Latin American writers, the Leonel Rugama prize for young Nicaraguan writers, as well as public poetry readings and contests, cultural festivals and concerts. The Sandinista regime tried to keep the revolutionary spirit alive by empowering its citizens artistically. At the time of its inception, the Ministry of Culture needed, according to Cardenal, \"to bring a culture to the people who were marginalized from it. We want a culture that is not the culture of an elite, of a group that is considered 'cultivated', but rather of an entire people.\" Nevertheless, the success of the Ministry of Culture had mixed results and by 1985 criticism arose over artistic freedom in the poetry workshops. The poetry workshops became a matter for criticism and debate. Critics argued that the ministry imposed too many principles and guidelines for young writers in the workshop, such as, asking them to avoid metaphors in their poetry and advising them to write about events in their everyday life. Critical voices came from established poets and writers represented by the \"Asociacion Sandinista de Trabajadores de la Cultura\" (ASTC) and from the \"Ventana\" both of which were headed by Rosario Murillo. They argued that young writers should be exposed to different poetic styles of writing and resources developed in Nicaragua and elsewhere. Furthermore, they argued that the ministry exhibited a tendency that favored and fostered political and testimonial literature in post-revolutionary Nicaragua.\nEconomy.\nThe new government, formed in 1979 and dominated by the Sandinistas, resulted in a socialist model of economic development. The new leadership was conscious of the social inequities produced during the previous thirty years of unrestricted economic growth and was determined to make the country's workers and peasants, the \"economically underprivileged\", the prime beneficiaries of the new society. Consequently, in 1980 and 1981, unbridled incentives to private investment gave way to institutions designed to redistribute wealth and income. Private property would continue to be allowed, but all land belonging to the Somozas was confiscated. By 1990 the agrarian reform had affected half of the country's arable land benefiting some 60% of rural families.\nHowever, the ideology of the Sandinistas put the future of the private sector and of private ownership of the means of production in doubt. Although under the new government both public and private ownership were accepted, government spokespersons occasionally referred to a reconstruction phase in the country's development, in which property owners and the professional class would be tapped for their managerial and technical expertise. After reconstruction and recovery, the private sector would give way to expanded public ownership in most areas of the economy. Despite such ideas, which represented the point of view of a faction of the government, the Sandinista government remained officially committed to a mixed economy.\nThe Sandinista government also significantly expanded workers rights in particular the right to form a union and collective bargaining. Some trade union rights however, like the right to strike were suspended during the Contra War, but strikes still occurred throughout the 1980s, most labour strikes were settled through dialogue with the FSLN.\nEconomic growth was uneven in the 1980s. Restructuring of the economy and the rebuilding immediately following the end of the civil war caused the GDP to rise about 5 percent in 1980 and 1981. Each year from 1984 to 1990, however, showed a drop in the GDP. Reasons for the contraction included the reluctance of foreign banks to offer new loans, the diversion of funds to fight the new insurrection against the government, and, after 1985, the total embargo on trade with the United States, formerly Nicaragua's largest trading partner. After 1985 the government chose to fill the gap between decreasing revenues and mushrooming military expenditures by printing large amounts of paper money. Inflation rose rapidly, peaking in 1988 at more than 14,000 percent annually.\nMeasures taken by the government to lower inflation were hampered by natural disaster. In early 1988, the administration of Daniel Jos\u00e9 Ortega Saavedra (Sandinista junta coordinator 1979\u201385, president 1985\u201390) established an austerity program to lower inflation. Price controls were tightened, and a new currency was introduced. As a result, by August 1988, inflation had dropped to an annual rate of 240 percent. The following month, however, Hurricane Joan cut a path directly across the center of the country. Damage was extensive, and the government's program of large spending to repair the infrastructure destroyed its anti-inflation measures.\nIn its eleven years in power, the Sandinista government never overcame most of the economic inequalities that it inherited from the Somoza era. Years of war, policy missteps, natural disasters, and the effects of the United States trade embargo all hindered economic development. Despite these problems however, the Nicaragua economy saw a transformation in a direction to satisfy the needs of Nicaragua's poor majority.\nWomen in revolutionary Nicaragua.\nThe women of Nicaragua prior to, during and after the revolution played a prominent role within the nation's society as they have commonly been recognized, throughout history and across all Latin American states, as its backbone. Nicaraguan women were therefore directly affected by all of the positive and negative events that took place during this revolutionary period. The victory of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) in 1979 brought about major changes and gains for women, mainly in legislation, broad educational opportunities, training programs for working women, childcare programs to help women enter the work force and greatly increased participation and leadership positions in a range of political activities. This, in turn, reduced the burdens that the women of Nicaragua were faced with prior to the revolution. During the Sandinista government, women were more active politically. The large majority of members of the neighborhood committees (Comit\u00e9s de Defensa Sandinista) were women. By 1987, 31% of the executive positions in the Sandinista government, 27% of the leadership positions of the FSLN, and 25% of the FSLN's active membership were women.\nSupporters of the Sandinistas see their era as characterized by the creation and implementation of successful social programs which were free and made widely available to the entire nation. Some of the more successful programs for women that were implemented by the Sandinistas were in the areas of education (see: Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign), health, and housing. Providing subsidies for basic foodstuffs and the introduction of mass employment were also contributions of the FSLN. The Sandinistas were particularly advantageous for the women of Nicaraguan as they promoted progressive views on gender as early as 1969 claiming that the revolution would \"abolish the detestable discrimination that women have suffered with regard to men and establish economic, political and cultural equality between men and women\". This was evident as the FSLN began integrating women into their ranks by 1967, unlike other left-wing guerilla groups in the region. This goal was not fully reached because the roots of gender inequality were not explicitly challenged. Women's participation within the public sphere was also substantial, as many took part in the armed struggle as part of the FSLN or as part of counter-revolutionary forces.\nNicaraguan women organized independently in support of the revolution and their cause. Some of those organizations were the Socialist Party (1963), Federaci\u00f3n Democr\u00e1tica (which support the FSLN in rural areas), and Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women (, AMNLAE). However, since Daniel Ortega, was defeated in the 1990 election by the United Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO) coalition headed by Violeta Chamorro, the situation for women in Nicaragua was seriously altered. In terms of women and the labor market, by the end of 1991 AMNLAE reported that almost 16,000 working women\u20149,000 agricultural laborers, 3,000 industrial workers, and 3,800 civil servants, including 2,000 in health, 800 in education, and 1,000 in administration\u2014had lost their jobs. The change in government also resulted in the drastic reduction or suspension of all Nicaraguan social programs, which brought back the burdens characteristic of pre-revolutionary Nicaragua. The women were forced to maintain and supplement community social services on their own without economic aid or technical and human resource.\nBetween 2007 and 2018 under Sandinista administrations, Nicaragua has advanced from 62nd to 6th in the world in terms of gender equality, according to the Global Gender Gap Report from the World Economic Forum.\nRelationship with the Catholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church's relationship with the Sandinistas was extremely complex. Initially, the Church was supportive of the Somoza regime as it broke with the liberal tradition of anti-clericalism. Anti-clerical laws of the \"Estado Liberal\" established by the Liberal Party of Nicaragua were repealed, and Somoza granted the Church tax exemptions and assigned it a central role in state education, allowing Catholic, state-funded schools to flourish. However, relations with the Catholic clergy gradually deteriorated as the regime grew more oppressive and Somoza committed atrocities against his political opponents with help of Guardia Nacional. Open conflict between the Church and the regime emerged in the wake of Vatican II.\nVatican II had a profound effect on the Catholic Church, leading to the beginning of liberation theology, Catholic-Marxist dialogue, and empowering already existing left-wing currents within the Catholic clergy such as the worker-priests. Many Nicagaruan priests would join this trend and radicalize their parishioners into either supporting or even joining the Sandinistas. Priest Ernesto Cardenal encouraged his parishioners to reflect on their living conditions in relation to the religious message; in his teachings, Cardenal concluded that the realization of the Gospel would be taking up arms against the Somoza regime to oppose \u201cun-Christian\u201d conditions. Cardenal's brand of revolutionary Catholicism attracted the local working class, allowing the FSLN to successfully recruit them. Eventually the Sandinistas managed to recruit Cardenal himself, turning his local church into a potent source of new recruits. Cardenal was even reported to have said that \"Jesus Christ is the Sandinistas\" during Mass. Other priests such as Jos\u00e9 de la Jara promoted a sense of Catholic community in poor squatter neighbourhoods, promoting the portrayal of Jesus Christ as a poor worker in image of local inhabitants, and instituted a number of Catholic programs to help the community, such as road repairs, literacy programs and founded the Christian Youth Movement. Such actions united hitherto dispersed communities and fostered mutual support and trust. When encouraged by local priests to consider struggling for better living conditions as the realization of Catholic social teachings, parishioners spoke out forcefully against poor living conditions and unaffordable prices, eventually turning their discontent into open support for the FSLN. Even the priests who did not join the revolution would turn their churches into safe houses for the insurrectionists, gathering food and medicine for Sandinista combatants.\nAt its core, liberation theology recognized class struggle as a part of the Latin American society that was inherited from colonialism, and that is continued under capitalism which was considered neo-colonialism. For revolutionary Catholics, imperialism and capitalism became sin in themselves, and Jesus Christ was interpreted in context of being a revolutionary. Left-wing Nicaraguan priests replaced the traditional imagery of 'New Jerusalem' with 'New Havana', and argued for the necessity of embracing the option for the poor and committing oneself to Marxist revolution in order to be a 'true Catholic'. Supporters of liberation theology also agreed in principle with Marxist economics, with liberation theology priests such as Gustavo Guti\u00e9rrez stating that a classless society where private ownership of production is prohibited, is the only acceptable Catholic response. The FSLN openly courted the growing following of revolutionary Catholics, portraying their revolutionary struggle against the Somoza regime as a realization of the Catholic social teaching. While the Catholic upper hierarchy was first reluctant to join the Sandinista revolution, it gradually moved to legitimatize its revolutionary goals and openly embraced it following the Second Episcopal Conference of Latin America, which openly called for challenging oppressive regimes in the region. The Church's hostility towards Somoza became even more apparent in 1970 with the appointment of Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo. When given a Mercedes Benz as a goodwill gift by Somoza, Bravo sold it and distributed the money among the poor. During the revolution, the Catholic Church's relationship with the Sandinistas grew so close that even sacraments acquired a revolutionary meaning - one priest reportedly baptized a newborn girl by saying: \u201cLet all selfishness, capitalism, Somozism, go out of this little girl.\u201d Numerous Christian base communities (CEBs) were created in which lower level clergy and laity took part in consciousness raising initiatives to educate the peasants about the institutionalized violence they were suffering from. Some priests took a more active role in supporting the revolutionary struggle. For example, Father Gaspar Garc\u00eda Laviana took up arms and became a member of FSLN.\nAfter the establishment of the Sandinista regime, the Catholic Church was jubilant, which could be observed in the November 1979 pastoral letter \u201cChristian Commitment for a New Nicaragua\u201d which was described as \u201cwarm, encouraging, confident, and supportive of the FSLN-led revolution.\u201d Nicaraguan bishops stated that they are \u201cconfident that the revolutionary process will be something creative, profoundly original, and in no way imitative.\u201d Full of praise for the new revolutionary government, the clergy promised to assist the new regime, \u201ceven in the construction of a socialist society.\u201d However, the new government alienated the Church by what was perceived as a gradual removal of the Church's role in education; the government was accused of introducing a purely secular model of education following the example of the Cuban government, even inviting Cuban teachers to assist the process. Conservative media attacked the government for promoting \u201cmaterialist ideology\u201d in schools and warning of looming Marxist and atheist infiltration of the state education. By 1982, the controversy over education became so polarizing that some members of the governing junta such as Violeta Chamorro and Alfonso Robelo resigned, arguing that new laws are unconstitutional. Analyzing the conflict, John M. Kirk concluded: \u201cFor their part, the Sandinistas can be criticized for their lack of sensitivity to the hierarchy\u2019s concerns \u2014 for it should have been obvious that education had long been regarded as the bailiwick of Church leaders. This political insensitivity of the FSLN \u2014 particularly among the middle-level cadres\u2014exacerbated the increasingly problematic relationship between the FSLN and the Church hierarchy.\u201d\nConservative Catholic priests and journalists attacked the new regime, with Humberto Belli claiming that the FSLN was trying to appropriate Catholic symbols. Examples of their attempts to \"infiltrate\" the Church was the presence of Sandinista leaders at religious ceremonies, supporting socialist-aligned Catholic institutions such as the Instituto Hist\u00e9rico Centro-Americano which published pamphlets that depicted Jesus Christ superimposed on the image of a guerrilla fighter, encouraging Catholics to participate in the \"revolutionary process\", and discussing \u201cmartyrs\u201d of the revolutionary struggle. The Episcopal Conference of Latin America (CELAM) warned in 1981 that \u201cNicaragua is heading for atheism, and that the Sandinista Front was already suppressing Christmas and the feast of the Immaculate Conception.\u201d However, when Spanish priest Te\u00f3filo Cabestrero travelled to Revolutionary Nicaragua to investigate the situation, he found that Catholic celebrations were not suppressed at all, but rather encouraged and openly celebrated by the Sandinistas themselves - festivities were held in government ministries, commercialization of the religious feast was prohibited, and a national holiday for all major Catholic feasts were proclaimed. Cabastrero concluded: \u201cThis revolution is not prohibiting or curbing religious activities, but rather is offering the churches a unique opportunity to re-evangelize themselves, and to evangelize the entire population with new evangelical vigor.\u201d He also added: \u201cFor the present, the danger for religion and the Church is not with the Sandinista people\u2019s revolution, but rather is in the utilization of religion and the Church against the people\u2019s revolution\u201d.\nPhillip Berryman concludes that the growing tension between the Sandinistas and the Catholic Church was a result of constant misinterpretations and misunderstanding between both sides, combined with interference of foreign conservative clergymen. He concludes that CELAM did not intend to attack the revolutionary government but rather as an attempt to \u201cspiritualize religion and support the moral authority of the bishops.\u201d John M. Kirk shares Berryman's conclusion, arguing that the emerging rift between the Church and state was a result of \u201cpowerful international organizations stepping in to shore up an increasingly conservative hierarchy and at the same time cast aspersions on the progressive wing of the Church, which favored the government reforms.\u201d Mounting tensions were followed by the attempts of the Sandinista government to silence bishops perceived as problematic - in July 1981 the government cancelled the weekly televised broadcast of mass by archbishop Obando y Bravo after he denied the government's request to share the spot with progressive, government-aligned priests. The government also shut down the Church-run media such as the Radio Cat\u00f3lica radio station, and in 1982 the government banned the publication of a letter from Pope John Paul II which called for ordinary priests to support and obey their bishops. FSLN also fostered a \"popular church\" by using its connections to progressive clergy established during the revolution, effectively developing a 'popular church' that became a parallel structure to the institutional church. Sandinistas advertised this move as a part of their liberation theology, which postulated moving the Church out of the hands of the vilified higher hierarchy and into the hands of lower-ranking priests who were part of the working class and knew their struggle. Geraldine O'Leary de Macias commented on this situation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The FSLN continues to cultivate the base Christian communities and call them \"the good Christians\". But the FSLN has turned against Archbishop Obando, calling him an anti-Christ, because he has challenged their human rights violations and their systematic elimination of the political opposition.\u2014\u200a\nThe Sandinistas' relationship with the Church deteriorated as the Contra War continued. The hierarchy refused to speak out against the counterrevolutionary activities of the contras and failed to denounce American military aid. State media accused the Church of being reactionary and supporting the Contras. According to former President Ortega, \"The conflict with the church was strong, and it costs us, but I don't think it was our fault. ... There were so many people being wounded every day, so many people dying, and it was hard for us to understand the position of the church hierarchy in refusing to condemn the contras.\" The hierarchy-state tensions were brought to the fore with Pope John Paul II 1983 visit to Nicaragua. Hostility to the Church became so great that at one point, FSLN militants shouted down Pope John Paul II as he tried to say Mass during a visit. Therefore, while the activities of the Church contributed to the success of the Sandinista revolution, the hierarchy's opposition was a major factor in the downfall of the revolutionary government.\nThe relations between the Sandinistas and the Catholic Church started improving in 1986, starting with the appointment of Paolo Giglio as the new papal nuncio in Nicaragua in July. Giglio quickly earned the respect of the revolutionary government in November after attacking the United States for its hostility to the government, arguing that the Sandinistas were always open to negotiations with the United States but were turned down each time. That year, Vice President Sergio Ram\u00edrez was also received by the pope in a private audience. Once Congreso Eucaristico Nacional took place in Managua, Sandinistas leaders helped promote the congress and decried the lack of interest in it; President Ortega met with several Catholic clergymen during the congress, and also allowed Mother Teresa to bring four sisters into Nicaragua in order to create a new, small religious community. The Sandinista conflict with the Catholic Church was ultimately settled with the signing of the Esquipulas Peace Agreement - the government allowed Radio Catolica to broadcast again and allowed expelled clergy to return to Nicaragua.\nPrior to their victory in the 2006 election, Ortega sought to rekindle his old relationship with the Catholic Church and befriended Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, an erstwhile opponent of the Sandinistas in the 1980s. Bravo emerged as a close ally of Ortega, and in return Sandinistas expressed their support for a blanket ban on abortion in 2006, and in his speeches Ortega would refer to the reforged FSLN as \u201cChristian socialist\u201d. Despite this, FSLN still faces tensions with the Catholic clergy outside of Nicaragua. On August 23, 2020, Bishop Silvio B\u00e1ez, who had been outside of Nicaragua for reasons of security since April 23, 2019, accused President Ortega of being a dictator. The Centro Nicarag\u00fcense de Derechos Humanos (Nicaraguan Human Rights Center, CENIDH) said that the Church had been the victim of 24 attacks since April 2018, including a fire that began in the Immaculate Conception Cathedral when a Molotov cocktail was thrown at a sacred image of the Blood of Christ on July 31, 2020.\nHuman rights violations by the Sandinistas.\n\"Time\" magazine in 1983 published reports of human rights violations in an article which stated that \"According to Nicaragua's Permanent Commission on Human Rights, the regime detains several hundred people a month; about half of them are eventually released, but the rest simply disappear.\" \"Time\" also interviewed a former deputy chief of Nicaraguan military counterintelligence, who stated that he had fled Nicaragua after being ordered to kill 800 Miskito prisoners and make it look like they had died in combat. Another article described Sandinista neighbourhood \"Defense Committees\", modeled on similar Cuban Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which according to critics were used to unleash mobs on anyone who was labeled a counterrevolutionary. Nicaragua's only opposition newspaper, La Prensa, was subject to strict censorship. The newspaper's editors were forbidden to print anything negative about the Sandinistas either at home or abroad.\nNicaragua's Permanent Commission on Human Rights reported 2,000 murders in the first six months and 3,000 disappearances in the first few years. It has since documented 14,000 cases of torture, rape, kidnapping, mutilation and murder.\nThe Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in a 1981 report found evidence for mass executions in the period following the revolution. It stated: \"In the Commission's view, while the government of Nicaragua clearly intended to respect the lives of all those defeated in the civil war, during the weeks immediately subsequent to the Revolutionary triumph, when the government was not in effective control, illegal executions took place which violated the right to life, and these acts have not been investigated and the persons responsible have not been punished.\" The IACHR also stated that: \"The Commission is of the view that the new regime did not have, and does not now have, a policy of violating the right to life of political enemies, including among the latter the former guardsmen of the Government of General Somoza, whom a large sector of the population of Nicaragua held responsible for serious human rights violations during the former regime; proof of the foregoing is the abolition of the death penalty and the high number of former guardsmen who were prisoners and brought to trial for crimes that constituted violations of human rights.\"\nA 1983 IACHR report documented allegations of human rights violations against the Miskito Indians, which were alleged to have taken place after opposition forces (the Contras) infiltrated a Miskito village in order to launch attacks against government soldiers, and as part of a subsequent forced relocation program. Allegations included arbitrary imprisonment without trial, \"disappearances\" of such prisoners, forced relocation, and destruction of property. A 1984 IACHR report accused the Sandinistas of having \"repeatedly violated the basic rights of Miskito Indians living there, including instances of \"illegal killings\" and torture\". The report accused them of executing 35 to 40 Miskitos in Leimus in December 1981. The U.S. government accused Nicaragua of genocide. The U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig pointed to a photo published in Le Figaro alleged to show Miskito bodies being burned by Sandinista troops as evidence; however, the photo was actually of people killed by Somoza's National Guard in 1978.\nThe IACHR's 1991 annual report states: \"In 1990, the Commission was informed of the discovery of common graves in Nicaragua, especially in areas where fighting had occurred. The information was provided by the Nicaraguan Pro Human Rights Association, which had received its first complaint in June 1990. By December 1991, that Association had received reports of 60 common graves and had investigated 15 of them. While most of the graves seem to be the result of summary executions by members of the Sandinista People's Army or the State Security, some contain the bodies of individuals executed by the Nicaraguan Resistance.\"\nThe IACHR's 1992 annual report contains details of mass graves and investigations which suggest that mass executions had been carried out. One such grave contained 75 corpses of peasants who were believed to have been executed in 1984 by government security forces pretending to be members of the Contras. Another grave was also found in the town of Quininowas which contained six corpses, believed to be an entire family killed by government forces when the town was invaded. A further 72 graves were reported as being found, containing bodies of people, the majority of whom were believed to have been executed by agents of the state and some also by the Contras.\nPoliticization of human rights.\nThe issue of human rights also became highly politicized at this time as human rights is claimed to be a key component of propaganda created by the Reagan administration to help legitimize its policies in the region. The Inter-Church Committee on Human Rights in Latin America (ICCHRLA) in its \"Newsletter\" stated in 1985 that: \"The hostility with which the Nicaraguan government is viewed by the Reagan administration is an unfortunate development. Even more unfortunate is the expression of that hostility in the destabilization campaign developed by the US administration. ... An important aspect of this campaign is misinformation and frequent allegations of serious human rights violations by the Nicaraguan authorities.\" Among the accusations in The Heritage Foundation report and the Demokratizatsiya article are references to alleged policies of religious persecution, particularly antisemitism. The ICCHRLA in its newsletter stated that: \"From time to time the current U.S. administration, and private organizations sympathetic to it, have made serious and extensive allegations of religious persecution in Nicaragua. Colleague churches in the United States undertook onsite investigation of these charges in 1984. In their report, the delegation organized by the Division of Overseas Ministries of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States concluded that there is 'no basis for the charge of systematic religious persecution'. The delegation 'considers this issue to be a device being used to justify aggressive opposition to the present Nicaraguan government.'\" On the other hand, some elements of the Catholic Church in Nicaragua, among them Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo, strongly criticized the Sandinistas. The Archbishop stated \"The government wants a church that is aligned with the Marxist\u2013Leninist regime.\" The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights states that: \"Although it is true that much of the friction between the Government and the churches arises from positions that are directly or indirectly linked to the political situation of the country, it is also true that statements by high government officials, official press statements, and the actions of groups under the control of the Government have gone beyond the limits within which political discussions should take place and have become obstacles to certain specifically religious activities.\"\nHuman Rights Watch also stated in its 1989 report on Nicaragua that: \"Under the Reagan administration, U.S. policy toward Nicaragua's Sandinista government was marked by constant hostility. This hostility yielded, among other things, an inordinate amount of publicity about human rights issues. Almost invariably, U.S. pronouncements on human rights exaggerated and distorted the real human rights violations of the Sandinista regime, and exculpated those of the U.S.-supported insurgents, known as the \"contras\".\"\nIn 1987, a report was published by the UK based NGO Catholic Institute for International Relations (CIIR, now known as \"Progressio\"), a human rights organization which identifies itself with liberation theology. The report, \"Right to Survive: Human Rights in Nicaragua\", discussed the politicization of the human rights issue: \"The Reagan administration, with scant regard for the truth, has made a concerted effort to paint as evil a picture as possible of Nicaragua, describing it as a 'totalitarian dungeon'. Supporters of the Sandinistas ... have argued that Nicaragua has a good record of human rights compared with other Central American countries and have compared Nicaragua with other countries at war.\" The CIIR report refers to estimates made by the NGO Americas Watch which count the number of non-battle related deaths and disappearances for which the government was responsible up to the year 1986 as \"close to 300\".\nAccording to the CIIR report, Amnesty International and Americas Watch stated that there is no evidence that the use of torture was sanctioned by the Nicaraguan authorities, although prisoners reported the use of conditions of detention and interrogation techniques that could be described as psychological torture. The Red Cross made repeated requests to be given access to prisoners held in state security detention centers, but were refused. The CIIR was critical of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights (PCHR or CPDH in Spanish), claiming that the organisation had a tendency to immediately publish accusations against the government without first establishing a factual basis for the allegations. The CIIR report also questioned the independence of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, referring to an article in \"The Washington Post\" which claims that the National Endowment for Democracy, an organization funded by the US government, allocated a concession of US$50,000 for assistance in the translation and distribution outside Nicaragua of its monthly report, and that these funds were administered by the Committee for Democracy in Central America (Prodemca), a US-based organization which later published full-page advertisements in \"The Washington Post\" and \"The New York Times\" supporting military aid to the Contras. The Permanent Commission denies that it received any money which it claims was instead used by others for translating and distributing their monthly reports in other nations.\nThe Nicaraguan-based magazine \"Revista Envio\", which describes its stance as one of \"critical support for the Sandinistas\", refers to the report: \"The CPDH: Can It Be Trusted?\" written by Scottish lawyer Paul Laverty. In the report, Laverty observes that: \"The entire board of directors [of the Permanent Commission], are members of or closely identify with the 'Nicaraguan Democratic Coordinating Committee' (Coordinadora), an alliance of the more right wing parties and COSEP, the business organization.\" He goes on to express concern about CPDH's alleged tendency to provide relatively few names and other details in connection with alleged violations. \"According to the 11 monthly bulletins of 1987 (July being the only month without an issue), the CPDH claims to have received information on 1,236 abuses of all types. However, of those cases, only 144 names are provided. The majority of those 144 cases give dates and places of alleged incidents, but not all. This means that only in 11.65% of its cases is there the minimal detail provided to identify the person, place, date, incident and perpetrator of the abuse.\"\nOn the other hand, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights states: \"During its on-site observation in 1978 under the Government of General Somoza, the Permanent Commission on Human Rights in Nicaragua, (CPDH) gave the Commission notable assistance, which certainly helped it to prepare its report promptly and correctly.\" and in 1980 \"It cannot be denied that the CPDH continues to play an important role in the protection of human rights, and that a good number of people who consider that their human rights have been ignored by the Government are constantly coming to it.\" The IACHR continued to meet with representatives of the Permanent Commission and report their assessments in later years.\nThe Heritage Foundation stated that: \"While elements of the Somoza National Guard tortured political opponents, they did not employ psychological torture.\" The International Commission of Jurists stated that under the Somoza regime cruel physical torture was regularly used in the interrogation of political prisoners.\nThroughout the 1980s the Sandinista government was regarded as \"Partly Free\" by Freedom House.\nUnited States government allegations of support for foreign rebels.\nThe United States State Department accused the Sandinistas of many cases of illegal foreign intervention.\nThe first allegation was supporting the FMLN rebels in El Salvador with safe haven, training, command-and-control headquarters, advice, weapons, ammunition, and other vital supplies. Captured documents, testimonials of former rebels and Sandinistas, aerial photographs, the tracing of captured weapons back to Nicaragua, and captured vehicles from Nicaragua smuggling weapons were cited as evidence. El Salvador was in a civil war in the period in question and the US was heavily supporting the Salvadoran government against the FMLN guerrillas.\nThere were also accusations of subversive activities in Honduras, Costa Rica, and Colombia, and in the case of Honduras and Costa Rica outright military operations by Nicaraguan troops.\nIn 2015, Kentucky senator Mitch McConnell claimed during an interview with CNN that John Kerry, then Secretary of State, had visited Nicaragua and met Daniel Ortega and denounced the Reagan Administration's support for the Contras as supporting terrorism during Kerry's tenure as a United States senator.\nDuring the Nicaraguan Revolution in the 1980s, American Democratic politician and then mayor Bernie Sanders expressed support for the Sandinistas and condemned US support for the Contras, he wrote letters to the group denouncing the US media portrayal of the conflict, and also visited Nicaragua during the war where he attended a Sandinista rally where anti-American chants were reportedly being done.\nSymbols.\nThe flag of the FSLN consists of an upper half in red, a lower half in black, and the letters F S L N in white. It is a modified version of the flag Sandino used in the 1930s, during the war against the U.S. occupation of Nicaragua which consisted of two vertical stripes, equally in size, one red and the other black with a skull (like the traditional Jolly Roger flag). These colors came from the Mexican anarchist movements that Sandino was involved with during his stay in Mexico in the early 1920s. (The traditional flag of anarcho-syndicalism, which joins diagonally the red color of the labour movement and the black color of anarchism, as in the flag of the CNT, is a negation of nationalism and reaffirmation of internationalism.)\nIn recent times, there has been a dispute between the FSLN and the dissident Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) about the use of the red and black flag in public activities. Although the MRS has its own flag (orange with a silhouette of Sandino's hat in black), they also use the red-and-black flag in honor of Sandino's legacy. They state that the red-and-black flag is a symbol of Sandinismo as a whole, not only of the FSLN party.\nSandinista Revolution Day is a national holiday, celebrated on July 19 each year.\nIn popular culture.\nIn literature.\nI grew up in Urbana three houses down from the Sanderson family \u2013 Milton and Virginia and their boys Steve and Joe. My close friend was Joe. His bedroom was filled with aquariums, terrariums, snakes, hamsters, spiders, and butterfly and beetle collections. I envied him like crazy. After college he hit the road. He never made a break from his parents, but they rarely knew where he was. Sometimes he came home and his mother would have to sew $100 bills into the seams of his blue jeans. He disappeared in Nicaragua. His body was later identified as a dead Sandinista freedom fighter. From a nice little house surrounded by evergreens at the other end of Washington Street, he left to look for something he needed to find. I believe in Sean Penn's Christopher McCandless. I grew up with him.\nPresidents of the Executive.\nDaniel Ortega has been the only Sandinista President of the Republic, from 1985 to 1990 and from 2007 to the present day.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29317", "revid": "147185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29317", "title": "Schematic planned language", "text": ""}
{"id": "29318", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29318", "title": "Streptococcus", "text": "Genus of bacteria\nStreptococcus, from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b5\u03c0\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 (\"strept\u00f3s\"), meaning \"twisted\", and \u03ba\u03cc\u03ba\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2 (\"k\u00f3kkos\"), meaning \"grain\", is a genus of gram-positive spherical bacteria that belongs to the family Streptococcaceae, within the order Lactobacillales (lactic acid bacteria), in the phylum Bacillota. Cell division in streptococci occurs along a single axis, thus when growing they tend to form pairs or chains, which may appear bent or twisted. This differs from staphylococci, which divide along multiple axes, thereby generating irregular, grape-like clusters of cells. Most streptococci are oxidase-negative and catalase-negative, and many are facultative anaerobes (capable of growth both aerobically and anaerobically).\nThe term was coined in 1877 by Viennese surgeon Albert Theodor Billroth (1829\u20131894), from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b5\u03c0\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 (\"strept\u00f3s\"), meaning \"twisted\", and \u03ba\u03cc\u03ba\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2 (\"k\u00f3kkos\"), meaning \"grain\". In 1984, many bacteria formerly grouped in the genus \"Streptococcus\" were separated out into the genera \"Enterococcus\" and \"Lactococcus\". Currently, over 50 species are recognised in this genus. This genus has been found to be part of the salivary microbiome.\nPathogenesis and classification.\nIn addition to streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat), certain \"Streptococcus\" species are responsible for many cases of pink eye, meningitis, bacterial pneumonia, endocarditis, erysipelas, and necrotizing fasciitis (the 'flesh-eating' bacterial infections). However, many streptococcal species are not pathogenic, and form part of the commensal human microbiota of the mouth, skin, intestine, and upper respiratory tract. Streptococci are also a necessary ingredient in producing Emmentaler (\"Swiss\") cheese.\nSpecies of streptococci are classified based on their hemolytic properties. Alpha-hemolytic species cause oxidization of iron in hemoglobin molecules within red blood cells, giving it a greenish color on blood agar. Beta-hemolytic species cause complete rupture of red blood cells. On blood agar, this appears as wide areas clear of blood cells surrounding bacterial colonies. Gamma-hemolytic species cause no hemolysis.\nBeta-hemolytic streptococci are further classified by Lancefield grouping, a serotype classification (that is, describing specific carbohydrates present on the bacterial cell wall). The 21 described serotypes are named Lancefield groups A to W (excluding E, I and J). This system of classification was developed by Rebecca Lancefield, a scientist at Rockefeller University.\nIn the medical setting, the most important groups are the alpha-hemolytic streptococci \"S. pneumoniae\" and \"Streptococcus\" \"viridans \"groups, and the beta-hemolytic streptococci of Lancefield groups A and B (also known as \"group A strep\" and \"group B strep\").\nTable: Medically relevant streptococci\nAlpha-hemolytic.\nWhen alpha-hemolysis (\u03b1-hemolysis) is present, a blood based agar under the colony will appear dark and greenish due to the conversion of hemoglobin to green biliverdin. \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" and a group of oral streptococci (\"Streptococcus viridans\" or viridans streptococci) display alpha-hemolysis.\nAlpha-hemolysis is also termed incomplete hemolysis or partial hemolysis because the cell membranes of the red blood cells are left intact. This is also sometimes called green hemolysis because of the color change in the agar.\nBeta-hemolytic.\nBeta-hemolysis (\u03b2-hemolysis), sometimes called complete hemolysis, is a complete lysis of red cells in the media around and under the colonies: the area appears lightened (yellow) and transparent. Streptolysin, an exotoxin, is the enzyme produced by the bacteria which causes the complete lysis of red blood cells. There are two types of streptolysin: Streptolysin O (SLO) and streptolysin S (SLS). Streptolysin O is an oxygen-sensitive cytotoxin, secreted by most group A \"Streptococcus\" (GAS), and interacts with cholesterol in the membrane of eukaryotic cells (mainly red and white blood cells, macrophages, and platelets), and usually results in beta-hemolysis under the surface of blood agar. Streptolysin S is an oxygen-stable cytotoxin also produced by most GAS strains which results in clearing on the surface of blood agar. SLS affects immune cells, including polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes, and is thought to prevent the host immune system from clearing infection. \"Streptococcus pyogenes\", or GAS, displays beta hemolysis.\nSome weakly beta-hemolytic species cause intense hemolysis when grown together with a strain of \"Staphylococcus\". This is called the CAMP test. \"Streptococcus agalactiae\" displays this property. \"Clostridium perfringens\" can be identified presumptively with this test. \"Listeria monocytogenes\" is also positive on sheep's blood agar.\nGroup A.\nGroup A \"S. pyogenes\" is the causative agent in a wide range of group A streptococcal infections (GAS). These infections may be noninvasive or invasive. The noninvasive infections tend to be more common and less severe. The most common of these infections include streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) and impetigo. Scarlet fever is another example of Group A noninvasive infection.\nThe invasive infections caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci tend to be more severe and less common. This occurs when the bacterium is able to infect areas where it is not usually found, such as the blood and organs. The diseases that may be caused include streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, necrotizing fasciitis, pneumonia, and bacteremia. Globally, GAS has been estimated to cause more than 500,000 deaths every year, making it one of the world's leading pathogens.\nAdditional complications may be caused by GAS, namely acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis. Rheumatic fever, a disease that affects the joints, kidneys, and heart valves, is a consequence of untreated strep A infection caused not by the bacterium itself, but due to the antibodies created by the immune system to fight off the infection cross-reacting with other proteins in the body. This \"cross-reaction\" causes the body to essentially attack itself and leads to the damage above. A similar autoimmune mechanism initiated by Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) infection is hypothesized to cause pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS), wherein autoimmune antibodies affect the basal ganglia, causing rapid onset of psychiatric, motor, sleep, and other symptoms in pediatric patients.\nGAS infection is generally diagnosed with a rapid strep test or by culture.\nGroup B.\n\"S. agalactiae\", or group B \"streptococcus\", GBS, causes pneumonia and meningitis in newborns and the elderly, with occasional systemic bacteremia. Importantly, \"Streptococcus agalactiae\" is the most common cause of meningitis in infants from one month to three months old. They can also colonize the intestines and the female reproductive tract, increasing the risk for premature rupture of membranes during pregnancy, and transmission of the organism to the infant. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Centers for Disease Control recommend all pregnant women between 35 and 37 weeks gestation to be tested for GBS. Women who test positive should be given prophylactic antibiotics during labor, which will usually prevent transmission to the infant. Group III polysaccharide vaccines have been proven effective in preventing the passing of GBS from mother to infant.\nThe United Kingdom has chosen to adopt a risk factor-based protocol, rather than the culture-based protocol followed in the US. Current guidelines state that if one or more of the following risk factors is present, then the woman should be treated with \"intrapartum\" antibiotics:\nThis protocol results in the administration of intrapartum antibiotics to 15\u201320% of pregnant women and the prevention of 65\u201370% of cases of early onset GBS sepsis.\nGroup C.\nThis group includes \"S. equi\", which causes strangles in horses, and \"S. zooepidemicus\" \u2014 \"S. equi\" is a clonal descendant or biovar of the ancestral \"S. zooepidemicus\" \u2014 which causes infections in several species of mammals, including cattle and horses. \"S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae\" is also a member of group C, beta-haemolytic streptococci that can cause pharyngitis and other pyogenic infections similar to group A streptococci. Group C streptococcal bacteria are considered zoonotic pathogens, meaning infection can be passed from animal to human.\nGroup D (enterococci).\nMany former group D streptococci have been reclassified and placed in the genus \"Enterococcus\" (including \"E. faecalis\", \"E. faecium\", \"E. durans\", and \"E. avium\"). For example, \"Streptococcus faecalis\" is now \"Enterococcus faecalis\". \"E. faecalis\" is sometimes alpha-hemolytic and \"E. faecium\" is sometimes beta hemolytic.\nThe remaining nonenterococcal group D strains include \"Streptococcus gallolyticus\", \"Streptococcus bovis\", \"Streptococcus equinus\" and \"Streptococcus suis\".\nNonhemolytic streptococci rarely cause illness. However, weakly hemolytic group D beta-hemolytic streptococci and \"Listeria monocytogenes\" (which is actually a gram-positive bacillus) should not be confused with nonhemolytic streptococci.\nGroup F streptococci.\nGroup F streptococci were first described in 1934 by Long and Bliss among the \"minute haemolytic streptococci\". They are also known as \"Streptococcus anginosus\" (according to the Lancefield classification system) or as members of the \"S. milleri\" group (according to the European system).\nGroup G streptococci.\nThese streptococci are usually, but not exclusively, beta-hemolytic. \"Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. canis\" is the predominant subspecies encountered. It is a particularly common GGS in humans, although it is typically found on animals. \"S. phocae\" is a GGS subspecies that has been found in marine mammals and marine fish species. In marine mammals it has been mainly associated with meningoencephalitis, sepsis, and endocarditis, but is also associated with many other pathologies. Its environmental reservoir and means of transmission in marine mammals is not well characterized. Group G streptococci are also considered zoonotic pathogens.\nGroup H streptococci.\nGroup H streptococci cause infections in medium-sized canines. Group H streptococci rarely cause human illness unless a human has direct contact with the mouth of a canine. One of the most common ways this can be spread is human-to-canine, mouth-to-mouth contact. However, the canine may lick the human's hand and infection can be spread, as well.\nClinical identification.\nIn clinical practice, the most common groups of \"Streptococcus\" can be distinguished by simple bench tests, such as the PYR test for group A streptococcus. There are also latex agglutination kits which can distinguish each of the main groups seen in clinical practice.\nTreatment.\nStreptococcal infections can be treated with antibiotics from the penicillin family. Most commonly, penicillin or amoxicillin is used to treat strep infection. These antibiotics work by disrupting peptidoglycan production in the cell wall. Treatment most often occurs as a 10-day oral antibiotic cycle. For patients with penicillin allergies and those suffering from skin infections, clindamycin can be used. Clindamycin works by disrupting protein synthesis within the cell.\nMolecular taxonomy and phylogenetics.\nStreptococci have been divided into six groups on the basis of their 16S rDNA sequences: \"S. anginosus, S. gallolyticus, S. mitis, S. mutans, S. pyogenes\" and \"S. salivarius\". The 16S groups have been confirmed by whole genome sequencing (see figure). The important pathogens \"S. pneumoniae\" and \"S. pyogenes\" belong to the \"S. mitis\" and \"S. pyogenes\" groups, respectively, while the causative agent of dental caries, \"Streptococcus mutans\", is basal to the \"Streptococcus\" group.\nRecent technological advances have resulted in an increase of available genome sequences for \"Streptococcus\" species, allowing for more robust and reliable phylogenetic and comparative genomic analyses to be conducted. In 2018, the evolutionary relationships within \"Streptococcus\" was re-examined by Patel and Gupta through the analysis of comprehensive phylogenetic trees constructed based on four different datasets of proteins and the identification of 134 highly specific molecular signatures (in the form of conserved signature indels) that are exclusively shared by the entire genus or its distinct subclades.\nThe results revealed the presence of two main clades at the highest level within \"Streptococcus\", termed the \"Mitis-Suis\" and \"Pyogenes-Equinus-Mutans\" clades. The \"Mitis-Suis\" main clade comprises the Suis subclade and the Mitis clade, which encompasses the Angiosus, Pneumoniae, Gordonii and Parasanguinis subclades. The second main clade, the \"Pyogenes-Equinus-Mutans\", includes the Pyogenes, Mutans, Salivarius, Equinus, Sobrinus, Halotolerans, Porci, Entericus and Orisratti subclades. In total, 14 distinct subclades have been identified within the genus \"Streptococcus\", each supported by reliable branching patterns in phylogenetic trees and by the presence of multiple conserved signature indels in different proteins that are distinctive characteristics of the members of these 14 clades. A summary diagram showing the overall relationships among the \"Streptococcus\" based on these studies is depicted in a figure on this page.\nGenomics.\nThe genomes of hundreds of species have been sequenced. Most \"Streptococcus\" genomes are 1.8 to 2.3 Mb in size and encode 1,700 to 2,300 proteins. Some important genomes are listed in the table. The four species shown in the table (\"S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, S. pneumoniae\", and \"S. mutans\") have an average pairwise protein sequence identity of about 70%.\nBacteriophage.\nBacteriophages have been described for many species of \"Streptococcus\". 18 prophages have been described in \"S. pneumoniae\" that range in size from 38 to 41 kb in size, encoding from 42 to 66 genes each. Some of the first \"Streptococcus\" phages discovered were Dp-1\nand \u03c91 (alias \u03c9-1).\nIn 1981 the Cp (Complutense phage 1, officially \"Streptococcus virus Cp1\", \"Picovirinae\") family was discovered with Cp-1 as its first member. Dp-1 and Cp-1 infect both \"S. pneumoniae\" and \"S. mitis\". However, the host ranges of most \"Streptococcus\" phages have not been investigated systematically.\nNatural genetic transformation.\nNatural genetic transformation involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another through the surrounding medium. Transformation is a complex process dependent on the expression of numerous genes. To be capable of transformation a bacterium must enter a special physiologic state referred to as competence. \"S. pneumoniae\", \"S. mitis\" and \"S. oralis\" can become competent, and as a result actively acquire homologous DNA for transformation by a predatory fratricidal mechanism This fratricidal mechanism mainly exploits non-competent siblings present in the same niche Among highly competent isolates of \"S. pneumoniae\", Li et al. showed that nasal colonization fitness and virulence (lung infectivity) depend on an intact competence system. Competence may allow the streptococcal pathogen to use external homologous DNA for recombinational repair of DNA damages caused by the host's oxidative attack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29319", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29319", "title": "Sandinista", "text": ""}
{"id": "29322", "revid": "42229202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29322", "title": "SignWriting", "text": "Writing system for sign languages\nSutton SignWriting, or simply SignWriting, is a writing system for sign languages. It can be used to write any sign language, including American Sign Language, Brazilian Sign Language, Tunisian Sign Language, and many others. \nSignWriting is the only international writing system for sign languages. It has been used to publish young adult fiction, translate the Bible, caption YouTube videos, and study sign language literacy.\nThe SignWriting system is visually iconic: its symbols depict the hands, face, and body of a signer. Unlike most writing systems, which are written linearly, the symbols of SignWriting are written two-dimensionally, to represent the signing space.\nSignWriting was invented in 1974 by Valerie Sutton, a ballet dancer who eight years earlier had developed a dance notation named Sutton DanceWriting. The current standardized form of SignWriting is known as the International Sign Writing Alphabet (ISWA).\nHistory.\nSutton originally created SignWriting in Denmark in the fall of 1974, at the request of professor and others on his research team in the Audiology Research Group at the University of Copenhagen.\nSutton was asked to work on a research project, transcribing the gestures made by Danish hearing and Deaf people while they speak or sign. The project, part of a dissertation by Jan Enggaard Pedersen, showed that Danish Sign Language was a rich language, while the gestures of hearing people were unconnected with language.\nSutton's experience transcribing Danish sign language inspired her to work with Deaf people worldwide, helping them to write their own sign languages. She named the new writing system \u201cSignWriting\u201d.\nSignWriting has since been used to write the sign languages of 40 countries. However, it is not clear how widespread its use is in each country.\nBetween 1986 and 1994 Sutton worked with a software developer to create \"SignWriter\", a word processor for SignWriting which runs on MS-DOS computers. SignWriter included an integrated sign dictionary, and support for multiple languages and countries.\nIn 1996, Antonio Carlos da Rocha Costa, a professor at the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), discovered SignWriter and introduced it to his colleagues, beginning Brazil's institutional use of SignWriting.\nIn 2001, SignWriting was used in a Brazilian Sign Language dictionary containing more than 9,500 signs, which was published by the University of S\u00e3o Paulo.\nIn 2005, the Brazilian government issued Federal Decree 5626, which specified that Brazilian Sign Language be taught in universities and public schools, so it could serve as the primary language of instruction for Deaf students.\nSignWriting is used to teach Brazilian Sign Language in 18 Federal Universities and 12 public schools in Brazil. In Germany, it is taught to deaf adults to improve their ability to read and write spoken German. There is also a German website dedicated to SignWriting.\nSymbols.\nSignWriting represents the positions and movements of your body. Because of this, the SignWriting symbols can be used to write any sign language, or even non-linguistic gestures.\nSignWriting has 652 symbols, which are grouped into seven symbol classes: hands; movement; dynamics; head and faces; body; punctuation; and detailed location.\nSignWriting includes so many symbols because it is designed to work with all sign languages, not just a single language. For instance, SignWriting has 261 hand symbols, but American Sign Language uses only 83 of them.\nSignWriting has ten basic hand symbols, with all the remaining hand symbols being variations on the basic symbols.\nThe hand and movement symbols can be modified to show additional information:\nThe SignWriting symbols are described in the standard textbook \"Lessons in SignWriting\".\nSigns.\nIn SignWriting a sign is a group of symbols, arranged two-dimensionally to represent the gestures made by a person signing the sign.\nSignWriting has a number of rules for writing the symbols in a sign. These rules ensure that common patterns of gestures get written consistently across signs.\nEach written sign exists in a \"sign box\", which is an invisible box just large enough to contain all the symbols in the sign. Just as a word consists of a line of letters, a sign consists of a box of symbols.\nThe size of a sign box is variable, and depends on the size and placement of the symbols in the box. This size can change when symbols are added to, deleted from, or moved within a sign.\nSign boxes are used by SignWriting software to align the signs that appear in a line of SignWriting text.\nWriting direction.\nWhile SignWriting symbols are written two-dimensionally within each sign, the signs themselves are written in lines, either horizontally across the page in rows, or vertically down the page in columns.\nSignWriting text was originally written only horizontally. But after Deaf users reported that it felt more natural to write signs down the page, SignWriting was changed to conventionally write signs vertically.\nThis change yielded two benefits. First, the midline used to align vertically-written signs mimics the center line of the depicted signer's body, making the signs easier to read. Second, writing signs vertically simplifies the representation of body-shifting in sign language.\nAlphabetical order.\nSignWriting defines rules for how to sort signs in alphabetical order. But because the SignWriting alphabet contains so many symbols, and the symbols are arranged spatially in signs, SignWriting's ordering rules are more complex than those of the Roman alphabet.\nSignWriting defines two sets of rules for alphabetical ordering: the \"Sign Spelling Sequence\", and the \"Sign Symbol Sequence\".\nThe Sign Spelling Sequence defines a linear order for the individual symbols in a sign. This order is specified manually by the sign author, and it remains with the sign as a non-visible attribute.\nThe Sign Symbol Sequence defines a sort order for lists of signs that have already been assigned individual Sign Spelling Sequences. This order is determined by various symbol properties, and the sign sorting is performed automatically by software.\nHandwriting.\nSignWriting was invented before personal computers, and for many years was written solely by hand. Various forms of hand-written SignWriting were created, including \"Block Printing\", \"Handwriting\", and \"Cursive\".\nWhen handwriting in Block Printing form, each SignWriting symbol is drawn as it appears in the textbook. Of the various hand-written forms, Block Printing is the easiest to read, and the most difficult to write. This difficulty is why some people consider SignWriting to be a cumbersome writing system.\nHandwriting form is similar to Block Printing, but has been simplified to be more easily written by hand. Once Block Printing has been mastered, the Handwriting form can be learned quickly. Note that this form varies among writers, just as handwriting does in other languages.\nCursive form further simplifies Handwriting form to make writing even faster, by omitting certain symbols (such as the non-dominant hand) from each written sign.\nHand-written SignWriting continues to be taught and used, especially in educational settings based on chalkboards and paper.\nSoftware.\nWhile SignWriting can be written by hand, it is easier to use with software specifically designed for writing it.\n\"SignPuddle\" and \"SignMaker\" are the standard software applications for using SignWriting. They work as web applications which run in a web browser.\nSignPuddle is a document and dictionary editor for SignWriting. SignPuddle documents and dictionaries are stored in the cloud, and can be shared among SignPuddle users. Documents and dictionaries can be exported from SignPuddle as PDF files. Signs can be exported as graphics files.\nSignMaker is an editor for signs and dictionaries. Signs can be exported as graphics files, and dictionaries as text or JavaScript files. The SignMaker application can be downloaded to your computer and used locally without an internet connection.\nUnicode.\nUnicode is a character encoding standard which was created so all of the world's writing systems could be used in any software application that supports the standard.\nThe https:// was added to the Unicode standard in 2015. The added symbols conform to the SignWriting ISWA standard.\nHowever, the Unicode support for SignWriting is incomplete, because when the SignWriting symbols were added to Unicode, the Unicode system itself was not also updated to support writing systems that arrange their symbols two-dimensionally, as SignWriting does.\nBecause of this, SignWriting currently cannot be used in software that supports the Unicode standard, and existing SignWriting software uses an https:// for encoding SignWriting symbols.\nA technical proposal has been submitted to the Unicode Consortium, detailing how to update the Unicode standard to fully support SignWriting.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nSignWriting offers several advantages as a writing system:\nHowever, it has a few disadvantages as well:\nResearch.\nSignWriting has served as both a tool in language research, and an object of study in educational research.\nHere is a partial list of PhD theses on (or using) SignWriting:\n\u2013 Abushaira, Mohamed (2007). \" \" (PhD thesis). King Abdulaziz University.\n\u2013 Bianchini, Claudia Savina (2012). \"\" (PhD thesis). University of Paris VIII \u2013 Vincenne Saint-Denis.\n\u2013 Borgia, Fabrizio (2015). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Toulouse 3 \u2013 Paul Sabatier University.\n\u2013 B\u00f3zoli, Daniele Miki Fujikawa (2021). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Universidade Federal Santa Catarina.\n\u2013 Brito, Ronnie Fagundes de (2013). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Universidade Federal Santa Catarina.\n\u2013 Flood, Cecilia Mary (2002). \"https://\u201d (PhD thesis). University of New Mexico.\n\u2013 Galea, Maria (2014). \"\" (PhD thesis). University of Malta.\n\u2013 Gan, Lu (2011). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). University of Central Lancashire.\n\u2013 Moryossef, Amit (2023). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Bar-Ilan University.\n\u2013 Pinto, Jorge Manuel Ferriera (2015). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Universidade do Porto.\n\u2013 Stumpf, Marianne Rossi (2005). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.\n\u2013 Wanderley, D\u00e9bora Campos (2017). \"https://\" (PhD thesis). Universidade Federal Santa Catarina.\nDevelopment.\nThe SignPuddle and SignMaker applications are built on a set of JavaScript packages which manage SignWriting text, including display, searching, sorting, text flow, and other processing.\nTo support researchers and software developers who wish to build custom SignWriting applications, these packages are freely available under the MIT Open Source License.\nThe package \"@sutton-signwriting/core\" provides the following sign-processing commands:\nThe package \"@sutton-signwriting/font-ttf\" includes the SignWriting symbol fonts, which are TrueType fonts distributed under the SIL Open Font License. Separately, Google distributes \"Noto Sans SignWriting\", an OpenType font containing the Unicode SignWriting symbol set.\n\"Formal SignWriting\" is the character encoding for SignWriting text, which provides the logical foundation for the JavaScript packages.\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "29323", "revid": "150280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29323", "title": "Suez Canal", "text": "Artificial sea-level waterway in Egypt\nThe Suez Canal (; , \"\") is an artificial sea-level waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea through the Isthmus of Suez and dividing Africa and Asia (and by extension, the Sinai Peninsula from the rest of Egypt). It is the border between Africa and Asia. The canal is a key trade route between Europe and Asia.\nIn 1858, French diplomat Ferdinand de Lesseps formed the Compagnie de Suez for the express purpose of building the canal. Construction of the canal lasted from 1859 to 1869. The canal officially opened on 17 November 1869. It offers vessels a direct route between the North Atlantic and northern Indian oceans via the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, avoiding the South Atlantic and southern Indian oceans and reducing the journey distance from the Arabian Sea to London by approximately , to 10 days at or 8 days at . The canal extends from the northern terminus of Port Said to the southern terminus of Port Tewfik at the city of Suez. In 2021, more than 20,600 vessels traversed the canal (an average of 56 per day).\nThe original canal featured a single-lane waterway with passing locations in the Ballah Bypass and the Great Bitter Lake. It contained, according to Alois Negrelli's plans, no locks, with seawater flowing freely through it. In general, the water in the canal north of the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer. South of the lakes, the current changes with the tide at Suez.\nThe canal was the property of the Egyptian government, but European shareholders, mostly British and French, owned the concessionary company which operated it until July 1956, when President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalised it\u2014an event which led to the Suez Crisis of October\u2013November 1956. The canal is operated and maintained by the state-owned Suez Canal Authority (SCA) of Egypt. Under the Convention of Constantinople, it may be used \"in time of war as in time of peace, by every vessel of commerce or of war, without distinction of flag.\" Nevertheless, the canal has played an important military strategic role as a naval short-cut and choke point. Navies with coastlines and bases on both the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea (Egypt and Israel) have a particular interest in the Suez Canal. After Egypt closed the Suez Canal at the beginning of the Six-Day War on 5 June 1967, the canal remained closed for eight years, reopening on 5 June 1975.\nThe Egyptian government launched construction in 2014 to expand and widen the Ballah Bypass for to speed up the canal's transit time. The expansion was intended to nearly double the capacity of the Suez Canal, from 49 to 97 ships per day. At a cost of LE (Egyptian Pound) 59.4 billion (US$9 billion), this project was funded with interest-bearing investment certificates issued exclusively to Egyptian entities and individuals.\nThe Suez Canal Authority officially opened the new side channel in 2016. This side channel, at the northern side of the east extension of the Suez Canal, serves the East Terminal for berthing and unberthing vessels from the terminal. As the East Container Terminal is located on the Canal itself, before the construction of the new side channel it was not possible to berth or unberth vessels at the terminal while a convoy was running.\nPrecursors.\nAncient west\u2013east canals were built to facilitate travel from the Nile to the Red Sea. One smaller canal is believed to have been constructed under the auspices of Senusret II or Ramesses II. Another canal, probably incorporating a portion of the first, was constructed under the reign of Necho II (610\u2013595 BCE), but the only fully functional canal was engineered and completed by Darius I (522\u2013486 BCE).\nSecond millennium BCE.\nJames Henry Breasted attributes the earliest-known attempt to construct a canal to the first cataract, near Aswan, to the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt and its completion to Senusret III (1878\u20131839 BCE) of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt.\nThe legendary Sesostris (likely either Pharaoh Senusret II or Senusret III of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt) may have constructed the ancient canal, the Canal of the Pharaohs, joining the Nile with the Red Sea (1897\u20131839 BCE), when an irrigation channel was constructed around 1848 BCE that was navigable during the flood season, leading into a dry river valley east of the Nile River Delta named Wadi Tumilat. (In ancient times, the Red Sea may have reached northward to the Bitter Lakes and Lake Timsah).\nIn his \"Meteorology\", Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) wrote:\nOne of their kings tried to make a canal to it (for it would have been of no little advantage to them for the whole region to have become navigable; Sesostris is said to have been the first of the ancient kings to try), but he found that the sea was higher than the land. So he first, and Darius afterwards, stopped making the canal, lest the sea should mix with the river water and spoil it.\nStrabo wrote that Sesostris started to build a canal, and Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 AD) wrote:\n165. Next comes the Tyro tribe and, the harbour of the Daneoi, from which Sesostris, king of Egypt, intended to carry a ship-canal to where the Nile flows into what is known as the Delta; this is a distance of over . Later the Persian king Darius had the same idea, and yet again Ptolemy II, who made a trench wide, deep and about long, as far as the Bitter Lakes.\nIn the 20th century, the northward extension of the later Darius I canal was discovered, extending from Lake Timsah to the Ballah Lakes. This was dated to the Middle Kingdom of Egypt by extrapolating the dates of ancient sites along its course.\nThe reliefs of the Punt expedition under Hatshepsut, 1470 BCE, depict seagoing vessels carrying the expeditionary force returning from Punt. This suggests that a navigable link existed between the Red Sea and the Nile. Recent excavations in Wadi Gawasis may indicate that Egypt's maritime trade started from the Red Sea and did not require a canal. Evidence seems to indicate its existence by the 13th century BCE during the time of Ramesses II.\nCanals dug by Necho, Darius I and Ptolemy.\nRemnants of an ancient west\u2013east canal through the ancient Egyptian cities of Bubastis, Pi-Ramesses, and Pithom were discovered by Napoleon Bonaparte and his engineers and cartographers in 1799.\nAccording to the \"Histories\" of the Greek historian Herodotus, about 600 BCE, Necho II undertook to dig a west\u2013east canal through the Wadi Tumilat between Bubastis and Heroopolis, and perhaps continued it to the Heroopolite Gulf and the Red Sea. Regardless, Necho is reported as having never completed his project.\nHerodotus was told that 120,000 men perished in this undertaking, but this figure is doubtless exaggerated. According to Pliny the Elder, Necho's extension to the canal was about , equal to the total distance between Bubastis and the Great Bitter Lake, allowing for winding through valleys. The length that Herodotus tells, of over 1,000 stadia (i.e., over ), must be understood to include the entire distance between the Nile and the Red Sea at that time.\nWith Necho's death, work was discontinued. Herodotus tells that the reason the project was abandoned was because of a warning received from an oracle that others would benefit from its successful completion. Necho's war with Nebuchadnezzar II most probably prevented the canal's continuation.\nNecho's project was completed by Darius I of Persia, who ruled over Ancient Egypt after it had been conquered by his predecessor Cambyses II. It may be that by Darius's time a natural waterway passage which had existed between the Heroopolite Gulf and the Red Sea in the vicinity of the Egyptian town of Shaluf (alt. \"Chalouf\" or \"Shaloof\"), located just south of the Great Bitter Lake, had become so blocked with silt that Darius needed to clear it out so as to allow navigation once again. According to Herodotus, Darius's canal was wide enough that two triremes could pass each other with oars extended, and required four days to traverse. Darius commemorated his achievement with a number of granite stelae that he set up on the Nile bank, including one near Kabret, and a further one a few kilometres north of Suez. Darius the Great's Suez Inscriptions read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;King Darius says: I am a Persian; setting out from Persia I conquered Egypt. I ordered to dig this canal from the river that is called Nile and flows in Egypt, to the sea that begins in Persia. Therefore, when this canal had been dug as I had ordered, ships went from Egypt through this canal to Persia, as I had intended\u2014\u200a\nThe canal left the Nile at Bubastis. An inscription on a pillar at Pithom records that in 270 or 269\u00a0BCE, it was again reopened, by Ptolemy II Philadelphus. In Arsinoe, Ptolemy constructed a navigable lock, with sluices, at the Heroopolite Gulf of the Red Sea, which allowed the passage of vessels but prevented salt water from the Red Sea from mingling with the fresh water in the canal.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, French cartographers discovered the remnants of an ancient north\u2013south canal past the east side of Lake Timsah and ending near the north end of the Great Bitter Lake. This proved to be the canal made by Darius I, as his stele commemorating its construction was found at the site. (This ancient, second canal may have followed a course along the shoreline of the Red Sea when it once extended north to Lake Timsah.)\nReceding Red Sea and the dwindling Nile.\nThe Red Sea is believed by some historians to have gradually receded over the centuries, its coastline slowly moving southward away from Lake Timsah and the Great Bitter Lake. Coupled with persistent accumulations of Nile silt, maintenance and repair of Ptolemy's canal became increasingly cumbersome over each passing century.\nTwo hundred years after the construction of Ptolemy's canal, Cleopatra seems to have had no west\u2013east waterway passage, because the Pelusiac branch of the Nile, which fed Ptolemy's west\u2013east canal, had by that time dwindled, being choked with silt. In support of this contention one can note that in 31 BCE, during a reversal of fortune in Mark Antony's and Cleopatra's war against Octavian, she attempted to escape Egypt with her fleet by raising the ships out of the Mediterranean and dragging them across the isthmus of Suez to the Red Sea. Then, according to Plutarch, the Arabs of Petra attacked and burned the first wave of these ships and Cleopatra abandoned the effort. (Modern historians, however, maintain that her ships were burned by the enemy forces of Malichus I.)\nCairo to the Red Sea.\nThe ancient canal was re-excavated by Roman emperor Trajan in the first century AD, who named it after himself. He reportedly moved its mouth on the Nile further south, at the site of what is now Old Cairo. By the time of the Arab conquest in 641 AD, this canal had fallen out of use. The commander of the Muslim force, Amr ibn al-As, ordered that it be restored so as to improve connections between Egypt and Medina, the Muslim capital at the time. The Muslim canal was excavated further north from Trajan's canal, joining the Nile close to what is now the Sayyida Zaynab neighbourhood of Cairo. This canal reportedly ended near modern Suez. The site of the former Roman channel near the Nile was absorbed into the new city of Fustat.\nA geography treatise \"De Mensura Orbis Terrae\" written by the Irish monk Dicuil (born late 8th century) reports a conversation with another monk, Fidelis, who had sailed on the canal from the Nile to the Red Sea during a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in the first half of the 8th century.\nThe Abbasid caliph al-Mansur is said to have ordered this canal closed in 767 to prevent supplies from reaching Arabian detractors. The Fatimid caliph al-Hakim is claimed to have repaired the Cairo to Red Sea passageway, but only briefly, circa 1000 CE, as it soon \"became choked with sand\". The remaining section of the canal near the Nile, known as the \"Khalij\", continued to serve as part of Cairo's water infrastructure until the 19th century. In later periods, the canal was closed with a dike for much of the year and reopened during the flood season.\nConception by Venice.\nThe successful 1488 navigation of southern Africa by Bartolomeu Dias opened a direct maritime trading route to India and the Spice Islands, and forever changed the balance of Mediterranean trade. One of the most prominent losers in the new order, as former middlemen, was the former spice trading center of Venice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Venetian leaders, driven to desperation, contemplated digging a waterway between the Red Sea and the Nile\u2014anticipating the Suez Canal by almost 400 years\u2014to bring the luxury trade flooding to their doors again. But this remained a dream.\u2014\u200a\nDespite entering negotiations with Egypt's ruling Mamelukes, the Venetian plan to build the canal was quickly put to rest by the Ottoman conquest of Egypt in 1517, led by Sultan Selim I.\nOttoman attempts.\nDuring the 16th century, the Ottoman Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha attempted to construct a canal connecting the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. This was motivated by a desire to connect Constantinople to the pilgrimage and trade routes of the Indian Ocean, as well as by strategic concerns\u2014as the European presence in the Indian Ocean was growing, Ottoman mercantile and strategic interests were increasingly challenged, and the Sublime Porte was increasingly pressed to assert its position. A navigable canal would allow the Ottoman Navy to connect its Red Sea, Black Sea, and Mediterranean fleets. However, this project was deemed too expensive, and was never completed.\nNapoleon's discovery of an ancient canal.\nDuring the French campaign in Egypt and Syria in late 1798, Napoleon expressed interest in finding the remnants of an ancient waterway passage. This culminated in a cadre of archaeologists, scientists, cartographers and engineers scouring northern Egypt. Their findings, recorded in the \"Description de l'\u00c9gypte\", include detailed maps that depict the discovery of an ancient canal extending northward from the Red Sea and then westward toward the Nile.\nAfter becoming Emperor of France in 1804, Napoleon contemplated the construction of a north\u2013south canal to connect the Mediterranean with the Red Sea. By avoiding the silt-laden Nile, such a canal would be easier to maintain. But the plan was abandoned because of the erroneous belief that the Red Sea was higher than the Mediterranean, and the waterway would thus require the costly and time-consuming construction of locks to operate. This was the result of using fragmentary survey measurements taken during the aforementioned war.\nAs late as 1861, the unnavigable ancient route discovered by Napoleon from Bubastis to the Red Sea still channelled water as far east as Kassassin.\nHistory of the Suez Canal.\nInterim period.\nDespite the construction challenges that could have been the result of the alleged difference in sea levels, the idea of finding a shorter route to the east remained alive. In 1830, General Francis Chesney submitted a report to the British government that stated that there was no difference in elevation and that the Suez Canal was feasible, but his report received no further attention. Lieutenant Waghorn established his \"Overland Route\", which transported post and passengers to India via Egypt. The usefulness of this route for the British Empire was shown when dealing with the Indian Rebellion of 1857, with 5,000 British troops having passed through Egypt.\nLinant de Bellefonds, a French explorer of Egypt, became chief engineer of Egypt's Public Works. In addition to his normal duties, he surveyed the Isthmus of Suez and made plans for the Suez Canal. French Saint-Simonianists showed an interest in the canal and in 1833, Barth\u00e9lemy Prosper Enfantin tried to draw Muhammad Ali's attention to the canal but was unsuccessful. Alois Negrelli, the Italian-Austrian railroad pioneer, became interested in the idea in 1836.\nIn 1846, Prosper Enfantin's Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'\u00c9tudes du Canal de Suez invited a number of experts, among them Robert Stephenson, Negrelli and Paul-Adrien Bourdaloue to study the feasibility of the Suez Canal (with the assistance of Linant de Bellefonds). Bourdaloue's survey of the isthmus was the first generally accepted evidence that there was no practical difference in elevation between the two seas. Britain, however, feared that a canal open to everyone might interfere with its India trade and therefore preferred a connection by train from Alexandria via Cairo to Suez, which Stephenson eventually built.\nConstruction by the Suez Canal Company.\nPreparations (1854\u20131858).\nIn 1854 and 1856, Ferdinand de Lesseps obtained a concession from Sa'id Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt and Sudan, to create a company to construct a canal open to ships of all nations. The company was to operate the canal for 99 years from its opening. De Lesseps had used his friendly relationship with Sa'id, which he had developed while he was a French diplomat in the 1830s. As stipulated in the concessions, de Lesseps convened the International Commission for the piercing of the isthmus of Suez (\"Commission Internationale pour le percement de l'isthme de Suez\") consisting of 13 experts from seven countries, among them John Robinson McClean, later President of the Institution of Civil Engineers in London, and again Negrelli, to examine the plans developed by Linant de Bellefonds, and to advise on the feasibility of and the best route for the canal. After surveys and analyses in Egypt and discussions in Paris on various aspects of the canal, where many of Negrelli's ideas prevailed, the commission produced a unanimous report in December 1856 containing a detailed description of the canal complete with plans and profiles. The Suez Canal Company (\"Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez\") came into being on 15 December 1858.\nThe British government had opposed the project from the outset to its completion. The British, who controlled both the Cape route and the Overland route to India and the Far East, favored the \"status quo\", given that a canal might disrupt their commercial and maritime supremacy. Lord Palmerston, the project's most unwavering foe, confessed in the mid-1850s the real motive behind his opposition: that Britain's commercial and maritime relations would be overthrown by the opening of a new route, open to all nations, and thus deprive his country of its present exclusive advantages. As one of the diplomatic moves against the project when it nevertheless went ahead, it disapproved of the use of \"forced labour\" for construction of the canal. Involuntary labour on the project ceased, and the viceroy condemned the corv\u00e9e, halting the project.\nInternational opinion was initially skeptical, and shares of the Suez Canal Company did not sell well overseas. Britain, Austria, and Russia did not buy a significant number of shares. With assistance from the Cattaui banking family, and their relationship with James de Rothschild of the French House of Rothschild, bonds and shares were successfully promoted in France and other parts of Europe. All French shares were quickly sold in France. A contemporary British skeptic claimed \"One thing is sure... our local merchant community doesn't pay practical attention at all to this grand work, and it is legitimate to doubt that the canal's receipts... could ever be sufficient to recover its maintenance fee. It will never become a large ship's accessible way in any case.\"\nConstruction (1859\u20131869).\nWork started on the shore of the future Port Said on 25 April 1859.\nThe excavation took some 10 years, with forced labour (corv\u00e9e) being employed until 1864 to dig out the canal. Some sources estimate that over 30,000 people were working on the canal at any given period, that more than 1.5 million people from various countries were employed, and that tens of thousands of labourers died, many of them from cholera and similar epidemics.\nEstimates of the number of deaths vary widely with Gamal Abdel Nasser citing 120,000 deaths upon nationalisation of the canal in a 26 July 1956 speech and the company's chief medical officer reporting no higher than 2.49 deaths per thousand in 1866. Doubling these estimates with a generous assumption of 50,000 working staff per year over 11 years would put a conservative estimate at fewer than 3,000 deaths. More closely relying on the limited reported data of the time, the number would be fewer than 1,000.\nCompany towns.\nFrom its inauguration, till 1925, the Suez Canal Company built a series of company towns along the canal to serve its operation. They included ports and their facilities as well as housing for employees segregated by race or nationality. These were Port Said (1869) and Port Fuad (1925) at the canal's northern entrance by the Mediterranenan, Ismailia (1862) near the middle and north of Lake Timsah, and Port Twefik (1867) at the canal's southern entrance on the Red Sea.\nInauguration (17 November 1869).\nThe canal opened under French control in November 1869. The opening ceremonies began at Port Said on the evening of 15 November, with illuminations, fireworks, and a banquet on the yacht of the Khedive Isma'il Pasha of Egypt and Sudan. The royal guests arrived the following morning: the Emperor Franz Joseph I, the French Empress Eugenie in the Imperial yacht \"L'Aigle\", the Crown Prince of Prussia, and Prince Louis of Hesse. Other international guests included the American natural historian H. W. Harkness. In the afternoon there were blessings of the canal with both Muslim and Christian ceremonies, a temporary mosque and church having been built side by side on the beach. In the evening there were more illuminations and fireworks.\nOn the morning of 17 November, a procession of ships entered the canal, headed by the \"L'Aigle\". Among the ships following was\u00a0HMS \"Newport\", captained by George Nares, which surveyed the canal on behalf of the Admiralty a few months later. The \"Newport\" was involved in an incident that demonstrated some of the problems with the canal. There were suggestions that the depth of parts of the canal at the time of the inauguration were not as great as promised, and that the deepest part of the channel was not always clear, leading to a risk of grounding. The first day of the passage ended at Lake Timsah, south of Port Said. The French ship \"P\u00e9luse\" anchored close to the entrance, then swung around and grounded, the ship and its hawser blocking the way into the lake. The following ships had to anchor in the canal itself until the \"P\u00e9luse\" was hauled clear the next morning, making it difficult for them to join that night's celebration in Ismailia. Except for the \"Newport\": Nares sent out a boat to carry out soundings, and was able to manoeuvre around the \"P\u00e9luse\" to enter the lake and anchor there for the night.\nIsmailia was the scene of more celebrations the following day, including a military \"march past\", illuminations and fireworks, and a ball at the Governor's Palace. The convoy set off again on the morning of 19 November, for the remainder of the trip to Suez. After Suez, many of the participants headed for Cairo, and then to the Pyramids, where a new road had been built for the occasion.\nAn Anchor Line ship, the S.S. \"Dido\", became the first to pass through the Canal from South to North.\nInitial difficulties (1869\u20131871).\nAlthough numerous technical, political, and financial problems had been overcome, the final cost was more than double the original estimate.\nThe Khedive, in particular, was able to overcome initial reservations held by both British and French creditors by enlisting the help of the Sursock family, whose deep connections proved invaluable in securing much international support for the project.\nAfter the opening, the Suez Canal Company was in financial difficulties. The remaining works were completed only in 1871, and traffic was below expectations in the first two years. De Lesseps therefore tried to increase revenues by interpreting the kind of net ton referred to in the second concession (\"tonneau de capacit\u00e9\") as meaning a ship's cargo capacity and not only the theoretical net tonnage of the \"Moorsom System\" introduced in Britain by the Merchant Shipping Act in 1854. The ensuing commercial and diplomatic activities resulted in the International Commission of Constantinople establishing a specific kind of net tonnage and settling the question of tariffs in its protocol of 18 December 1873. This was the origin of the Suez Canal Net Tonnage and the Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate, both of which are still in use today.\nGrowth and reorganisation.\nThe canal had an immediate and dramatic effect on world trade. Combined with the American transcontinental railroad completed six months earlier, it allowed the world to be circled in record time. It played an important role in increasing European colonization of Africa. The construction of the canal was one of the reasons for the Panic of 1873 in Great Britain, because goods from the Far East had, until then, been carried in sailing vessels around the Cape of Good Hope and stored in British warehouses. An inability to pay his bank debts led Said Pasha's successor, Isma'il Pasha, in 1875 to sell his 44% share in the canal for \u00a34,000,000 ($19.2 million), equivalent to \u00a3432 million to \u00a3456 million ($540 million to $570 million) in 2019, to the government of the United Kingdom. French shareholders still held the majority. Local unrest caused the British to invade Egypt in 1882 and take full control, although nominally Egypt remained part of the Ottoman Empire. The British representative from 1883 to 1907 was Evelyn Baring, 1st Earl of Cromer, who reorganized and modernized the government and suppressed rebellions and corruption, thereby facilitating increased traffic on the canal.\nThe European Mediterranean countries in particular benefited economically from the Suez Canal, as they now had much faster connections to Asia and East Africa than the North and West European maritime trading nations such as Great Britain, the Netherlands or Germany. The biggest beneficiary in the Mediterranean was Austria-Hungary, which had participated in the planning and construction of the canal. The largest Austrian maritime trading company, \u00d6sterreichischer Lloyd, experienced rapid expansion after the canal was completed, as did the port city of Trieste, then an Austrian possession. The company was a partner in the Compagnie Universelle du Canal de Suez, whose vice-president was the Lloyd co-founder Pasquale Revoltella.\nIn 1900, a dredging trial was held by the Suez Canal Company to determine which ship would assist in the widening and deepening of the canal. One of the ships trialed in the dredging was The \"Hercules\", a ship owned by the Queensland Government in Australia. The \"Hercules\" dredged deposits of granite and limestone, but it was determined at the end of the trial that the \"Hercules\" would not be used for the dredging of the Suez Canal. The ship was then returned to Brisbane, Australia in January 1901.\nThe Convention of Constantinople in 1888 declared the canal a neutral zone under the protection of the British, who had occupied Egypt and Sudan at the request of Khedive Tewfiq to suppress the Urabi Revolt against his rule. The revolt went on from 1879 to 1882. The British defended the strategically important passage against a major Ottoman attack in 1915, during the First World War. Under the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, the UK retained control over the canal. With outbreak of World War II the canal was again strategically important; Italo-German attempts to capture it were repulsed during the North Africa Campaign, which ensured the canal remained closed to Axis shipping. After the war the British Army continued to maintain a large garrison of some 70,000 troops in the Suez Canal Zone.\nSuez Crisis.\nIn 1951 Egypt repudiated the 1936 treaty with Great Britain. In October 1954 the UK tentatively agreed to remove its troops from the Canal Zone. Because of Egyptian overtures towards the Soviet Union, both the United Kingdom and the United States withdrew their pledge to financially support construction of the Aswan Dam. Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser responded by nationalising the canal on 26\u00a0July\u00a01956 and transferring it to the Suez Canal Authority, intending to finance the dam project using revenue from the canal. On the same day that the canal was nationalised Nasser also closed the Straits of Tiran to all Israeli ships. This led to the Suez Crisis in which the UK, France, and Israel invaded Egypt. According to the pre-agreed war plans under the Protocol of S\u00e8vres, Israel invaded the Sinai Peninsula on 29\u00a0October, forcing Egypt to engage them militarily, and allowing the Anglo-French partnership to declare the resultant fighting a threat to stability in the Middle East and enter the war \u2013 officially to separate the two forces but in reality to regain the Canal and bring down the Nasser government.\nTo save the British from what he thought was a disastrous action and to stop the war from a possible escalation, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson proposed the creation of the first United Nations peacekeeping force to ensure access to the canal for all and an Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula. On 4\u00a0November\u00a01956, a majority at the United Nations voted for Pearson's peacekeeping resolution, which mandated the UN peacekeepers to stay in Sinai unless both Egypt and Israel agreed to their withdrawal. The United States backed this proposal by putting pressure on the British government through the selling of sterling, which would cause it to depreciate. Britain then called a ceasefire, and later agreed to withdraw its troops by the end of the year. Pearson was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. As a result of damage and ships sunk under orders from Nasser the canal was closed from November\u00a01956 to April\u00a01957, when it was cleared with UN assistance. A UN force (UNEF) was established to maintain the free navigability of the canal, and peace in the Sinai Peninsula.\nArab\u2013Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973.\nAfter the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Egypt closed the Canal to Israeli shipping, despite UN Security Council resolutions from 1949 and 1951 urging it not to, on the grounds that hostilities had ended with the 1949 armistice agreement.\nOn 16 May 1967, Nasser ordered UNEF peacekeeping forces out of the Sinai Peninsula, including the Suez Canal area. Egyptian troops were sent into Sinai to take their place. On 21 May, Israel protested Nasser's order to close the Straits of Tiran to Israeli trade.\nAfter the 1967 Six-Day War, Israeli forces occupied the Sinai Peninsula, including the entire east bank of the Suez Canal. In the following years the tensions between Egypt and Israel intensified and from March 1969 until August 1970, the War of Attrition took place as the then Egyptian president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, tried to retake the territories occupied by Israel during the conflict. The fighting ceased after the death of Nasser on 28 September 1970. After this conflict there were no changes in the distribution of territory, but the underlying tensions persisted.\nUnwilling to allow the Israelis to use the canal, Egypt imposed a blockade which closed the canal to all shipping immediately after the beginning of the Six-Day War. The canal remained blocked for eight years. There was no anticipation of this event and consequently fifteen cargo ships, known as the \"Yellow Fleet\", were trapped in the canal, and remained there until its reopening in 1975.\nOn 6 October 1973, during the Yom Kippur War, the Canal was the scene of Operation Badr, in which the Egyptian army crossed into Israeli-occupied Sinai. Much wreckage from this conflict remains visible along the canal's edges. On 22 October 1973, Israeli forces counter-attacked by crossing the Suez Canal into Egypt and advancing towards Suez City, where they remained until after Israel and Egypt signed on 18 January 1974, an agreement, commonly known as Sinai I, with the official name of \"Sinai Separation of Forces Agreement,\" which included a withdrawal of Israeli forces from the western side of the Suez Canal.\nMine clearing operations (1974\u201375).\nAfter the Yom Kippur War, the United States initiated Operation Nimbus Moon. The amphibious assault ship USS \"Inchon (LPH-12)\" was sent to the Canal, carrying 12 RH-53D minesweeping helicopters of Helicopter Mine Countermeasures Squadron 12. These partly cleared the canal between May and December 1974. It was relieved by the LST USS \"Barnstable County\" (LST1197). The British Royal Navy initiated Operation Rheostat and Task Group 65.2 provided for Operation Rheostat One (six months in 1974), the minehunters HMS \"Maxton\", HMS \"Bossington\", and HMS \"Wilton\", the Fleet Clearance Diving Team (FCDT) and HMS \"Abdiel\", a practice minelayer/MCMV support ship; and for Operation Rheostat Two (six months in 1975) the minehunters HMS \"Hubberston\" and HMS \"Sheraton\", and HMS \"Abdiel\". When the Canal Clearance Operations were completed, the canal and its lakes were considered 99% clear of mines. The canal was then reopened by Egyptian President Anwar Sadat aboard an Egyptian destroyer, which led the first convoy northbound to Port Said in 1975, at his side stood the Iranian Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi.\nUN presence.\nThe UNEF mandate expired in 1979. Despite the efforts of the United States, Israel, Egypt, and others to obtain an extension of the UN role in observing the peace between Israel and Egypt, as called for under the Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty of 1979, the mandate could not be extended because of the veto by the Soviet Union in the UN Security Council, at the request of Syria. Accordingly, negotiations for a new observer force in the Sinai produced the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), stationed in Sinai in 1981 in coordination with a phased Israeli withdrawal. The MFO remains active under agreements between the United States, Israel, Egypt, and other nations.\nBypass expansion.\nIn 2014, months after taking office as President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ordered the expansion of the Ballah Bypass from wide to wide for . The project was called the New Suez Canal, as it allows ships to transit the canal in both directions simultaneously. The project cost more than LE 59.4 billion (US$9 billion) and was completed within a year. Sisi declared the expanded channel open to business in a ceremony on 6 August 2015.\nSecond channel extension.\nFollowing the grounding of the vessel Ever Given in 2021, Egypt accelerated plans to extend and widen the canal's second channel. In early 2025, new sections of this extension had begun to be tested, with the Suez Canal Authority reporting two vessels had passed through the canal with no issues.\nIncidents.\nIn 2004, the canal was closed for three days when the oil tanker \"Tropic Brilliance\" became stuck.\nOn 18 October 2017, the \"OOCL Japan\" ran aground causing an obstruction which blocked the canal for a few hours.\n2021 obstruction.\nOn 23 March 2021, at around 05:40 UTC (07:40 local time), the Suez Canal was blocked in both directions by ultra-large Evergreen G-class container ship \"Ever Given\". The ship, operated by Evergreen Marine, was en route from Malaysia to the Netherlands when it ran aground after strong winds allegedly blew the ship off course. Upon running aground, \"Ever Given\" turned sideways, completely blocking the canal. Although part of the length of the canal is paralleled by an older narrower channel which can be used to bypass obstructions, this incident occurred to the south, in a section of the canal where there is only one channel.\nWhen the incident began, many economists and trade experts commented on the effects of the obstruction if not resolved quickly, citing how important the Suez was to global trade; the incident was likely to drastically affect the global economy because of the trapped goods scheduled to go through the canal. Among those goods, oil shipments were the most affected in the immediate aftermath, due to a significant number still blocked with no other way to reach their destination. Referring to the European and American market, a few maritime experts have disputed the prediction of a drastic effect on trade, saying this \"really isn't a substantial transit route for crude\" according to Marshall Steeves, energy markets analyst at IHS Markit, and \"there are existing stocks\" according to Camille Egloff of Boston Consulting Group and alternative sources of supply, noting that traffic only slowed down and that it might only have impacted sectors with existing shortages (such as the semiconductor industry). The International Chamber of Shipping (ICS) estimated that up to $3 billion worth of cargo passes through the Suez Canal every day.\nIt was said the blockage would have an impact on cargo schedules around the world. Shipping companies were also considering whether to divert their ships along the much longer route around the Cape of Good Hope. The first container ship diverted was \"Ever Given\"'s sister ship, \"Ever Greet\".\n\"Ever Given\" was re-floated on 29 March. Within a few hours, cargo traffic resumed, slowly resolving the backlog of around 450 ships. The first ship to pass through the canal after \"Ever Given\"'s recovery was \"YM Wish\", a Hong Kong-based cargo ship.\nOn 2 April 2021, Usama Rabie, chairman of the Suez Canal Authority of Egypt, said that the damage caused by the blockage of the canal could reach about $1 billion. Rabie also revealed that after the Suez Canal resumed navigation, as of noon on 31 March 285 cargo ships had passed through the canal smoothly. He said that the remaining 175 freighters waiting to pass through the canal would all pass by 2 April.\nAfter the incident, the Egyptian government announced that they would be widening the narrower parts of the canal. On 9 September 2021, the canal was briefly blocked again by MV \"Coral Crystal\". However, this ship was freed within 15 minutes, presenting minimal disruption to other convoys.\n2023 grounding.\nOn 25 May 2023, a Hong Kong-flagged cargo ship, MV \"Xin Hai Tong 23\", was grounded near the southern end of the canal, but it was refloated by tugboats in less than a day.\nLayout and operation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhen built, the canal was long and deep. After several enlargements, it is long, deep and wide. It consists of the northern access channel of , the canal itself of and the southern access channel of .\nThe so-called New Suez Canal, functional since 6 August 2015, currently has a new parallel canal in the middle part, with its length over . The current parameters of the Suez Canal, including both individual canals of the parallel section are: depth and width at least (that width measured at of depth).\nCapacity.\nThe canal allows passage of ships up to draft or 240,000 deadweight tons and up to a height of above water level and a maximum beam of under certain conditions. The canal can handle more traffic and larger ships than the Panama Canal, as Suezmax dimensions are greater than both Panamax and New Panamax. Some supertankers are too large to traverse the canal. Others can offload part of their cargo onto a canal-owned ship to reduce their draft, transit, and reload at the other end of the canal. On 15 April 2021 Egyptian authorities announced that they would widen the southern section of the Suez Canal to improve the efficiency of the canal. The plan mainly covers about from Suez to the Great Bitter Lake. It will be widened by and the maximum depth will be increased from about to about .\nNavigation.\nShips approaching the canal from the sea are expected to radio the harbour when they are within of the Fairway Buoy near Port Said. The canal has no locks because of the flat terrain, and the minor sea level difference between each end is inconsequential for shipping. As the canal has no sea surge gates, the ports at the ends would be subject to the sudden impact of tsunamis from the Mediterranean Sea and Red Sea, according to a 2012 article in the \"Journal of Coastal Research\".\nThere is one shipping lane with passing areas in Ballah-Bypass near El Qantara and in the Great Bitter Lake. On a typical day, three convoys transit the canal, two southbound and one northbound. The passage takes between 11 and 16 hours at a speed of around . The low speed helps prevent erosion of the banks by ships' wakes.\nBy 1955, about two-thirds of Europe's oil passed through the canal. Around 8% of world sea trade is carried via the canal. In 2008, 21,415 vessels passed through the canal and the receipts totalled $5.381 billion, with an average cost per ship of $251,000.\nNew Rules of Navigation came into force on 1 January 2008, passed by the board of directors of the Suez Canal Authority (SCA) to organise vessels' transit. The most important amendments include allowing vessels with draught to pass, increasing the allowed breadth from (following improvement operations), and imposing a fine on vessels using pilots from outside the SCA inside the canal boundaries without permission. The amendments allow vessels loaded with dangerous cargo (such as radioactive or flammable materials) to pass if they conform with the latest amendments provided by international conventions.\nThe SCA has the right to determine the number of tugs required to assist warships traversing the canal, to achieve the highest degree of safety during transit.\nOperation.\nBefore August 2015, the canal was too narrow for free two-way traffic, so ships had to pass in convoys and use bypasses. The bypasses were out of (40%). From north to south, they are Port Said bypass (entrances) , Ballah bypass &amp; anchorage , Timsah bypass , and the Deversoir bypass (northern end of the Great Bitter Lake) . The bypasses were completed in 1980.\nTypically, it would take a ship 12 to 16 hours to transit the canal. The canal's 24-hour capacity was about 76 standard ships.\nIn August 2014, Egypt chose a consortium that includes the Egyptian army and global engineering firm Dar Al-Handasah to develop an international industrial and logistics hub in the Suez Canal area, and began the construction of a new canal section from combined with expansion and deep digging of the other of the canal. This has allowed navigation in both directions simultaneously in the central section of the canal. These extensions were formally opened on 6 August 2015 by President Al-Sisi.\nConvoy sailing.\nSince the canal does not cater to unregulated two-way traffic, all ships transit in convoys on regular times, scheduled on a 24-hour basis. Each day, a single northbound convoy starts at 04:00 EET from Suez. At dual lane sections, the convoy uses the eastern route. Synchronised with this convoy's passage is the southbound convoy. It starts at 03:30 EET from Port Said and so passes the Northbound convoy in the two-lane section.\nCanal crossings.\nFrom north to south, the crossings are:\nA railway on the west bank runs parallel to the canal for its entire length.\nThe five pontoon bridges were opened between 2016 and 2019. They are designed to be movable, and can be completely rotated against the banks of the canal to allow shipping through, or else individual sections can be moved to create a narrower channel.\nSix new tunnels for cars and trains are also planned across the canal. Currently the Ahmed Hamdi is the only tunnel connecting Suez to the Sinai.\nEconomic impact.\nEconomically, after its completion, the Suez Canal benefited primarily the sea trading powers of the Mediterranean countries, which now had much faster connections to the Near and Far East than the North and West European sea trading nations such as Great Britain or Germany. The main Habsburg trading port of Trieste with its direct connections to Central Europe experienced a meteoric rise at that time.\nThe time saved in the 19th century for an assumed steamship trip to Bombay from Brindisi and Trieste was 37 days, from Genoa 32, from Marseille 31, from Bordeaux, Liverpool, London, Amsterdam and Hamburg 24 days. At that time, it was also necessary to consider whether the goods to be transported could bear the costly canal tariff. This led to a rapid growth of Mediterranean ports with their land routes to Central and Eastern Europe. According to today's information from the shipping companies, the route from Singapore to Rotterdam through the Suez Canal will be shortened by and thus by nine days compared to the route around Africa. As a result, liner services between Asia and Europe save 44 per cent CO2 (carbon dioxide) thanks to this shorter route. The Suez Canal has a correspondingly important role in the connection between East Africa and the Mediterranean region.\nIn the 20th century, trade through the Suez Canal came to a standstill several times, due to the two world wars and the Suez Canal crisis. Many trade flows were also shifted away from the Mediterranean ports towards Northern European terminals, such as Hamburg and Rotterdam. Only after the end of the Cold War, the growth in European economic integration, the consideration of CO2 emission and the Chinese Silk Road Initiative, are Mediterranean ports such as Piraeus and Trieste again at the focus of growth and investment.\nThe Suez Canal set a new record with annual revenue of $9.4 billion in USD for the fiscal year that ended 30 June 2023. Attacks by Houthi rebels on shipping vessels off the coast of Yemen caused monthly losses of $800 million, according to Egypt's President Sisi.\nAlternative routes.\nBefore the canal's opening in 1869, goods were sometimes offloaded from ships and carried overland between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.\nCape Agulhas.\nThe main alternative is around Cape Agulhas, the southernmost point of Africa, commonly referred to as the Cape of Good Hope route. This was the only sea route before the canal was constructed, and when the canal was closed. It is still the only route for ships that are too large for the canal. In the early 21st century, the Suez Canal has suffered from diminished traffic due to piracy in Somalia, with many shipping companies choosing to take the long route instead. Between 2008 and 2010, it is estimated that the canal lost 10% of traffic due to the threat of piracy, and another 10% due to the 2008 financial crisis. An oil tanker going from Saudi Arabia to the United States has farther to go when taking the route south of Africa rather than the canal.\nNorthern Sea Route.\nIn recent years, the shrinking Arctic sea ice has made the Northern Sea Route feasible for commercial cargo ships between Europe and East Asia during a six-to-eight-week window in the summer months, shortening the voyage by thousands of kilometres compared to that through the Suez Canal. According to polar climate researchers, as the extent of the Arctic summer ice pack recedes the route will become passable without the help of icebreakers for a greater period each summer.\nThe Bremen-based Beluga Group claimed in 2009 to be the first Western company to attempt using the Northern Sea Route without assistance from icebreakers, cutting off the journey between Ulsan, Korea and Rotterdam, the Netherlands.\nCape Horn.\nSailing ships, such as the windjammers in the heyday of the Great Grain Race between Australia and Europe during the 1930s, often preferred the Cape Horn route when going to Europe, due to prevalent wind directions, even though it is slightly longer from Sydney to Europe this way than past Cape Agulhas.\nNegev desert railway.\nIn February 2012, Israel announced its intention to construct a railway between the Mediterranean and Eilat through the Negev desert to compete with the canal. By 2019, the project had been put on indefinite hold.\nIraq\u2013Europe Development Road.\nFirst envisioned in the 1980s, an ongoing infrastructure project nicknamed the \"Dry Canal\" seeks to turn Iraq into an international transit hub. The project includes creating corridors that link the southern coastal province of Basra and the Grand Faw Port and several other provinces of Iraq with Turkey and further extend into Europe. Once finished, it will serve as an alternative route for international freight traffic. It was first introduced in the 1980s, but domestic issues, sanctions and wars hindered its implementation. Recent improvements in security and economic growth have allowed Iraq to revive the project, and since 2023, the country has made significant strides in implementing the project. In 2025, a pilot operation designed to test the feasibility of the project was conducted; a fully inland operation beginning from Poland and traversing through Turkey and Iraq and reaching its destination in the UAE. According to the operator, the journey was completed securely in under a week, significantly less than a multimodal operation via the Red Sea, which would have (under normal circumstances) taken 21 days.\nEnvironmental impact.\nThe opening of the canal created the first salt-water passage between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea. Although the Red Sea is about higher than the eastern Mediterranean, the current between the Mediterranean and the middle of the canal at the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer. The current south of the Bitter Lakes is tidal, varying with the tide at Suez. The Bitter Lakes, which were hypersaline natural lakes, blocked the migration of Red Sea species into the Mediterranean for many decades, but as the salinity of the lakes gradually equalised with that of the Red Sea the barrier to migration was removed, and plants and animals from the Red Sea have begun to colonise the eastern Mediterranean.\nThe Red Sea is generally saltier and less nutrient-rich than the Mediterranean, so that Erythrean species will often do well in the 'milder' eastern Mediterranean environment. To the contrary very few Mediterranean species have been able to settle in the 'harsher' conditions of the Red Sea. The dominant, south to north, migratory passage across the canal is often called Lessepsian migration (after Ferdinand de Lesseps) or \"Erythrean invasion\". The recent construction by the Egyptian government of a major canal extension \u2013 allowing for two-way traffic in the central section of the canal and finally implemented in 2015 \u2013 raised concerns from marine biologists, who fear that it will enhance the arrival of Red Sea species in the Mediterranean.\nExotic species from the Indo-Pacific Ocean and introduced into the Mediterranean via the canal since the 1880s have become a significant component of the Mediterranean ecosystem. They already impact its ecology, endangering some local and endemic species. Since the piercing of the canal, over a thousand species from the Red Sea\u2014plankton, seaweeds, invertebrates, fishes\u2014have been recorded in the Mediterranean, and many others will clearly follow. The resulting change in biodiversity is without precedent in human memory and is accelerating: a long-term cross-Basin survey engaged by the Mediterranean Science Commission recently documented that in the first twenty years of this century more exotic fish species from the Indian Ocean had reached the Mediterranean than during the entire 20th century.\nHistorically, the construction of the canal was preceded by cutting a small fresh-water canal called Sweet Water Canal from the Nile delta along Wadi Tumilat to the future canal, with a southern branch to Suez and a northern branch to Port Said. Completed in 1863, these brought fresh water to a previously arid area, initially for canal construction, and subsequently facilitating growth of agriculture and settlements along the canal. However the Aswan High Dam construction across the Nile, which started operating in 1968, much reduced the inflow of freshwater and cut all natural nutrient-rich silt entering the eastern Mediterranean at the Nile Delta.\nSuez Canal Economic Zone.\nThe Suez Canal Economic Zone, sometimes shortened to SCZONE, describes the set of locations neighbouring the canal where customs rates have been reduced to zero in order to attract investment. The zone comprises over within the governorates of Port Said, Ismailia and Suez. Projects in the zone are collectively described as the Suez Canal Area Development Project (SCADP).\nThe plan focuses on development of East Port Said and the port of Ain Sokhna, and hopes to extend to four more ports at West Port Said, El-Adabiya, Arish and El Tor.\nThe zone incorporates the four \"Qualifying Industrial Zones\" at Port Said, Ismailia and Suez, a 1996 American initiative to encourage economic ties between Israel and its neighbours.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography and memory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29324", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29324", "title": "Signal processing", "text": "Field of electrical engineering\nSignal processing is an electrical engineering subfield that focuses on analyzing, modifying and synthesizing \"signals\", such as sound, images, potential fields, seismic signals, altimetry processing, and scientific measurements. Signal processing techniques are used to optimize transmissions, digital storage efficiency, correcting distorted signals, improve subjective video quality, and to detect or pinpoint components of interest in a measured signal.\nHistory.\nAccording to Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer, the principles of signal processing can be found in the classical numerical analysis techniques of the 17th century. They further state that the digital refinement of these techniques can be found in the digital control systems of the 1940s and 1950s.\nIn 1948, Claude Shannon wrote the influential paper \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\" which was published in the \"Bell System Technical Journal\". The paper laid the groundwork for later development of information communication systems and the processing of signals for transmission.\nSignal processing matured and flourished in the 1960s and 1970s, and digital signal processing became widely used with specialized digital signal processor chips in the 1980s.\nDefinition of a signal.\nIn signal processing, a signal is represented as a function of time: formula_1, where this function is either\nCategories.\nAnalog.\nAnalog signal processing is for signals that have not been digitized, as in most 20th-century radio, telephone, and television systems. This involves linear electronic circuits as well as nonlinear ones. The former are, for instance, passive filters, active filters, additive mixers, integrators, and delay lines. Nonlinear circuits include compandors, multipliers (frequency mixers, voltage-controlled amplifiers), voltage-controlled filters, voltage-controlled oscillators, and phase-locked loops.\nContinuous time.\nContinuous-time signal processing is for signals that vary with the change of continuous domain (without considering some individual interrupted points).\nThe methods of signal processing include time domain, frequency domain, and complex frequency domain. This technology mainly discusses the modeling of a linear time-invariant continuous system, integral of the system's zero-state response, setting up system function and the continuous time filtering of deterministic signals. For example, in time domain, a continuous-time signal formula_1 passing through a linear time-invariant filter/system denoted as formula_5, can be expressed at the output as\nformula_6\nIn some contexts, formula_5 is referred to as the impulse response of the system. The above convolution operation is conducted between the input and the system.\nDiscrete time.\nDiscrete-time signal processing is for sampled signals, defined only at discrete points in time, and as such are quantized in time, but not in magnitude.\n\"Analog discrete-time signal processing\" is a technology based on electronic devices such as sample and hold circuits, analog time-division multiplexers, analog delay lines and analog feedback shift registers. This technology was a predecessor of digital signal processing (see below), and is still used in advanced processing of gigahertz signals.\nThe concept of discrete-time signal processing also refers to a theoretical discipline that establishes a mathematical basis for digital signal processing, without taking quantization error into consideration.\nDigital.\nDigital signal processing is the processing of digitized discrete-time sampled signals. Processing is done by general-purpose computers or by digital circuits such as ASICs, field-programmable gate arrays or specialized digital signal processors. Typical arithmetical operations include fixed-point and floating-point, real-valued and complex-valued, multiplication and addition. Other typical operations supported by the hardware are circular buffers and lookup tables. Examples of algorithms are the fast Fourier transform (FFT), finite impulse response (FIR) filter, Infinite impulse response (IIR) filter, and adaptive filters such as the Wiener and Kalman filters.\nNonlinear.\nNonlinear signal processing involves the analysis and processing of signals produced from nonlinear systems and can be in the time, frequency, or spatiotemporal domains. Nonlinear systems can produce highly complex behaviors including bifurcations, chaos, harmonics, and subharmonics which cannot be produced or analyzed using linear methods. \nPolynomial signal processing is a type of non-linear signal processing, where polynomial systems may be interpreted as conceptually straightforward extensions of linear systems to the nonlinear case.\nStatistical.\nStatistical signal processing is an approach which treats signals as stochastic processes, utilizing their statistical properties to perform signal processing tasks. Statistical techniques are widely used in signal processing applications. For example, one can model the probability distribution of noise incurred when photographing an image, and construct techniques based on this model to reduce the noise in the resulting image.\nGraph.\nGraph signal processing generalizes signal processing tasks to signals living on non-Euclidean domains whose structure can be captured by a weighted graph. Graph signal processing presents several key points such as sampling signal techniques, recovery techniques and time-varying techiques. Graph signal processing has been applied with success in the field of image processing, computer vision \n and sound anomaly detection.\nApplication fields.\nIn communication systems, signal processing may occur at:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29328", "revid": "48941312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29328", "title": "Six-Day War", "text": "1967 war between Israel and Egypt, Jordan, and Syria\nThe Six-Day War, also known as the June war, 1967 Arab\u2013Israeli war or third Arab\u2013Israeli war, was fought between Israel and a coalition of Arab states, primarily Egypt, Syria, and Jordan from 5 to 10June 1967.\nMilitary hostilities broke out amid poor relations between Israel and its Arab neighbors, who had been observing the 1949 Armistice Agreements signed at the end of the First Arab\u2013Israeli War. In 1956, regional tensions over the Straits of Tiran (giving access to Eilat, a port on the southeast tip of Israel) escalated in what became known as the Suez Crisis, when Israel invaded Egypt over the Egyptian closure of maritime passageways to Israeli shipping, ultimately resulting in the re-opening of the Straits of Tiran to Israel as well as the deployment of the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) along the Egypt\u2013Israel border. \nIn the months prior to the outbreak of the Six-Day War in June 1967, tensions again became dangerously heightened: Israel reiterated its post-1956 position that another Egyptian closure of the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping would be a definite \"casus belli\". In May 1967, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser announced that the Straits of Tiran would again be closed to Israeli vessels. He subsequently mobilized the Egyptian military into defensive lines along the border with Israel and ordered the immediate withdrawal of all UNEF personnel.\nOn 5 June 1967, as the UNEF was in the process of leaving the zone, Israel launched a series of airstrikes against Egyptian airfields and other facilities in what is known as Operation Focus. Egyptian forces were caught by surprise, and nearly all of Egypt's military aerial assets were destroyed, giving Israel air supremacy. Simultaneously, the Israeli military launched a ground offensive into Egypt's Sinai Peninsula as well as the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip. After some initial resistance, Nasser ordered an evacuation of the Sinai Peninsula; by the sixth day of the conflict, Israel had occupied the entire Sinai Peninsula. Jordan, which had entered into a defense pact with Egypt just a week before the war began, did not take on an all-out offensive role against Israel, but launched attacks against Israeli forces to slow Israel's advance. On the fifth day, Syria joined the war by shelling Israeli positions in the north.\nEgypt and Jordan agreed to a ceasefire on 8 June, and Syria on 9 June, and it was signed with Israel on 11 June. The Six-Day War resulted in more than 15,000 Arab fatalities, while Israel suffered fewer than 1,000. Alongside the combatant casualties were the deaths of 20 Israeli civilians killed in Arab forces air strikes on Jerusalem, 15 UN peacekeepers killed by Israeli strikes in the Sinai at the outset of the war, and 34 US personnel killed in the USS \"Liberty\" incident in which Israeli air forces struck a United States Navy technical research ship.\nAt the time of the cessation of hostilities, Israel had occupied the Golan Heights from Syria, the West Bank including East Jerusalem from Jordan, and the Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza Strip from Egypt. The displacement of civilian populations as a result of the Six-Day War would have long-term consequences, as around 280,000 to 325,000 Palestinians and 100,000 Syrians fled or were expelled from the West Bank and the Golan Heights, respectively. Nasser resigned in shame after Israel's victory, but was later reinstated following a series of protests across Egypt. In the aftermath of the conflict, Egypt closed the Suez Canal from 1967 to 1975.\nBackground.\nAfter the 1956 Suez Crisis, Egypt agreed to the stationing of a United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) in the Sinai to ensure all parties would comply with the 1949 Armistice Agreements. In the following years there were numerous minor border clashes between Israel and its Arab neighbors, particularly Syria. In early November 1966, Syria signed a mutual defense agreement with Egypt. Soon after this, in response to Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) guerilla activity, including a mine attack that left three dead, the Israeli Defense Force (IDF) attacked the village of as-Samu in the Jordanian-ruled West Bank. Jordanian units that engaged the Israelis were quickly beaten back. King Hussein of Jordan criticized Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser for failing to come to Jordan's aid, and \"hiding behind UNEF skirts\".\nIn May 1967, Nasser received false reports from the Soviet Union that Israel was massing on the Syrian border. Nasser began massing his troops in two defensive lines in the Sinai Peninsula on Israel's border (16 May), expelled the UNEF force from Gaza and Sinai (19 May) and took over UNEF positions at Sharm el-Sheikh, overlooking the Straits of Tiran. Israel repeated declarations it had made in 1957 that any closure of the Straits would be considered an act of war, or justification for war, but Nasser closed the Straits to Israeli shipping on 22\u201323 May. After the war, U.S. President Lyndon Johnson commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a single act of folly was more responsible for this explosion than any other, it was the arbitrary and dangerous announced decision that the Straits of Tiran would be closed. The right of innocent, maritime passage must be preserved for all nations.\nOn 30 May, Jordan and Egypt signed a defense pact. The following day, at Jordan's invitation, the Iraqi army began deploying troops and armored units in Jordan. They were later reinforced by an Egyptian contingent. On 1 June, Israel formed a National Unity Government by widening its cabinet, and on 4 June the decision was made to go to war. The next morning, Israel launched Operation Focus, a large-scale, surprise air strike that launched the Six-Day War.\nMilitary preparation.\nBefore the war, Israeli pilots and ground crews had trained extensively in rapid refitting of aircraft returning from sorties, enabling a single aircraft to sortie up to four times a day, as opposed to the norm in Arab air forces of one or two sorties per day. This enabled the Israeli Air Force (IAF) to send several attack waves against Egyptian airfields on the first day of the war, overwhelming the Egyptian Air Force and allowing the IAF to knock out other Arab air forces on the same day. This has contributed to the Arab belief that the IAF was helped by foreign air forces (see Controversies relating to the Six-Day War). Pilots were extensively schooled about their targets, memorized layouts in detail, and rehearsed the operation multiple times on dummy runways in total secrecy.\nThe Egyptians had constructed fortified defenses in the Sinai. These designs were based on the assumption that an attack would come along the few roads leading through the desert, rather than through the difficult desert terrain. The Israelis chose not to risk attacking the Egyptian defenses head-on, and instead surprised them from an unexpected direction.\nJames Reston, writing in \"The New York Times\" on 23 May 1967, noted, \"In; discipline, training, morale, equipment and general competence his [Nasser's] army and the other Arab forces, without the direct assistance of the Soviet Union, are no match for the Israelis. ... Even with 50,000 troops and the best of his generals and air force in Yemen, he has not been able to work his way in that small and primitive country, and even his effort to help the Congo rebels was a flop.\"\nOn the eve of the war, Israel believed it could win a war in 3\u20134 days. The United States estimated Israel would need 7\u201310 days to win, with British estimates supporting the U.S. view.\nArmies and weapons.\nArmies.\nThe Israeli army had a total strength, including reservists, of 264,000, though this number could not be sustained during a long conflict, as the reservists were vital to civilian life.\nAgainst Jordan's forces on the West Bank, Israel deployed about 40,000 troops and 200 tanks (eight brigades). Israeli Central Command forces consisted of five brigades. The first two were permanently stationed near Jerusalem and were the Jerusalem Brigade and the mechanized Harel Brigade. Mordechai Gur's 55th Paratroopers Brigade was summoned from the Sinai front. The 10th Armored Brigade was stationed north of the West Bank. The Israeli Northern Command comprised a division of three brigades led by Major General Elad Peled which was stationed in the Jezreel Valley to the north of the West Bank.\nOn the eve of the war, Egypt massed approximately 100,000 of its 160,000 troops in the Sinai, including all seven of its divisions (four infantry, two armored and one mechanized), four independent infantry brigades and four independent armored brigades. Over a third of these soldiers were veterans of Egypt's continuing intervention into the North Yemen Civil War and another third were reservists. These forces had 950 tanks, 1,100 APCs, and more than 1,000 artillery pieces.\nSyria's army had a total strength of 75,000 and was deployed along the border with Israel. Professor David W. Lesch wrote that \"One would be hard-pressed to find a military less prepared for war with a clearly superior foe\" since Syria's army had been decimated in the months and years prior through coups and attempted coups that had resulted in a series of purges, fracturings and uprisings within the armed forces.\nThe Jordanian Armed Forces included 11 brigades, totaling 55,000 troops. Nine brigades (45,000 troops, 270 tanks, 200 artillery pieces) were deployed in the West Bank, including the elite armored 40th, and two in the Jordan Valley. They possessed sizable numbers of M113 APCs and were equipped with some 300 modern Western tanks, 250 of which were U.S. M48 Pattons. They also had 12 battalions of artillery, six batteries of 81\u00a0mm and 120\u00a0mm mortars, a paratrooper battalion trained in the new U.S.-built school and a new battalion of mechanized infantry. The Jordanian Army was a long-term-service, professional army, relatively well-equipped and well-trained. Israeli post-war briefings said that the Jordanian staff acted professionally, but was always left \"half a step\" behind by the Israeli moves. The small Royal Jordanian Air Force consisted of only 24 British-made Hawker Hunter fighters, six transport aircraft and two helicopters. According to the Israelis, the Hawker Hunter was essentially on par with the French-built Dassault Mirage III \u2013 the IAF's best plane.\nOne hundred Iraqi tanks and an infantry division were readied near the Jordanian border. Two squadrons of Iraqi fighter-aircraft, Hawker Hunters and MiG 21s, were rebased adjacent to the Jordanian border.\nIn the weeks leading up to the war, Saudi Arabia mobilized forces for deployment to the Jordanian front. A Saudi infantry battalion entered Jordan on 6 June, followed by another on 8 June. Both were based in Jordan's southernmost city, Ma'an. By 17 June, the Saudi contingent in Jordan had grown to include a single infantry brigade, a tank company, two artillery batteries, a heavy mortar company, and a maintenance and support unit. By the end of July, a second tank company and a third artillery battery had been added. These forces remained in Jordan until the end of 1977, when they were recalled for re-equipment and retraining in the Karak region near the Dead Sea.\nThe Arab air forces were reinforced by aircraft from Libya, Algeria, Morocco, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia to make up for the massive losses suffered on the first day of the war. They were also aided by volunteer pilots from the Pakistan Air Force acting in an independent capacity. PAF pilots like Saiful Azam shot down several Israeli planes.\nWeapons.\nWith the exception of Jordan, the Arabs relied principally on Soviet weaponry. Jordan's army was equipped with American weaponry, and its air force was composed of British aircraft.\nEgypt had by far the largest and the most modern of all the Arab air forces, consisting of about 420 combat aircraft, all of them Soviet-built and with a large number of top-of-the-line MiG-21s. Of particular concern to the Israelis were the 30 Tu-16 \"Badger\" medium bombers, capable of inflicting heavy damage on Israeli military and civilian centers.\nIsraeli weapons were mainly of Western origin. Its air force was composed principally of French aircraft, while its armored units were mostly of British and American design and manufacture. Some light infantry weapons, including the ubiquitous Uzi, were of Israeli origin.\nFighting fronts.\nInitial attack.\nThe first and most critical move of the conflict was a surprise Israeli attack on the Egyptian Air Force. Initially, both Egypt and Israel announced that they had been attacked by the other country.\nOn 5 June at 7:45 Israeli time, with civil defense sirens sounding all over Israel, the IAF launched Operation Focus (\"Moked\"). All but 12 of its nearly 200 operational jets launched a mass attack against Egypt's airfields. The Egyptian defensive infrastructure was extremely poor, and no airfields were yet equipped with hardened aircraft shelters capable of protecting Egypt's warplanes. Most of the Israeli warplanes headed out over the Mediterranean Sea, flying low to avoid radar detection, before turning toward Egypt. Others flew over the Red Sea.\nMeanwhile, the Egyptians hindered their own defense by effectively shutting down their entire air defense system: they were worried that rebel Egyptian forces would shoot down the plane carrying Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer and Lt-Gen. Sidqi Mahmoud, who were en route from al Maza to Bir Tamada in the Sinai to meet the commanders of the troops stationed there. It did not make a great deal of difference as the Israeli pilots came in below Egyptian radar cover and well below the lowest point at which its SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries could bring down an aircraft.\nAlthough the powerful Jordanian radar facility at Ajloun detected waves of aircraft approaching Egypt and reported the code word for \"war\" up the Egyptian command chain, Egyptian command and communications problems prevented the warning from reaching the targeted airfields. The Israelis employed a mixed-attack strategy: bombing and strafing runs against planes parked on the ground, and bombing to disable runways with special tarmac-shredding penetration bombs developed jointly with France, leaving surviving aircraft unable to take off.\nThe runway at the Arish airfield was spared, as the Israelis expected to turn it into a military airport for their transports after the war. Surviving aircraft were taken out by later attack waves. The operation was more successful than expected, catching the Egyptians by surprise and destroying virtually all of the Egyptian Air Force on the ground, with few Israeli losses. Only four unarmed Egyptian training flights were in the air when the strike began. A total of 338 Egyptian aircraft were destroyed and 100 pilots were killed, although the number of aircraft lost by the Egyptians is disputed.\nAmong the Egyptian planes lost were all 30 Tu-16 bombers, 27 out of 40 Il-28 bombers, 12 Su-7 fighter-bombers, over 90 MiG-21s, 20 MiG-19s, 25 MiG-17 fighters, and around 32 transport planes and helicopters. In addition, Egyptian radars and SAM missiles were also attacked and destroyed. The Israelis lost 19 planes, including two destroyed in air-to-air combat and 13 downed by anti-aircraft artillery. One Israeli plane, which was damaged and unable to break radio silence, was shot down by Israeli Hawk missiles after it strayed over the Negev Nuclear Research Center. Another was destroyed by an exploding Egyptian bomber.\nThe attack guaranteed Israeli air supremacy for the rest of the war. Attacks on other Arab air forces by Israel took place later in the day as hostilities broke out on other fronts.\nThe large numbers of Arab aircraft claimed destroyed by Israel on that day were at first regarded as \"greatly exaggerated\" by the Western press, but the fact that the Egyptian Air Force, along with other Arab air forces attacked by Israel, made practically no appearance for the remaining days of the conflict proved that the numbers were most likely authentic. Throughout the war, Israeli aircraft continued strafing Arab airfield runways to prevent their return to usability. Meanwhile, Egyptian state-run radio had reported an Egyptian victory, falsely claiming that 70 Israeli planes had been downed on the first day of fighting.\nGaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula.\nThe Egyptian forces consisted of seven divisions: four armored, two infantry, and one mechanized infantry. Overall, Egypt had around 100,000 troops and 900\u2013950 tanks in the Sinai, backed by 1,100 APCs and 1,000 artillery pieces. This arrangement was thought to be based on the Soviet doctrine, where mobile armor units at strategic depth provide a dynamic defense while infantry units engage in defensive battles.\nIsraeli forces concentrated on the border with Egypt included six armored brigades, one infantry brigade, one mechanized infantry brigade, three paratrooper brigades, giving a total of around 70,000 men and 700 tanks, who were organized in three armored divisions. They had massed on the border the night before the war, camouflaging themselves and observing radio silence before being ordered to advance.\nThe Israeli plan was to surprise the Egyptian forces in both timing (the attack exactly coinciding with the IAF strike on Egyptian airfields), and in location (attacking via northern and central Sinai routes, as opposed to the Egyptian expectations of a repeat of the 1956 war, when the IDF attacked via the central and southern routes) and method (using a combined-force flanking approach, rather than direct tank assaults).\nNorthern (El Arish) Israeli division.\nOn 5 June, at 7:50\u00a0am, the northernmost Israeli division, consisting of three brigades and commanded by Major General Israel Tal, one of Israel's most prominent armor commanders, crossed the border at two points, opposite Nahal Oz and south of Khan Yunis. They advanced swiftly, holding their fire to maintain the element of surprise. Tal's forces assaulted the \"Rafah Gap\", an stretch containing the shortest of three main routes through the Sinai towards El Qantara and the Suez Canal. The Egyptians had four divisions in the area, backed by minefields, pillboxes, underground bunkers, hidden gun emplacements and trenches. The terrain on either side of the route was impassable. The Israeli plan was to hit the Egyptians at selected key points with concentrated armor.\nTal's advance was led by the 7th Armored Brigade, under Colonel Shmuel Gonen. The Israeli plan called for the 7th Brigade to outflank Khan Yunis from the north and the 60th Armored Brigade, under Colonel Menachem Aviram, to advance from the south. The two brigades would link up and surround Khan Yunis, while the paratroopers would take Rafah. Gonen entrusted the breakthrough to a single battalion of his brigade.\nInitially, the advance encountered light resistance, as Egyptian intelligence had concluded that it was a diversion for the main attack. As Gonen's lead battalion advanced, it suddenly came under intense fire and took heavy losses. A second battalion was brought up, but was also pinned down. Meanwhile, the 60th Brigade became bogged down in the sand, while the paratroopers had trouble navigating through the dunes. The Israelis continued to press their attack, and despite heavy losses, cleared the Egyptian positions and reached the Khan Yunis railway junction in a little over four hours.\nGonen's brigade then advanced to Rafah in twin columns. Rafah itself was circumvented, and the Israelis attacked Sheikh Zuweid, to the southwest, which was defended by two brigades. Though inferior in numbers and equipment, the Egyptians were deeply entrenched and camouflaged. The Israelis were pinned down by fierce Egyptian resistance and called in air and artillery support to enable their lead elements to advance. Many Egyptians abandoned their positions after their commander and several of his staff were killed.\nThe Israelis broke through with tank-led assaults, but Aviram's forces misjudged the Egyptians' flank and were pinned between strongholds before being extracted after several hours. By nightfall, the Israelis had finished mopping up resistance. The Israelis had taken significant losses, with Colonel Gonen later telling reporters that \"we left many of our dead soldiers in Rafah and many burnt-out tanks.\" The Egyptians suffered some 2,000 casualties and lost 40 tanks.\nAdvance on Arish.\nOn 5 June, with the road open, Israeli forces continued advancing towards Arish. Already by late afternoon, elements of the 79th Armored Battalion had charged through the Jiradi defile, a narrow pass defended by well-emplaced troops of the Egyptian 112th Infantry Brigade. In fierce fighting, which saw the pass change hands several times, the Israelis charged through the position. The Egyptians suffered heavy casualties and tank losses, while Israeli losses stood at 66 dead, 93 wounded and 28 tanks. Emerging at the western end, Israeli forces advanced to the outskirts of Arish. As it reached the outskirts of Arish, Tal's division also consolidated its hold on Rafah and Khan Yunis.\nThe following day, 6 June, the Israeli forces on the outskirts of Arish were reinforced by the 7th Brigade, which fought its way through the Jiradi pass. After receiving supplies via an airdrop, the Israelis entered the city and captured the airport at 7:50\u00a0am. The Israelis entered the city at 8:00\u00a0am. Company commander Yossi Peled recounted that \"Al-Arish was totally quiet, desolate. Suddenly, the city turned into a madhouse. Shots came at us from every alley, every corner, every window and house.\" An IDF record stated that \"clearing the city was hard fighting. The Egyptians fired from the rooftops, from balconies and windows. They dropped grenades into our half-tracks and blocked the streets with trucks. Our men threw the grenades back and crushed the trucks with their tanks.\" Gonen sent additional units to Arish, and the city was eventually taken.\nBrigadier-General Avraham Yoffe's assignment was to penetrate Sinai south of Tal's forces and north of Sharon's. Yoffe's attack allowed Tal to complete the capture of the Jiradi defile, Khan Yunis. All of them were taken after fierce fighting. Gonen subsequently dispatched a force of tanks, infantry and engineers under Colonel Yisrael Granit to continue down the Mediterranean coast towards the Suez Canal, while a second force led by Gonen himself turned south and captured Bir Lahfan and Jabal Libni.\nMid-front (Abu-Ageila) Israeli division.\nFurther south, on 6 June, the Israeli 38th Armored Division under Major-General Ariel Sharon assaulted Um-Katef, a heavily fortified area defended by the Egyptian 2nd Infantry Division under Major-General Sa'adi Naguib (though Naguib was actually absent) of Soviet World War II armor, which included 90 T-34-85 tanks, 22 SU-100 tank destroyers, and about 16,000 men. The Israelis had about 14,000 men and 150 post-World War II tanks including the AMX-13, Centurions, and M50 Super Shermans (modified M-4 Sherman tanks).\nTwo armored brigades in the meantime, under Avraham Yoffe, slipped across the border through sandy wastes that Egypt had left undefended because they were considered impassable. Simultaneously, Sharon's tanks from the west were to engage Egyptian forces on Um-Katef ridge and block any reinforcements. Israeli infantry would clear the three trenches, while heliborne paratroopers would land behind Egyptian lines and silence their artillery. An armored thrust would be made at al-Qusmaya to unnerve and isolate its garrison.\nAs Sharon's division advanced into the Sinai, Egyptian forces staged successful delaying actions at Tarat Umm, Umm Tarfa, and Hill 181. An Israeli jet was downed by anti-aircraft fire, and Sharon's forces came under heavy shelling as they advanced from the north and west. The Israeli advance, which had to cope with extensive minefields, took a large number of casualties. A column of Israeli tanks managed to penetrate the northern flank of Abu Ageila, and by dusk, all units were in position. The Israelis then brought up ninety 105\u00a0mm and 155\u00a0mm artillery cannon for a preparatory barrage, while civilian buses brought reserve infantrymen under Colonel Yekutiel Adam and helicopters arrived to ferry the paratroopers. These movements were unobserved by the Egyptians, who were preoccupied with Israeli probes against their perimeter.\nAs night fell, the Israeli assault troops lit flashlights, each battalion a different colour, to prevent friendly fire incidents. At 10:00\u00a0pm, Israeli artillery began a barrage on Um-Katef, firing some 6,000 shells in less than twenty minutes, the most concentrated artillery barrage in Israel's history. Israeli tanks assaulted the northernmost Egyptian defenses and were largely successful, though an entire armored brigade was stalled by mines, and had only one mine-clearance tank. Israeli infantrymen assaulted the triple line of trenches in the east. To the west, paratroopers commanded by Colonel Danny Matt landed behind Egyptian lines, though half the helicopters got lost and never found the battlefield, while others were unable to land due to mortar fire.\nThose that successfully landed on target destroyed Egyptian artillery and ammunition dumps and separated gun crews from their batteries, sowing enough confusion to significantly reduce Egyptian artillery fire. Egyptian reinforcements from Jabal Libni advanced towards Um-Katef to counterattack but failed to reach their objective, being subjected to heavy air attacks and encountering Israeli lodgements on the roads. Egyptian commanders then called in artillery attacks on their own positions. The Israelis accomplished and sometimes exceeded their overall plan, and had largely succeeded by the following day. The Egyptians suffered about 2,000 casualties, while the Israelis lost 42 dead and 140 wounded.\nYoffe's attack allowed Sharon to complete the capture of the Um-Katef, after fierce fighting. The main thrust at Um-Katef was stalled due to mines and craters. After IDF engineers had cleared a path by 4:00\u00a0pm, Israeli and Egyptian tanks engaged in fierce combat, often at ranges as close as ten yards. The battle ended in an Israeli victory, with 40 Egyptian and 19 Israeli tanks destroyed. Meanwhile, Israeli infantry finished clearing out the Egyptian trenches, with Israeli casualties standing at 14 dead and 41 wounded and Egyptian casualties at 300 dead and 100 taken prisoner.\nOther Israeli forces.\nFurther south, on 5 June, the 8th Armored Brigade under Colonel Albert Mandler, initially positioned as a ruse to draw off Egyptian forces from the real invasion routes, attacked the fortified bunkers at Kuntilla, a strategically valuable position whose capture would enable Mandler to block reinforcements from reaching Um-Katef and to join Sharon's upcoming attack on Nakhl. The defending Egyptian battalion outnumbered and outgunned, fiercely resisted the attack, hitting several Israeli tanks. Most of the defenders were killed, and only three Egyptian tanks, one of them damaged, survived. By nightfall, Mandler's forces had taken Kuntilla.\nWith the exceptions of Rafah and Khan Yunis, Israeli forces had initially avoided entering the Gaza Strip. Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Dayan had expressly forbidden entry into the area. After Palestinian positions in Gaza opened fire on the Negev settlements of Nirim and Kissufim, IDF Chief of Staff Yitzhak Rabin overrode Dayan's instructions and ordered the 11th Mechanized Brigade under Colonel Yehuda Reshef to enter the Strip. The force was immediately met with heavy artillery fire and fierce resistance from Palestinian forces and remnants of the Egyptian forces from Rafah.\nBy sunset, the Israelis had taken the strategically vital Ali Muntar ridge, overlooking Gaza City, but were beaten back from the city itself. Some 70 Israelis were killed, along with Israeli journalist Ben Oyserman and American journalist Paul Schutzer. Twelve members of UNEF were also killed. On the war's second day, 6 June, the Israelis were bolstered by the 35th Paratroopers Brigade under Colonel Rafael Eitan and took Gaza City along with the entire Strip. The fighting was fierce and accounted for nearly half of all Israeli casualties on the southern front. Gaza rapidly fell to the Israelis.\nMeanwhile, on 6 June, two Israeli reserve brigades under Yoffe, each equipped with 100 tanks, penetrated the Sinai south of Tal's division and north of Sharon's, capturing the road junctions of Abu Ageila, Bir Lahfan, and Arish, taking all of them before midnight. Two Egyptian armored brigades counterattacked, and a fierce battle took place until the following morning. The Egyptians were beaten back by fierce resistance coupled with airstrikes, sustaining heavy tank losses. They fled west towards Jabal Libni.\nThe Egyptian Army.\nDuring the ground fighting, remnants of the Egyptian Air Force attacked Israeli ground forces but took losses from the Israeli Air Force and from Israeli anti-aircraft units. Throughout the last four days, Egyptian aircraft flew 150 sorties against Israeli units in the Sinai.\nMany of the Egyptian units remained intact and could have tried to prevent the Israelis from reaching the Suez Canal, or engaged in combat in the attempt to reach the canal, but when the Egyptian Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer heard about the fall of Abu-Ageila, he panicked and ordered all units in the Sinai to retreat. This order effectively meant the defeat of Egypt.\nMeanwhile, President Nasser, having learned of the results of the Israeli air strikes, decided together with Field Marshal Amer to order a general retreat from the Sinai within 24 hours. No detailed instructions were given concerning the manner and sequence of withdrawal.\nNext fighting days.\nAs Egyptian columns retreated, Israeli aircraft and artillery attacked them. Israeli jets used napalm bombs during their sorties. The attacks destroyed hundreds of vehicles and caused heavy casualties. At Jabal Libni, retreating Egyptian soldiers were fired upon by their own artillery. At Bir Gafgafa, the Egyptians fiercely resisted advancing Israeli forces, knocking out three tanks and eight half-tracks, and killing 20 soldiers. Due to the Egyptians' retreat, the Israeli High Command decided not to pursue the Egyptian units but rather to bypass and destroy them in the mountainous passes of West Sinai.\nTherefore, in the following two days (6 and 7 June), all three Israeli divisions (Sharon and Tal were reinforced by an armored brigade each) rushed westwards and reached the passes. Sharon's division first went southward then westward, via An-Nakhl, to Mitla Pass with air support. It was joined there by parts of Yoffe's division, while its other units blocked the Gidi Pass. These passes became killing grounds for the Egyptians, who ran right into waiting Israeli positions and suffered heavy losses in both soldiers and vehicles. According to Egyptian diplomat Mahmoud Riad, 10,000 men were killed in one day alone, and many others died from thirst. Tal's units stopped at various points to the length of the Suez Canal.\nIsrael's blocking action was partially successful. Only the Gidi pass was captured before the Egyptians approached it, but at other places, Egyptian units managed to pass through and cross the canal to safety. Due to the haste of the Egyptian retreat, soldiers often abandoned weapons, military equipment, and hundreds of vehicles. Many Egyptian soldiers were cut off from their units had to walk about on foot before reaching the Suez Canal with limited supplies of food and water and were exposed to intense heat. Thousands died as a result. Many Egyptian soldiers chose instead to surrender to the Israelis, who eventually exceeded their capabilities to provide for prisoners. As a result, they began directing soldiers towards the Suez Canal and only imprisoned high-ranking officers, who were expected to be exchanged for captured Israeli pilots.\nAccording to some accounts, during the Egyptian retreat from the Sinai, a unit of Soviet Marines based on a Soviet warship in Port Said at the time came ashore and attempted to cross the Suez Canal eastward. The Soviet force was reportedly decimated by an Israeli air attack and lost 17 dead and 34 wounded. Among the wounded was the commander, Lt. Col. Victor Shevchenko.\nDuring the offensive, the Israeli Navy landed six combat divers from the Shayetet 13 naval commando unit to infiltrate Alexandria harbor. The divers sank an Egyptian minesweeper before being taken prisoner. Shayetet 13 commandos also infiltrated Port Said harbor, but found no ships there. A planned commando raid against the Syrian Navy never materialized. Both Egyptian and Israeli warships made movements at sea to intimidate the other side throughout the war but did not engage each other. Israeli warships and aircraft hunted for Egyptian submarines throughout the war.\nOn 7 June, Israel began its attack on Sharm el-Sheikh. The Israeli Navy started the operation with a probe of Egyptian naval defenses. An aerial reconnaissance flight found that the area was less defended than originally thought. At about 4:30\u00a0am, three Israeli missile boats opened fire on Egyptian shore batteries, while paratroopers and commandos boarded helicopters and Nord Noratlas transport planes for an assault on Al-Tur, as Chief of Staff Rabin was convinced it was too risky to land them directly in Sharm el-Sheikh. The city had been largely abandoned the day before, and reports from air and naval forces finally convinced Rabin to divert the aircraft to Sharm el-Sheikh. There, the Israelis engaged in a pitched battle with the Egyptians and took the city, killing 20 Egyptian soldiers and taking eight more prisoners. At 12:15\u00a0pm, Defense Minister Dayan announced that the Straits of Tiran constituted an international waterway open to all ships without restriction.\nOn 8 June, Israel completed the capture of the Sinai by sending infantry units to Ras Sudar on the western coast of the peninsula.\nSeveral tactical elements made the swift Israeli advance possible:\nThese factors would prove to be decisive elements on Israel's other fronts as well.\nWest Bank.\nEgyptian control of Jordanian forces.\nKing Hussein had given control of his army to Egypt on 1 June, on which date Egyptian General Riad arrived in Amman to take control of the Jordanian military.\nEgyptian Field Marshal Amer used the confusion of the first hours of the conflict to send a cable to Amman that he was victorious; he claimed as evidence a radar sighting of a squadron of Israeli aircraft returning from bombing raids in Egypt, which he said was an Egyptian aircraft en route to attack Israel. In this cable, sent shortly before 9:00\u00a0am, Riad was ordered to attack.\nInitial attack.\nOne of the Jordanian brigades stationed in the West Bank was sent to the Hebron area in order to link with the Egyptians.\nThe IDF's strategic plan was to remain on the defensive along the Jordanian front, to enable focus in the expected campaign against Egypt.\nIntermittent machine-gun exchanges began taking place in Jerusalem at 9:30\u00a0am, and the fighting gradually escalated as the Jordanians introduced mortar and recoilless rifle fire. Under the orders from General Narkis, the Israelis responded only with small-arms fire, firing in a flat trajectory to avoid hitting civilians, holy sites or the Old City. At 10:00\u00a0am on 5 June, the Jordanian Army began shelling Israel. Two batteries of 155\u00a0mm Long Tom cannons opened fire on the suburbs of Tel Aviv and Ramat David Airbase. The commanders of these batteries were instructed to lay a two-hour barrage against military and civilian settlements in central Israel. Some shells hit the outskirts of Tel Aviv.\nBy 10:30\u00a0am, Eshkol had sent a message via Odd Bull to King Hussein promising not to initiate any action against Jordan if it stayed out of the war. King Hussein replied that it was too late, and \"the die was cast\". At 11:15\u00a0am, Jordanian howitzers began a 6,000-shell barrage at Israeli Jerusalem. The Jordanians initially targeted kibbutz Ramat Rachel in the south and Mount Scopus in the north, then ranged into the city center and outlying neighborhoods. Military installations, the Prime Minister's Residence, and the Knesset compound were also targeted. Jordanian forces shelled the Beit HaNassi and the Biblical Zoo, killing fifteen civilians. Israeli civilian casualties totalled 20 dead and over 1,000 wounded. Some 900 buildings were damaged, including Hadassah Ein Kerem Hospital, which had its Chagall-made windows destroyed.\nAround midday, eight Iraqi Hawker Hunters attacked the Kfar Sirkin airfield, destroying a Noratlas transport aircraft and a Piper Super Cub. Four Jordanian Hunters also hit a factory hall in Netanya, killing one civilian and wounding seven.\nIsraeli cabinet meets.\nWhen the Israeli cabinet convened to decide on a plan of action, Yigal Allon and Menahem Begin argued that this was an opportunity to take the Old City of Jerusalem, but Eshkol decided to defer any decision until Moshe Dayan and Yitzhak Rabin could be consulted. Uzi Narkiss made proposals for military action, including the capture of Latrun, but the cabinet turned him down. Dayan rejected multiple requests from Narkiss for permission to mount an infantry assault towards Mount Scopus but sanctioned some limited retaliatory actions.\nInitial response.\nShortly before 12:30\u00a0pm, the Israeli Air Force attacked Jordan's two airbases. The Hawker Hunters were refueling at the time of the attack. The Israeli aircraft attacked in two waves, the first of which cratered the runways and knocked out the control towers, and the second wave destroyed all 21 of Jordan's Hawker Hunter fighters, along with six transport aircraft and two helicopters. One Israeli jet was shot down by ground fire.\nThree Israeli Vautours also attacked H-3, an airfield in western Iraq used by the Iraqi Air Force. During the attack, three MiG-21s, one Hunter, one de Havilland Dove and one Antonov An-12 were destroyed on the ground. They also damaged the runway, although it was repaired by the next morning. The Jordanian radar facility at Ajloun was also destroyed in an Israeli airstrike.\nIsraeli Fouga Magister jets attacked the Jordanian 40th Brigade with rockets as it moved south from the Damia Bridge. Dozens of tanks were knocked out, and a convoy of 26 trucks carrying ammunition was destroyed. In Jerusalem, Israel responded to Jordanian shelling with a missile strike that devastated Jordanian positions. The Israelis used the L missile, a surface-to-surface missile developed jointly with France in secret.\nThe next morning, three Iraqi Hawker Hunters attacked a group of tanks in the process of refueling next to the road between Nazareth and Haifa. An Iraqi Tupolev Tu-16 also bombed a military installation 10 kilometers southeast of Afula, killing two Israeli soldiers, while another attacked Netanya and Ramat David Airbase, before being shot down near the Megiddo airfield. The aircraft crashed into a military storage complex hidden in a forest, killing its crew and 16 Israeli soldiers. Four Israeli Vautours escorted by two Mirages re-attacked the H-3 airfield, resulting in one Hunter crashing on take-off, and a Hunter and a MiG-21 being damaged in air combat.\nOn 7 June, four Vautours escorted by four Mirages attacked the H-3 airfield for the third time. This resulted in an air combat with Hunters, piloted by Iraqis, as well as a Jordanian and Pakistani pilot Saiful Azam. One Iraqi Hunter was shot down and its pilot killed, while the Israelis lost two Vautours and one Mirage, with three crewmen dead and two taken prisoner.\nJordanian battalion at Government House.\nA Jordanian battalion advanced up Government House ridge and dug in at the perimeter of Government House, the headquarters of the United Nations observers, and opened fire on Ramat Rachel, the Allenby Barracks and the Jewish section of Abu Tor with mortars and recoilless rifles. UN observers fiercely protested the incursion into the neutral zone, and several manhandled a Jordanian machine gun out of Government House after the crew had set it up in a second-floor window. After the Jordanians occupied Jabel Mukaber, an advance patrol was sent out and approached Ramat Rachel, where they came under fire from four civilians, including the wife of the director, who were armed with old Czech-made weapons.\nThe immediate Israeli response was an offensive to retake Government House and its ridge. The Jerusalem Brigade's Reserve Battalion 161, under Lieutenant-Colonel Asher Dreizin, was given the task. Dreizin had two infantry companies and eight tanks under his command, several of which broke down or became stuck in the mud at Ramat Rachel, leaving three for the assault. The Jordanians mounted fierce resistance, knocking out two tanks.\nThe Israelis broke through the compound's western gate and began clearing the building with grenades, before General Odd Bull, commander of the UN observers, compelled the Israelis to hold their fire, telling them that the Jordanians had already fled. The Israelis proceeded to take the Antenna Hill, directly behind Government House, and clear out a series of bunkers to the west and south. The fighting often conducted hand-to-hand, continued for nearly four hours before the surviving Jordanians fell back to trenches held by the Hittin Brigade, which were steadily overwhelmed. By 6:30\u00a0am, the Jordanians had retreated to Bethlehem, having suffered about 100 casualties. All but ten of Dreizin's soldiers were casualties, and Dreizin himself was wounded three times.\nIsraeli invasion.\nDuring the late afternoon of 5 June, the Israelis launched an offensive to encircle Jerusalem, which lasted into the following day. During the night, they were supported by intense tank, artillery and mortar fire to soften up Jordanian positions. Searchlights placed atop the Labor Federation building, then the tallest in Israeli Jerusalem, exposed and blinded the Jordanians. The Jerusalem Brigade moved south of Jerusalem, while the mechanized Harel Brigade and 55th Paratroopers Brigade under Mordechai Gur encircled it from the north.\nA combined force of tanks and paratroopers crossed no-man's land near the Mandelbaum Gate. Gur's 66th paratroop battalion approached the fortified Police Academy. The Israelis used Bangalore torpedoes to blast their way through barbed wire leading up to the position while exposed and under heavy fire. With the aid of two tanks borrowed from the Jerusalem Brigade, they captured the Police Academy. After receiving reinforcements, they moved up to attack Ammunition Hill.\nThe Jordanian defenders, who were heavily dug-in, fiercely resisted the attack. All of the Israeli officers except for two company commanders were killed, and the fighting was mostly led by individual soldiers. The fighting was conducted at close quarters in trenches and bunkers and was often hand-to-hand. The Israelis captured the position after four hours of heavy fighting. During the battle, 36 Israeli and 71 Jordanian soldiers were killed. Even after the fighting on Ammunition Hill had ended, Israeli soldiers were forced to remain in the trenches due to Jordanian sniper fire from Givat HaMivtar until the Harel Brigade overran that outpost in the afternoon.\nThe 66th battalion subsequently drove east, and linked up with the Israeli enclave on Mount Scopus and its Hebrew University campus. Gur's other battalions, the 71st and 28th captured the other Jordanian positions around the American Colony, despite being short on men and equipment and having come under a Jordanian mortar bombardment while waiting for the signal to advance.\nAt the same time, the IDF's 4th Brigade attacked the fortress at Latrun, which the Jordanians had abandoned due to heavy Israeli tank fire. The mechanized Harel Brigade attacked Har Adar, but seven tanks were knocked out by mines, forcing the infantry to mount an assault without armored cover. The Israeli soldiers advanced under heavy fire, jumping between rocks to avoid mines and the fighting was conducted at close quarters with knives and bayonets.\nThe Jordanians fell back after a battle that left two Israeli and eight Jordanian soldiers dead, and Israeli forces advanced through Beit Horon towards Ramallah, taking four fortified villages along the way. By the evening, the brigade arrived in Ramallah. Meanwhile, the 163rd Infantry Battalion secured Abu Tor following a fierce battle, severing the Old City from Bethlehem and Hebron.\nMeanwhile, 600 Egyptian commandos stationed in the West Bank moved to attack Israeli airfields. Led by Jordanian intelligence scouts, they crossed the border and began infiltrating through Israeli settlements towards Ramla and Hatzor. They were soon detected and sought shelter in nearby fields, which the Israelis set on fire. Some 450 commandos were killed, and the remainder escaped to Jordan.\nFrom the American Colony, the paratroopers moved towards the Old City. Their plan was to approach it via the lightly defended Salah al-Din Street but made a wrong turn onto the heavily defended Nablus Road and ran into fierce resistance. Their tanks fired at point-blank range down the street, while the paratroopers mounted repeated charges. Despite repelling repeated Israeli charges, the Jordanians gradually gave way to Israeli firepower and momentum. The Israelis suffered some 30 casualties \u2013 half the original force \u2013 while the Jordanians lost 45 dead and 142 wounded.\nMeanwhile, the Israeli 71st Battalion breached barbed wire and minefields and emerged near Wadi Joz, near the base of Mount Scopus, from where the Old City could be cut off from Jericho and East Jerusalem from Ramallah. Israeli artillery targeted the one remaining route from Jerusalem to the West Bank, and shellfire deterred the Jordanians from counterattacking from their positions at Augusta-Victoria. An Israeli detachment then captured the Rockefeller Museum after a brief skirmish.\nAfterwards, the Israelis broke through to the Jerusalem-Ramallah road. At Tel al-Ful, the Harel Brigade fought a running battle with up to thirty Jordanian tanks. The Jordanians stalled the advance and destroyed some half-tracks, but the Israelis launched air attacks and exploited the vulnerability of the external fuel tanks mounted on the Jordanian tanks. The Jordanians lost half their tanks, and retreated towards Jericho. Joining up with the 4th Brigade, the Israelis then descended through Shuafat and the site of what is now French Hill, through Jordanian defenses at Mivtar, emerging at Ammunition Hill.\nWith Jordanian defenses in Jerusalem crumbling, elements of the Jordanian 60th Brigade and an infantry battalion were sent from Jericho to reinforce Jerusalem. Its original orders were to repel the Israelis from the Latrun corridor, but due to the worsening situation in Jerusalem, the brigade was ordered to proceed to Jerusalem's Arab suburbs and attack Mount Scopus. Parallel to the brigade were infantrymen from the Imam Ali Brigade, who were approaching Issawiya. The brigades were spotted by Israeli aircraft and decimated by rocket and cannon fire. Other Jordanian attempts to reinforce Jerusalem were beaten back, either by armored ambushes or airstrikes.\nFearing damage to holy sites and the prospect of having to fight in built-up areas, Dayan ordered his troops not to enter the Old City. He also feared that Israel would be subjected to a fierce international backlash and the outrage of Christians worldwide if it forced its way into the Old City. Privately, he told David Ben-Gurion that he was also concerned over the prospect of Israel capturing Jerusalem's holy sites, only to be forced to give them up under the threat of international sanctions.\nThe West Bank.\nIsrael was to gain almost total control of the West Bank by the evening of 7 June, and began its military occupation of the West Bank on that day, issuing a military order, the \"Proclamation Regarding Law and Administration (The West Bank Area) (No. 2)\u20141967\", which established the military government in the West Bank and granted the commander of the area full legislative, executive, and judicial power. Jordan had realised that it had no hope of defense as early as the morning of 6 June, just a day after the conflict had begun. At Nasser's request, Egypt's Abdul Munim Riad sent a situation update at midday on 6 June:\nThe situation on the West Bank is rapidly deteriorating. A concentrated attack has been launched on all axes, together with heavy fire, day and night. Jordanian, Syrian and Iraqi air forces in position H3 have been virtually destroyed. Upon consultation with King Hussein I have been asked to convey to you the following choices:\n 1. A political decision to cease fighting to be imposed by a third party (the USA, the Soviet Union or the Security Council).\n 2. To vacate the West Bank tonight.\n 3. To go on fighting for one more day, resulting in the isolation and destruction of the entire Jordanian Army.\nKing Hussein has asked me to refer this matter to you for an immediate reply.\nAn Egyptian order for Jordanian forces to withdraw across the Jordan River was issued at 10 am on 6 June; that afternoon King Hussein learned of the impending United Nations Security Council Resolution 233 and decided instead to hold out in the hope that a ceasefire would be implemented soon. It was already too late, as the counter-order caused confusion and in many cases, it was not possible to regain positions that had been left.\nOn 7 June, Dayan ordered his troops not to enter the Old City but, upon hearing that the UN was about to declare a ceasefire, he changed his mind, and without cabinet clearance, decided to capture it. Two paratroop battalions attacked Augusta-Victoria Hill, high ground overlooking the Old City from the east. One battalion attacked from Mount Scopus, and another attacked from the valley between it and the Old City. Another paratroop battalion, personally led by Gur, broke into the Old City and was joined by the other two battalions after their missions were complete. The paratroopers met little resistance. The fighting was conducted solely by the paratroopers; the Israelis did not use armor during the battle out of fear of severe damage to the Old City.\nIn the north, a battalion from Peled's division checked Jordanian defenses in the Jordan Valley. A brigade from Peled's division captured the western part of the West Bank. One brigade attacked Jordanian artillery positions around Jenin, which were shelling Ramat David Airbase. The Jordanian 12th Armored Battalion, which outnumbered the Israelis, held off repeated attempts to capture Jenin. Israeli air attacks took their toll, and the Jordanian M48 Pattons, with their external fuel tanks, proved vulnerable at short distances, even to the Israeli-modified Shermans. Twelve Jordanian tanks were destroyed, and only six remained operational.\nJust after dusk, Israeli reinforcements arrived. The Jordanians continued to fiercely resist, and the Israelis were unable to advance without artillery and air support. One Israeli jet attacked the Jordanian commander's tank, wounding him and killing his radio operator and intelligence officer. The surviving Jordanian forces then withdrew to Jenin, where they were reinforced by the 25th Infantry Brigade. The Jordanians were effectively surrounded in Jenin.\nJordanian infantry and their three remaining tanks managed to hold off the Israelis until 4:00\u00a0am, when three battalions arrived to reinforce them in the afternoon. The Jordanian tanks charged and knocked out multiple Israeli vehicles, and the tide began to shift. After sunrise, Israeli jets and artillery conducted a two-hour bombardment against the Jordanians. The Jordanians lost 10 dead and 250 wounded, and had only seven tanks left, including two without gas, and sixteen APCs. The Israelis then fought their way into Jenin and captured the city after fierce fighting.\nAfter the Old City fell, the Jerusalem Brigade reinforced the paratroopers, and continued to the south, capturing Judea and Gush Etzion. Hebron was taken without any resistance. Fearful that Israeli soldiers would exact retribution for the 1929 massacre of the city's Jewish community, Hebron's residents flew white sheets from their windows and rooftops. The Harel Brigade proceeded eastward, descending to the Jordan River.\nOn 7 June, Israeli forces seized Bethlehem, taking the city after a brief battle that left some 40 Jordanian soldiers dead, with the remainder fleeing. On the same day, one of Peled's brigades seized Nablus; then it joined one of Central Command's armored brigades to fight the Jordanian forces; as the Jordanians held the advantage of superior equipment and were equal in numbers to the Israelis.\nAgain, the air superiority of the IAF proved paramount as it immobilized the Jordanians, leading to their defeat. One of Peled's brigades joined with its Central Command counterparts coming from Ramallah, and the remaining two blocked the Jordan river crossings together with the Central Command's 10th. Engineering Corps sappers blew up the Abdullah and Hussein bridges with captured Jordanian mortar shells, while elements of the Harel Brigade crossed the river and occupied positions along the east bank to cover them, but quickly pulled back due to American pressure. The Jordanians, anticipating an Israeli offensive deep into Jordan, assembled the remnants of their army and Iraqi units in Jordan to protect the western approaches to Amman and the southern slopes of the Golan Heights.\nAs Israel continued its offensive on 7 June, taking no account of the UN ceasefire resolution, the Egyptian-Jordanian command ordered a full Jordanian withdrawal for the second time, in order to avoid an annihilation of the Jordanian army. This was complete by nightfall on 7 June.\nAfter the Old City was captured, Dayan told his troops to \"dig in\" to hold it. When an armored brigade commander entered the West Bank on his own initiative, and stated that he could see Jericho, Dayan ordered him back. It was only after intelligence reports indicated that Hussein had withdrawn his forces across the Jordan River that Dayan ordered his troops to capture the West Bank. According to Narkis:\nFirst, the Israeli government had no intention of capturing the West Bank. On the contrary, it was opposed to it. Second, there was not any provocation on the part of the IDF. Third, the rein was only loosened when a real threat to Jerusalem's security emerged. This is truly how things happened on June 5, although it is difficult to believe. The result was something that no one had planned.\nGolan Heights.\nIn May\u2013June 1967, in preparation for conflict, the Israeli government planned to confine the confrontation to the Egyptian front, whilst taking into account the possibility of some fighting on the Syrian front.\nSyrian front 5\u20138 June.\nSyria largely stayed out of the conflict for the first four days.\nFalse Egyptian reports of a crushing victory against the Israeli army and forecasts that Egyptian forces would soon be attacking Tel Aviv influenced Syria's decision to enter the war \u2013 in a sporadic manner \u2013 during this period. Syrian artillery began shelling northern Israel, and twelve Syrian jets attacked Israeli settlements in the Galilee. Israeli fighter jets intercepted the Syrian aircraft, shooting down three and driving off the rest. In addition, two Lebanese Hawker Hunter jets, two of the twelve Lebanon had, crossed into Israeli airspace and began strafing Israeli positions in the Galilee. They were intercepted by Israeli fighter jets, and one was shot down.\nOn the evening of 5 June, the Israeli Air Force attacked Syrian airfields. The Syrian Air Force lost some 32 MiG 21s, 23 MiG-15 and MiG-17 fighters, and two Ilyushin Il-28 bombers, two-thirds of its fighting strength. The Syrian aircraft that survived the attack retreated to distant bases and played no further role in the war. Following the attack, Syria realized that the news it had received from Egypt of the near-total destruction of the Israeli military could not have been true.\nOn 6 June, a minor Syrian force tried to capture the water plants at Tel Dan (the subject of a fierce escalation two years earlier), Dan, and She'ar Yashuv. These attacks were repulsed with the loss of twenty soldiers and seven tanks. An Israeli officer was also killed. But a broader Syrian offensive quickly failed. Syrian reserve units were broken up by Israeli air attacks, and several tanks were reported to have sunk in the Jordan River.\nOther problems included tanks being too wide for bridges, lack of radio communications between tanks and infantry, and units ignoring orders to advance. A post-war Syrian army report concluded:\nOur forces did not go on the offensive either because they did not arrive or were not wholly prepared or because they could not find shelter from the enemy's aircraft. The reserves could not withstand the air attacks; they dispersed after their morale plummeted.\nThe Syrians bombarded Israeli civilian settlements in the Galilee Panhandle with two battalions of M-46 130mm guns, four companies of heavy mortars, and dug-in Panzer IV tanks. The Syrian bombardment killed two civilians and hit 205 houses as well as farming installations. An inaccurate report from a Syrian officer said that as a result of the bombardment that \"the enemy appears to have suffered heavy losses and is retreating\".\nIsraelis debate whether the Golan Heights should be attacked.\nOn 7 and 8 June, the Israeli leadership debated about whether to attack the Golan Heights as well. Syria had supported pre-war raids that had helped raise tensions and had routinely shelled Israel from the Heights, so some Israeli leaders wanted to see Syria punished. Military opinion was that the attack would be extremely costly since it would entail an uphill battle against a strongly fortified enemy. The western side of the Golan Heights consists of a rock escarpment that rises 500 meters (1,700\u00a0ft) from the Sea of Galilee and the Jordan River, and then flattens to a gently sloping plateau. Dayan opposed the operation bitterly at first, believing such an undertaking would result in losses of 30,000 and might trigger Soviet intervention. Prime Minister Eshkol, on the other hand, was more open to the possibility, as was the head of the Northern Command, David Elazar, whose unbridled enthusiasm for and confidence in the operation may have eroded Dayan's reluctance.\nEventually, the situation on the Southern and Central fronts cleared up, intelligence estimated that the likelihood of Soviet intervention had been reduced, reconnaissance showed some Syrian defenses in the Golan region collapsing, and an intercepted cable revealed that Nasser was urging the President of Syria to immediately accept a ceasefire. At 3 am on 9 June, Syria announced its acceptance of the ceasefire. Despite this announcement, Dayan became more enthusiastic about the idea and four hours later at 7 am, \"gave the order to go into action against Syria\" without consultation or government authorization.\nThe Syrian army consisted of about 75,000 men grouped in nine brigades, supported by an adequate amount of artillery and armor. Israeli forces used in combat consisted of two brigades (the 8th Armored Brigade and the Golani Brigade) in the northern part of the front at Givat HaEm, and another two (infantry and one of Peled's brigades summoned from Jenin) in the center. The Golan Heights' unique terrain (mountainous slopes crossed by parallel streams every several kilometers running east to west), and the general lack of roads in the area channeled both forces along east\u2013west axes of movement and restricted the ability of units to support those on either flank. Thus the Syrians could move north\u2013south on the plateau itself, and the Israelis could move north\u2013south at the base of the Golan escarpment. An advantage Israel possessed was the intelligence collected by Mossad operative Eli Cohen (who was captured and executed in Syria in 1965) regarding the Syrian battle positions. Syria had built extensive defensive fortifications in depths up to 15 kilometers.\nAs opposed to all the other campaigns, IAF was only partially effective in the Golan because the fixed fortifications were so effective. The Syrian forces proved unable to put up effective defense largely because the officers were poor leaders and treated their soldiers badly; often officers would retreat from danger, leaving their men confused and ineffective. The Israelis also had the upper hand during close combat that took place in the numerous Syrian bunkers along the Golan Heights, as they were armed with the Uzi, a submachine gun designed for close combat, while Syrian soldiers were armed with the heavier AK-47 assault rifle, designed for combat in more open areas.\nIsraeli attack: first day (9 June).\nOn the morning of 9 June, Israeli jets began carrying out dozens of sorties against Syrian positions from Mount Hermon to Tawfiq, using rockets salvaged from captured Egyptian stocks. The airstrikes knocked out artillery batteries and storehouses and forced transport columns off the roads. The Syrians suffered heavy casualties and a drop in morale, with some senior officers and troops deserting. The attacks also provided time as Israeli forces cleared paths through Syrian minefields. The airstrikes did not seriously damage the Syrians' bunkers and trench systems, and the bulk of Syrian forces on the Golan remained in their positions.\nAbout two hours after the airstrikes began, the 8th Armored Brigade, led by Colonel Albert Mandler, advanced into the Golan Heights from Givat HaEm. Its advance was spearheaded by Engineering Corps sappers and eight bulldozers, which cleared away barbed wire and mines. As they advanced, the force came under fire, and five bulldozers were immediately hit. The Israeli tanks, with their manoeuvrability sharply reduced by the terrain, advanced slowly under fire toward the fortified village of Sir al-Dib, with their ultimate objective being the fortress at Qala. Israeli casualties steadily mounted.\nPart of the attacking force lost its way and emerged opposite Za'ura, a redoubt manned by Syrian reservists. With the situation critical, Colonel Mandler ordered simultaneous assaults on Za'ura and Qala. Heavy and confused fighting followed, with Israeli and Syrian tanks struggling around obstacles and firing at extremely short ranges. Mandler recalled that \"the Syrians fought well and bloodied us. We beat them only by crushing them under our treads and by blasting them with our cannons at very short range, from 100 to 500 meters.\" The first three Israeli tanks to enter Qala were stopped by a Syrian bazooka team, and a relief column of seven Syrian tanks arrived to repel the attackers.\nThe Israelis took heavy fire from the houses, but could not turn back, as other forces were advancing behind them, and they were on a narrow path with mines on either side. The Israelis continued pressing forward and called for air support. A pair of Israeli jets destroyed two of the Syrian tanks, and the remainder withdrew. The surviving defenders of Qala retreated after their commander was killed. Meanwhile, Za'ura fell in an Israeli assault, and the Israelis also captured the 'Ein Fit fortress.\nIn the central sector, the Israeli 181st Battalion captured the strongholds of Dardara and Tel Hillal after fierce fighting. Desperate fighting also broke out along the operation's northern axis, where Golani Brigade attacked thirteen Syrian positions, including the formidable Tel Fakhr position. Navigational errors placed the Israelis directly under the Syrians' guns. In the fighting that followed, both sides took heavy casualties, with the Israelis losing all nineteen of their tanks and half-tracks. The Israeli battalion commander then ordered his twenty-five remaining men to dismount, divide into two groups, and charge the northern and southern flanks of Tel Fakhr. The first Israelis to reach the perimeter of the southern approach laid on the barbed wire, allowing their comrades to vault over them. From there, they assaulted the fortified Syrian positions. The fighting was waged at extremely close quarters, often hand-to-hand.\nOn the northern flank, the Israelis broke through within minutes and cleared out the trenches and bunkers. During the seven-hour battle, the Israelis lost 31 dead and 82 wounded, while the Syrians lost 62 dead and 20 captured. Among the dead was the Israeli battalion commander. The Golani Brigade's 51st Battalion took Tel 'Azzaziat, and Darbashiya also fell to Israeli forces.\nBy the evening of 9 June, the four Israeli brigades had all broken through to the plateau, where they could be reinforced and replaced. Thousands of reinforcements began reaching the front, those tanks and half-tracks that had survived the previous day's fighting were refuelled and replenished with ammunition, and the wounded were evacuated. By dawn, the Israelis had eight brigades in the sector.\nSyria's first line of defense had been shattered, but the defenses beyond that remained largely intact. Mount Hermon and the Banias in the north, and the entire sector between Tawfiq and Customs House Road in the south remained in Syrian hands. In a meeting early on the night of 9 June, Syrian leaders decided to reinforce those positions as quickly as possible and to maintain a steady barrage on Israeli civilian settlements.\nIsraeli attack: second day (10 June).\nThroughout the night, the Israelis continued their advance, though it was slowed by fierce resistance. An anticipated Syrian counterattack never materialized. At the fortified village of Jalabina, a garrison of Syrian reservists, levelling their anti-aircraft guns, held off the Israeli 65th Paratroop Battalion for four hours before a small detachment managed to penetrate the village and knock out the heavy guns.\nMeanwhile, the 8th Brigade's tanks moved south from Qala, advancing to Wasit under heavy artillery and tank bombardment. At the Banias in the north, Syrian mortar batteries opened fire on advancing Israeli forces only after Golani Brigade sappers had cleared a path through a minefield, killing 16 Israeli soldiers and wounding four.\nOn the next day, 10 June, the central and northern groups joined in a pincer movement on the plateau, but that fell mainly on empty territory as the Syrian forces retreated. At 8:30\u00a0am, the Syrians began blowing up their own bunkers, burning documents and retreating. Several units joined by Elad Peled's troops climbed to the Golan from the south, only to find the positions mostly empty. When the 8th Brigade reached Mansura, from Wasit, the Israelis met no opposition and found abandoned equipment, including tanks, in perfect working condition. In the fortified Banias village, Golani Brigade troops found only several Syrian soldiers chained to their positions.\nDuring the day, the Israeli units stopped after obtaining manoeuvre room between their positions and a line of volcanic hills to the west. In some locations, Israeli troops advanced after an agreed-upon cease-fire to occupy strategically strong positions. To the east, the ground terrain is an open gently sloping plain. This position later became the cease-fire line known as the \"Purple Line\".\n\"Time\" magazine reported: \"In an effort to pressure the United Nations into enforcing a ceasefire, Damascus Radio undercut its own army by broadcasting the fall of the city of Quneitra three hours before it actually capitulated. That premature report of the surrender of their headquarters destroyed the morale of the Syrian troops left in the Golan area.\"\nConclusion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA week ago, the fateful campaign began. The existence of the State of Israel hung in the balance, the hopes of generations, and the vision that was realised in our own time... During the fighting, our forces destroyed about 450 enemy planes and hundreds of tanks. The enemy forces were decisively defeated in battles. Many fled for their lives or were captured. For the first time since the establishment of the state, the threat to our security has been removed at once from the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, Jerusalem, the West Bank and the northern border.\n \u2013 Levi Eshkol, 12 June 1967 (Address to Israeli Parliament)\nBy 10 June, Israel had completed its final offensive in the Golan Heights, and a ceasefire was signed the day after. Israel had seized the Gaza Strip, the Sinai Peninsula, the West Bank of the Jordan River (including East Jerusalem), and the Golan Heights. About one million Arabs were placed under Israel's direct control in the newly captured territories. Israel's strategic depth grew to at least 300 kilometers in the south, 60 kilometers in the east, and 20 kilometers of extremely rugged terrain in the north, a security asset that would prove useful in the Yom Kippur War six years later.\nSpeaking three weeks after the war ended, as he accepted an honorary degree from Hebrew University, Yitzhak Rabin gave his reasoning behind the success of Israel:\nOur airmen, who struck the enemies' planes so accurately that no one in the world understands how it was done and people seek technological explanations or secret weapons; our armoured troops who beat the enemy even when their equipment was inferior to his; our soldiers in all other branches ... who overcame our enemies everywhere, despite the latter's superior numbers and fortifications\u2014all these revealed not only coolness and courage in the battle but ... an understanding that only their personal stand against the greatest dangers would achieve victory for their country and for their families, and that if victory was not theirs the alternative was annihilation.\nIn recognition of contributions, Rabin was given the honor of naming the war for the Israelis. From the suggestions proposed, including the \"War of Daring\", \"War of Salvation\", and \"War of the Sons of Light\", he \"chose the least ostentatious, the Six-Day War, evoking the days of creation\".\nDayan's final report on the war to the Israeli general staff listed several shortcomings in Israel's actions, including misinterpretation of Nasser's intentions, overdependence on the United States, and reluctance to act when Egypt closed the Straits. He also credited several factors for Israel's success: Egypt did not appreciate the advantage of striking first and their adversaries did not accurately gauge Israel's strength and its willingness to use it.\nIn Egypt, according to Heikal, Nasser had admitted his responsibility for the military defeat in June 1967. According to historian Abd al-Azim Ramadan, Nasser's mistaken decisions to expel the international peacekeeping force from the Sinai Peninsula and close the Straits of Tiran in 1967 led to a state of war with Israel, despite Egypt's lack of military preparedness.\nAfter the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Egypt reviewed the causes of its loss of the 1967 war. Issues that were identified included \"the individualistic bureaucratic leadership\"; \"promotions on the basis of loyalty, not expertise, and the army's fear of telling Nasser the truth\"; lack of intelligence; and better Israeli weapons, command, organization, and will to fight.\nCasualties and losses.\nBetween 776 and 983 Israelis were killed and 4,517 were wounded. Fifteen Israeli soldiers were captured. Arab casualties were far greater. Between 9,800 and 15,000 Egyptian soldiers were listed as killed or missing in action. An additional 4,338 Egyptian soldiers were captured. Jordanian losses are estimated to be 700 killed in action with another 2,500 wounded. The Syrians were estimated to have sustained between 1,000 and 2,500 killed in action. Between 367 and 591 Syrians were captured.\nCasualties were also suffered by UNEF, the United Nations Emergency Force that was stationed on the Egyptian side of the border. In three different episodes, Israeli forces attacked a UNEF convoy, camps in which UNEF personnel were concentrated and the UNEF headquarters in Gaza, resulting in one Brazilian peacekeeper and 14 Indian officials killed by Israeli forces, with an additional seventeen peacekeepers wounded in both contingents.\nRegarding material losses, 46 Israeli aircraft and 400 tanks were destroyed. Egyptian losses were reported at 700 tanks according to President Nasser, although Israeli officials claimed to have destroyed 509 Egyptian tanks. Egyptian aircraft losses range from 282 to 350. Syria lost close to 60 aircraft. Jordanian losses accounted to 21, including 17 military aircraft, 1 helicopter and 3 passenger aircraft. Iraq lost 9 aircraft;\u00a0Lebanon\u00a0lost\u00a02.\nControversies.\nPreemptive war vs war of aggression.\nAt the commencement of hostilities, both Egypt and Israel announced that they had been attacked by the other country. The Israeli government later abandoned its initial position, acknowledging Israel had struck first, describing the attack as a preemptive move to prevent an anticipated invasion by Egypt. The Arab view was that it was unjustified to attack Egypt. Many scholars consider the war a case of preventative war as a form of self-defense. The war has been assessed by others as a war of aggression.\nAllegations of atrocities committed against Egyptian soldiers.\nIt has been alleged that Nasser did not want Egypt to learn of the true extent of his defeat and so ordered the killing of Egyptian army stragglers making their way back to the Suez canal zone. There have also been allegations from both Israeli and Egyptian sources that Israeli troops killed unarmed Egyptian prisoners.\nAllegations of military support from the US, UK and Soviet Union.\nThere have been allegations of direct military support of Israel during the war by the US and the UK, including the supply of equipment (despite an embargo) and the participation of US forces in the conflict. Many of these allegations and conspiracy theories have been disputed and it has been claimed that some were given currency in the Arab world to explain the Arab defeat.\nIt has also been claimed that the Soviet Union, in support of its Arab allies, used its naval strength in the Mediterranean to act as a major restraint on the US Navy.\nAmerica features prominently in Arab conspiracy theories purporting to explain the June 1967 defeat. Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, a confidant of Nasser, claims that President Lyndon B. Johnson was obsessed with Nasser and that Johnson conspired with Israel to bring him down. The reported Israeli troop movements seemed all the more threatening because they were perceived in the context of a US conspiracy against Egypt. Salah Bassiouny of the Foreign Ministry, claims that Foreign Ministry saw the reported Israeli troop movements as credible because Israel had reached the level at which it could find strategic alliance with the United States.\nDuring the war, Cairo announced that American and British planes were participating in the Israeli attack. Nasser broke off diplomatic relations following this allegation. Nasser's image of the United States was such that he might well have believed the worst. Anwar Sadat implied that Nasser used this deliberate conspiracy in order to accuse the United States as a political cover-up for domestic consumption. Lutfi Abd al-Qadir, the director of Radio Cairo during the late 1960s, who accompanied Nasser to his visits in Moscow, had his conspiracy theory that both the Soviets and the Western powers wanted to topple Nasser or to reduce his influence.\nUSS \"Liberty\" incident.\nOn 8 June 1967, USS \"Liberty\", a United States Navy electronic intelligence vessel sailing off Arish (just outside Egypt's territorial waters), was attacked by Israeli jets and torpedo boats, nearly sinking the ship, killing 34 sailors and wounding 171. Israel said the attack was a case of mistaken identity, and that the ship had been misidentified as the Egyptian vessel \"El Quseir\". Israel apologized for the mistake and paid compensation to the victims or their families, and to the United States for damage to the ship. After an investigation, the U.S. accepted the explanation that the incident was an accident and the issue was closed by the exchange of diplomatic notes in 1987. Others, including the then United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Thomas Moorer, some survivors of the attack, and intelligence officials familiar with transcripts of intercepted signals on the day, have rejected these conclusions as unsatisfactory and maintain that the attack was made in the knowledge that the ship was American.\nAftermath.\nThe political importance of the 1967 War was immense. Israel demonstrated again that it was able and willing to initiate strategic strikes that could change the regional balance. Egypt and Syria learned tactical lessons and would launch an attack in 1973 in an attempt to reclaim their lost territories.\nAfter following other Arab nations in declaring war, Mauritania remained in a declared state of war with Israel until about 1999. The United States imposed an embargo on new arms agreements to all Middle East countries, including Israel. The embargo remained in force until the end of 1967, despite urgent Israeli requests to lift it.\nExodus of Arabs from Israeli-occupied territories.\nThere was extensive displacement of populations in the occupied territories: of about one million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, 280,000 to 325,000 were displaced from their homes. Most of them settled in Jordan. The other 700,000 remained. In the Golan Heights, over 100,000 fled. Israel allowed only the inhabitants of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights to receive full Israeli citizenship, applying its law, administration and jurisdiction to these territories in 1967 and 1981, respectively. The vast majority of the populations in both territories declined to take citizenship. See also Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict and Golan Heights.\nIn his book \"Righteous Victims\" (1999), Israeli \"New Historian\" Benny Morris writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In three villages southwest of Jerusalem and at Qalqilya, houses were destroyed \"not in battle, but as punishment ... and in order to chase away the inhabitants ... contrary to government ... policy,\" Dayan wrote in his memoirs. In Qalqilya, about a third of the homes were razed and about 12,000 inhabitants were evicted, though many then camped out in the environs. The evictees in both areas were allowed to stay and later were given cement and tools by the Israeli authorities to rebuild at least some of their dwellings.\nBut many thousands of other Palestinians now took to the roads. Perhaps as many as seventy thousand, mostly from the Jericho area, fled during the fighting; tens of thousands more left over the following months. Altogether, about one-quarter of the population of the West Bank, about 200\u2013250,000 people, went into exile. ... They simply walked to the Jordan River crossings and made their way on foot to the East Bank. It is unclear how many were intimidated or forced out by the Israeli troops and how many left voluntarily, in panic and fear. There is some evidence of IDF soldiers going around with loudspeakers ordering West Bankers to leave their homes and cross the Jordan. Some left because they had relatives or sources of livelihood on the East Bank and feared being permanently cut off.\nThousands of Arabs were taken by bus from East Jerusalem to the Allenby Bridge, though there is no evidence of coercion. The free Israeli-organized transportation, which began on June 11, 1967, went on for about a month. At the bridge, they had to sign a document stating that they were leaving of their own free will. Perhaps as many as 70,000 people emigrated from the Gaza Strip to Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world.\nOn July 2, the Israeli government announced that it would allow the return of those 1967 refugees who desired to do so, but no later than August 10, later extended to September 13. The Jordanian authorities probably pressured many of the refugees, who constituted an enormous burden, to sign up to return. In practice only 14,000 of the 120,000 who applied were allowed by Israel back into the West Bank by the beginning of September. After that, only a trickle of \"special cases\" were allowed back, perhaps 3,000 in all. (328\u201329)\nIn addition, between 80,000 and 110,000 Syrians fled the Golan Heights, of which about 20,000 were from the city of Quneitra. According to more recent research by the Israeli daily \"Haaretz\", a total of 130,000 Syrian inhabitants fled or were expelled from the territory, most of them pushed out by the Israeli army.\nIsrael and Zionism.\nFollowing the war, Israel experienced a wave of national euphoria, and the press praised the military's performance for weeks afterwards. New \"victory coins\" were minted to celebrate. In addition, the world's interest in Israel grew, and the country's economy, which had been in crisis before the war, flourished due to an influx of tourists and donations, as well as the extraction of oil from the Sinai's wells. The aftermath of the war also saw a baby boom, which lasted for four years.\nThe aftermath of the war is also of religious significance. Under Jordanian rule, Jews were expelled from Jerusalem and were effectively barred from visiting the Western Wall, despite Article VIII of the 1949 Armistice Agreement which required making arrangements for Israeli Jewish access to the Western Wall. Jewish holy sites were not maintained, and Jewish cemeteries had been desecrated. After the annexation to Israel, each religious group was granted administration over its holy sites. For the first time since 1948, Jews could visit the Old City of Jerusalem and pray at the Western Wall, the holiest site where Jews are permitted to pray, an event celebrated every year during Yom Yerushalayim.\nDespite the Temple Mount where the Al-Aqsa compound is located being the most important holy site in Jewish tradition, it has been under sole administration of the Jordanian Muslim Waqf, and Jews are barred from praying there, although they are allowed to visit. In Hebron, Jews gained access to the Cave of the Patriarchs \u2013 the second-most holy site in Judaism, after the Temple Mount \u2013 for the first time since the 14th century (previously Jews were allowed to pray only at the entrance). Other Jewish holy sites, such as Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem and Joseph's Tomb in Nablus, also became accessible.\nThe war inspired the Jewish diaspora, which was swept up in overwhelming support for Israel. According to Michael Oren, the war enabled American Jews to \"walk with their backs straight and flex their political muscle as never before. American Jewish organizations which had previously kept Israel at arms length suddenly proclaimed their Zionism.\" Thousands of Jewish immigrants arrived from Western countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, France and South Africa after the war. Many of them returned to their countries of origin after a few years; one survey found that 58% of American Jews who immigrated to Israel between 1961 and 1972 returned to the United States. Nevertheless, immigration to Israel of Jews from Western countries, which was previously only a trickle, was a significant force for the first time.\nMost notably, the war stirred Zionist passions among Jews in the Soviet Union, who had by that time been forcibly assimilated. Many Soviet Jews subsequently applied for exit visas and began protesting for their right to immigrate to Israel. Following diplomatic pressure from the West, the Soviet government began granting exit visas to Jews in growing numbers. From 1970 to 1988, some 291,000 Soviet Jews were granted exit visas, of whom 165,000 immigrated to Israel and 126,000 immigrated to the United States. The great rise in Jewish pride in the wake of Israel's victory also fueled the beginnings of the baal teshuva movement, the return of secular Jews to religious Judaism. The war gave impetus to a campaign in which the leader of the hasidic Lubavitch movement directed his male followers around the world to wear tefillin (small leather boxes) during morning prayers.\nJews in Arab countries.\nIn the Arab nations, populations of minority Jews faced persecution and expulsion following the Israeli victory, contributing to the Jewish exodus from Arab lands, which had been ongoing since 1948. As a result, Jewish populations in Arab countries further diminished as many Jews emigrated to Israel and other Western countries. According to historian and ambassador Michael Oren:\nMobs attacked Jewish neighborhoods in Egypt, Yemen, Lebanon, Tunisia, and Morocco, burning synagogues and assaulting residents. A pogrom in Tripoli, Libya, left 18 Jews dead and 25 injured; the survivors were herded into detention centers. Of Egypt's 4,000 Jews, 800 were arrested, including the chief rabbis of both Cairo and Alexandria, and their property sequestered by the government. The ancient communities of Damascus and Baghdad were placed under house arrest, their leaders imprisoned and fined. A total of 7,000 Jews were expelled, many with merely a satchel.\nAntisemitism in Communist countries.\nFollowing the war, a series of antisemitic purges began in Communist countries. Some 11,200 Jews from Poland immigrated to Israel during the 1968 Polish political crisis and the following year.\nWar of Attrition.\nFollowing the war, Egypt initiated clashes along the Suez Canal in what became known as the War of Attrition.\nPalestinian terrorism.\nAs a result of Israel's victory, the Palestinian leadership concluded that the Arab world was not able to defeat Israel in open warfare, which in turn led to an increase in terrorist attacks with an international reach. While the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was established in 1964, it became more active after the Six-Day War; its actions gave credibility to those who claimed that only terror could end Israel's existence. Also after the war, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine emerged, with its leader George Habash speaking of turning the occupied territories into an \"inferno whose fires consume the usurpers\". These events led to a series of hijackings, bombings, and kidnappings that culminated in the massacre of Israeli athletes during the 1972 Munich Olympics.\nPeace and diplomacy.\nFollowing the war, Israel made an offer for peace that included the return of most of the recently captured territories. According to Chaim Herzog:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On June 19, 1967, the National Unity Government [of Israel] voted unanimously to return the Sinai to Egypt and the Golan Heights to Syria in return for peace agreements. The Golans would have to be demilitarized and special arrangement would be negotiated for the Straits of Tiran. The government also resolved to open negotiations with King Hussein of Jordan regarding the Eastern border.\nThe 19 June Israeli cabinet decision did not include the Gaza Strip and left open the possibility of Israel permanently acquiring parts of the West Bank. On 25\u201327 June, Israel incorporated East Jerusalem together with areas of the West Bank to the north and south into Jerusalem's new municipal boundaries.\nThe Israeli decision was to be conveyed to the Arab nations by the United States. The U.S. was informed of the decision, but not that it was to transmit it. There is no evidence of receipt from Egypt or Syria, and some historians claim that they may never have received the offer.\nIn September, the Khartoum Arab Summit resolved that there would be \"no peace, no recognition and no negotiation with Israel\". Avraham Sela notes that the Khartoum conference effectively marked a shift in the perception of the conflict by the Arab states away from one centered on the question of Israel's legitimacy, toward one focusing on territories and boundaries. This was shown on 22 November when Egypt and Jordan accepted United Nations Security Council Resolution 242. Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel. In dozens of speeches and statements, Nasser posited the equation that any direct peace talks with Israel were tantamount to surrender.\nAfter the war, the entire Soviet bloc of Eastern Europe (with the exception of Romania) broke off diplomatic relations with Israel.\nMao-era China contended that the Arab defeat in the Six-Day War demonstrated that only people's war, not other strategies or methods, could defeat imperialism in the Middle East.47\nThe 1967 War laid the foundation for future discord in the region, as the Arab states resented Israel's victory and did not want to give up territory.\nOn 22 November 1967, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 242, the \"land for peace\" formula, which called for Israeli withdrawal \"from territories occupied\" in 1967 and \"the termination of all claims or states of belligerency\". Resolution 242 recognized the right of \"every state in the area to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or acts of force.\" Israel returned the Sinai to Egypt in 1978, after the Camp David Accords. In the summer of 2005, Israel withdrew all military forces and evacuated all civilians from the Gaza Strip. Its army frequently re-enters Gaza for military operations and still retains control of the seaports, airports and most of the border crossings.\nLong term.\nIsrael made peace with Egypt following the Camp David Accords of 1978 and completed a staged withdrawal from the Sinai in 1982. The position of the other occupied territories has been a long-standing and bitter cause of conflict for decades between Israel and the Palestinians, and the Arab world in general. Jordan and Egypt eventually withdrew their claims to sovereignty over the West Bank and Gaza, respectively. Israel and Jordan signed a peace treaty in 1994.\nAfter the Israeli occupation of these territories, the Gush Emunim movement launched a large settlement effort in these areas to secure a permanent foothold. There are now hundreds of thousands of Israeli settlers in the West Bank. They are a matter of controversy within Israel, both among the general population and within different political administrations, supporting them to varying degrees. Palestinians consider them a provocation. The Israeli settlements in Gaza were evacuated in August 2005 as a part of Israel's disengagement from Gaza.\n* Gideon Rafael [Israeli Ambassador to the UN] received a message from the Israeli foreign office: \"Inform immediately the President of the Sec. Co. that Israel is now engaged in repelling Egyptian land and air forces.\" At 3:10\u00a0am, Rafael woke ambassador Hans Tabor, the Danish President of the Security Council for June, with the news that Egyptian forces had \"moved against Israel\".\n* [At Security Council meeting of 5 June], both Israel and Egypt claimed to be repelling an invasion by the other.\n* \"Egyptian sources claimed that Israel had initiated hostilities [...] but Israeli officials \u2013 Eban and Evron \u2013 swore that Egypt had fired first\".\n* \"Gideon Rafael phoned Danish ambassador Hans Tabor, Security Council president for the month of June, and informed him that Israel was responding to a 'cowardly and treacherous' attack from Egypt...\".\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29329", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29329", "title": "Spectrum", "text": "Continuous range of values, such as wavelengths in physics\nA spectrum (pl.: spectra or spectrums) is a set of related ideas, objects, or properties whose features overlap such that they blend to form a continuum. The word \"spectrum\" was first used scientifically in optics to describe the rainbow of colors in visible light after passing through a prism. In the optical spectrum, light wavelength is viewed as continuous, and spectral colors are seen to blend into one another smoothly when organized in order of their corresponding wavelengths. As scientific understanding of light advanced, the term came to apply to the entire electromagnetic spectrum, including radiation not visible to the human eye. \n\"Spectrum\" has since been applied by analogy to topics outside optics. Thus, one might talk about the \"spectrum of political opinion\", or the \"spectrum of activity\" of a drug, or the \"autism spectrum\". In these uses, values within a spectrum may not be associated with precisely quantifiable numbers or definitions. Such uses imply a broad range of conditions or behaviors grouped together and studied under a single title for ease of discussion. Nonscientific uses of the term \"spectrum\" are sometimes misleading. For instance, a single left\u2013right spectrum of political opinion does not capture the full range of people's political beliefs. Political scientists use a variety of biaxial and multiaxial systems to more accurately characterize political opinion.\nIn most modern usages of \"spectrum\" there is a unifying theme between the extremes at either end. This was not always true in older usage.\nEtymology.\nIn Latin, \"spectrum\" means \"image\" or \"apparition\", including the meaning \"spectre\". Spectral evidence is testimony about what was done by spectres of persons not present physically, or hearsay evidence about what ghosts or apparitions of Satan said. It was used to convict a number of persons of witchcraft at Salem, Massachusetts in the late 17th century. The word \"spectrum\" [Spektrum] was strictly used to designate a ghostly optical afterimage by Goethe in his \"Theory of Colors\" and Schopenhauer in \"On Vision and Colors\".\nThe prefix \"spectro-\" is used to form words relating to spectra. For example, a spectrometer is a device used to record spectra and spectroscopy is the use of a spectrometer for chemical analysis.\nBiological science.\nAntibiotic spectrum of activity is a component of antibiotic classification. A broad-spectrum antibiotic is active against a wide range of bacteria, whereas a narrow-spectrum antibiotic is effective against specific families of bacteria. An example of a commonly used broad-spectrum antibiotic is ampicillin. An example of a narrow spectrum antibiotic is Dicloxacillin, which acts on beta-lactamase-producing Gram-positive bacteria such as \"Staphylococcus aureus\".\nIn psychiatry, the spectrum approach uses the term spectrum to describe a range of linked conditions, sometimes also extending to include singular symptoms and traits. For example, the autism spectrum describes a range of conditions classified as neurodevelopmental disorders.\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, the spectrum of a matrix is the multiset of the eigenvalues of the matrix.\nIn functional analysis, the concept of the spectrum of a bounded operator is a generalization of the eigenvalue concept for matrices.\nIn algebraic topology, a spectrum is an object representing a generalized cohomology theory.\nSocial science.\nIn social science, economic spectrum is used to indicate the range of social class along some indicator of wealth or income. In political science, the term political spectrum refers to a system of classifying political positions in one or more dimensions, for example in a range including right wing and left wing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29330", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29330", "title": "Social dynamics", "text": "Study of behavior of groups\nSocial dynamics (or sociodynamics) is the study of the behavior of groups and of the interactions of individual group members, aiming to understand the emergence of complex social behaviors among microorganisms, plants and animals, including humans. It is related to sociobiology but also draws from physics and complex system sciences.\nIn the last century, sociodynamics was viewed as part of psychology, as shown in the work: \"Sociodynamics: an integrative theorem of power, authority, interfluence and love\". In the 1990s, social dynamics began being viewed as a separate scientific discipline[\"By whom?\"]. An important paper in this respect is: \"The Laws of\u00a0Sociodynamics\".\nThen, starting in the 2000s, sociodynamics took off as a discipline of its own, many papers were released in the field in this decade.\nOverview.\nThe field of social dynamics brings together ideas from economics, sociology, social psychology, and other disciplines, and is a sub-field of complex adaptive systems or complexity science. The fundamental assumption of the field is that individuals are influenced by one another's behavior. The field is closely related to system dynamics. Like system dynamics, social dynamics is concerned with changes over time and emphasizes the role of feedbacks. However, in social dynamics individual choices and interactions are typically viewed as the source of aggregate level behavior, while system dynamics posits that the structure of feedbacks and accumulations are responsible for system level dynamics. Research in the field typically takes a behavioral approach, assuming that individuals are boundedly rational and act on local information. Mathematical and computational modeling are important tools for studying social dynamics. This field grew out of work done in the 1940s by game theorists such as Duncan &amp; Luce, and even earlier works by mathematician Armand Borel. Because social dynamics focuses on individual level behavior, and recognizes the importance of heterogeneity across individuals, strict analytic results are often impossible. Instead, approximation techniques, such as mean-field approximations from statistical physics, or computer simulations are used to understand the behaviors of the system. In contrast to more traditional approaches in economics, scholars of social dynamics are often interested in non-equilibrium, or dynamic, behavior. That is, behavior that changes over time.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29331", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29331", "title": "Steady State theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "29332", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29332", "title": "Sign Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "29333", "revid": "42850097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29333", "title": "Social evolution", "text": "Social evolution may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29334", "revid": "40538871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29334", "title": "Soviet battleship Novorossiysk", "text": ""}
{"id": "29336", "revid": "305208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29336", "title": "Systemic functional grammar", "text": "Primary tenets\nSystemic functional grammar (SFG) is a form of grammatical description originated by Michael Halliday. It is part of a social semiotic approach to language called \"systemic functional linguistics\". In these two terms, \"systemic\" refers to the view of language as \"a network of systems, or interrelated sets of options for making meaning\"; \"functional\" refers to Halliday's view that language is as it is because of what it has evolved to do (see Metafunction). Thus, what he refers to as the \"multidimensional architecture of language\" \"reflects the multidimensional nature of human experience and interpersonal relations.\"\nInfluences.\nHalliday describes his grammar as built on the work of Saussure, Louis Hjelmslev, Malinowski, J.R. Firth, and the Prague school linguists. In addition, he drew on the work of the American anthropological linguists Boas, Sapir and Whorf. His \"main inspiration\" was Firth, to whom he owes, among other things, the notion of language as system. Among American linguists, Whorf had \"the most profound effect on my own thinking\". Whorf \"showed how it is that human beings do not all mean alike, and how their unconscious ways of meaning are among the most significant manifestations of their culture\".\nFrom his studies in China, he lists Luo Changpei and Wang Li as two scholars from whom he gained \"new and exciting insights into language\". He credits Luo for giving him a diachronic perspective and insights into a non-Indo-European language family. From Wang Li he learnt \"many things, including research methods in dialectology, the semantic basis of grammar, and the history of linguistics in China\".\nBasic tenets.\nSome interrelated key terms underpin Halliday's approach to grammar, which forms part of his account of how language works. These concepts are: system, (meta)function, and rank. Another key term is lexicogrammar. In this view, grammar and lexis are two ends of the same continuum.\nAnalysis of the grammar is taken from a trinocular perspective, meaning from three different levels. So to look at lexicogrammar, it can be analysed from two more levels, 'above' (semantic) and 'below' (phonology). This grammar gives emphasis to the view from above.\nFor Halliday, grammar is described as systems not as rules, on the basis that every grammatical structure involves a choice from a describable set of options. Language is thus a \"meaning potential\". Grammarians in SF tradition use system networks to map the available options in a language. In relation to English, for instance, Halliday has described systems such as \"mood\", \"agency\", \"theme\", etc. Halliday describes grammatical systems as closed, i.e. as having a finite set of options. By contrast, lexical sets are open systems, since new words come into a language all the time.\nThese grammatical systems play a role in the construal of meanings of different kinds. This is the basis of Halliday's claim that language is \"meta-functionally\" organised. He argues that the raison d'\u00eatre of language is meaning in social life, and for this reason all languages have three kinds of semantic components. All languages have resources for construing experience (the \"ideational\" component), resources for enacting humans' diverse and complex social relations (the \"interpersonal\" component), and resources for enabling these two kinds of meanings to come together in coherent text (the \"textual\" function). Each of the grammatical systems proposed by Halliday are related to these metafunctions. For instance, the grammatical system of 'mood' is considered to be centrally related to the expression of interpersonal meanings, 'process type' to the expression of experiential meanings, and 'theme' to the expression of textual meanings.\nTraditionally the \"choices\" are viewed in terms of either the content or the structure of the language used. In SFG, language is analysed in three ways (strata): semantics, phonology, and lexicogrammar. SFG presents a view of language in terms of both structure (grammar) and words (lexis). The term \"lexicogrammar\" describes this combined approach.\nMetafunctions.\nFrom early on in his account of language, Halliday has argued that it is inherently functional. His early papers on the grammar of English make reference to the \"functional components\" of language, as \"generalized uses of language, which, since they seem to determine the nature of the language system, require to be incorporated into our account of that system.\" Halliday argues that this functional organization of language \"determines the form taken by grammatical structure\".\nHalliday refers to his functions of language as metafunctions. He proposes three general functions: the \"ideational\", the \"interpersonal\" and the \"textual\".\nIdeational metafunction.\nThe ideational metafunction is the function for construing human experience. It is the means by which we make sense of \"reality\". Halliday divides the ideational into the logical and the experiential metafunctions. The logical metafunction refers to the grammatical resources for building up grammatical units into complexes, for instance, for combining two or more clauses into a clause complex. The experiential function refers to the grammatical resources involved in construing the flux of experience through the unit of the clause.\nThe ideational metafunction reflects the contextual value of \"field\", that is, the nature of the social process in which the language is implicated. An analysis of a text from the perspective of the ideational function involves inquiring into the choices in the grammatical system of \"transitivity\": that is, process types, participant types, circumstance types, combined with an analysis of the resources through which clauses are combined. Halliday's \"An Introduction to Functional Grammar\" (in the third edition, with revisions by Christian Matthiessen) sets out the description of these grammatical systems.\nInterpersonal metafunction.\nThe interpersonal metafunction relates to a text's aspects of \"tenor\" or interactivity. Like field, tenor comprises three component areas: the speaker/writer persona, social distance, and relative social status. Social distance and relative social status are applicable only to spoken texts, although a case has been made that these two factors can also apply to written text.\nThe speaker/writer persona concerns the stance, personalisation and standing of the speaker or writer. This involves looking at whether the writer or speaker has a neutral attitude, which can be seen through the use of positive or negative language. Social distance means how close the speakers are, e.g. how the use of nicknames shows the degree to which they are intimate. Relative social status asks whether they are equal in terms of power and knowledge on a subject, for example, the relationship between a mother and child would be considered unequal. Focuses here are on speech acts (e.g. whether one person tends to ask questions and the other speaker tends to answer), who chooses the topic, turn management, and how capable both speakers are of evaluating the subject.\nTextual metafunction.\nThe textual metafunction relates to \"mode\"; the internal organisation and communicative nature of a text. This comprises textual interactivity, spontaneity and communicative distance.\nTextual interactivity is examined with reference to disfluencies such as hesitators, pauses and repetitions.\nSpontaneity is determined through a focus on lexical density, grammatical complexity, coordination (how clauses are linked together) and the use of nominal groups. The study of communicative distance involves looking at a text's cohesion\u2014that is, how it hangs together, as well as any abstract language it uses.\nCohesion is analysed in the context of both lexical and grammatical as well as intonational aspects with reference to lexical chains and, in the speech register, tonality, tonicity, and tone. The lexical aspect focuses on sense relations and lexical repetitions, while the grammatical aspect looks at repetition of meaning shown through reference, substitution and ellipsis, as well as the role of linking adverbials.\nSystemic functional grammar deals with all of these areas of meaning equally within the grammatical system itself.\nChildren\u2019s grammar.\nMichael Halliday (1973) outlined seven functions of language with regard to the grammar used by children:\nRelation to other branches of grammar.\nHalliday's theory sets out to explain how spoken and written texts construe meanings and how the resources of language are organised in open systems and functionally bound to meanings. It is a theory of language in use, creating systematic relations between choices and forms within the less abstract strata of grammar and phonology, on the one hand, and more abstract strata such as context of situation and context of culture on the other. It is a radically different theory of language from others which explore less abstract strata as autonomous systems, the most notable being Noam Chomsky's. Since the principal aim of systemic functional grammar is to represent the grammatical system as a resource for making meaning, it addresses different concerns. For example, it does not try to address Chomsky's thesis that there is a \"finite rule system which generates all and only the grammatical sentences in a language\". Halliday's theory encourages a more open approach to the definition of language as a resource; rather than focus on grammaticality as such, a systemic functional grammatical treatment focuses instead on the relative frequencies of choices made in uses of language and assumes that these relative frequencies reflect the probability that particular paths through the available resources will be chosen rather than others. Thus, SFG does not describe language as a finite rule system, but rather as a system, realised by instantiations, that is continuously expanded by the very instantiations that realise it and that is continuously reproduced and recreated with use.\nAnother way to understand the difference in concerns between systemic functional grammar and most variants of generative grammar is through Chomsky's claim that \"linguistics is a sub-branch of psychology\". Halliday investigates linguistics more as a sub-branch of \"sociology\". SFG therefore pays much more attention to pragmatics and discourse semantics than is traditionally the case in formalism.\nThe orientation of systemic functional grammar has served to encourage several further grammatical accounts that deal with some perceived weaknesses of the theory and similarly orient to issues not seen to be addressed in more structural accounts. Examples include the model of Richard Hudson called \"word grammar\", and William B. McGregor's \"Semiotic Grammar\" which revises the organization of the metafunctions.\nSee also.\nOther significant systemic functional grammarians:\nLinguists also involved with the early development of the approach:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29340", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29340", "title": "Starfleet", "text": "Fictional space flight organization\nMilitary unit\nStarfleet is a fictional organization in the \"Star Trek\" media franchise. Within this fictional universe, Starfleet is a uniformed space force maintained by the United Federation of Planets (\"the Federation\") as the principal means for conducting deep space exploration, research, defense, peacekeeping, and diplomacy (although Starfleet predates the Federation, having originally been an Earth organization, as shown by the television series \"\"). While most of Starfleet's members are human and it has been headquartered on Earth, hundreds of other species are also represented. Most of the franchise's protagonists are Starfleet commissioned officers.\nHistory.\nDuring production of early episodes of the , several details of the makeup of the \"Star Trek\" universe had yet to be worked out, including the operating authority for the USS \"Enterprise\". The terms \"Star Service\" (\"The Conscience of the King\"), \"Spacefleet Command\" (\"The Squire of Gothos\"), \"United Earth Space Probe Agency\" (\"Charlie X\" and \"Tomorrow Is Yesterday\"), and \"Space Central\" (\"\") were all used to refer to the \"Enterprise\"'s operating authority, before the term \"Starfleet\" became widespread from the episode \"\" onwards.\nHowever, references to the United Earth Space Probe Agency, and its abbreviation UESPA, are to be found in episodes of later series. For example, the \"Friendship One\" probe (launched, on the fictional timeline, in 2067) is marked with the letters UESPA-1 in the ' episode \"\". Other background props included additional UESPA references, such as Captain Jean-Luc Picard's family album in \"Star Trek Generations\". During the production of ', some larger Starfleet insignia designs included the name \"United Earth Space Probe Agency\".\nMultiple \"Star Trek: Enterprise\" episodes refer to Starfleet having started operation some time between 2112 and 2136, when it funded research begun by Zefram Cochrane and Henry Archer, which led to the first successful flight of Warp-3 vessels in the 2140s. This research is said to have evolved into the NX Program, which led to Starfleet launching its first Warp 5\u2013capable starship, \"Enterprise\" (NX-01), in 2151, followed by \"Columbia\" (NX-02), in 2155, as well as other vessels.\nStarfleet acts under the Prime Directive, a policy of non-interference with pre-warp worlds, such as interference in their internal politics. This is said not to be a human construct, but stems from policies originally implemented by the Vulcans, who regarded an alien civilization's attainment of warp speed as the reason for making first contact with them. This was to avoid any unfortunate incidences during space travel, as well as avoiding interfering in the natural development of a civilization. The Prime Directive and Starfleet's first-contact policies are at the center of several episodes in each \"Star Trek\" series and the film \"\".\nStarfleet Headquarters is shown to be located on Earth, northeast of the Golden Gate Bridge in the present-day Fort Baker area. Starfleet Academy is located in the same general area. Additionally, various episodes show Starfleet operating a series of starbases throughout Federation territory, as ground facilities, or as space stations in planetary orbit or in deep space. One example is Deep Space Nine, a station near a wormhole commanded by Benjamin Sisko after its transfer from the Cardassian Empire.\nMission.\nStarfleet has been shown to handle scientific, defense, and diplomatic missions, although its primary mandate seems to be peaceful exploration in the search for sentient life, as seen in the mission statements of different incarnations of the USS \"Enterprise\". The flagship of Starfleet is often considered to be the starship USS \"Enterprise\".\nComponents.\nStarfleet has many components, including:\nStarfleet Academy.\nAs early as the original ', characters refer to attending Starfleet Academy. Later series establish it as an officer training facility with a four-year educational program. The main campus is located near Starfleet Headquarters in what is now Fort Baker, California.\nStarfleet Command.\nStarfleet Command is the headquarters/command center of Starfleet. The term \"Starfleet Command\" is first used in episode \"\". Its headquarters are depicted as being in Fort Baker, across the Golden Gate from San Francisco, in ' and '. Overlooking the Command from the other side of the Golden Gate is the permanent site of the Council of the United Federation of Planets in what is now the Presidio of San Francisco. Throughout the \"Star Trek\" franchise, the main characters' isolation from Starfleet Command compels them to make and act upon decisions without Starfleet Command's orders or information, particularly in \"\" when the main protagonists have no means of contacting Earth for several years.\nStarfleet Shipyards.\nStarTrek.com notes that many of Starfleet's ships are built on Mare Island near San Francisco. It states:\nLocated on San Francisco's Mare Island, with additional starship assembly facilities located in Earth orbit, Starfleet's San Francisco Navy Yards is the site where the USS \"Enterprise\" NCC-1701 was built in 2245. Captain Robert April, the \"Enterprise\"'s first commanding officer, was present at the San Francisco Navy Yards when the vessel's major components were built and prepared for assembly in Starfleet's orbital drydock facilities (episode, \"The Counter-Clock Incident\").\nThe \"Enterprise-D\" and USS \"Voyager\" are depicted to have been constructed at a shipyard named Utopia Planitia in Mars orbit. Utopia Planitia served as Starfleet's main ship yards throughout a large portion of Starfleet's existence. After the \"Enterprise-D\" encountered the Borg in the episode \"Q Who\" the size of the Utopia Planitia shipyards was doubled out of fear of a Borg strike. They were once again doubled after the Dominion threat became more evident. A devastating attack on these shipyards is a major plot point in \".\"\nIn the 2009 film, the \"Enterprise\" is shown under construction near James T. Kirk's home in Iowa. In the 2013 sequel, Montgomery \"Scotty\" Scott discovers a covert Starfleet facility, near Jupiter, that has built a much larger Federation warship, USS \"Vengeance\".\nStarfleet Engineering Corps.\nThe Starfleet Engineering Corps (also called the Starfleet Corps of Engineers) is mentioned in several episodes in conjunction with projects such as hollowing out the underground laboratory complex inside the Regula I asteroid in ', the design of the \"Yellowstone\"-class Runabout in the alternate timeline in the ' episode \", and devising a defense against the Breen energy-dampening weapon in the \" episode \"When It Rains...\" As a result of these successes, Starfleet engineers gained a reputation as the undisputed masters of technological adaptation and modification. As one minion of the Dominion in the \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\" episode, \"\" notes, Starfleet engineers are reputed to be able to \"Turn rocks into replicators.\"\nAdditionally, Pocket Books has published a series of eBooks and novels in the \"Starfleet Corps of Engineers\" series.\nStarfleet Intelligence.\nStarfleet Intelligence is an intelligence agency of the United Federation of Planets. It is entrusted with foreign and domestic espionage, counter-espionage, and state security. In the non-canon novels the series main character Mackenzie Calhoun was once a Starfleet Intelligence operative. \nStarfleet Judge Advocate General.\nThe Starfleet Judge Advocate General (or \"JAG\") is the branch charged with overseeing legal matters within Starfleet. Several episodes revolve around or involve JAG officers and procedures:\nDialog in \"Court Martial\" reveals that a court-martial may be convened in the absence of any JAG officers by three presiding command-level officers. Additionally, dialog in \"The Measure of a Man\" indicates that the loss of a starship automatically leads to a JAG court-martial (this is similar to real-world military procedures, in which a court-martial is convened to enter the loss of the ship into the official record). Courts-martial were held following the loss of the USS \"Pegasus\" and USS \"Stargazer\". In the \"Voyager\" episode \"\", Tuvok states that the Captain has the authority to conduct a court-martial on the ship, given the circumstance of the ship being isolated from the Federation.\nStarfleet Medical.\nStarfleet Medical is the medical branch of Starfleet.\nGates McFadden, who played Dr. Beverly Crusher, left \"\" during its second season. The character is described during this season, and after her return, as having been assigned to Starfleet Medical.\nStarfleet Operations.\nNumerous star ship dedication plaques identify other personnel associated with Starfleet Operations. Rear Admiral James T. Kirk served 18 months as Starfleet's Chief of Operations.\nStarfleet Security.\nStarfleet Security is an agency of Starfleet referred to in several episodes of ' and '. Security is a branch of Starfleet first introduced in the . Main characters in subsequent series have been security officers.\nStarfleet Tactical.\nStarfleet Tactical is a rarely mentioned department in Starfleet that is responsible for planning defensive strategies, as well as engaging in weapons research and development.\nDifferent species in Starfleet.\nAlthough Humans are the most-often-seen crew members onscreen, Starfleet is shown to be composed of individuals from over 150 species, with Vulcans perhaps being the most common aliens seen.\nAlready in ', the USS \"Enterprise\" and other ships have a mixed-species crew, although this does not appear to be an absolute rule; for instance, the episode \"\" refers to the USS \"Intrepid\" as having an all-Vulcan crew. The ' episode \"Take Me Out to the Holosuite\" also features such a crew, serving aboard the USS \"T'Kumbra\".\nIn keeping with this idea, \", in its first two seasons, was the only show to have an entirely human crew, as it was set before the formation of the Federation, although the vessel did carry Phlox, a Denobulan serving in a medical exchange program, and T'Pol, then serving as an observer from the Vulcan High Command.\n\" saw the introduction of Starfleet's first Klingon officer. Other races\u2014such as Bolians, Betazoids, and Trill\u2014were seen, and given more central roles, in later series; some of these, notably Klingons, had been shown as enemies in earlier episodes.\nVarious episodes show that Earth/Federation citizenship is not a necessary pre-condition for joining Starfleet. T'Pol of Vulcan is shown to be the first non-human Starfleet officer, receiving a commission as a commander following the Xindi mission and her resignation from the Vulcan High Command. Even after the Federation's formation citizenship was not required; several officers are from planets that are not part of the Federation. For example, \"Star Trek: TNG\"'s Ensign Ro Laren, a Bajoran aboard the USS \"Enterprise\"-D; her fellow Bajoran Kira Nerys, who was field-commissioned as a Starfleet commander so that she could aid the Cardassian resistance during the Dominion War; and Ferengi Nog, who enters Starfleet Academy in season four of \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\"; all were from non-member planets. In addition, Quinn and Icheb from \"\" both spoke of joining Starfleet.\nAn example of the process imagined by the writers is given when the character Nog attempts to apply to the Academy. He is told that since he is from a non-member world (Ferenginar), he requires a letter of recommendation from a command-level officer before his application can be considered, with the implication that this is the standard procedure for all non-Federation applicants to Starfleet.\nIn the \"Star Trek\" Expanded Universe, an example of what typically becomes of a new Federation member world's military is depicted when the Bajoran Militia is integrated into Starfleet upon Bajor's entry into the Federation.\nInsignia.\nThe Starfleet insignia have been inspired by the chevron, which is broadly used in aeronautics, and particularly by the insignia of NASA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29341", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29341", "title": "Superheterodyne receiver", "text": "Type of radio receiver\nA superheterodyne receiver, often shortened to superhet, is a type of radio receiver that uses frequency mixing to convert a received signal to a fixed intermediate frequency (IF) which can be more conveniently processed than the original carrier frequency. Edwin Howard Armstrong developed the concept, though Lucien L\u00e9vy, Walter Schottky, Henry Round, and John Renshaw Carson worked along the same lines. Superheterodyne receiver systems are still a modern feature, and can be used for other modes than AM. \nAccording to Nahin, \"Any receiver that shifts the antenna signal frequencies to new locations in the spectrum is a heterodyne receiver.\" The prefix \"super\" is reserved for those receivers that include a tunable antenna filter for image rejection, and intermediate frequency amplification that suppresses adjacent channels. \"This sort of receiver circuitry results in an easy-to-use radio that has reliably consistent tuning with a clearly audible audio output. It is the gold standard of modern AM broadcast radio.\"\nPrecursors.\nEarly radio.\nEarly Morse code radio broadcasts were produced using an alternator connected to a spark gap. The output signal was at a carrier frequency defined by the physical construction of the gap, modulated by the alternating current signal from the alternator. Since the output frequency of the alternator was generally in the audible range, this produces an audible amplitude modulated (AM) signal. Simple radio detectors filtered out the high-frequency carrier, leaving the modulation, which was passed on to the user's headphones as an audible signal of dots and dashes.\nIn 1904, Ernst Alexanderson introduced the Alexanderson alternator, a device that directly produced radio frequency output with higher power and much higher efficiency than the older spark gap systems. In contrast to the spark gap, however, the output from the alternator was a pure carrier wave at a selected frequency. When detected on existing receivers, the dots and dashes would normally be inaudible, or \"supersonic\". Due to the filtering effects of the receiver, these signals generally produced a click or thump, which were audible but made distinguishing dots from dashes difficult.\nIn 1905, the Canadian inventor Reginald Fessenden came up with the idea of using two Alexanderson alternators operating at closely spaced frequencies to broadcast two signals, instead of one. The receiver would then receive both signals, and as part of the detection process, only the beat frequency would exit the receiver. By selecting two carriers close enough that the beat frequency was audible, the resulting Morse code could once again be easily heard even in simple receivers. For instance, if the two alternators operated at frequencies 3\u00a0kHz apart, the output in the headphones would be dots or dashes of 3\u00a0kHz tone, making them easily audible.\nFessenden coined the term \"heterodyne\", meaning \"generated by a difference\" (in frequency), to describe this system. The word is derived from the Greek roots \"hetero-\" \"different\", and \"-dyne\" \"power\".\nRegeneration.\nMorse code was widely used in the early days of radio because it was both easy to produce and easy to receive. In contrast to voice broadcasts, the output of the amplifier didn't have to closely match the modulation of the original signal. As a result, any number of simple amplification systems could be used. One method used an interesting side-effect of early triode amplifier tubes. If both the plate (anode) and grid were connected to resonant circuits tuned to the same frequency and the stage gain was much higher than unity, stray capacitive coupling between the grid and the plate would cause the amplifier to go into oscillation.\nIn 1913, Edwin Howard Armstrong described a receiver system that used this effect to produce audible Morse code output using a single triode. The output of the amplifier taken at the anode was connected back to the input through a \"tickler\", causing feedback that drove input signals well beyond unity. This caused the output to oscillate at a chosen frequency with great amplification. When the original signal cut off at the end of the dot or dash, the oscillation decayed and the sound disappeared after a short delay.\nArmstrong referred to this concept as a regenerative receiver, and it immediately became one of the most widely used systems of its era. Many radio systems of the 1920s were based on the regenerative principle, and it continued to be used in specialized roles into the 1940s, for instance in the IFF Mark II.\nRadio direction finding.\nThere was one role where the regenerative system was not suitable, even for Morse code sources, and that was the task of radio direction finding, RDF.\nThe regenerative system was highly non-linear, amplifying any signal above a certain threshold by a huge amount, sometimes so large it caused it to turn into a transmitter (which was the entire basis of the original IFF system). In RDF, the strength of the signal is used to determine the location of the transmitter, so one requires linear amplification to allow the strength of the original signal, often very weak, to be accurately measured.\nTo address this need, RDF systems of the era used triodes operating below unity. To get a usable signal from such a system, tens or even hundreds of triodes had to be used, connected together anode-to-grid. These amplifiers drew enormous amounts of power and required a team of maintenance engineers to keep them running. Nevertheless, the strategic value of direction finding on weak signals was so high that the British Admiralty felt the high cost was justified.\nHistory.\nConceptualisation.\nAlthough a number of researchers discovered the superheterodyne concept, filing patents only months apart, American engineer Edwin Armstrong is often credited with the concept. He came across it while considering better ways to produce RDF receivers. He had concluded that moving to higher \"short wave\" frequencies would make RDF more useful and was looking for practical means to build a linear amplifier for these signals. At the time, short wave was anything above about 500\u00a0kHz, beyond any existing amplifier's capabilities.\nIt had been noticed that when a regenerative receiver went into oscillation, other nearby receivers would start picking up other stations as well. Armstrong (and others) eventually deduced that this was caused by a \"supersonic heterodyne\" between the station's carrier frequency and the regenerative receiver's oscillation frequency. When the first receiver began to oscillate at high outputs, its signal would flow back out through the antenna to be received on any nearby receiver. On that receiver, the two signals mixed just as they did in the original heterodyne concept, producing an output that is the difference in frequency between the two signals.\nFor instance, consider a lone receiver that was tuned to a station at 300\u00a0kHz. If a second receiver is set up nearby and set to 400\u00a0kHz with high gain, it will begin to give off a 400\u00a0kHz signal that will be received in the first receiver. In that receiver, the two signals will mix to produce four outputs, one at the original 300\u00a0kHz, another at the received 400\u00a0kHz, and two more, the difference at 100\u00a0kHz and the sum at 700\u00a0kHz. This is the same effect that Fessenden had proposed, but in his system the two frequencies were deliberately chosen so the beat frequency was audible. In this case, all of the frequencies are well beyond the audible range, and thus \"supersonic\", giving rise to the name superheterodyne.\nArmstrong realized that this effect was a potential solution to the \"short wave\" amplification problem, as the \"difference\" output still retained its original modulation, but on a lower carrier frequency. In the example above, one can amplify the 100\u00a0kHz beat signal and retrieve the original information from that, the receiver does not have to tune in the higher 300\u00a0kHz original carrier. By selecting an appropriate set of frequencies, even very high-frequency signals could be \"reduced\" to a frequency that could be amplified by existing systems.\nFor instance, to receive a signal at 1500\u00a0kHz, far beyond the range of efficient amplification at the time, one could set up an oscillator at, for example, 1560\u00a0kHz. Armstrong referred to this as the \"local oscillator\" or LO. As its signal was being fed into a second receiver in the same device, it did not have to be powerful, generating only enough signal to be roughly similar in strength to that of the received station, although in practice LOs tend to be relatively strong signals. When the signal from the LO mixes with the station's, one of the outputs will be the heterodyne difference frequency, in this case, 60\u00a0kHz. He termed this resulting difference the \"intermediate frequency\" often abbreviated to \"IF\".\nIn December 1919, Major E. H. Armstrong gave publicity to an indirect method of obtaining short-wave amplification, called the super-heterodyne. The idea is to reduce the incoming frequency, which may be, for example 1,500,000 cycles (200 meters), to some suitable super-audible frequency that can be amplified efficiently, then passing this current through an intermediate frequency amplifier, and finally rectifying and carrying on to one or two stages of audio frequency amplification.\nThe \"trick\" to the superheterodyne is that by changing the LO frequency you can tune in different stations. For instance, to receive a signal at 1300\u00a0kHz, one could tune the LO to 1360\u00a0kHz, resulting in the same 60\u00a0kHz IF. This means the amplifier section can be tuned to operate at a single frequency, the design IF, which is much easier to do efficiently.\nDevelopment.\nArmstrong put his ideas into practice, and the technique was soon adopted by the military. It was less popular when commercial radio broadcasting began in the 1920s, mostly due to the need for an extra tube (for the oscillator), the generally higher cost of the receiver, and the level of skill required to operate it. For early domestic radios, tuned radio frequency receivers (TRF) were more popular because they were cheaper, easier for a non-technical owner to use, and less costly to operate. Armstrong eventually sold his superheterodyne patent to Westinghouse, which then sold it to Radio Corporation of America (RCA), the latter monopolizing the market for superheterodyne receivers until 1930.\nBecause the original motivation for the superhet was the difficulty of using the triode amplifier at high frequencies, there was an advantage in using a lower intermediate frequency. During this era, many receivers used an IF frequency of only 30\u00a0kHz. These low IF frequencies, often using IF transformers based on the self-resonance of iron-core transformers, had poor image frequency rejection, but overcame the difficulty in using triodes at radio frequencies in a manner that competed favorably with the less robust neutrodyne TRF receiver. Higher IF frequencies (455\u00a0kHz was a common standard) came into use in later years, after the invention of the tetrode and pentode as amplifying tubes, largely solving the problem of image rejection. Even later, however, low IF frequencies (typically 60\u00a0kHz) were again used in the \"second\" (or third) IF stage of double or triple-conversion communications receivers to take advantage of the selectivity more easily achieved at lower IF frequencies, with image-rejection accomplished in the earlier IF stage(s) which were at a higher IF frequency.\nIn the 1920s, at these low frequencies, commercial IF filters looked very similar to 1920s audio interstage coupling transformers, had similar construction, and were wired up in an almost identical manner, so they were referred to as \"IF transformers\". By the mid-1930s, superheterodynes using much higher intermediate frequencies (typically around 440\u2013470\u00a0kHz) used tuned transformers more similar to other RF applications. The name \"IF transformer\" was retained, however, now meaning \"intermediate frequency\". Modern receivers typically use a mixture of ceramic resonators or surface acoustic wave resonators and traditional tuned-inductor IF transformers.\nBy the 1930s, improvements in vacuum tube technology rapidly eroded the TRF receiver's cost advantages, and the explosion in the number of broadcasting stations created a demand for cheaper, higher-performance receivers.\nThe introduction of an additional grid in a vacuum tube, but before the more modern screen-grid tetrode, included the tetrode with two control grids; this tube combined the mixer and oscillator functions, first used in the so-called autodyne mixer. This was rapidly followed by the introduction of tubes specifically designed for superheterodyne operation, most notably the pentagrid converter. By reducing the tube count (with each tube stage being the main factor affecting cost in this era), this further reduced the advantage of TRF and regenerative receiver designs.\nBy the mid-1930s, commercial production of TRF receivers was largely replaced by superheterodyne receivers. By the 1940s, the vacuum-tube superheterodyne AM broadcast receiver was refined into a cheap-to-manufacture design called the \"All American Five\" because it used five vacuum tubes: usually a converter (mixer/local oscillator), an IF amplifier, a detector/audio amplifier, audio power amplifier, and a rectifier. Since this time, the superheterodyne design was used for almost all commercial radio and TV receivers.\nPatent battles.\nFrench engineer Lucien L\u00e9vy filed a patent application for the superheterodyne principle in August 1917 with brevet n\u00b0 493660. Armstrong also filed his patent in 1917. Levy filed his original disclosure about seven months before Armstrong's.\nGerman inventor Walter H. Schottky also filed a patent in 1918.\nAt first the US recognised Armstrong as the inventor, and his US Patent 1,342,885 was issued on 8 June 1920. After various changes and court hearings L\u00e9vy was awarded US patent No 1,734,938 that included seven of the nine claims in Armstrong's application, while the two remaining claims were granted to Alexanderson of GE and Kendall of AT&amp;T.\nPrinciple of operation.\nThe antenna collects the radio signal. The tuned RF stage with optional RF amplifier provides some initial selectivity; it is necessary to suppress the \"image frequency\", and may also serve to prevent strong out-of-passband signals from saturating the initial amplifier. A local oscillator provides the mixing frequency; it is usually a variable frequency oscillator which is used to tune the receiver to different stations. The frequency mixer does the actual heterodyning that gives the superheterodyne its name; it changes the incoming radio frequency signal to a higher or lower, fixed, intermediate frequency (IF). The IF band-pass filter and amplifier supply most of the gain and the narrowband filtering for the radio. The demodulator extracts the audio or other modulation from the IF radio frequency. The extracted signal is then amplified by the audio amplifier.\nCircuit description.\nTo receive a radio signal, a suitable antenna is required. The output of the antenna may be very small, often only a few microvolts. The signal from the antenna is tuned and may be amplified in a so-called radio frequency (RF) amplifier, although this stage is often omitted. One or more tuned circuits at this stage block frequencies that are far removed from the intended reception frequency. To tune the receiver to a particular station, the frequency of the local oscillator is controlled by the tuning knob (for instance). Tuning of the local oscillator and the RF stage may use a variable capacitor, or varicap diode. The tuning of one (or more) tuned circuits in the RF stage must track the tuning of the local oscillator.\nLocal oscillator and mixer.\nThe signal is then fed into a circuit where it is mixed with a sine wave from a variable frequency oscillator known as the local oscillator (LO). The mixer uses a non-linear component to produce both sum and difference beat frequency signals, each one containing the modulation in the desired signal. The output of the mixer may include the original RF signal at \"f\"RF, the local oscillator signal at \"f\"LO, and the two new heterodyne frequencies \"f\"RF\u00a0+\u00a0\"f\"LO and \"f\"RF\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"f\"LO. The mixer may inadvertently produce additional frequencies such as third- and higher-order intermodulation products. Ideally, the IF bandpass filter removes all but the desired IF signal at \"f\"IF. The IF signal contains the original modulation (transmitted information) that the received radio signal had at \"f\"RF.\nThe frequency of the local oscillator \"f\"LO is set so the desired reception radio frequency \"f\"RF mixes to \"f\"IF. There are two choices for the local oscillator frequency because of the correspondence between positive and negative frequencies. If the local oscillator frequency is less than the desired reception frequency, it is called \"low-side injection\" (\"f\"IF = \"f\"RF \u2212 \"f\"LO); if the local oscillator is higher, then it is called \"high-side injection\" (\"f\"IF = \"f\"LO \u2212 \"f\"RF).\nThe mixer will process not only the desired input signal at fRF, but also all signals present at its inputs. There will be many mixer products (heterodynes). Most other signals produced by the mixer (such as due to stations at nearby frequencies) can be filtered out in the IF tuned amplifier; that gives the superheterodyne receiver its superior performance. However, if \"f\"LO is set to \"f\"RF\u00a0+\u00a0\"f\"IF, then an incoming radio signal at \"f\"LO\u00a0+\u00a0\"f\"IF will \"also\" produce a heterodyne at \"f\"IF; the frequency \"f\"LO\u00a0+\u00a0\"f\"IF is called the \"image frequency\" and must be rejected by the tuned circuits in the RF stage. The image frequency is 2\u00a0\"f\"IF higher (or lower) than the desired frequency \"f\"RF, so employing a higher IF frequency \"f\"IF increases the receiver's \"image rejection\" without requiring additional selectivity in the RF stage.\nTo suppress the unwanted image, the tuning of the RF stage and the LO may need to \"track\" each other. In some cases, a narrow-band receiver can have a fixed tuned RF amplifier. In that case, only the local oscillator frequency is changed. In most cases, a receiver's input band is wider than its IF center frequency. For example, a typical AM broadcast band receiver covers 510\u00a0kHz to 1655\u00a0kHz (a roughly 1160\u00a0kHz input band) with a 455\u00a0kHz IF frequency; an FM broadcast band receiver covers 88\u00a0MHz to 108\u00a0MHz band with a 10.7\u00a0MHz IF frequency. In that situation, the RF amplifier must be tuned so the IF amplifier does not see two stations at the same time. If the AM broadcast band receiver LO were set at 1200\u00a0kHz, it would see stations at both 745\u00a0kHz (1200\u2212455\u00a0kHz) and 1655\u00a0kHz. Consequently, the RF stage must be designed so that any stations that are twice the IF frequency away are significantly attenuated. The tracking can be done with a multi-section variable capacitor or some varactors driven by a common control voltage. An RF amplifier may have tuned circuits at both its input and its output, so three or more tuned circuits may be tracked. In practice, the RF and LO frequencies need to track closely but not perfectly.\nIn the days of tube (valve) electronics, it was common for superheterodyne receivers to combine the functions of the local oscillator and the mixer in a single tube, leading to a savings in power, size, and especially cost. A single pentagrid converter tube would oscillate and also provide signal amplification as well as frequency mixing.\nThe mixer tube or transistor is sometimes called the \"first detector\", while the demodulator that extracts the modulation from the IF signal is called the \"second detector\". In a dual-conversion superhet there are two mixers, so the demodulator is called the \"third detector\".\nIF amplifier.\nThe stages of an intermediate frequency amplifier (\"IF amplifier\" or \"IF strip\") are tuned to a fixed frequency that does not change as the receiving frequency changes. The fixed frequency simplifies optimization of the IF amplifier. The IF amplifier is selective around its center frequency \"f\"IF. The fixed center frequency allows the stages of the IF amplifier to be carefully tuned for best performance (this tuning is called \"aligning\" the IF amplifier). If the center frequency changed with the receiving frequency, then the IF stages would have had to track their tuning. That is not the case with the superheterodyne.\nNormally, the IF center frequency \"f\"IF is chosen to be less than the range of desired reception frequencies \"f\"RF. That is because it is easier and less expensive to get high selectivity at a lower frequency using tuned circuits. The bandwidth of a tuned circuit with a certain Q is proportional to the frequency itself (and what's more, a higher Q is achievable at lower frequencies), so fewer IF filter stages are required to achieve the same selectivity. Also, it is easier and less expensive to get high gain at a lower frequencies.\nHowever, in many modern receivers designed for reception over a wide frequency range (e.g. scanners and spectrum analyzers) a first IF frequency \"higher\" than the reception frequency is employed in a double conversion configuration. For instance, the Rohde &amp; Schwarz EK-070 VLF/HF receiver covers 10\u00a0kHz to 30\u00a0MHz. It has a band switched RF filter and mixes the input to a first IF of 81.4\u00a0MHz and a second IF frequency of 1.4\u00a0MHz. The first LO frequency is 81.4 to 111.4\u00a0MHz, a reasonable range for an oscillator. But if the original RF range of the receiver were to be converted \"directly\" to the 1.4\u00a0MHz intermediate frequency, the LO frequency would need to cover 1.4-31.4\u00a0MHz which cannot be accomplished using tuned circuits (a variable capacitor with a fixed inductor would need a capacitance range of 500:1). Image rejection is never an issue with such a high IF frequency. The first IF stage uses a crystal filter with a 12\u00a0kHz bandwidth. There is a second frequency conversion (making a triple-conversion receiver) that mixes the 81.4\u00a0MHz first IF with 80\u00a0MHz to create a 1.4\u00a0MHz second IF. Image rejection for the second IF is not an issue as the first IF has a bandwidth of much less than 2.8\u00a0MHz.\nTo avoid interference to receivers, licensing authorities will avoid assigning common IF frequencies to transmitting stations. Standard intermediate frequencies used are 455\u00a0kHz for medium-wave AM radio, 10.7\u00a0MHz for broadcast FM receivers, 38.9\u00a0MHz (Europe) or 45\u00a0MHz (US) for television, and 70\u00a0MHz for satellite and terrestrial microwave equipment. To avoid tooling costs associated with these components, most manufacturers then tended to design their receivers around a fixed range of frequencies offered, which resulted in a worldwide \"de facto\" standardization of intermediate frequencies.\nIn early superhets, the IF stage was often a regenerative stage providing the sensitivity and selectivity with fewer components. Such superhets were called super-gainers or regenerodynes. This is also called a Q multiplier, involving a small modification to an existing receiver especially for the purpose of increasing selectivity.\nIF bandpass filter.\nThe IF stage includes a filter and/or multiple tuned circuits to achieve the desired selectivity. This filtering must have a band pass equal to or less than the frequency spacing between adjacent broadcast channels. Ideally a filter would have a high attenuation to adjacent channels, but maintain a flat response across the desired signal spectrum in order to retain the quality of the received signal. This may be obtained using one or more dual tuned IF transformers, a quartz crystal filter, or a multipole ceramic crystal filter.\nIn the case of television receivers, no other technique was able to produce the precise bandpass characteristic needed for vestigial sideband reception, such as that used in the NTSC system first approved by the US in 1941. By the 1980s, multi-component capacitor-inductor filters had been replaced with precision electromechanical surface acoustic wave (SAW) filters. Fabricated by precision laser milling techniques, SAW filters are cheaper to produce, can be made to extremely close tolerances, and are very stable in operation.\nDemodulator.\nThe received signal is now processed by the demodulator stage where the audio signal (or other baseband signal) is recovered and then further amplified. AM demodulation requires envelope detection, which can be achieved by means of rectification and a low-pass filter (which can be as simple as an RC circuit) to remove remnants of the intermediate frequency. FM signals may be detected using a discriminator, ratio detector, or phase-locked loop. Continuous wave and single sideband signals require a product detector using a so-called beat frequency oscillator, and there are other techniques used for different types of modulation. The resulting audio signal (for instance) is then amplified and drives a loudspeaker.\nWhen so-called high-side injection has been used, where the local oscillator is at a \"higher\" frequency than the received signal (as is common), then the frequency spectrum of the original signal will be reversed. This must be taken into account by the demodulator (and in the IF filtering) in the case of certain types of modulation such as single sideband.\nMultiple conversion.\nTo overcome obstacles such as image response, some receivers use multiple successive stages of frequency conversion and multiple IFs of different values. A receiver with two frequency conversions and IFs is called a \"dual conversion superheterodyne\", and one with three IFs is called a \"triple conversion superheterodyne\".\nThe main reason that this is done is that with a single IF there is a tradeoff between low image response and selectivity. The separation between the received frequency and the image frequency is equal to twice the IF frequency, so the higher the IF, the easier it is to design an RF filter to remove the image frequency from the input and achieve low image response. However, the higher the IF, the more difficult it is to achieve high selectivity in the IF filter. At shortwave frequencies and above, the difficulty in obtaining sufficient selectivity in the tuning with the high IFs needed for low image response impacts performance. To solve this problem two IF frequencies can be used, first converting the input frequency to a high IF to achieve low image response, and then converting this frequency to a low IF to achieve good selectivity in the second IF filter. To improve tuning, a third IF can be used.\nFor example, for a receiver that can tune from 500\u00a0kHz to 30\u00a0MHz, three frequency converters might be used. With a 455\u00a0kHz IF it is easy to get adequate front end selectivity with broadcast band (under 1600\u00a0kHz) signals. For example, if the station being received is on 600\u00a0kHz, the local oscillator can be set to 1055 kHz, giving an image on (-600+1055=) 455\u00a0kHz. But a station on 1510\u00a0kHz could also potentially produce an image at (1510-1055=) 455\u00a0kHz and so cause image interference. However, because 600\u00a0kHz and 1510\u00a0kHz are so far apart, it is easy to design the front end tuning to reject the 1510\u00a0kHz frequency.\nHowever at 30\u00a0MHz, things are different. The oscillator would be set to 30.455\u00a0MHz to produce a 455\u00a0kHz IF, but a station on 30.910 would also produce a 455\u00a0kHz beat, so both stations would be heard at the same time. But it is virtually impossible to design an RF tuned circuit that can adequately discriminate between 30\u00a0MHz and 30.91\u00a0MHz, so one approach is to \"bulk downconvert\" whole sections of the shortwave bands to a lower frequency, where adequate front-end tuning is easier to arrange.\nFor example, the ranges 29\u00a0MHz to 30\u00a0MHz; 28\u00a0MHz to 29\u00a0MHz etc. might be converted down to 2\u00a0MHz to 3\u00a0MHz, there they can be tuned more conveniently. This is often done by first converting each \"block\" up to a higher frequency (typically 40\u00a0MHz) and then using a second mixer to convert it down to the 2\u00a0MHz to 3\u00a0MHz range. The 2\u00a0MHz to 3\u00a0MHz \"IF\" is basically another self-contained superheterodyne receiver, most likely with a standard IF of 455\u00a0kHz.\nModern designs.\nMicroprocessor technology allows replacing the superheterodyne receiver design by a software-defined radio architecture, where the IF processing after the initial IF filter is implemented in software. This technique is already in use in certain designs, such as very low-cost FM radios incorporated into mobile phones, since the system already has the necessary microprocessor.\nRadio transmitters may also use a mixer stage to produce an output frequency, working more or less as the reverse of a superheterodyne receiver.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nSuperheterodyne receivers have essentially replaced all previous receiver designs. The development of modern semiconductor electronics negated the advantages of designs (such as the regenerative receiver) that used fewer vacuum tubes. The superheterodyne receiver offers superior sensitivity, frequency stability and selectivity. Compared with the tuned radio frequency receiver (TRF) design, superhets offer better stability because a tuneable oscillator is more easily realized than a tuneable amplifier. Operating at a lower frequency, IF filters can give narrower passbands at the same Q factor than an equivalent RF filter. A fixed IF also allows the use of a crystal filter or similar technologies that cannot be tuned. Regenerative and super-regenerative receivers offered a high sensitivity, but often suffer from stability problems making them difficult to operate.\nAlthough the advantages of the superhet design are overwhelming, there are a few drawbacks that need to be tackled in practice.\nImage frequency (\"f\"IMAGE).\nOne major disadvantage to the superheterodyne receiver is the problem of \"image frequency\". In heterodyne receivers, an image frequency is an undesired input frequency equal to the station frequency plus (or minus) twice the intermediate frequency. The image frequency results in two stations being received at the same time, thus producing interference. Reception at the image frequency can be combated through tuning (filtering) at the antenna and RF stage of the superheterodyne receiver.\nformula_1\nFor example, an AM broadcast station at 580\u00a0kHz is tuned on a receiver with a 455\u00a0kHz IF. The local oscillator is tuned to 580 + 455 \n 1035\u00a0kHz. But a signal at 580 + 455 + 455 \n 1490\u00a0kHz is also 455\u00a0kHz away from the local oscillator; so both the desired signal and the image, when mixed with the local oscillator, will appear at the intermediate frequency. This image frequency is within the AM broadcast band. Practical receivers have a tuning stage before the converter, to greatly reduce the amplitude of image frequency signals; additionally, broadcasting stations in the same area have their frequencies assigned to avoid such images.\nThe unwanted frequency is called the \"image\" of the wanted frequency, because it is the \"mirror image\" of the desired frequency reflected about formula_2. A receiver with inadequate filtering at its input will pick up signals at two different frequencies simultaneously: the desired frequency and the image frequency. A radio reception which happens to be at the image frequency can interfere with reception of the desired signal, and noise (static) around the image frequency can decrease the receiver's signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) by up to 3dB. \nEarly Autodyne receivers typically used IFs of only 150\u00a0kHz or so. As a consequence, most Autodyne receivers required greater front-end selectivity, often involving double-tuned coils, to avoid image interference. With the later development of tubes able to amplify well at higher frequencies, higher IF frequencies came into use, reducing the problem of image interference. Typical consumer radio receivers have only a single tuned circuit in the RF stage.\nSensitivity to the image frequency can be minimized only by (1) a filter that precedes the mixer or (2) a more complex mixer circuit to suppress the image; this is rarely used. In most tunable receivers using a single IF frequency, the RF stage includes at least one tuned circuit in the RF front end whose tuning is performed in tandem with the local oscillator. In double (or triple) conversion receivers in which the first conversion uses a fixed local oscillator, this may rather be a fixed bandpass filter which accommodates the frequency range being mapped to the first IF frequency range.\nImage rejection is an important factor in choosing the intermediate frequency of a receiver. The farther apart the bandpass frequency and the image frequency are, the more the bandpass filter will attenuate any interfering image signal. Since the frequency separation between the bandpass and the image frequency is formula_3, a higher intermediate frequency improves image rejection. It may be possible to use a high enough first IF that a fixed-tuned RF stage can reject any image signals.\nThe ability of a receiver to reject interfering signals at the image frequency is measured by the image rejection ratio. This is the ratio (in decibels) of the output of the receiver from a signal at the received frequency, to its output for an equal-strength signal at the image frequency.\nLocal oscillator radiation.\nIt can be difficult to keep stray radiation from the local oscillator below the level that a nearby receiver can detect. If the receiver's local oscillator can reach the antenna it will act as a low-power CW transmitter. Consequently, what is meant to be a receiver can itself create radio interference.\nIn intelligence operations, local oscillator radiation gives a means to detect a covert receiver and its operating frequency. The method was used by MI5 during Operation RAFTER. This same technique is also used in radar detector detectors used by traffic police in jurisdictions where radar detectors are illegal.\nLocal oscillator radiation is most prominent in receivers in which the antenna signal is connected directly to the mixer (which itself receives the local oscillator signal) rather than from receivers in which an RF amplifier stage is used in between. Thus it is more of a problem with inexpensive receivers and with receivers at such high frequencies (especially microwave) where RF amplifying stages are difficult to implement.\nLocal oscillator sideband noise.\nLocal oscillators typically generate a single frequency signal that has negligible amplitude modulation but some random phase modulation which spreads some of the signal's energy into sideband frequencies. That causes a corresponding widening of the receiver's frequency response, which would defeat the aim to make a very narrow bandwidth receiver such as to receive low-rate digital signals. Care needs to be taken to minimize oscillator phase noise, usually by ensuring that the oscillator never enters a non-linear mode.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29342", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29342", "title": "SS Titanic", "text": ""}
{"id": "29344", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29344", "title": "Seventh Day Baptists", "text": "Branch of Christianity\nSeventh Day Baptists are Baptists who observe the Sabbath in the seventh day of the week, Saturday, as a holy day to God. They adopt a theology common to Baptists, profess the Bible as the only infallible rule of faith and practice, perform the baptism of believers by immersion, and believe in the autonomy of the local church. They profess a statement of faith instituted on fundamental precepts of belief. Seventh Day Baptists rest on Saturday as a sign of obedience in a covenant relationship with God and not as a condition of salvation. \nMost Christians and churches in history made Sunday their principal day of rest instead of Saturday. Nevertheless, there are countless accounts in the history of Christians who resisted that innovation and preserved the seventh day of the week as a day of rest and worship to God as instituted by God in the creation of the world, affirmed as a fourth commandment and reaffirmed in the teaching and example of Jesus and the Apostles. There are reports of Sabbath keeping in different parts of the world. In England, the first Baptists to keep the seventh day only appears in middle of the 17th century, and it was not the mainstream belief.\nSeventh Day Baptists consist of churches all over the world, with over 520 churches and at least 45,000 members. Many have constant interaction among themselves through conferences in each country and through the Seventh Day Baptist World Federation. Other groups are independent. In general, federations maintain good relations with other Baptist churches and Protestant denominations as well as establishing links with other Christian institutions and unions worldwide.\nHistory.\nEnglish Baptists date back to the early 17th century Puritan Nonconformism, in which many did not conform to the Church of England and formed other churches. Among these congregations were the Gainsborough church whose leaders were John Smyth and Thomas Helwys. In 1608, they left England in exile and went to the Netherlands. Soon, the congregation concluded that infants should not be baptized because of the lack of biblical and apostolical support. The exiled English church in Amsterdam became what is considered the first Baptist church. Two years later, Helwys expelled Smyth and returned with some of the supporters to England, reestablishing the church in London. From there, Baptist practices and teachings spread throughout the country. However, they observed the Sabbath in the first day of the week.\nMill Yard Seventh Day Baptist Church.\nThe beginning of the observance of the Sabbath on the seventh day of the week in England caused the occurrence of well-known debates on the subject to arise. These started in London, where one of the \"Seventh-Day Men\", a tailor and self-taught Bible student called Hamlet Jackson, converted a Minister couple, John &amp; Dorothy Traske, to the observance of the seventh day (Saturday). In 1614, John Traske ordained Hamlet and three other Seventh-Day Men to proclaim their discoveries and anoint the sick. In 1616 John and Dorothy were arrested but Hamlet's Ministry was able to establish the Mill Yard Seventh Day Baptist Church in London in 1617. \nJohn Traske was accused of writing two scandalous letters to the king and sentenced by the authorities to prison on 19 June 1618, for \"\u2026aspiring to be the leader of a Jewish faction\". After a year in prison, John Traske recanted, was released and tried to divert his followers from this and other doctrines he preached. However, Dorothy Traske did not deny her convictions and remained in prison for 25 years. After these, other groups also kept and declared Sabbath observance, which led to retaliation by the political and ecclesiastical authorities of the time such as when Theophilus Brabourne was imprisoned for 18 months and threatened with the loss of his ears for publishing his \"Discourse on the Sabbath\" in 1628. \nWhen Christmas, Easter and Pentecost were banned in 1643/4 leading to a number of riots, a variety of \"Independent\" churches sprang up supporting the Seventh-Day Baptists' right to dissent. Then in 1645 Henry Jessey converted into a Seventh Day Baptist arguing in 1647 that the seventh-day was \"[Christ's] Sabbath which he blessed and sanctified\". Subsequently the new Independent churches began to be tolerated and enjoyed relative religious and political freedom from 1649 under the republican rule of the Commonwealth of England. With this newfound freedom, England's first Seventh Day Baptist Church became secure. In 1650, Brabourne's pupil, James Ockford, published in London the book \"The Doctrine of the Fourth Commandment, Deformed by Popery, Reformed &amp; Restored to its Primitive Purity\", which was the first writings of a Baptist defending Seventh-day Sabbath observance, when the overwhelming majority of Baptists in England observed the Sabbath on Sunday. The book generated such a nuisance that the mayor of Salisbury, the city where Ockford lived, asked the president of Parliament for guidance on how to handle the work; a parliamentary committee determined that all copies should be burned without giving the opportunity for James Ockford to defend them. Only one copy has escaped, kept today in a library in Oxford.\nThe first official Seventh Day Baptist service in London took place at the Mill Yard Church in 1651, led by Peter Chamberlen. M.D. \"the Third\". The first records of church activities were destroyed in a fire; the second record book is in possession of the Seventh Day Baptist Historical Library and Archives and begins in 1673. The first pastor to be officially considered responsible for the congregation was William Saller, who among other activities, wrote eleven books and a booklet, in addition to an appeal to magistrates reporting concern over laws imposing rest on Sunday. The local church continues its activities to this day under the name of Mill Yard Seventh Day Baptist Church.\nThere were matters among the Seventh Day Baptists that were discussed in addition to the uniform agreement of the Sabbath, among them the general propitiation. Most Baptists were \"General Baptists\" and believed in a general propitiation. Certainly in 1710 when it attracted John Maulden (d. 1714) the Millyard Church was a Seventh-day Arminian Baptist Church. However, some Seventh Day Baptists were influenced by Calvinist doctrine and believed in predestination, in which salvation is limited to the elect, the rest being predestined to condemnation, which is why they were called \"private Baptists\". This difference does not appear to have prevented fellowship among Seventh Day Baptists in the beginning. However, it generated greater discomfort from the 17th century onwards. Today, Seventh Day Baptist churches still continue to leave this issue open, with no direct mention in their declaration of faith or other official church document.\nUnder the Restoration.\nIn 1660 with the end of the republican government and the restoration of the monarchy in England, relative religious freedom was again restricted mainly to English Dissidents, forcing Seventh Day Baptists to increasingly unite in specific locations. Edward Stennett wrote in 1668 for Seventh Day Baptists in Newport in the American Colony of Rhode Island that there were in England approximately nine or ten churches that observed the Sabbath in Saturday.\nThe minister and master at Oxford, Francis Bampfield, and his brother Thomas Bampfield, were also prominent Seventh Day Baptists. Francis founded the Pinner's Hall Seventh Day Baptist Church in London in 1676. He was one of the first to propose an association that encompassed England's seventh day Baptist churches and their colonies in North America, technical best biblical instruction for children and ministers, as well as strategies for method conversion.\nSeventh Day Baptist individuals and groups continue to appear in Britain; however, they did not achieve much growth compared to North America. Between the mid-17th century and 1910, Don A. Sanford lists between five and sixteen congregations that existed in the United Kingdom: three in London, one in Colchester and Braintree and others that existed from Norfolk to Dorsetshire and Gloucestershire. The UK currently has very few Seventh Day Baptist Churches, largely the result of missionary work at the Jamaica Seventh Day Baptist Conference.\nUnited States.\nThe first immigration to the British colonies in North America occurred for political, religious, economic and social reasons. The organization of the American colonies conferred more religious freedom than in the territory of the British Isles, which provided the development and solidification of different Protestant groups and churches. The first to be recognized as a Seventh Day Baptist in the Americas was Stephen Mumford and his wife Anne, who were from the Baptist Church of Tewkesbury and personally observed the Sabbath in Saturday. The Mumfords emigrated to the American colonies in 1664, but little is known about their lives in England.\nAfter some adamant opposition by some Baptists to the Sabbath rest on Sunday of the First Baptist Church of the Colony of Rhode Island (located in Newport), about five to fifty Baptists who kept the Seventh-day Sabbath left the church, united with the Mumford couple and founded on 3 January 1672, Newport, Rhode Island Seventh Day Baptist Church, which was the first Seventh Day Baptist church in the Americas. The services took place in a building in Green End (address) but it grew small with the growth of the church, land was then purchased on Barney Street and the new temple built in 1730. With this, Newport became a center in which they expanded to other American colonies. A few years later two other important churches were established in the early 18th century, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Piscataway, New Jersey. By 1776, there were a few hundred members and twelve churches established in the Americas, including two governors of the Colony Rhode Island: Richard Ward and Samuel Ward. Over time, the seventh day Baptists expanded, following the development of the colonies.\nThe course of expanding the Seventh Day Baptist churches and increasing the territorial distance between them culminated in the organization of a General Conference. At the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the following century, annual meetings and assemblies were taking place between some churches to share unity and the Lord's Supper. On 11 September 1801, at an annual meeting of some churches in Hopkinton, Rhode Island, Henry Clarke of Brookfield, New York, proposed \"the union in an institution with the purpose of propagating our religion in different parts of the United States, sending missionaries from various churches, at their own expense\". In September 1802, the majority of the eight Seventh Day Baptist churches voted in favor of the proposal, with the result that the General Conference was founded. The service conference for carrying out missionary works, promoting unity and a great growth in the number of members and locations. It continues its activities until today, obtained the union with the seventh day Baptist churches of Canada, passing the nomination to the https://. Undertook most of the mission fields of the Seventh Day Baptists and through these they were instituting and spreading the churches and conferences in several other countries of the world. Currently, the conference is member of the Baptist World Alliance. \nThe church was committed to education, but they encountered many difficulties. As the church grew, they managed to found some educational institutions. Alfred University started as a college in 1836 in Alfred, New York, by the Seventh Day Baptists, being elevated to the academy in 1842. Motivated to organize a theological seminary, they worked to obtain a university license. In 1857 they finally obtained a license and the Department of Theology was created at the then Alfred University. \nIn 1857 the Seventh Day Baptist Church finally obtained a license and the Department of Theology was created at the then Alfred University. The former Milton College began operating as a school in 1844, being incorporated into the Wisconsin legislature in 1848 as Academy DuLac, offering high school courses concurrently with Higher Education. The academy progressed to the point of becoming a college in 1867. The college had clear connections with the USA's Seventh Day Baptist Church that offered operational support.\nA school was founded in Salem, West Virginia, after the Eastern Seventh Day Baptist Association decided to build an academy in the area. The state granted a permit in December 1888 to build what was called the Academy of Salem, specifying that the institution was subject to the regulations and decisions of the Society of Seventh Day Baptist Education. The charter required the institution to make a college as soon as possible, which occurred in 1890. Until 1992, a close relationship between Seventh Day Baptists and the Salem University still existed.\nIt is not the case that the Seventh-day Adventists (SDAs), established in 1863, are a \"splinter group\" of the Seventh Day Baptist, at least not in the sense that they broke away from their church and formed the SDAs. But there was a connection and an influence. Rachel Oakes Preston (1809\u20131868) a Seventh Day Baptist from Verona, New York, brought Seventh Day teaching to a small Millerite group that became the SDAs in Washington, New Hampshire. Through her influence, Frederick Wheeler became the first SDA preacher. One family, the Cottrells, looked favorably upon William Miller's Second Advent message but did not join the movement prior to 1844 because it did not acknowledge the seventh-day Sabbath. After a group of Adventists accepted the Sabbath, the Cottrells joined them. Later on, in the 1860s and '70s, the leadership of the two organizations associated with each other. They recognized their common interest in promoting Sabbath observance. Adventist pioneer James Springer White went so far as to advise Adventist preachers not to conduct evangelistic campaigns in the small towns with a Seventh Day Baptist presence.\nBy 2017, Seventh Day Baptists had 81 churches including those located in the U.S. and Canada. Seventh Day Baptist churches are present in all regions of the United States, with a greater presence in the Northeast and Southern regions of the United States.\nStatement of Belief.\nSeventh Day Baptists consider liberty of thought under the guidance of the Holy Spirit to be essential to Christian belief and practice. Therefore we encourage the unhindered study and open discussion of Scripture. We uphold the individual\u2019s freedom of conscience in seeking to determine and obey the will of God. The following statement is not intended to be exhaustive, but is an expression of our common belief, which is derived from our understanding of Scripture (2 Corinthians 3:17\u201318; 2 Timothy 2:15; Romans 12:2; Ephesians 4:3\u20136, 15; Romans 10:17; 2 Timothy 3:16\u201317).\nGod\nWe believe in one God, infinite and perfect, the Creator and Sustainer of the universe who exists eternally in three persons\u2014Father, Son, and Holy Spirit\u2014and desires to share His love in a personal relationship with everyone (1 Timothy 1:17; Deuteronomy 6:4; 1 Kings 8:27; 1 John 1:5; Genesis 1:1-2; Acts 17:24-25, 28; Psalm 90:1-2; Matthew 28:19; John 3:16; Isaiah 57:15; 2 Peter 3:9).\nThe Father\nWe believe in God the Father, who is sovereign over all, and is loving and just as He forgives the repentant and condemns the unrepentant (1 Corinthians 8:6; Ephesians 4:6; Ezekiel 33:11; 2 Thessalonians 1:6-8; John 5:24; John 3:16-18).\nThe Son\nWe believe in God the Son, who became incarnate in Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. He gave Himself on the cross as the complete and final sacrifice for sin. As our Risen Lord, He is the mediator between God the Father and mankind. We believe that Jesus Christ, in keeping with His promise, will return suddenly, personally and visibly, at a time known only by God (John 1:34; Hebrews 1:3; John 1:14-18; Romans 1:3-4; 1 John 3:16; 1 Peter 2:24; Hebrews 10:10-14; 1 Corinthians 15:20-21; 1 Timothy 2:5; John 14:6; 1 John 2:1-2; Mark 13:32-33; Revelation 22:7, 12, 20).\nThe Holy Spirit\nWe believe in God the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, who gives spiritual birth to believers, lives within them, and empowers them for witnessing and service. We believe the Holy Spirit inspired the Scriptures, convicts of sin and instructs in righteousness (John 14:16; 3:5-8; 14:17; Romans 5:5; 1 Corinthians 12:4-7; 2 Peter 1:20-21; John 16:7-11).\nThe Bible\nWe believe that the Bible is the inspired Word of God and is our final authority in matters of faith and practice. We believe that Jesus Christ, in His life and teachings as recorded in the Bible, is the supreme interpreter of God\u2019s will for mankind (2 Peter 1:20-21; Romans 3:2; 2 Peter 3:1-2, 15-16; 2 Timothy 3:14-17; Matthew 5:17-19; Psalm 119:105; John 20:30-31; Hebrews 1:1-2).\nMankind\nWe believe that mankind was created in the image of God and is therefore the noblest work of creation. We believe that human beings have moral responsibility and are created to enjoy both divine and human fellowship as children of God (Genesis 1:26-27; Psalm 8:3-9; Micah 6:8; Matthew 5:44-48; 1 John 1:3; John 1:12).\nSin and Salvation\nWe believe that sin is disobedience to God and failure to live according to His will. Because of sin all people have separated themselves from God. We believe that because we are sinners, we are in need of a Savior. We believe that salvation from sin and death is the gift of God by redeeming love accomplished by Christ\u2019s death and resurrection, and is received only by repentance and faith in Him. We believe that all who repent of their sin and receive Christ as Savior will not be punished at the final judgment but enjoy eternal life (1 John 3:4-5; Romans 3:23-25; Isaiah 59:2; 1 John 1:8-10; Romans 5:6-8; Romans 6:23; Hebrews 10:10-14; 1 Peter 1:3; John 3:16-18, 36; Ephesians 2:8-9; John 14:6; Matthew 25:41-46; Romans 5:10).\nEternal Life\nWe believe that Jesus rose from the dead and lives eternally with the Father, and that He will come again with power and great glory. We believe that eternal life begins in knowing God through a commitment to Jesus Christ. We believe that because He died and lives again, resurrection with spiritual and imperishable bodies is the gift of God to believers (1 Corinthians 15:3-4, 20-23; John 14:1-3; Matthew 24:30; Titus 2:13; John 17:3; 1 John 5:11-13; 1 Corinthians 15:42-44; John 10:27-28; John 6:40).\nThe Church\nWe believe that the church of God is all believers gathered by the Holy Spirit and joined into one body, of which Christ is the Head. We believe that the local church is a community of believers organized in covenant relationship for worship, fellowship and service, practicing and proclaiming common convictions, while growing in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We believe in the priesthood of all believers and practice the autonomy of the local congregation, as we seek to work in association with others for more effective witness (Acts 20:28; 1 Corinthians 12:13, 14, 27; Romans 12:4-5; Colossians 1:18; Acts 2:42; Ephesians 2:19-22; Romans 15:5-7; Ephesians 4:11-16; 2 Peter 3:18; 1 Peter 2:4-10; Matthew 18:20; Hebrews 10:24-25).\nBaptism\nWe believe that baptism of believers in obedience to Christ\u2019s command is a witness to the acceptance of Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord. We believe in baptism by immersion as a symbol of death to sin, a pledge to a new life in Him (Romans 6:3-4; Matthew 28:19-20; Acts 2:41; Colossians 2:12; Romans 6:11; Galatians 3:26-27).\nThe Lord\u2019s Supper\nWe believe that the Lord\u2019s Supper commemorates the suffering and death of our Redeemer until He comes, and is a symbol of union in Christ and a pledge of renewed allegiance to our risen Lord (Mark 14:22-25; Matthew 26:26-29; 1 Corinthians 10:16-17, 11:23-30).\nSabbath\nWe believe that the Sabbath of the Bible, the seventh day of the week, is sacred time, a gift of God to all people, instituted at creation, affirmed in the Ten Commandments and reaffirmed in the teaching and example of Jesus and the apostles. We believe that the gift of Sabbath rest is an experience of God\u2019s eternal presence with His people. We believe that in obedience to God and in loving response to His grace in Christ, the Sabbath should be faithfully observed as a day of rest, worship, and celebration (Genesis 2:2\u20133; Exodus 16:23\u201330; Exodus 20:8\u201311; Matthew 5:17\u201319; Mark 2:27\u201328; Luke 4:16; Acts 13:14, 42\u201344; 16:11\u201313; 17:2\u20133; 18:4\u201311; Ezekiel 20:19\u201320; Hebrews 4:9\u201310; John 14:15; Isaiah 58:13\u201314; Luke 23:56).\nEvangelism\nWe believe that Jesus Christ commissions us to proclaim the Gospel, to make disciples, to baptize and to teach observance of all that He has commanded. We are called to be witnesses for Christ throughout the world and in all human relationships (Matthew 24:14; Acts 1:8; Matthew 28:18\u201320; 2 Corinthians 4:1\u20132, 5\u20136; 1 Peter 3:15; 2 Corinthians 5:17\u201320; Ephesians 6:14\u201320).\nSeventh Day Baptist World Federation.\nThe idea of a worldwide Seventh Day Baptist Association was considered by Everett Harris of the United States and Gerben Zijlstra of the Netherlands. After the exposition of the idea by both at a meeting of representatives of Baptist conferences of the seventh day, the federation was founded in 1965, by Baptist conferences of the seventh day of 11 countries, later expanding to 20 countries. \nThe https:// is a federation that brings together Seventh Day Baptist associations around the world that cooperate with the federation's purpose of providing greater communication between Seventh Day Baptists; promote projects of mutual interest that benefit from international cooperation; and encourage fellowship among Seventh Day Baptist Christians; among other purposes. According to a Seventh Day Baptist Historical Library &amp; Archives estimate published in 2017, it has 20 member denominations and 50,000 baptized members. It is conducted by elected officials who perform functions in accordance with their established constitution. Representatives meet to share unity and discuss topics relevant to Seventh Day Baptist churches."}
{"id": "29345", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29345", "title": "Shem", "text": "Biblical figure, son of Noah\nShem (; \"\u0160\u0113m\"; ) is one of the sons of Noah in the Bible (Genesis 5\u201311 and 1 Chronicles 1:4).\nThe children of Shem are Elam, Ashur, Arphaxad, Lud and Aram, in addition to unnamed daughters. Abraham, the patriarch of Jews, Christians, and Muslims, is one of the descendants of Arphaxad.\nIn medieval and early modern European tradition he was considered to be the ancestor of the peoples of Asia, and he gives his name to the title \"Semites\" formerly given to West Asian peoples.\nIslamic literature describes Shem as one of the believing sons of Noah. Some sources even identify Shem as a prophet in his own right and that he was the next prophet after his father. \nIn the Bible.\nGenesis 10.\nGenesis 10:21 refers to relative ages of Shem and his brother Japheth, but with sufficient ambiguity to have yielded different English translations. The verse is translated in the King James Version as: \"Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.\" However, the New American Standard Bible gives: \"Also to Shem, the father of all the children of Eber, and the older brother of Japheth, children were born\".\nAccording to Genesis 10:22\u201331 (\"Jewish Publication Society\" translation of 1917):\n\"22\" The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram. \"23\" And the sons of Aram: Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. \"24\" And Arpachshad begot Shelah; and Shelah begot Eber. \"25\" And unto Eber were born two sons; the name of the one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan. \"26\" And Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah; \"27\" and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah; \"28\" and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba; \"29\" and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan. \"30\" And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest toward Sephar, unto the mountain of the east. \"31\" These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations. \"32\" These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations; and of these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.\nGenesis 11.\nGenesis 11:10 records that Shem was 100 years old at the birth of Arphaxad, two years after the flood; and that he lived for another 500 years after this, making his age at death 600 years.\nExcerpts from Genesis 11:10\u201327\u2014(\"Jewish Publication Society\" translation of 1917):\n'Shem was a hundred years old, and begot Arpachshad two years after the flood. ... Arpachshad lived five and thirty years, and begot Shelah. \"13\" And Arpachshad lived after he begot Shelah ... Shelah lived thirty years, and begot Eber. ... Eber lived four and thirty years, and begot Peleg. ... Peleg lived thirty years, and begot Reu. ... Reu lived two and thirty years, and begot Serug. '... Serug lived thirty years, and begot Nahor. ... Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begot Terah. ... Terah lived seventy years, and begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran. ... and Haran begot Lot.\nIn later Jewish sources.\nThe 1st-century historian Flavius Josephus told a legendary, non-scriptural account that Shem's five sons were the progenitors of the nations of Elam, Assyria, Chaldea, Lydia, and Levantine, respectively.\nAccording to some Jewish traditions (e.g., B. Talmud Nedarim 32b; Genesis Rabbah 46:7; Genesis Rabbah 56:10; Leviticus Rabbah 25:6; Numbers Rabbah 4:8.), Shem is believed to have been Melchizedek, King of Salem, whom Abraham is recorded to have met after the Battle of the Four Kings.\nA rabbinic document that surfaced in the 17th century, claiming to be the lost Book of Jasher, provides some names not found in any other source.\nIn Islam.\nSunni Islam.\nShem is regarded by scholars to be the successor to Noah, receiving prophetic knowledge, enlightenment, and leadership of his people. Shem was also one of the people whom God had Jesus resurrect as a sign to the Children of Israel. Early Islamic historians like Ibn Ishaq and Ibn Hisham always included Shem's name in the genealogy of Muhammad.\nShi'a Islam.\nIn a Shiite tradition Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq has narrated to his companions that Jibrael visited Noah close to the time of his death, relaying God's message: \"Oh Noah! Your prophethood has expired and your days are complete, so look to the Great Name, the inheritance and effects of the knowledge of prophethood, and hand these over to your son, Sam (Shem), for I do not leave the Earth except that there is a knowledgeable one by which obedience to Me (God) can be recognized...\"\nIn Gnosticism.\nThe Paraphrase of Shem, which contains ideas unique to other Gnostic scriptures, states that Shem was the first being on Earth. Unlike traditional Sethian literature, Seth is not seen as the father of the followers of Gnosticism, rather it is Shem, who receives a divine revelation from a spiritual savior named Derkedeas. Shem later helps bring his universal teaching of secret knowledge to humanity before the forces of darkness attempt to destroy the world with a great flood.\nIn Mandaeism.\nIn Mandaean scriptures such as the Ginza Rabba and Qulasta, Shem is referred to as \"\u0160um\" (or Shum; pronounced in Modern Mandaic as \"\u0160om\" (Shom)). Shem is sometimes considered to be the progenitor of the Mandaeans and a prophet.\nFamily tree.\nThe following family tree contains information from the Hebrew Bible, without data from any other sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29346", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29346", "title": "Sambuca", "text": "Italian anise-flavored liqueur\nSambuca () is an Italian anise-flavoured liqueur. Its most common variety is often referred to as \"white sambuca\" to differentiate it from other varieties that are deep blue (\"black sambuca\") or bright red (\"red sambuca\"). Like other anise-flavoured liqueurs, the ouzo effect is sometimes observed when combined with water.\nIngredients.\nSambuca is flavoured with essential oils obtained from star anise, or less commonly, green anise. Other spices such as elderflower, liquorice and others may be included but are not required as per the legal definition. It is bottled at a minimum of 38% alc/vol. The oils are added to pure alcohol, a concentrated solution of sugar, and other flavours.\nHistory.\nThe term comes from the Latin word \"sambucus\", meaning 'elderberry'. The word \"sambuca\" was first used as the name of another elderberry liquor that was created in Civitavecchia around 1850 by Luigi Manzi.\nServing.\nSambuca may be served neat. It may also be served on the rocks or with water, resulting in the ouzo effect from the anethole in the anise. Like other anise liqueurs, it may be consumed after coffee as an (Italian: \"coffee-killer\") or added directly to coffee in place of sugar to produce a (Italian: \"corrected coffee\").\nA serving of sambuca can be a shot with seven coffee beans, representing the seven hills of Rome. Likewise, a shot with one coffee bean, called , (Italian: \"with the fly\"), is as common. The traditional serving is with three coffee beans, each representing health, happiness and prosperity. The shot may be ignited to toast the coffee beans with the flame extinguished immediately before drinking.\nSambuca is also used in cooking, in small amounts because it has a strong flavour. It is usually used in desserts and seafood recipes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29348", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29348", "title": "Saint Francis of Assisi", "text": ""}
{"id": "29349", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29349", "title": "Sweeney Todd", "text": "Fictional serial killer barber\nSweeney Todd is a fictional character who first appeared as the villain of the penny dreadful serial \"The String of Pearls\" (1846\u20131847). The original tale became a feature of 19th-century melodrama and London legend. A barber from Fleet Street, Todd murders his customers with a straight razor and gives their corpses to Mrs. Lovett, his partner in crime, who bakes their flesh into meat pies. The tale has been retold many times since in various media.\nClaims that Sweeney Todd was a historical person are disputed strongly by scholars, although possible legendary prototypes exist.\nPlot synopsis.\nIn the original version of the tale, Todd is a barber who kills his victims by pulling a lever as they sit in his barber chair. His victims fall backward through a revolving trap door into the basement of his shop, generally causing them to break their necks or skulls. In case they are alive, Todd goes to the basement and \"polishes them off\" (slitting their throats with his straight razor). In some adaptations, the murdering process is reversed, with Todd slitting his customers' throats before dispatching them into the basement through the revolving trap door. After Todd has robbed his dead victims of their goods, Mrs. Lovett, his partner in crime (in some later versions, his friend and/or lover), assists him in disposing of the bodies by baking their flesh into meat pies and selling them to the unsuspecting customers of her pie shop. Todd's barber shop is situated at 186 Fleet Street, London, next to St. Dunstan's church, and is connected to Mrs. Lovett's pie shop in nearby Bell Yard by means of an underground passage. In most versions of the story, he and Mrs. Lovett hire an unwitting orphan boy, Tobias Ragg, to serve the pies to customers.\nLiterary history.\nSweeney Todd first appeared in a story titled \"The String of Pearls: A Romance\". This penny dreadful was published in 18\u00a0weekly parts, in Edward Lloyd's magazine \"The People's Periodical and Family Library\", issues 7\u201324, published 21\u00a0November 1846 to 20\u00a0March 1847. It was probably written by James Malcolm Rymer, though Thomas Peckett Prest has also been credited with it; possibly each worked on the serial from part to part. Other attributions include Edward P. Hingston, George Macfarren, and Albert Richard Smith. During February/March 1847, before the serial was even completed, George Dibdin Pitt adapted \"The String of Pearls\" as a melodrama for the Britannia Theatre in Hoxton, east London. It was in this alternative version of the tale, rather than the original, that Todd acquired his catchphrase: \"I'll polish him off\".\nLloyd published another, lengthier, penny part serial during 1847\u20131848, with 92\u00a0episodes. It was then published in book form in 1850 as \"The String of Pearls\", subtitled \"The Barber of Fleet Street. A Domestic Romance\". This expanded version of the story was 732\u00a0pages long. A plagiarised version of this book appeared in the United States c.\u00a01852\u20131853 as \"Sweeney Todd: or the Ruffian Barber. A Tale of Terror of the Seas and the Mysteries of the City\" by \"Captain Merry\" (a pseudonym used by American author Harry Hazel, 1814\u20131889).\nIn 1865, the French novelist Paul H.C. F\u00e9val (1816\u20131887), famous as a writer of horror and crime novels and short stories, referred to what he termed \"L'Affaire de la Rue des Marmousets\" in the introductory chapter to his book \"La Vampire\".\nIn 1875, Frederick Hazleton's c.\u00a01865 dramatic adaptation \"Sweeney Todd, the Barber of Fleet Street: or the String of Pearls\" (see below) was published as volume\u00a0102 of \"Lacy's Acting Edition of Plays\".\nA scholarly, annotated edition of the original 1846\u20131847 serial was published in volume form in 2007 by the Oxford University Press with the title of \"Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street\", edited by Robert Mack.\nAlleged historical basis.\nThe original story of Sweeney Todd is from an older legend that may contain motifs from even earlier stories. Possibly the oldest reference to the story in its present form is found in the journal of the Swedish traveller Pehr Lindestr\u00f6m. In his diary, dating from the middle of the 17th century, the story is set in Calais, which is also where the author heard the story. The story includes all the details of the legend, except for the name of the character. Another version relates to a supposed 1800 narrative of events in the rue de la Harpe, Paris, which appeared in an English version in \"Tell-Tale Magazine\" (London) under the title \"A Terrific Story of the Rue de la Harpe\".\nIn Charles Dickens' \"Pickwick Papers\" (1836\u20131837), the servant Sam Weller says that a pieman used cats \"for beefsteak, veal, and kidney, 'cording to the demand\", and recommends that people should buy pies only \"when you know the lady as made it, and is quite sure it ain't kitten.\" Dickens then developed this in \"Martin Chuzzlewit\" (1843\u20131844), published two years before the appearance of Sweeney Todd in \"The String of Pearls\" (1846\u20131847), with a character named Tom Pinch who is grateful that his own \"evil genius did not lead him into the dens of any of those preparers of cannibalic pastry, who are represented in many country legends as doing a lively retail business in the metropolis\".\nClaims that Sweeney Todd was a real person were first made in the introduction to the 1850 (expanded) edition of \"The String of Pearls\" and have persisted to the present. In two books, Peter Haining argued that Sweeney Todd was a historical person who committed his crimes around 1800. Nevertheless, other researchers who have tried to verify his citations do not find anything in these sources to verify Haining's claims.\nIn literature.\nA late 1890s reference to the legend of the murderous barber can be found in the poem by the Australian bush poet Banjo Paterson, \"The Man from Ironbark\".\nIn Cozette de Charmoy's 1973 \"collage novel\", \"The True Life of Sweeney Todd\", the character appears as a politically aware figure of social satire.\nIn his 2012 novel\" Dodger\", Terry Pratchett portrays Sweeney Todd as a tragic character, having lost his mind after being exposed to the horrors of the Napoleonic Wars as a barber surgeon.\nIn performing arts.\nIn rhyming slang.\nIn rhyming slang, Sweeney Todd is the Flying Squad (a branch of the UK's Metropolitan Police), which inspired the television series \"The Sweeney\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29352", "revid": "50969279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29352", "title": "Selection sort", "text": "Sorting algorithm\nIn computer science, selection sort is an in-place comparison sorting algorithm. It has a O(\"n\"2) time complexity, which makes it inefficient on large lists, and generally performs worse than the similar insertion sort. Selection sort is noted for its simplicity and has performance advantages over more complicated algorithms in certain situations, particularly where auxiliary memory is limited.\nThe algorithm divides the input list into two parts: a sorted sublist of items which is built up from left to right at the front (left) of the list and a sublist of the remaining unsorted items that occupy the rest of the list. Initially, the sorted sublist is empty and the unsorted sublist is the entire input list. The algorithm proceeds by finding the smallest (or largest, depending on sorting order) element in the unsorted sublist, exchanging (swapping) it with the leftmost unsorted element (putting it in sorted order), and moving the sublist boundaries one element to the right. \nThe time efficiency of selection sort is quadratic, so there are a number of sorting techniques which have better time complexity than selection sort.\nExample.\nHere is an example of this sort algorithm sorting five elements:\nSelection sort can also be used on list structures that make add and remove efficient, such as a linked list. In this case it is more common to \"remove\" the minimum element from the remainder of the list, and then \"insert\" it at the end of the values sorted so far. :3 For example:\nImplementations.\nBelow is an implementation in C.\n/* a[0] to a[aLength-1] is the array to sort */\nint i,j;\nint aLength; // initialise to a's length\n/* advance the position through the entire array */\n/* (could do i &lt; aLength-1 because single element is also min element) */\nfor (i = 0; i &lt; aLength-1; i++)\n /* find the min element in the unsorted a[i .. aLength-1] */\n /* assume the min is the first element */\n int jMin = i;\n /* test against elements after i to find the smallest */\n for (j = i+1; j &lt; aLength; j++)\n /* if this element is less, then it is the new minimum */\n if (a[j] &lt; a[jMin])\n /* found new minimum; remember its index */\n jMin = j;\n if (jMin != i) \n swap(&amp;a[i], &amp;a[jMin]);\nComplexity.\nSelection sort is not difficult to analyze compared to other sorting algorithms, since none of the loops depend on the data in the array. Selecting the minimum requires scanning formula_1 elements (taking formula_2 comparisons) and then swapping it into the first position. Finding the next lowest element requires scanning the remaining formula_2 elements (taking formula_4 comparisons) and so on. Therefore, the total number of comparisons is\n formula_5\nBy arithmetic progression,\n formula_6\nwhich is of complexity formula_7 in terms of number of comparisons.\nComparison to other sorting algorithms.\nAmong quadratic sorting algorithms (sorting algorithms with a simple average-case of \u0398(\"n\"2)), selection sort almost always outperforms bubble sort and gnome sort. Insertion sort is very similar in that after the \"k\"th iteration, the first formula_8 elements in the array are in sorted order. Insertion sort's advantage is that it only scans as many elements as it needs in order to place the formula_9st element, while selection sort must scan all remaining elements to find the formula_9st element.\nSimple calculation shows that insertion sort will therefore usually perform about half as many comparisons as selection sort, although it can perform just as many or far fewer depending on the order the array was in prior to sorting. It can be seen as an advantage for some real-time applications that selection sort will perform identically regardless of the order of the array, while insertion sort's running time can vary considerably. However, this is more often an advantage for insertion sort in that it runs much more efficiently if the array is already sorted or \"close to sorted.\"\nWhile selection sort is preferable to insertion sort in terms of number of writes (formula_2 swaps versus up to formula_12 swaps, with each swap being two writes), this is roughly twice the theoretical minimum achieved by cycle sort, which performs at most \"n\" writes. This can be important if writes are significantly more expensive than reads, such as with EEPROM or Flash memory, where every write lessens the lifespan of the memory.\nSelection sort can be implemented without unpredictable branches for the benefit of CPU branch predictors, by finding the location of the minimum with branch-free code and then performing the swap unconditionally.\nFinally, selection sort is greatly outperformed on larger arrays by formula_13 divide-and-conquer algorithms such as mergesort. However, insertion sort or selection sort are both typically faster for small arrays (i.e. fewer than 10\u201320 elements). A useful optimization in practice for the recursive algorithms is to switch to insertion sort or selection sort for \"small enough\" sublists.\nVariants.\nHeapsort has been described as \"nothing but an implementation of selection sort using the right data structure.\" It greatly improves the basic algorithm by using an implicit heap data structure to find and remove each lowest element in formula_14 time, instead of normal selection sort's formula_15 inner loop, reducing the total running time to formula_13.\nA bidirectional variant of selection sort (called double selection sort or sometimes cocktail sort due to its similarity to cocktail shaker sort) finds \"both\" the minimum and maximum values in the list in every pass. This requires three comparisons per two items (a pair of elements is compared, then the greater is compared to the maximum and the lesser is compared to the minimum) rather than regular selection sort's one comparison per item, but requires only half as many passes, a net 25% savings.\nSelection sort can be implemented as a stable sort if, rather than swapping in step 2, the minimum value is \"inserted\" into the first position and the intervening values shifted up. However, this modification either requires a data structure that supports efficient insertions or deletions, such as a linked list, or it leads to performing formula_17 writes.\nIn the bingo sort variant, items are sorted by repeatedly looking through the remaining items to find the greatest value and moving \"all\" items with that value to their final location. Like counting sort, this is an efficient variant if there are many duplicate values: selection sort does one pass through the remaining items for each \"item\" moved, while Bingo sort does one pass for each \"value\". After an initial pass to find the greatest value, subsequent passes move every item with that value to its final location while finding the next value as in the following pseudocode (arrays are zero-based and the for-loop includes both the top and bottom limits, as in Pascal):\nbingo(array A)\nbegin\n last := length(A) - 1;\n { The first iteration is written to look very similar to\n nextMax := A[last];\n for i := last - 1 downto 0 do\n if A[i] &gt; nextMax then\n nextMax := A[i];\n while (last &gt; 0) and (A[last] = nextMax) do\n last := last - 1;\n while last &gt; 0 do begin\n { Each main loop searches for the new nextMax while\n prevMax := nextMax;\n nextMax := A[last];\n for i := last - 1 downto 0 do\n if A[i] &gt; nextMax then\n if A[i] &lt;&gt; prevMax then\n nextMax := A[i];\n else begin\n swap(A[i], A[last]);\n last := last - 1;\n end\n while (last &gt; 0) and (A[last] = nextMax) do\n last := last - 1;\n end;\nend;\nThus, if on average there are more than two items with the same value, bingo sort can be expected to be faster because it executes the inner loop fewer times than selection sort.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29353", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29353", "title": "Syracuse University", "text": "Private university in Syracuse, New York, US\nSyracuse University (informally 'Cuse or SU) is a private research university in Syracuse, New York, United States. It was established in 1870 with roots in the Methodist Episcopal Church but has been nonsectarian since 1920. Located in the city's University Hill neighborhood, east and southeast of downtown Syracuse, the large campus features an eclectic mix of architecture, ranging from nineteenth-century Romanesque Revival to contemporary buildings. Syracuse University is organized into 13 schools and colleges and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\".\nSyracuse University athletic teams, the Orange, participate in 20 intercollegiate sports. SU is a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all NCAA Division I athletics, except for the men's rowing and women's ice hockey teams. SU is also a member of the Eastern College Athletic Conference. Alumni, faculty, and affiliates include former President Joe Biden, three Nobel Prize laureates, one Fields Medalist, thirty-six Olympic Medalists, thirteen Pulitzer Prize recipients, Academy Award winners, Emmy Award winners, Grammy Award winners, two Rhodes Scholars, seven Marshall Scholars, governors, and members of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nThe institution's roots can be traced to the Genesee Wesleyan Seminary. The seminary was founded in 1831 by the Genesee annual conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in Lima, New York, south of Rochester. In 1850, it was resolved to enlarge the institution from a seminary into a college, or to connect a college with the seminary, becoming Genesee College. However, the location was soon thought by many to be insufficiently central. Its difficulties were compounded by a new railroad that competed with the Erie Canal and reconfigured the region's primary economic conduits to bypass Lima. The trustees of the struggling college decided to seek an alternate locale whose economic and transportation advantages could provide a surer base of support.\nThe college began looking for a new home at the same time that Syracuse, ninety miles to the east, was searching to bring a university to the city after having failed to convince Ezra Cornell and Andrew Dickson White to locate Cornell University in Syracuse rather than in Ithaca. Syracuse resident White pressed that the new university should relocate on the hill in Syracuse (the current location of Syracuse University) due to the city's attractive transportation hub, which would ease the recruitment of faculty, students, and other persons of note. However, as a young carpenter working in Syracuse, Cornell had been cheated of his wages by an employer there. Instead, he insisted Cornell University be in Ithaca on his large farm on East Hill, overlooking the town and Cayuga Lake.\nMeanwhile, there were several years of dispute between the Methodist ministers, Lima, and contending cities across the state over proposals to move Genesee College to Syracuse. At the time, the ministers wanted a share of the funds from the Morrill Land Grant Act for Genesee College. They agreed to a \"quid pro quo\" donation of $25,000 from Senator Cornell in exchange for their (and their Methodist constituents') support for his bill. Cornell insisted the bargain be written into the bill and Cornell became New York State's Land Grant University in 1865. In 1869, Genesee College obtained New York State approval to move to Syracuse but Lima got a court injunction to block the move, and thus Genesee stayed in Lima until it was dissolved in 1875. By that time, however, the court injunction had been made moot by the founding of a new university on March 24, 1870. On that date the State of New York granted the new Syracuse University its own charter independent of Genesee College. The Methodist church subscribed an endowment of $400,000 and the City of Syracuse offered $100,000 to establish the school. Methodist bishop Jesse T. Peck had donated $25,000 to the proposed school and was elected the first president of the board of trustees.\nDaniel Steele, a former Genesee College president, served as the first administrative leader of Syracuse until its Chancellor was appointed. The university opened in September 1871 in rented space downtown. Judge George F. Comstock, a member of the new university's board of trustees, had offered the school of farmland on a hillside to the southeast of the city center. Comstock intended Syracuse University and the hill to develop as an integrated whole; a contemporary account described the latter as \"a beautiful town ... springing up on the hillside and a community of refined and cultivated membership ... established near the spot which will soon be the center of a great and beneficent educational institution.\"\nThe university was founded as coeducational and racially integrated: \"open to men and women, white and black.\" President Peck stated at the opening ceremonies, \"The conditions of admission shall be equal to all persons... there shall be no invidious discrimination here against woman... brains and heart shall have a fair chance... \" Syracuse implemented this policy with a high proportion of women students for its era. In the College of Liberal Arts, the ratio between male and female students during the 19th century was approximately even. The College of Fine Arts was predominantly female, while lower ratios of women enrolled in the College of Medicine and the College of Law. Men and women were taught together in the same courses, and many extra-curricular activities were coeducational as well. Syracuse also developed \"women-only\" organizations and clubs.\nExpansion.\nCoeducation at Syracuse traced its roots to the early days of Genesee College where educators and students like Frances Willard and Belva Lockwood were heavily influenced by the Women's movement in nearby Seneca Falls, New York. However, the progressive \"co-ed\" policies practiced at Genesee would soon find controversy at the new university in Syracuse. Colleges and universities admitted few women students in the 1870s. Administrators and faculty argued women had inferior minds and could not master mathematics and the classics. Erastus Otis Haven, Syracuse University chancellor and former president of the University of Michigan and Northwestern University, maintained that women should receive the advantages of higher education. He enrolled his daughter Frances at Syracuse, where she joined the other newly admitted female students in founding the Gamma Phi Beta sorority. The inclusion of women in the early days of the university led to the proliferation of various women's clubs and societies. Frank Smalley, a Syracuse professor coined the term \"sorority\" specifically for Gamma Phi Beta.\nIn the late 1880s, the university engaged in a rapid building spree. Holden Observatory (1887) was followed by two Romanesque Revival buildings\u00a0\u2013 Von Ranke Library (1889), now Tolley Humanities Building, and Crouse College (1889). Together with the Hall of Languages, these first buildings formed the basis for the \"Old Row,\" a grouping which, along with its companion Lawn, established one of Syracuse's most enduring images. The emphatically linear organization of these buildings along the brow of the hill follows a tradition of American campus planning which dates to the construction of the \"Yale Row\" in the 1790s. At Syracuse, \"The Old Row\" continued to provide the framework for growth well into the twentieth century.\nFrom its founding until the early 1920s, the university grew rapidly. It offered programs in the physical sciences and modern languages and, in 1873, added one of the first architecture programs in the U.S. It was also the first institution to grant a Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) degree in the United States. In 1874, Syracuse created the nation's first bachelor of fine arts degree. In 1876, the school offered its first post-graduate courses in the College of Arts and Sciences. SU created its first doctoral program in 1911. In 1919, Syracuse added its business school which contains multiple MBA programs. SU's school of journalism, now the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, was established at Syracuse in 1934.\nThe growth of Syracuse University from a small liberal arts college into a major comprehensive university was due to the efforts of two men, chancellor James Roscoe Day and John Dustin Archbold. James Roscoe Day was serving the Calvary Church in New York City, where he befriended Archbold. Together, the two dynamic figures would oversee the first of two great periods of campus renewal in Syracuse's history.\nJohn Dustin Archbold was a capitalist, philanthropist, and President of the Board of Trustees at Syracuse University. He was known as John D. Rockefeller's right-hand man and successor at the Standard Oil Company. He was a close friend of Syracuse University Chancellor James R. Day and gave almost $6\u00a0million to the university over his lifetime. Said a journalist in 1917:\nMr. Archbold's ... is the president of the board of trustees of Syracuse University, an institution which has prospered so remarkably since his connection with it that its student roll has increased from hundreds to over 4,000, including 1,500 young women, placing it in the ranks of the foremost institutions of learning in the United States.\nIn 1905, James D. Phelps secured a donation of $150,000 from Andrew Carnegie for a new university library provided the university raised an equal sum as an endowment for the library. The university raised the required endowment in a little over a month, with the largest share being contributed by Archbold. On September 11, 1907, the transfer of the Von Ranke collection from the old library building marking the opening of the new Carnegie library with a collection of over 71,000 volumes.\nIn addition to keeping the university financially solvent during its early years, Archbold also contributed funds for eight buildings, including the full cost of Archbold Stadium (opened 1907, demolished 1978), Sims Hall (men's dormitory, 1907), the Archbold Gymnasium (1909, nearly destroyed by fire in 1947, but still in use), and the oval athletic field.\nModern.\nAfter World War II, Syracuse University transformed into a major research institution. Enrollment increased in the four years after the war due to the G.I. Bill, which paid tuition, room, board, and a small allowance for veterans returning from World War II. In 1946, the university admitted 9,464 freshmen, nearly four times greater than the previous incoming class. Branch campuses were established in Endicott, New York, and Utica, New York, which became Binghamton University and Utica University respectively.\nBy the end of the 1950s, Syracuse ranked twelfth nationally in terms of the amount of its sponsored research and it had over four hundred professors and graduate students engaging in that investigation. From the early 1950s through the 1960s, Syracuse University added programs and staff that continued the transformation of the school into a research university. In 1954, Arthur Phillips was recruited from MIT and started the first pathogen-free animal research laboratory. The lab focused on studying medical problems using animal models. The School of Social Work, which eventually merged into the College of Human Ecology, was founded in 1956. Syracuse's College of Engineering also founded the nation's second-oldest computer engineering and bioengineering programs. In 1962, Samuel Irving Newhouse Sr. donated $15\u00a0million to begin construction of a school of communications, eventually known as the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications. In 1966, Syracuse University was admitted to the Association of American Universities.\n1988 crash of Pan Am Flight 103.\nOn December 21, 1988, 35 Syracuse University students were killed in the terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. The students were returning from a study-abroad program in Europe. That evening, Syracuse University went on with a basketball game just hours after the attack, for which the university was severely criticized and the university's chancellor subsequently apologized. The bombing of Flight 103 was the deadliest terrorist attack against the United States prior to the attacks on September 11, 2001.\nIn April 1990, Syracuse University dedicated a memorial wall to the students killed on Flight 103, constructed at the entrance to the main campus in front of the Hall of Languages. Every year the university holds \"Remembrance Week\" during the fall semester to commemorate the students. The university also maintains a link to the tragedy with the \"Remembrance Scholars\" program, when 35 senior students receive scholarships during their final year at the university. With the \"Lockerbie Scholars\" program, two graduating students from Lockerbie Academy study at Syracuse for one year.\nTwenty-first century.\nIn 2018, the university's Theta Tau fraternity was expelled after a video showing a mock initiation ritual featuring racist, antisemitic, ableist, and homophobic language.\nIn 2019, over ten instances of racist graffiti, swastikas, and other bigoted language were found around campus. That same week, the university suspended the Alpha Chi Rho fraternity after the university determined that four of its members yelled a racial epithet at a black student on campus. All social activities at fraternities were suspended for the rest of the semester as a result of these racist and anti-Semitic incidents, but officials of the university were criticized for not doing enough.\nDays later, a white supremacist manifesto was allegedly sent to several students studying in the library using Apple's AirDrop service and was also posted on a website about Greek Life at Syracuse University\u2014the same manifesto that had been cited prior to the Christchurch mosque shootings. However, the Syracuse Police Department and the university's Department of Public Safety could not find anyone who directly received the manifesto to verify these claims. In response, Syracuse University denied that there was any \"credible threat\", and the chancellor said that the alleged circulation of the manifesto \"was probably a hoax\" in an address to the University Senate.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], the university had supported faculty member Douglas Biklen and his discredited pseudoscientific practice of facilitated communication for nearly 30 years. The university's Institute on Communication and Inclusion, founded by Biklen, (formerly called the \"Facilitated Communication Institute\"), has offered workshops with the intent of \"giving a voice and a means to communicate to people with disabilities\". However, in a 2016 article, the editorial board of the independent student newspaper The Daily Orange, condemned the university's support for this practice. \"It is inexcusable and equal-parts embarrassing for Syracuse University as a research institution to stand behind facilitated communication (FC) despite it being a potentially life-destroying practice that has been empirically debunked.\"\nIn July 2025, Chancellor and President Kent Syverud announced that the university has closed its Office of Diversity and Inclusion, replacing it with an \"Office of People and Culture\" housed within Human Resources. The closure followed federal policies implemented by the Trump administration threatening universities with loss of federal funding for maintaining diversity programs. Syracuse University was among over 130 institutions identified by the administration for potential investigations related to diversity, equity, and inclusion programs. The executive order specifically targeted universities with endowments exceeding $1 billion, with the university's endowment valued at over $2 billion as of 2024.\nIn late August 2025, Syverud announced he would step down as president and chancellor in June 2026, concluding a twelve-year tenure that began in 2014. Syverud cited personal and professional reflection as the basis for his decision, with his departure also coinciding with the expiration of his contract.\nCampuses.\nThe university is set on a campus that features an eclectic mix of buildings, ranging from nineteenth-century Romanesque Revival structures to contemporary buildings designed by renowned architects such as I.M. Pei. The center of campus, with its grass quadrangle, landscaped walkways, and outdoor sculptures, offers students the amenities of a traditional college experience. The university overlooks downtown Syracuse, a medium-sized city of approximately 150,000 residents in Central New York.\nThe school also owns an on-campus Sheraton Hotel; (later turned into a dorm named Orange Hall), Marshall Square Mall; the Drumlins Country Club, a nearby, 36-hole golf course to the east of South Campus; the Marshall, a 287-bed student housing complex (later renamed Milton Hall); the Fisher Center and Joseph I. Lubin House in New York City; the Paul Greenberg House in Washington, D.C.; the Minnowbrook Conference Center, a 28-acre (121,000 m2) retreat in the Adirondack mountains of Upstate New York; and various properties surrounding its University Hill campus.\nMain campus.\nAlso called \"North Campus,\" the Main Campus contains nearly all academic buildings and residence halls. Its centerpiece is The Kenneth A. Shaw Quadrangle, more affectionately known as \"The Quad\", which is surrounded by academic and administrative buildings, including Hendricks Chapel. The North Campus represents a large portion of the University Hill neighborhood. Buses run to South Campus, as well as downtown Syracuse and other locations in the city.\nAbout 70 percent of students live in university housing. First- and second-year students are required to live on campus. All 22 residence halls are coeducational, and each contains a lounge, laundry facility, and various social/study spaces. Residence halls are secured with a card access system. Residence halls are located on both Main Campus and South Campus, the latter of which is a five-minute ride via bus. Learning communities and interest housing options are also available. Food facilities include six residential dining centers, two food courts, and several cafes. A few blocks walk from Main Campus on East Genesee Street, the Syracuse Stage building includes two proscenium theatres. The Storch is used primarily by the Drama Department and the Archbold is used primarily by Syracuse Stage, a professional regional theatre.\nThe Comstock Tract Buildings, a historic district of older buildings on the campus, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980. Three buildings on campus\u2014the Crouse Memorial College and the Hall of Languages, and the Pi Chapter House of Psi Upsilon Fraternity\u2014are individually listed on the National Register.\nIn 2017, the university released a campus framework report detailing plans to align the campus's physical landscape, buildings, and infrastructure over the next 20 years.\nSouth campus.\nAfter World War II, a large, undeveloped hill owned by the university was used to house returning veterans in military-style campus housing. During the 1970s, this housing at Skytop was replaced by permanent two-level townhouses equipped with kitchen, bathroom, and private bedrooms for two or three undergraduate students each or graduate families. There are also three small residence halls that feature open doubles. More than 2,000 students live on the South Campus, which is one mile away from the Main Campus and connected by frequent shuttle bus service.\nSouth Campus is home to the Institute for Sensory Research, Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion, Comstock Art Facility, Skytop Softball Stadium, Skytop Track, Goldstein Student Center, Outdoor Education Center, Skytop Office Building, and the Inn Complete pub, a graduate student bar.\nJust north is the headquarters of SU Athletics, the John A. Lally Athletics Complex, formerly known as Manley Field House. Named after alumnus John Lally, the academic and athletics village is home to 20 Syracuse University athletics teams. The complex is surrounded by other athletic facilities, including the Carmelo K. Anthony Basketball Center, J.S. Coyne Stadium, Ensley Athletic Center, and SU Soccer Stadium.\nDowntown Syracuse.\nIn December 2004, the university announced that it had purchased or leased twelve buildings in downtown Syracuse. Five design programs\u2014Communication, Advertising, Environmental and Interior Design, Industrial and Interactive Design, and Fashion\u2014reside permanently in the newly renovated facilities, fittingly called The Warehouse, which was renovated by Gluckman Mayner Architects. Both programs were chosen to be located in the downtown area because of their history of working on projects directly with the community. The Warehouse also houses a contemporary art space that commissions, exhibits, and promotes the work of local and international artists in a variety of media. Hundreds of students and faculty have also been affected by the temporary move of the School of Architecture downtown for the $12\u00a0million renovation of its campus facility, Slocum Hall.\nSince 2009, the Syracuse Center of Excellence in Environmental and Energy Systems, led by Syracuse University in partnership with Clarkson University and the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, creates innovations in environmental and energy technologies that improve human health and productivity, security, and sustainability in urban and built environments. The Paul Robeson Performing Arts Company and the Community Folk Art Center will also be located downtown. On March 31, 2006, the university and the city announced an initiative to connect the main campus of the university with the arts and culture areas of downtown Syracuse and The Warehouse. Using natural gas, the Green Data Center generates its electricity on-site, providing cooling for servers and for a neighboring building.\nThe Connective Corridor project, supported by of public and private funds, will be a strip of cultural development that will connect the main campus of the university to downtown Syracuse. In 2008, an engineering firm was studying traffic patterns and lighting to commence the project. A design competition was held to determine the best design for the project.\nMetropolitan satellite locations.\nSU has established an admissions presence in Los Angeles, California, that will enhance the university's visibility on the West Coast and will join the university's West Coast offices of alumni relations, institutional advancement, and the LA semester program in the same location. Syracuse University has also established an admissions presence in New York City, Atlanta, Georgia, Chicago, Illinois, and Boston, Massachusetts. Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs maintains their Washington D.C. operations in collaboration with Center for Strategic and International Studies. Also in Washington, D.C. is the newly launched Center for Democracy, Journalism and Citizenship, a research center jointly run by the Newhouse School and Maxwell School.\nArt.\nArt collections.\nSyracuse is home to the Syracuse University Art Museum. The main gallery space is located in the Shaffer Art Building on the main campus.\nThe Warehouse Gallery is a new contemporary art space that is operated under the umbrella of the SU Art Museum. Housed in a former furniture warehouse off-campus, the Warehouse Gallery features works from international artists in a variety of media.\nThe Louise and Bernard Palitz Gallery is located on the second floor of the Lubin House in New York City. It has a rotation of exhibitions, including two annual public shows, local and regional artists, featured items from the university's art collection, and professional artists.\nOther venues.\nThere are many other venues for student work at Syracuse University, including the Lowe Art Gallery in Shaffer Art Building, the Robert B Menschel Photography Gallery that features work from professional photographers as well as students and local artists, and the White Cube Gallery in Schine Student Center that showcases work for the student body outside of the school of art and design.\nSU has a permanent art collection of over 45,000 objects from artists including Picasso, Rembrandt, Hopper, Tiffany and Wyeth. More than 100 important paintings, sculptures, and murals are displayed in public places around campus. Notable sculptures on campus include Sol LeWitt's \"Six Curved Walls\", Anna Hyatt Huntington's \"Diana\", Jean-Antoine Houdon's \"George Washington\", Antoine Bourdelle's \"Herakles\", James Earle Fraser's \"Lincoln\", Malvina Hoffman's \"The Struggle of Elemental Man,\" and Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107's \"Moses\", \"Job\" and \"Supplicant Persephone\". A mural version of Ben Shahn's \"The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti\" adorns an exterior wall at HBC.\nStudents can also research primary sources through the Special Collections Research Center (SCRC), which is composed of rare books, manuscripts, works of architecture and design, and popular culture (cartoons, science fiction, and pulp literature), photography, the history of recorded sound, and more.\nAcademics.\nSyracuse is a comprehensive, highly residential research university. The majority of enrollments are in the full-time, four-year undergraduate program that balances arts &amp; sciences and professions. There is a high graduate coexistence with the comprehensive graduate program and a very high level of research activity. It is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.\nThe most popular majors at Syracuse University include: Communication, Journalism, and Related Programs; Social Sciences; Business, Management, Marketing, and Related Support Services; Visual and Performing Arts; and Engineering. The average freshman retention rate, an indicator of student satisfaction, is 91 percent. The student-faculty ratio at Syracuse University is 15:1, and the school has 58.5 percent of its classes with fewer than 20 students.\nOrganization.\nSyracuse is governed by a 70-member board of trustees with 64 trustees elected by the board to four-year terms and six elected by the alumni to four-year terms. Of the 64 board-elected trustees, three must represent specified conferences of the United Methodist Church. In addition, the Chancellor and the President of the Syracuse Alumni Association serve as ex officio voting trustees. Two students and one faculty member serve as non-voting representatives on the board. The board selects, and sets the salary of, the chancellor. The university bylaws also establish a university senate with \"general supervision over all educational matters concerning the University as a whole\". The senate consists of administrators, faculty, students and staff.\nSyracuse University is organized into 13 schools and colleges.\nAdmissions.\nSyracuse's admissions process is \"more selective\" according to the Carnegie Classification. For the 2023 incoming class, Syracuse accepted 17,545 of its 42,089 applicants, or 41.69 percent. 3,672 students enrolled in the class, a yield rate of 20.93 percent. In 2024, the school received around 45,000 applications.\nIn 2018, 26% of the incoming students were students of color; 18% were first-generation college students; 21% were federal Pell grant eligible (an indicator for low-income students), and 75% received some financial aid. Students came from 48 states, along with Washington, D.C., Guam and Puerto Rico. Nearly 600 international undergraduate students from 59 countries were also admitted.\nIn fall 2023, Syracuse University had a total acceptance rate of 42%.\nDegrees.\nThe university offers undergraduate degrees in over 200 majors in the nine undergraduate schools and colleges. Bachelor's degrees are offered through the Syracuse University School of Architecture, the College of Arts and Sciences, the School of Education, the David B. Falk College of Sport, the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the School of Information Studies, Martin J. Whitman School of Management, S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, and the College of Visual and Performing Arts. Also offered are Master's and doctoral degrees online and in person from the Graduate School and from specialized programs in the Martin J. Whitman School of Management, Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, College of Law, among others. Additionally, SU offers Certificates of Advanced Study Programs for specialized programs for education, counseling, and other academic areas. SU also offers over 100 minors.\nThe university has offered multiple international study programs since 1911. SU\u00a0Abroad, formerly known as the Division of International Programs Abroad (DIPA), currently offers joint programs with universities in over 40 countries. The university operates eight international centers, called SU Abroad Centers, that offer structured programs in a variety of academic disciplines. The centers are located at Beijing, Istanbul, Florence, Hong Kong, London (Faraday House), Madrid, Strasbourg, and Santiago.\nRankings and reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn its 2021 ranking of U.S. colleges, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Syracuse tied for 58th among undergraduate national universities. A 2019 survey in the Academic Ranking of World Universities places Syracuse University in the top 100 world universities in social sciences. In 2019, Syracuse University was ranked 22nd in New York State by average professor salaries. Syracuse was ranked 1st in \"The Princeton Review\"'s 2015 and 2019 list of top party schools. SU was named as one of top Fulbright Award producing institutions for 2020\u201321.\nThe School of Architecture Bachelor of Architecture program was ranked 5th nationally in both the \"most Hired from\" and \"most admired\" categories by the journal \"Design Intelligence\" in its 2019\u201320 rankings.\nThe School of Information Studies offers information management and technology courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Syracuse University. Within the School of Information Studies, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" has ranked the graduate program as the 6th best Library and Information Studies graduate school in the United States for 2022, with the graduate program in School Library Media ranked 3rd, the graduate program in Digital Librarianship ranked 4th, and the graduate Information Systems program tied at No. 5.\nThe School of Management was renamed the Martin J. Whitman School of Management in 2003, in honor of Syracuse alumnus and benefactor Martin J. Whitman. The school is home to about 2,200 undergraduate and graduate students. The graduate program was ranked tied at No. 84 among business schools nationwide by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 2022. Also, the Joseph I. Lubin School of Accounting was named No. 10 in the nation by \"The Chronicle of Higher Education\".\nThe College of Law was ranked tied for 102nd nationally by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 2022. It is an emerging leader in the relatively novel field of National Security Law. In 2007, the law school started the Cold Case Justice Initiative, investigating cold cases from the civil rights era in the South. Its professors and students have identified 196 cases, of which more than 100 are in Georgia, and will give information to the US Department of Justice to have cases prosecuted. The FBI has identified 122 cold cases that it is trying to resolve. President Joe Biden is a graduate of the College of Law.\nThe Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs combines social sciences with public administration and international relations. It was ranked as the No. 1 graduate school for public affairs in the U.S. by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 2022.\n\"Military Times\" ranks Syracuse University the top \"Private School for Vets\" and 5th overall in the \"Best for Vets\" in 2020. Syracuse University was ranked tied for 30th in \"Best Colleges for Veterans\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 2022. To position Syracuse University as the center of veteran life on the school's campus, in the local community, across Central New York; and the nation's hub of research and programming connected to the veteran and military sectors, the school completed the $63 million state-of-the-art National Veterans Resource Center (NVRC) in 2020, the first-of-its kind facility in the United States.\nThe graduate program of the College of Visual and Performing Art (VPA) is considered one of the top 50 programs in the US. VPA ranked No. 14 in multimedia/visual communications, a specialty that includes disciplines found in the college's Department of Transmedia, which offers M.F.A. programs in art photography, art video, computer art, and film. VPA also ranked No. 16 in ceramics, No. 19 in printmaking, and No. 20 in sculpture, which are M.F.A. programs based in the Department of Art. Project Advance (or SUPA) is a nationally recognized concurrent enrollment program honored by the American Association for Higher Education, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, the National Commission on Excellence in Education, and the National Institute of Education.\nCivil liberties organization FIRE gave Syracuse its 2021 \"Lifetime Censorship Award\", \"[f]or its unashamed assault on expressive freedoms\".\nLibraries.\nSyracuse University's main library is the E. S. Bird Library, which opened in September 1972. Its seven levels contain 2.3\u00a0million books, 11,500 periodicals, of manuscripts and rare books, 3.6\u00a0million microforms, and a caf\u00e9. It remains one of the hundred largest libraries in the country. The historic Carnegie library houses Science and Technology collection, additionally serving as a reading room. There are also several departmental libraries on campus. Many of the landmarks in the history of recorded communication between people are in the university's Special Collections Research Center, from cuneiform tablets and papyri to several codices dating from the 11th century to the invention of printing. The collection also includes works by Galileo, Luther, John Calvin, Voltaire, Isaac Newton, Descartes, Francis Bacon, Samuel Johnson, Thomas Hobbes, and Goethe. Other collections of note include Rudyard Kipling first editions and an original second leaf of the Gutenberg Bible.\nIn addition, the collection includes the personal library of Leopold Von Ranke. Making sensational headlines in 1887, the university outbid the Prussian government for all 19 tons of Von Ranke's prized personal library.\nBird Library is also home to the largest collection of national archives of Kenya and Tanzania. Since 1878, the university has participated in the Federal Depository Library Program of the U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO) as a Regional depository library. It is the first library to permanently preserve print collections of historical government publications produced by the US-GPO. In July 2008, Syracuse University became the owner of the second largest collection of 78 rpm records in the United States after the Library of Congress after a donation of more than 200,000 records. The donation, valued at $1\u00a0million, more than doubled the university's collection of 78\u00a0rpm records to about 400,000. It also has a special Harriet Tubman Research Collection and an Environmental Justice and Gender collection housed in the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library. The MLK library holds over 15,000 acquisitions in African, African-American, Afro-Latino, and Caribbean studies.\nThe university is also home to the Belfer Audio Laboratory and Archive, whose holdings total approximately 540,000 recordings in all formats, primarily cylinders, discs, and magnetic tapes. Some of the voices to be found include Thomas Edison, Amelia Earhart, and Albert Einstein. Since 2011, the facility has produced \"Sound Beat\", a daily 90-second music program that airs on nearly 375 local stations across North America.\nFaculty.\nSyracuse University has 1013 full-time instructional faculty, 96 part-time faculty, and 454 adjunct faculty. Approximately 86% of the full-time faculty have earned PhDs or professional degrees. The current faculty includes scholars such as MacArthur Fellow Don Mitchell, Professor of Geography, who has developed studies in cultural geography; Bruce Kingma, Associate Provost and Kauffman Professor of Entrepreneurship, a pioneer in the field of information economics and online learning; Catherine Bertini, Professor of Practice in Public Administration, who has worked on the role of women in food distribution; Frederick C. Beiser, Professor of Philosophy, one of leading scholars of German idealism; Mary Karr, the Jesse Truesdell Peck Professor of Literature, who has received a Guggenheim Fellowship in poetry; John Caputo, the Thomas J. Watson Professor of Humanities, who founded weak theology; Sean O'Keefe, former chairman of Airbus Group, Inc. and former Secretary of the Navy; and political theorist Elizabeth F. Cohen.\nResearch.\nSyracuse is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very High Research Activity\". According to the National Science Foundation, Syracuse spent $154.3 million on research and development in FY 2019, ranking it 136th in the nation. Through the university's Office of Research, which promotes research, technology transfer, and scholarship, and its Office of Sponsored Programs, which assists faculty in seeking and obtaining external research support, SU supports research in the fields of management and business, sciences, engineering, education, information studies, energy, environment, communications, computer science, public and international affairs, and other specialized areas. Syracuse became a member of the Association of American Universities (AAU) in 1966, an organization of leading research universities devoted to maintaining a strong system of research and education. In 2011, however, the university's board of trustees voted to pull out of the research consortium due to dispute over the counting of non-Federal research dollars.\nSU has established 29 research centers and institutes that focuses research, often across disciplines, in a variety of areas. The Burton Blatt Institute advances research in economic and social issues for individuals with disabilities, and it has international projects in the field. The Martin J Whitman School of Management supports the largest number of research centers, including The Ballentine Investment Institute, the George E. Bennett Center for Accounting and Tax Research, the Robert H. Brethen Operations Management Institute, Michael J. Falcone Center for Entrepreneurship, The H. H. Franklin Center for Supply Chain Management, Olivia and Walter Kiebach Center for International Business Studies, and the Earl V. Snyder Innovation Management Program. In 2010, the university launched https://, an online, open-access institutional repository for research, which is run by the Syracuse University Library System.\nOther research programs include The Syracuse Biomaterials Institute, the Alan K. Campbell Public Affairs Institute through the Maxwell School, the Center for the Study of Popular Television through the Newhouse School of Public Communications, and La Casita Cultural Center\u2014a 2011 research program focused on cultural memory, child development, and latino studies.\nSyracuse University also has collaborations with CERN and Fermilab, among other institutes. Syracuse also has a comparatively large number of collaborators on the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, which led to the first observation of gravitational waves in 2015. The Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy and Astrophysics \nresearches gravitational waves\u202fastronomy, designing of \"Cosmic Explorer\" next-gen observatory, development new quantum optics technologies and precision measurement to build new detectors.\nIn June 2022, Syracuse University announced the launch of the Center for Democracy, Journalism and Citizenship, a collaborative initiative between the Newhouse School and Maxwell School, in Washington D.C. The center aims to address the loss of trust in journalism and democracy, political polarization, and the deterioration of civil discourse. It will host prominent speakers at public events, sponsor scholarly and applied research, and provide students with an opportunity to spend a semester in Washington D.C.\nSyracuse University Press.\nSyracuse University Press has several areas of focus: Middle East studies, Native American studies, peace and conflict resolution, Irish studies and Jewish studies, New York State, television and popular culture, sports and entertainment. The press was founded on August 2, 1943, by Chancellor William Pearson Tolley and benefactor Thomas J. Watson. It is a member of the Association of American University Presses.\nStudent life.\nSyracuse University has a diverse student population, representing all 50 US states and over 127 countries. 52% of the 2020 class were women. Approximately 15 percent of students are from outside of the US, and are supported by the \"Center for International Services\" within the university's Division of Student Affairs.\nMedia.\nCitrusTV (formerly UUTV, HillTV and Synapse) is the university's entirely student-run television studio and one of the largest student-run TV studios in the country, with over 300 active members.\nThere are also multiple student-run magazines and other print publications, including: \"The Onondagan Yearbook\" (defunct), \"The Daily Orange\", \"Student Voice\", \"Perception\", \"Jerk Magazine\", \"What the Health\", \"360\", \"Baked Magazine\", \"The Out Crowd\", and \"Equal Time\". \"The Daily Orange\", a fully independent student newspaper published since 1903, is free and published daily during the Syracuse University academic year. It is often ranked among the best student newspapers in the United States.\nWAER, a radio station owned by the University, features jazz music, NPR, and Syracuse Orange play-by-play programming around the clock. It is best known for its sports staff, which has produced many prominent sportscasters. WJPZ-FM and WERW are independent student-run radio stations and feature Top 40 (CHR), underground rock music, world music, folk music, occasional news, and some political or public affairs programs.\nStudent government.\nFounded in 1957, the Student Association (SA) represents the undergraduate students of both SU and ESF. SA elects a President and Vice President (on a unified ticket) each academic year. They also each year elect a Comptroller, who, with the assembly, oversees the allocation and designation of the Student Activity Fee that was first collected in the 1968\u201369 school year. The goals of SA are to participate through a unified student voice in the formulation of Syracuse University rules and regulations. The SA-SGA Alumni Organization maintains the history and an organizational timeline on its website.\nThe graduate students at Syracuse University are represented by the Graduate Student Organization (GSO), while the law students at Syracuse University are represented by the Law Student Senate. Each of the three organizations elects students to serve in the Syracuse University Senate, which also includes faculty, staff, and administrators.\nFraternities and sororities.\nThe Syracuse University fraternity and sorority system offers organizations that are members of the Panhellenic Council (NPC), the Interfraternity Council (IFC), the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations, the National Multicultural Greek Council, the Professional Fraternity Council (PFC), and the National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC). In addition to SU students, ESF students are permitted to join the university's fraternity and sorority system.\nThe oldest fraternity at SU is Delta Kappa Epsilon, which established a chapter in 1871 soon after the founding of the university, followed by Psi Upsilon in 1875 and Phi Kappa Psi in 1884. Sororities were also a part of the early history of SU. Alpha Phi was founded at SU in 1872, followed by Gamma Phi Beta in 1874 (\"first organization to use the term \"sorority\"\"), and Alpha Gamma Delta in 1904. Alpha Phi Alpha established a chapter at SU in 1910 and was reorganized in 1949 and 1973. The first NPHC fraternity, Omega Psi Phi, was established at SU in 1922, and the first NPHC sorority, Delta Sigma Theta in 1973. Alpha Phi Delta, the only historically Italian-American heritage fraternity, was founded at SU in 1914. University policy prohibits fraternities and sororities from discriminating \"on the basis of race, creed, color, gender, national origin, religion, marital status, age, disability, sexual orientation, or status as a disabled veteran or a veteran of the Vietnam era.\"\nSyracuse University Ambulance.\nSyracuse University Ambulance, commonly referred to as SUA, is a SU Health Services-based student organization that responds to over 1,500 medical emergencies each year. SUA was formed in 1973 by a group of students out of a need for emergency medical services on campus. Starting with only a few members and meager equipment, the Syracuse University Medical Crisis Unit was formed. The organization has evolved greatly over time but, with 100 volunteer students, remains a student-run organization to this day. SUA provides emergency and non-emergency services 24 hours a day, seven days a week during the academic school year, and is funded by a portion of the student health fee. Providing intermediate life support (ILS), rapid cardiac defibrillation, emergency and non-emergency transportation, and special event standby services, SUA operates two full-time transporting ambulances, a supervisor's fly car, and a MCI trailer for mass-casualty incidents. Additionally, SUA operates four transport vans for non-emergency transports. Advanced life support (ALS) mutual aid is provided by the City of Syracuse's private EMS provider, American Medical Response (AMR).\nProgramming board.\nUniversity Union (UU) is the official programming board of the university, established in 1962. It is entirely run by a team of dedicated students and is one of the largest registered student organizations at SU in terms of budget, membership, size, and frequency of events. University Union hosts large-scale concert events including the annual Juice Jam festival in September and Block Party in April. Additionally, UU keeps the campus entertained throughout the year with the smaller Bandersnatch Concert Series, weekly cinemas screenings, special advanced screenings, and events featuring popular comedians and speakers.\nThe \"Goon Squad\" is a volunteer group whose student members welcome new students and their families at their residence halls during orientation. One of the oldest traditions at Syracuse, the group formed in 1944, and is part of Syracuse\u2019s official welcoming committee.\nSpiritual life.\nHendricks Chapel is an interfaith chapel located on the Quad, and serves as the spiritual center of Syracuse University. The Chapel is home to ten chaplaincies, including Baptist, Buddhist, Evangelical Christian, Historically Black Churches, Islamic, Jewish, Lutheran, Pagan, Methodist, and Roman Catholic. In addition, there are a number of student spiritual groups, including groups associated with the chaplaincies as well as Adventist, Christian Science, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, Hindu, Jainist, Mormon, Shinto, Sikh, Orthodox Christian, Pentecostal, Taoist, and more.\nAdditional buildings located on campus support specific spiritual groups, including the Alibrandi Catholic Center and the Winnick Hillel Center for Jewish Life. Off campus, the Chabad House and Islamic Society of CNY also support student spiritual life.\nCampus food.\nThe university's five dining halls, thirteen cafes, and two food courts serve thousands of students every day. In 2022, \"The Daily Orange\" reported the per meal cost of the meal plan was $19.59. The Ernie Davis dining hall was built in 2009. It has been recognized for its architecture and named one of the best dining halls in the United States. Syracuse's food program is managed by the university rather than a third party vendor. In 2022, \"Food Management\" reported the university had 6,844 students enrolled in its daily meal plans. In 2014, \"Food Management\" reported the university had 8,108 students enrolled in its daily meal plans. Since 2017, the university has received an A+ grade from PETA and been included on the organization's Dean's List of schools in the \"vanguard\" of vegan cuisine. The Kimmel food court closed in 2021 after the Schine Student Center reopened after renovations.\nA student-run chapter of the Food Recovery Network donates about 70 pounds of leftover food each day to food banks. During the fall 2021 semester, the program donated more than 5,000 pounds of food. However, a 2022 \"Daily Orange\" report found more than 230 pounds of food still goes to waste each day. In 2010, the dining halls began collecting food waste to be turned into compost with the Onondaga County Resource Recovery Agency. Two student-run food pantries operate on campus, one in Hendricks Chapel and one on South Campus. The pantries are supplemented by a garden that produced 450 pounds of fresh produce in 2020.\nJournalist and alumna Avery Yale Kamila reported the dining halls stopped serving veal in 1991, following student protests, and at the time served soy milk, veggie burgers, and vegan casseroles. Alumnus and former basketball player Matt Roe, who played for the Orange in 1986\u20131989, told \"The Athletic\" in 2020 when asked about Syracuse food memories that \"Everything on campus was good. Sometimes Shaw Dining Hall was decent.\"\nAthletics.\nSyracuse Orange.\nSyracuse University's sports teams have had \"the Orange\" nickname since 2004, although the former names of Orangemen and Orangewomen are still sometimes used. The school's mascot is Otto the Orange. SU fields intercollegiate teams in eight men's sports and 12 women's sports. The men's and women's basketball teams, the football team, and both the men's and women's lacrosse teams play in the JMA Dome, formerly known as the Carrier Dome. Other sports are located at the nearby Manley Field House, except ice hockey which takes place in the Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion. Most of Syracuse University's intercollegiate teams participate in NCAA Division I in the Atlantic Coast Conference since 2013. The Syracuse Orange women's ice hockey team participates in College Hockey America.\nSU has reached 31 team national championships, including 14 for men's lacrosse, six for men's rowing, five for women's rowing, two cross country running, and one each in boxing, football, women's lacrosse, and women's field hockey. Syracuse student-athletes in individual sports have won 49 national titles. Under long-time the Hall of Fame head coach Jim Boeheim, men's basketball team won seven Big East regular-season championships, five Big East tournament championships, and 35 NCAA tournament appearances, including the 2003 NCAA championship. The men's basketball team holds the largest on-campus attendance record of 35,642 attendees. The record was set in the JMA Dome playing Duke on Saturday, February 23, 2019.\nIn 1959, Syracuse earned its first National Championship following an undefeated football season and a Cotton Bowl victory over Texas. The team featured sophomore running back Ernie Davis who, in 1961, became the first African-American to win the Heisman Trophy. Davis was slated to play for the Cleveland Browns in the same backfield as Jim Brown, but died of leukemia before being able to play professionally.\nSyracuse played its first intercollegiate lacrosse game in 1916, and captured its first USILA championship in 1920. It won USILA championships in 1922, 1924, and 1925. In the modern NCAA era, Syracuse is the first school to capture 11 National Championships, the most of any team in college lacrosse history. Most recently, Syracuse reached the men's Division I championship game in 2013 after winning two championships in 2008 &amp; 2009 seasons and reaching the quarterfinals in 2011. The women's lacrosse team reached the NCAA Division I National Championship game for the first time in school history in 2012, which they lost to Northwestern.\nSyracuse University rowing crew is a full member of the Intercollegiate Rowing Association (IRA). The IRA governs intercollegiate rowing between varsity rowing programs across the United States. Syracuse was added as \"full\" members of the association briefly after its founding in 1894. Syracuse crew also participates in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges. In 1997, the Syracuse Women's Rowing team qualified for the inaugural NCAA Division I Rowing Championship in Rancho Cordova, California, finishing as the 12th ranked crew in the country. The women's rowing team competes in two conferences, both the Atlantic Coast Conference as well as the prestigious Eastern Association of Women's Rowing Colleges, and formerly the Big East Conference.\nSyracuse University hosted the 2019 United States Intercollegiate Boxing Association national championship tournament.\nJMA Dome.\nToward the end of the 1970s, Syracuse University was under pressure to improve its football facilities to remain an NCAA Division I football school. Its small concrete stadium, Archbold Stadium, was seventy years old and not up to the standards of other schools. The stadium could not be expanded; it had been reduced from 40,000 seats to 26,000 due to the fire codes. Syracuse University decided to build a new stadium. In 1978, Archbold Stadium was demolished to make way for the Carrier Dome, which was named after Carrier Global Corporation following a $2.75 million gift and would have a domed Teflon-coated, fiberglass inflatable roof. It would also serve as the home for the men's basketball team, as a replacement for Manley Field House. The Carrier Dome was constructed between April 1979 and September 1980.\nIn May 2018, the university announced a major renovation to the Carrier Dome as the central portion of a larger campus update. The renovation, estimated to cost $120 million, was completed in 2022. The most significant changes are the replacement of the current air-supported roof with a fixed roof, two-thirds of which will be translucent, the installation of air conditioning and the largest center-hung video board in college sports. The upgrade also included new lighting and sound systems, Wi-Fi improvements, accessibility upgrades, improved restrooms, and new concession spaces. The university announced the next phase of its work towards enhanced stadium experience, which will include complete replacement of benches with individual seats; a construction of an event facility adjacent to the Dome; and an upgrade of the entire wireless infrastructure. This phase two work will begin in spring 2023 following Commencement and will be completed ahead of the 2024 football season.\nIn May 2022, Syracuse University and JMA Wireless inked a 10-year naming rights deal to rename the Carrier Dome as the JMA Wireless Dome, referred to as the JMA Dome. This is only the second name for the venue since it opened in 1980.\nAlumni.\nSyracuse University has over 260,000 alumni representing all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and more than 171 countries and territories. Among the individuals who have attended or graduated from Syracuse University include writers George Saunders, Stephen Crane, Joyce Carol Oates, John D. MacDonald, Cheryl Strayed, Shirley Jackson, Barry N. Malzberg, and Alice Sebold; William Safire, Pulitzer Prize winning commentator; Pierre Ramond, string theorist; Cambridge University historian Sir Moses I. Finley; Sir John Stanley, British Member of Parliament; Salvador del Solar, former prime minister of Peru; Arthur Rock, legendary venture capitalist and cofounder of Intel; Vishal Sikka, Former CEO and MD of Infosys; Donna Shalala, CEO of the Clinton Foundation; Joe Biden, 46th President of the United States; Kathy Hochul, 57th Governor of New York; Robert Jarvik, inventor of the first artificial heart implanted into human beings; Eileen Collins, first female commander of a Space Shuttle; Prince Sultan bin Salman, first Arab, first Muslim and the youngest person to travel to space; Robert Menschel, partner/director at Goldman Sachs; Samuel Irving Newhouse Jr., owner of Conde Nast publications; Lowell Paxson, founder of Home Shopping Network; Betsey Johnson fashion designer; lawyer David P. Weber; and Prince Al-Waleed bin Talal. Emily C. Gorman, former director of the United States Women's Army Corps, completed her graduate studies at Syracuse.\nAlumni in journalism and broadcasting include Ted Koppel, Megyn Kelly, Michael Barkann, Bob Costas, Marv Albert, Len Berman, Marc S. Ellenbogen, Marty Glickman, Dorothy Thompson, Beth Mowins, Dave Pasch, Sean McDonough, Ian Eagle, Dave O'Brien, Dick Stockton, Arun Shourie, Mike Tirico, Brian Higgins, Adam Zucker, Lakshmi Singh, Larry Hryb (of Microsoft), Steve Kroft of \"60 Minutes\", Pulitzer Prize winner Eugene Payne and Adam Schein of Mad Dog Sports Radio, Vietnam war historian and correspondent Bernard Fall, national political columnist Roscoe Drummond, CBS News anchor Jeff Glor, and Nepalese columnist and TV personality Vijay Kumar Pandey.\nNotable SU alumni in the performing arts and art include Dick Clark, Taye Diggs, Rob Edwards, Peter Falk, Vera Farmiga, Peter Guber, Peter Hyams, Frank Langella, Jessie Mueller, Aribert Munzner, Lou Reed, Tom Everett Scott, Aaron Sorkin, Jerry Stiller, Lexington Steele, Bill Viola, Vanessa Williams, Pete Yorn, Susan Sensemann, Clairo, and Hong Kong Cantopop singer Priscilla Chan.\nProminent athletes include Kathrine Switzer, the first woman to officially run the Boston Marathon, Jim Brown, actor and NFL Hall of Famer with the Cleveland Browns; Ernie Davis, the first African-American Heisman Trophy winner; Donovan McNabb, former NFL quarterback; former Indianapolis Colts wide receiver Marvin Harrison; Dwight Freeney, defensive end for the San Diego Chargers; Larry Csonka, former Miami Dolphins running back, Pro Football Hall of Famer and television host, Carmelo Anthony, forward for Syracuse's NCAA men's basketball championship squad and NBA veteran; NBA forward Jerami Grant; 2013\u20132014 NBA Rookie of the Year Michael Carter-Williams; 7-time NBA All Star, pro basketball Hall of Famer and former Mayor of Detroit Dave Bing; Tim Green, former Atlanta Falcons player, author, lawyer, and National Public Radio commentator; Darryl Johnston, three-time Super Bowl winner with the Dallas Cowboys in the 1990s; Mikey Powell, who formerly played lacrosse for the Boston Cannons; Floyd Little, who played for the Denver Broncos; Kyle Johnson, who played the majority of his NFL career with the Denver Broncos; John Mackey a member of the NFL Hall of Fame played for the Baltimore Colts (1963\u201371); and Tom Coughlin, former New York Giants head coach and executive VP of football operation at Jacksonville Jaguars.\nAffiliations.\nAffiliated institutions.\nState University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry.\nThe College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF) has a long affiliation with Syracuse University, shares many campus resources, and operates its main academic campus immediately adjacent to Syracuse University. ESF was founded in 1911 as the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University, under the leadership of Syracuse University Trustee Louis Marshall, with the active support of Syracuse University Chancellor Day. Its founding followed the Governor's veto of annual appropriations to a separate New York State College of Forestry at Cornell.\nESF is an autonomous institution, administratively separate from SU, while resources, facilities, and some infrastructure are shared. The two schools share a common Schedule of Classes; students at both institutions may take courses at the other, and degrees from ESF bear the Syracuse University seal along with the State University of New York. A number of concurrent degree programs and certificates are offered between the schools, as well. The college receives an annual appropriation as part of the SUNY budget, and the state builds and maintains all of the college's educational facilities. The state has similar relationships with five statutory colleges that are at Alfred University and Cornell University.\nESF faculty, students, and students' families join those from SU to take part in a joint convocation ceremony at the beginning of the academic year in August and joint commencement exercises in May. ESF and SU students share access to libraries, recreational facilities, student clubs, and other activities at both institutions, except for the schools' intercollegiate sports teams, affiliated with the NCAA and USCAA, respectively. First-year ESF students live in Centennial Hall on ESF's campus.\nState University of New York Upstate Medical University.\nThe medical school was formerly a college within SU, known as the Syracuse University Medical School. In 1950, SU sold the medical school to the State University of New York system. The campuses of the two universities are adjacent to each other on University Hill in Syracuse. The universities jointly offer a Master of Public Health, a PhD program in biomedical engineering, and M.D./MBA degree program.\nFormerly affiliated institutions.\nState University of New York at Binghamton.\nBinghamton University was established in 1946 as Triple Cities College, to serve the needs of local veterans of the Binghamton, New York area, who were returning from World War II. Established in Endicott, New York, the college was a branch of Syracuse University. Triple Cities College offered local students the first two years of their education, while the following two were spent at Syracuse University. In 1946, students could earn their degrees entirely at the Binghamton campus. In 1950, it was absorbed by the State University of New York and renamed Harpur College.\nUtica University.\nUtica University, an independent private university located in Utica, New York, was founded by Syracuse University in 1946. Utica University became independent from Syracuse in 1995 but still offers its students the option to receive a specialized bachelor's degree from Syracuse University through a mutual relationship between the two schools.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29354", "revid": "37110517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29354", "title": "Snake oil", "text": "Euphemism for false advertising\n\"Snake oil\" is a term used to describe deceptive marketing, health care fraud, or a scam. Similarly, snake oil salesman is a common label used to describe someone who sells, promotes, or is a general proponent of some valueless or fraudulent cure, remedy, or solution. The term comes from the snake oil that was sold as a cure-all elixir for many kinds of physiological problems. Many 18th-century European and 19th-century United States entrepreneurs advertised and sold mineral oil (often mixed with various active and inactive household herbs, spices, drugs, and compounds, but containing no snake-derived substances whatsoever) as \"snake oil liniment\", making claims about its efficacy as a panacea. Patent medicines that claimed to be panaceas were extremely common from the 18th century until the 20th century, particularly among vendors masking addictive drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, alcohol, and opium-based concoctions or elixirs, to be sold at medicine shows as medication or products promoting health.\nHistory.\nPatent medicines originated in England, where a patent was granted to Richard Stoughton's elixir in 1712. There were no federal regulations in the United States concerning the safety and effectiveness of drugs until the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. Thus, the widespread marketing and availability of dubiously advertised patent medicines without known properties or origin persisted in the US for a much greater number of years than in Europe.\nIn 18th-century Europe, especially in Britain, viper oil had been commonly recommended for many afflictions, including the ones for which oil from the rattlesnake (pit viper), a type of viper native to America, was subsequently favored to treat rheumatism and skin diseases. Though there are accounts of oil obtained from the fat of various vipers in the Western world, the claims of its effectiveness as a medicine have never been thoroughly examined, and its efficacy is unknown. It is also likely that much of the snake oil sold by Western entrepreneurs was illegitimate, and did not contain ingredients derived from any kind of snake. Snake oil in the United Kingdom and the United States probably contained modified mineral oil. William Rockefeller Sr., the father of John D. Rockefeller, peddled literal snake oil.\nA common trope in Western films, selling snake oil is portrayed as a confidence trick: a traveling salesman purports to be a doctor (with false credentials), selling fake medicines with boisterous marketing hype, and supported by pseudo-scientific evidence. To increase sales, an accomplice in the crowd (a shill or a \"toadie\") will often attest to the value of the product in an effort to provoke buying enthusiasm. The \"doctor\" will leave town before his customers realize they have been cheated. This trope is associated with the American Old West. However, the famous judgment that sparked the most controversy happened in 1916, when Stanley's Snake Oil was discovered to contain no actual snake oil, creating the notion that bottles of snake oil (and their salesmen) were essentially a fraud. That case took place in Rhode Island, and involved snake oil being shipped to Massachusetts, far away from and substantially later than the Old West.\nFrom cure-all to quackery.\nClark Stanley's Snake Oil Liniment\u00a0\u2013 produced by Clark Stanley, the \"Rattlesnake King\"\u00a0\u2013 was tested by the United States government's Bureau of Chemistry, the precursor to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1916. It was found to contain: mineral oil, 1% fatty oil (assumed to be tallow), capsaicin from chili peppers, turpentine, and camphor.\nIn 1916, subsequent to the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906, Clark Stanley's Snake Oil Liniment was examined by the Bureau of Chemistry, and found to be drastically overpriced and of limited value. As a result, Stanley faced federal prosecution for peddling mineral oil in a fraudulent manner as snake oil. In his 1916 civil hearing instigated by federal prosecutors in the U.S. District Court for Rhode Island, Stanley pleaded \"nolo contendere\" (no contest) to the allegations against him, giving no admission of guilt. His plea was accepted, and as a result, he was fined $20 (about $ in 2024).\nThe term \"snake oil\" has since been established in popular culture as a reference to any worthless concoction sold as medicine, and has been extended to describe a wide-ranging degree of fraudulent goods, services, ideas, and activities such as worthless rhetoric in politics. By further extension, a snake oil salesman is commonly used in English to describe a quack, huckster, or charlatan.\nModern implications.\nFalse health products described by medical experts as \"snake oil\" continue to be marketed during the 21st century, including herbal medicines, dietary supplements, products such as Tibetan singing bowls (when used for healing) and treatments such as vaginal steaming. The company Goop has been accused of \"selling snake oil\" in some of its health products and recommendations.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, the Xinhua News Agency claimed that the herbal product \"Shuanghuanglian\" can prevent or treat infections from coronaviruses, stimulating sales across the United States, Russia, and China. However, the clinical studies on its effectiveness have been inconclusive. Su et al. published a report that the herbal substance has been shown \"in vitro\" to be cytotoxic \"against a clinical isolate of SARS-CoV-2\". However, another government media outlet, People\u2019s Daily, published a contrasting report urging citizens not to purchase the herbal remedy as it had not been recommended for coronavirus antiviral treatment and treatment measures had not passed clinical trials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29355", "revid": "4295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29355", "title": "Stanley Elkin", "text": "American novelist, essayist, and professor\nStanley Lawrence Elkin (May 11, 1930 \u2013 May 31, 1995) was an American novelist, short story writer, and essayist. His extravagant, satirical fiction revolves around American consumerism, popular culture, and male-female relationships.\nBiography.\nElkin was born to a Jewish family in Brooklyn and grew up in Chicago from age three onwards. He did both his undergraduate and graduate work at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, receiving a bachelor's degree in English in 1952 and a Ph.D. in 1961 for his dissertation on William Faulkner. During this period he was drafted and served in the U.S. Army from 1955 to 1957. In 1953 Elkin married Joan Marion Jacobson. He was a member of the English faculty at Washington University in St. Louis from 1960 until his death, and battled multiple sclerosis for most of his adult life. In 1968, he signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War.\nDuring his career, Elkin published ten novels, two volumes of novellas, two books of short stories, a collection of essays, and one (unproduced) screenplay. Elkin's work revolves about American pop culture, which it portrays in innumerable darkly comic variations. Characters and especially prose style take full precedence over plot. His language is extravagant and exuberant, baroque and flowery, taking fantastic flight from his characters' endless patter. \"He was like a jazz artist who would go off on riffs,\" said critic, writer, and Arts and Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis colleague William H. Gass. In a review of \"George Mills\", Ralph B. Sipper wrote, \"Elkin's trademark is to tightrope his way from comedy to tragedy with hardly a slip.\" About the influence of ethnicity on his work Elkin said he admired most \"the writers who are stylists, Jewish or not. Bellow is a stylist, and he is Jewish. William Gass is a stylist, and he is not Jewish. What I go for in my work is language.\"\nAlthough living in the Midwest, Elkin spent his childhood and teenage summers in a bungalow colony called West Oakland, on the Ramapo River in northern New Jersey not far from Mahwah, the home of Joyce Kilmer. This was a refuge for a close-knit group of several score families, mostly Jewish, from the summer heat of New York City and urban New Jersey. Elkin's writings placed in New Jersey were informed by this experience.\nElkin won the National Book Critics Circle Award on two occasions: for \"George Mills\" in 1982 and for \"Mrs. Ted Bliss\", his last novel, in 1995. \"The MacGuffin\" was a finalist for the 1991 National Book Award for Fiction. However, although he enjoyed high critical praise, his books have never enjoyed popular success. The 1976 Jack Lemmon film \"Alex &amp; the Gypsy\" was based on Elkin's novella \"The Bailbondsman\".\nElkin died May 31, 1995, of a heart attack, twenty days after his 65th birthday. His manuscripts and correspondence are archived in Olin Library at Washington University in St. Louis. Elkin's literary legacy is represented by the literary agency headed by Georges Borchardt.\nHe has a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29356", "revid": "1317240431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29356", "title": "International Society of Cryptozoology", "text": "The International Society of Cryptozoology (ISC) was an organization dedicated to the field of cryptozoology founded in 1982 in Washington, D.C. It ceased to exist in 1998.\nIt was founded to serve as a center for documenting and evaluating topics of interest to cryptozoologists. The study of such animals is known as cryptozoology, and \"Cryptozoology\" was also the title of its journal. The President was Bernard Heuvelmans, and the Vice-President Roy Mackal. The Secretary was J. Richard Greenwell (died 2005), of the University of Arizona. Loren Coleman, John Willison Green, and several other prominent cryptozoologists were either Life Members, Honorary Members, or Board Members.\nThe official emblem of the society was the okapi, which was chosen because, although it was well known to the inhabitants of its region, it was unknown to the European scientific community until the English explorer Harry Johnston sent to London an okapi skin which received international attention in 1901.\nThe journal \"Cryptozoology\" was published from 1982 to 1996. The Society also published a newsletter \"ISC News\".\nThe ISC ended its activities in 1998 due to financial problems, though a website continued until 2005.\nIn a 2025 interview with science writer Sharon Hill, the reason why cryptids are seeing a resurgence are because of the Internet, for example, the Flatwoods monster is seen in over 33 video games, but the real reason according to Hill is because for a while cryptids were thought to be real animals that some people had assigned magical powers to, and with some investigation the hope was that the magic could be stripped away and they would discover a real, perhaps unknown animal. \u201cOne of the reasons why I think that fell apart completely was because the International Society of Cryptozoology fell apart completely, so there were no longer any gatekeepers as of the early 1990\u2019s to say \u2018a cryptid is these animals that we are studying because we think it\u2019s got a zoological basis\u2019, those people were gone \u2026 they were quite old, they died and there was nobody there to take over that gatekeeping aspect although some people tried. \u2026 Then you saw an explosion of amateurs in the 2000\u2019s \u2026 they became researchers that connected via the Internet. Now they start making media they can publish themselves \u2026 it started to hit a younger and younger generation \u2026 who love these creatures \u2026 now everything can be a cryptid.\u201d\nAccording to the journal \"Cryptozoology\", the ISC served \"as a focal point for the investigation, analysis, publication, and discussion of all matters related to animals of unexpected form or size, or unexpected occurrence in time or space.\"\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29357", "revid": "1314510232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29357", "title": "Send In the Clowns", "text": "Song written by Stephen Sondheim for the 1973 musical A Little Night Music\n\"Send In the Clowns\" is a song written by Stephen Sondheim for the 1973 musical \"A Little Night Music\", an adaptation of Ingmar Bergman's 1955 film \"Smiles of a Summer Night\". It is a ballad from Act Two, in which the character Desir\u00e9e reflects on the ironies and disappointments of her life. Among other things, she looks back on an affair years earlier with the lawyer Fredrik, who was deeply in love with her, but whose marriage proposals she had rejected. Meeting him after so long, she realizes she is in love with him and finally ready to marry him, but now it is he who rejects her, as he is in an unconsummated marriage with a much younger woman. Desir\u00e9e proposes marriage to rescue him from this situation, but he declines, citing his dedication to his bride. Reacting to his rejection, Desir\u00e9e sings this song. The song is later reprised as a coda after Fredrik's young wife runs away with his son, and Fredrik is finally free to accept Desir\u00e9e's offer.\nSondheim wrote the song specifically for Glynis Johns, who originated the role of Desir\u00e9e on Broadway. The song is structured with four verses and a bridge, and uses a complex compound meter. It became Sondheim's most popular song after Frank Sinatra recorded it in 1973 and Judy Collins's version charted in 1975 and 1977. Subsequently, numerous other artists recorded the song, and it has become a standard.\nMeaning of title.\nThe \"clowns\" in the lyrics and title does not specifically refer to circus clowns, as Sondheim explained in a 1990 or 1993 interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I get a lot of letters over the years asking what the title means and what the song's about; I never thought it would be in any way esoteric. I wanted to use theatrical imagery in the song, because she's an \"actress,\" but it's not supposed to be a circus [...] [I]t's a theater reference meaning \"if the show isn't going well, let's send in the clowns\"; in other words, \"let's do the jokes.\" I always want to know, when I'm writing a song, what the end is going to be, so \"Send in the Clowns\" didn't settle in until I got the notion, \"Don't bother, they're here\", which means that \"We are the fools.\"\nIn a 2003 interview, Sondheim further clarified:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As I think of it now, the song could have been called \"Send in the Fools\". I knew I was writing a song in which Desir\u00e9e is saying, \"aren't we foolish\" or \"aren't we fools?\" Well, a synonym for fools is clowns, but \"Send in the Fools\" doesn't have the same ring to it.\nContext.\nJudi Dench, who performed the role of Desir\u00e9e in London, commented on the context of the song during an interview with Alan Titchmarsh. The play is \"a dark play about people who, at the beginning, are with wrong partners and in the end it is hopefully going to become right, and she (Desir\u00e9e) mistimes her life in a way and realizes when she re-meets the man she had an affair with and had a child by (though he does not know that), that she loves him and he is the man she wants.\"\nSome years before the play begins, Desir\u00e9e was a young, attractive actress, whose passions were the theater and romance. She lived her life dramatically, flitting from man to man. Fredrik was one of her many lovers and fell deeply in love with Desir\u00e9e, but she declined to marry him. The play implies that when they parted Desir\u00e9e may have been pregnant with his child.\nA few months before the play begins, Fredrik married a beautiful young woman who at 18 years old was much younger than he. In Act One, Fredrik meets Desir\u00e9e again, and is introduced to her daughter, a precocious adolescent suggestively named Fredrika. Fredrik explains to Desir\u00e9e that he is now married to a young woman he loves very much, but that she is still a virgin, continuing to refuse to have sex with him. Desir\u00e9e and Fredrik then make love.\nAct Two begins days later, and Desir\u00e9e realizes that she truly loves Fredrik. She tells Fredrik that he needs to be rescued from his marriage, and she proposes to him. Fredrik explains to Desir\u00e9e that he has been swept off the ground and is \"in the air\" in love with his beautiful, young wife, and apologizes for having misled her. Desir\u00e9e remains sitting on the bed; depending on the production, Fredrik walks across the room or stays seated on the bed next to her. Desir\u00e9e \u2013 feeling both intense sadness and anger, at herself, her life and her choices \u2013 sings \"Send in the Clowns\". She is, in effect, using the song \"to cover over a moment when something has gone wrong on stage. Midway through the second Act she has deviated from her usual script by suggesting to Fredrik the possibility of being together seriously and permanently, and, having been rejected, she falters \"as\" a show-person, finds herself bereft of the capacity to improvise and wittily cover. If Desir\u00e9e could perform at this moment \u2013 revert to the innuendos, one-liners and blithe self-referential humour that constitutes her normal character \u2013 all would be well. She cannot, and what follows is an exemplary manifestation of Sondheim's musico-dramatic complexity, his inclination to write music that performs drama. That is, what needs to be covered over (by the clowns sung about in the song) is the very intensity, ragged emotion and utter vulnerability that comes forward through the music and singing itself, a display protracted to six minutes, wrought with exposed silences, a shocked Fredrik sitting so uncomfortably before Desir\u00e9e while something much too real emerges in a realm where he \u2013 and his audience \u2013 felt assured of performance.\"\nNot long thereafter, Fredrik's young wife runs away with his son, so he is free to accept Desir\u00e9e's proposal, and the song is reprised as a coda.\nScore.\nHistory.\nSondheim wrote the lyrics and music over a two-day period during rehearsals for the play's Broadway debut, specifically for the actress Glynis Johns, who created the role of Desir\u00e9e. According to Sondheim, \"Glynis had a lovely, crystal voice, but sustaining notes was not her thing. I wanted to write short phrases, so I wrote a song full of questions\" and the song's melody is within a small music range:\nWe hired Glynis Johns to play the lead, though she had a nice little silvery voice. But I'd put all the vocal weight of the show on the other characters because we needed somebody who was glamorous, charming and could play light comedy, and pretty, and to find that in combination with a good voice is very unlikely, but she had all the right qualities and a nice little voice. So I didn't write much for her and I didn't write anything in the second act.\nAnd the big scene between her and her ex-lover, I had started on a song for him because it's his scene. And Hal Prince, who directed it, said he thought that the second act needed a song for her, and this was the scene to do it in. And so he directed the scene in such a way that even though the dramatic thrust comes from the man's monologue, and she just sits there and reacts, he directed it so you could feel the weight going to her reaction rather than his action.\nAnd I went down and saw it and it seemed very clear what was needed, and so that made it very easy to write. And then I wrote it for her voice, because she couldn't sustain notes. Wasn't that kind of singing voice. So I knew I had to write things in short phrases, and that led to questions, and so again, I wouldn't have written a song so quickly if I hadn't known the actress\u00a0... I wrote most of it one night and finished part of the second chorus, and I'd gotten the ending\u00a0... [T]he whole thing was done in two days.\nLyrics.\nThe lyrics of the song are written in four verses and a bridge and sung by Desir\u00e9e. As Sondheim explains, Desir\u00e9e experiences both deep regret and furious anger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Send in the Clowns\" was never meant to be a soaring ballad; it's a song of regret. And it's a song of a lady who is too upset and too angry to speak \u2013 meaning to sing for a very long time. She is furious, but she doesn't want to make a scene in front of Fredrik because she recognizes that his obsession with his 18\u00a0year-old wife is unbreakable. So she gives up; so it's a song of regret and anger, and therefore fits in with short-breathed phrases.\nMeter and key.\nThe song was originally performed in the key of D\u266d major.\nThe song uses an unusual and complex meter, which alternates between and . These are compound meters that evoke the sense of a waltz used throughout the score of the show. Sondheim tells the story:\nWhen I worked with Leonard Bernstein on \"West Side Story\", one of the things I learned from him was not always necessarily to think in terms of 2-, 4- and 8-bar phrases. I was already liberated enough before I met him not to be sticking to 32-bar songs, but I tend to think square. I tend to think\u00a0... it's probably because I was brought up on mid-19th and late-19th century music, and you know it's fairly square; there are not an awful lot of meter changes.\nYou often will shorten or lengthen a bar for rhythmic purposes and for energy, but\u00a0... when you switch in the middle [of a song], particularly when it's a modest song, when you're not writing an aria, you know\u00a0... [I mean,] if you're writing something like \"\", where people sing at great length, you \"expect\" switches of meter, because it helps variety. But in a little 36- or 40-bar song, to switch meters around is almost perverse, because the song doesn't get a chance to establish its own rhythm.\nBut the problem is, what would you do?: Would you go, \"Isn't it rich? (two, three) Are we a pair? (two, three) Me here at last on the ground (three), you in mid-air.\" Lenny [Bernstein] taught me to think in terms of, \"Do you really need the extra beat (after 'ground') or not.\" Just because you've got four bars of four, if you come across a bar that doesn't need the extra beat, then put a bar of three in. So\u00a0... the 9 [beat bars] and 12 [beat bars] that alternate in that song were not so much consciously arrived at as they were by the emotionality of the lyric.\nStyles.\n\"Send in the Clowns\" is performed in two completely different styles: dramatic and lyric. The dramatic style is the theatrical performance by Desir\u00e9e, and this style emphasizes Desir\u00e9e's feelings of anger and regret, and the dramatic style acts as a cohesive part of the play. The lyric style is the concert performance, and this style emphasizes the sweetness of the melody and the poetry of the lyrics. Most performances are in concert, so they emphasize the beauty of the melody and lyrics.\nSondheim teaches both dramatic and lyric performers several important elements for an accurate rendition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSondheim apologizes for flaws in his composition. For example, in the line, \"Well, maybe next year,\" the melodic emphasis is on the word \"year\" but the dramatic emphasis must be on the word \"next\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The word \"next\" is important: \"Maybe \"next\" year\" as opposed to \"\"this\" year\". [Desir\u00e9e means,] \"All right, I've screwed it up this year. Maybe next year I'll do something right in my life.\" So [it's] \"well, maybe \"next\" year\" even though it isn't accented in the music. This is a place where the lyric and the music aren't as apposite as they might be, because the important word is \"next\", and yet the accented word is \"year\". That's my fault, but [something the performer must] overcome.\nAnother example arises from Sondheim's roots as a speaker of American rather than British English: The line \"Don't you love farce?\" features two juxtaposed labiodental fricative sounds (the former [\"v\"] voiced, the latter [\"f\"] devoiced). American concert and stage performers will often fail to \"breathe\" and/or \"voice\" between the two fricatives, leading audiences familiar with British slang to hear \"Don't you love arse?\", misinterpreting the lyric or at the least perceiving an unintended double entendre. Sondheim agrees that \"[i]t's an awkward moment in the lyric, but that \"v\" and that \"f\" should be separated.\"\nIn the line of the fourth verse, \"I thought that you'd want what I want. Sorry, my dear,\" the performer must communicate the connection between the \"want\" and the \"sorry\". Similarly, Sondheim insists that performers separately enunciate the adjacent \"t\"'s in the line, \"There ought to be clowns.\"\nPopular success.\nThe musical and the song debuted on Broadway in 1973. The song became popular with theater audiences, but had not become a pop hit. Sondheim explained how the song became a hit:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First of all, it wasn't a hit for two years. I mean, the first person to sing it was Bobby Short, who happened to see the show in Boston, and it was exactly his kind of song: He's a cabaret entertainer. And then my memory is that Judy Collins picked it up, but she recorded it in England; Sinatra heard it and recorded it. And between the two of them, they made it a hit.\nFrank Sinatra recorded \"Send in the Clowns\" in 1973 for his album \"Ol' Blue Eyes Is Back\", which attained gold status. Gordon Jenkins arranged the song. It was also released as a single. In later versions, he sang it with minimal accompaniment. Sinatra's version plays in the end credits of Todd Phillips' 2019 film \"Joker\".\nTwo years later Judy Collins recorded \"Send in the Clowns\" for her album \"Judith\". The song was released as a single, which soon became a major pop hit. It remained on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for 11 weeks in 1975, reaching Number 36. The single again reached the Billboard Hot 100 in 1977, where it remained for 16 weeks and reached Number 19. At the Grammy Awards of 1976, the Collins performance of the song was named Song of the Year. After Sinatra and Collins recorded the song, it was recorded by Bing Crosby, Kenny Rogers, and Lou Rawls.\nGrace Jones recorded a seven-and-a-half minute disco version the song in 1977 as the lead track of her debut album, \"Portfolio\".\nOlivia Newton-John recorded the song for her 2004 album, \"\".\nIn 1985, Sondheim added a verse for Barbra Streisand to use on \"The Broadway Album\" and subsequent concert performances. Her version reached No. 25 on the Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary chart in 1986.\nThe song has become a jazz standard, with performances by Count Basie, Sarah Vaughan, the Stan Kenton Orchestra and many others. It has been recorded by more than 900 singers.\nAmerican ambient duo Stars of the Lid for their 2007 album \"And Their Refinement of the Decline\" use the melody of \"Send In the Clowns\" on the track \"Don't Bother They're Here\", the title itself referencing a line from the song.\nChart history.\nWeekly charts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29359", "revid": "45916690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29359", "title": "Sinhalese people", "text": "Native ethnic group of Sri Lanka\nThe Sinhalese people (), also known as the Sinhalese or Sinhala people, are an Indo-Aryan ethno-linguistic group native to the island of Sri Lanka. They are the largest ethnic group in Sri Lanka, constituting about 75% of the Sri Lankan population and number more than 15.2 million.\nThe Sinhalese people speak Sinhala, an insular Indo-Aryan language. Sinhalese people are predominantly Theravada Buddhists, although a significant minority of Sinhalese follow branches of Christianity and other religions. Since 1815, Sinhalese people were broadly divided into two subgroups: the up-country Sinhalese of the central mountainous regions, and the low-country Sinhalese of the coastal regions. Although both groups speak the same language, they are distinguished as they observe different cultural customs.\nAccording to the Mahavamsa, a Pali chronicle compiled by Buddhist monks of the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya in Sri Lanka, the Sinhalese descend from settlers who immigrated to the island circa 543 BCE, from the legendary kingdom of Sinhapura led by Prince Vijaya, who mixed with later settlers from the Pandya kingdom. Genetic analyses have found genetic affinity between the Sinhalese and South Indian populations, as well as links to other Indian populations such as the Maratha.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThere are a couple of explanations for the word Sinhala. Sinhala may be considered a combination of \"sinha\" (\u0dc3\u0dd2\u0d82\u0dc4), literally \"lion\", and \"la\" (\u0dbd), for \"slayer\" or \"taker\", hence Sinhala may mean \"lion-slayer\". The story of the derivation of Sinhala is told in \"Mah\u0101va\u1e43sa\", and it is believed to be a reference to the founding legend of Sri Lanka; the island was conquered by a descendant of Sinhabahu, who is said to have killed his father, a lion.\nAccording to legend, a princess Suppadevi of Vanga was abducted by a lion, with whom she then bore a daughter called Sinhasivali, and a son, Sinhabahu. On the origin of Sinhala, \"Mah\u0101va\u1e43sa\" says: \"By whatever means; the monarch S\u00edha B\u00e1hu slew the 'S\u00edha' (lion), from that feat his sons and descendants are called 'S\u00edhala' (the lion-slayers).\" By this account, Sri Lanka conquered and colonised by his descendants therefore also came to be associated with 'Sinhala'.\nThe first king of Sri Lanka, Vijaya, was the son of Sinhabahu, the ruler of Sinhapura. Some versions suggest Vijaya was the grandson of Sinhabahu. According to the Mahavamsa and other historical sources, King Vijaya arrived on the island of Tambapanni (Sri Lanka) and gave rise to the Sinhalese. The story of the arrival of Prince Vijaya in Sri Lanka and the origin of the Sinhalese people is also depicted in the Ajanta caves, in a mural of cave number\u00a017.\nAnother suggestion on the origin of Sinhala proposes that the descendants of Sinhabahu may have been called \"Sinha\" or lions, either because they were descended from a lion or because they were brave like a lion, but those who conquered and settled in Sri Lanka were called Sinhala simply as a derivative of \"Sinha\" for the people of the lion. Likewise, the conquered lands may be called 'Sinhalaya' or 'Sinhal\u00e9' (up-country Sri Lanka), or 'Sinhala dvipa', and their language 'Sinhala' or Sinhala-Bhasha'.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe early recorded history of the Sinhalese is chronicled in two documents, the Mahavamsa, compiled in P\u0101li around the fourth century CE, and the later Culavamsa (the first segment probably compiled in the 13th century CE by the Buddhist monk Dhammakitti). These are ancient sources that cover the histories of the powerful ancient Sinhalese kingdoms of Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa which lasted for 1500 years. The Mahavamsa describes the existence of fields of rice and reservoirs, indicating a well-developed agrarian society.\nPre-Anuradhapura period.\nAccording to the Mahavamsa, Prince Vijaya and his 700 followers left Supp\u0101raka, landed on the island at a site believed by historians to be in the district of Puttalam, south of modern-day Mannar, and founded the kingdom of Tambapanni. It is recorded that Vijaya made his landing on the day of Buddha's Parinirvana. Vijaya claimed Tambapanni as his capital and soon the whole island went under this name. Tambapanni was originally inhabited and governed by Yakkhas, having their capital at Sir\u012bsavatthu and their queen Kuveni. According to the Samyutta Commentary, Tambapanni was one hundred leagues in extent.\nAt the end of his reign, Vijaya, having trouble choosing a successor, sent a letter to the city of his ancestors, Sinhapura, in order to invite his brother Sumitta to take over the throne. However, Vijaya had died before the letter had reached its destination, so the elected minister of the people Upatissa, the Chief government minister and leading chief among the Sinhalese became regent and acted as regent for a year. After his coronation (in 505 BC), which was held in Tambapanni, he left it, building another city Upatissa Nuwara, named after himself, further north of Tambapanni. When Vijaya's letter finally arrived, Sumitta had already succeeded his father as king of his country, and so he sent his son Panduvasdeva to rule Upatissa Nuwara.\nAnuradhapura period.\nIn 377 BC, King Pandukabhaya (437\u2013367 BC) moved the capital to Anuradhapura and developed it into a prosperous city. Anuradhapura (Anurapura) was named after the minister who first established the village and after a grandfather of Pandukabhaya who lived there. The name was also derived from the city's establishment on the auspicious asterism called Anura. Anuradhapura was the capital of all the monarchs who ruled from the dynasty.\nRulers such as Dutthagamani, Valagamba, and Dhatusena are noted for defeating the South Indians and regaining control of the kingdom. Other rulers who are notable for military achievements include Gajabahu I, who launched an invasion against the invaders, and Sena II, who sent his armies to assist a Pandyan prince.\nPolonnaruwa period.\nDuring the Middle Ages Sri Lanka was well known for its agricultural prosperity under king Parakramabahu in Polonnaruwa during which period the island was famous around the world as the rice mill of the east.\nTransitional period.\nLater in the 13th century the country's administrative provinces were divided into independent kingdoms and chieftaincies: kingdom of Sitawaka, kingdom of Kotte, Jaffna kingdom and the Kandyan kingdom. The invasion by the Hindu king Magha in the 13th century led to migrations by the Buddhists (mostly Sinhalese) to areas not under his control. This migration was followed by a period of conflict among the Sinhalese chiefs who tried to exert political supremacy. Parakramabahu\u00a0VI, a Sinhalese king invaded the Jaffna kingdom and conquered it, bringing the entire country back under the Sinhalese kingdom for 17 years. Trade also increased during this period, as Sri Lanka began to trade cinnamon and a large number of Muslim traders were bought into the island.\nIn the 15th century a Kandyan kingdom formed which divided the Sinhalese politically into low-country and up-country. In this period, the Sinhalese caste structure absorbed recent Dravidian Hindu immigrants from South India leading to the emergence of three new Sinhalese caste groups \u2013 the Salagama, the Durava and the Karava.\nModern history.\nThe Sinhalese have a stable birth rate and a population that has been growing at a slow pace relative to India and other Asian countries.\nSociety.\nDemographics.\nSri Lanka.\nWithin Sri Lanka the majority of the Sinhalese reside in the South, Central, Sabaragamuwa and Western parts of the country. This coincides with the largest Sinhalese populations areas in Sri Lanka. Cities with more than 90% Sinhalese population include Hambantota, Galle, Gampaha, Kurunegala, Monaragala, Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa.\nDiaspora.\nSinhalese people have emigrated out to many countries for a variety of reasons. The larger diaspora communities are situated in the United Kingdom, Australia, United States and Canada among others. In addition to this there are many Sinhalese, who reside in the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Europe, temporarily in connection with employment and/or education. They are often employed as guest workers in the Middle East and professionals in the other regions.\nThe largest population centres of the Sinhalese diaspora are mainly situated in Europe, North America and Australia. The city of Melbourne contains just under half of the Sri Lankan Australians. The 2011 census recorded 86,412 Sri Lanka born in Australia. There are 73,849 Australians (0.4 of the population) who reported having Sinhalese ancestry in 2006. Sinhala was also reported to be the 29th-fastest-growing language in Australia (ranking above Somali but behind Hindi and Belarusian). Sinhalese Australians have an exceptionally low rate of return migration to Sri Lanka. In the 2011 Canadian Census, 7,220 people identified themselves as of Sinhalese ancestry, out of 139,415 Sri Lankans. There are a small number of Sinhalese people in India, scattered around the country, but mainly living in and around the northern and southern regions. Sri Lankan New Zealanders comprised 3% of the Asian population of New Zealand in 2001. The numbers arriving continued to increase, and at the 2018 census there were over 16,000 Sri Lankans living in New Zealand among those 9,171 were Sinhalese.\nIn the U.S., the Sinhalese number about 12,000 people. The New York City Metropolitan Area contains the largest Sri Lankan community in the United States, receiving the highest legal permanent resident Sri Lankan immigrant population, followed by Central New Jersey and the Los Angeles metropolitan area. Many Sinhalese have migrated to Italy since the 1970s. Italy was attractive to the Sinhalese due to perceived easier employment opportunities and entry, compared to other European countries. It is estimated that there are 30,000\u201333,000 Sinhalese in Italy. The major Sinhalese communities in Italy are located in Lombardia (In the districts Loreto and Lazzaretto), Milan, Lazio, Rome, Naples, and Southern Italy (Particularly Palermo, Messina and Catania). Many countries census list Sri Lankan, which also includes Sri Lankan Tamils, so the numbers of just Sinhalese are not as accurate when the census states Sri Lankan and not Sinhalese. Though Sinhalese people in particular and Sri Lankans in general have migrated to the UK over the centuries beginning from the colonial times, the number of Sinhalese people in the UK cannot be estimated accurately due to inadequacies of census in the UK. The UK government does not record statistics on the basis of language or ethnicity and all Sri Lankans are classified into one group as Asian British or Asian Other.\nLanguage and literature.\nSinhalese people speak Sinhala, also known as \"Helabasa\"; this language has two varieties, spoken and written. Sinhala is an Indo-Aryan language within the broader group of Indo-European languages. The early form of the language was brought to Sri Lanka by the ancestors of the Sinhalese people from northern India who settled on the island in the sixth century BCE. Sinhala developed in a way different from the other Indo-Aryan languages because of the geographic separation from its Indo-Aryan sister languages. It was influenced by many languages, prominently Pali, the sacred language of Southern Buddhism, Telugu and Sanskrit. Many early texts in the language such as the \"Hela Atuwa\" were lost after their translation into Pali. Other significant Sinhala texts include \"Am\u0101vatura\", \"Kavu Silumina\", \"Jathaka Potha\" and \"Sala Liheeniya\". Sinhala has also adopted many , including from many Indian languages such as Tamil and European languages such as Portuguese, Dutch, and English.\nSandesha Kavyas written by Buddhist priests of Sri Lanka are regarded as some of the most sophisticated and versatile works of literature in the world. The Sinhala language was mainly inspired by Sanskrit and Pali, and many words of the Sinhala language derive from these languages. Today some English words too have come in as a result of the British occupation during colonial times, and the exposure to foreign cultures through television and foreign films. Additionally many Dutch and Portuguese words can be seen in the coastal areas. Sinhalese people, depending on where they live in Sri Lanka, may also additionally speak English and or Tamil. According to the 2012 Census 23.8% or 3,033,659 Sinhalese people also spoke English and 6.4% or 812,738 Sinhalese people also spoke Tamil. In the Negombo area bilingual fishermen who generally identify themselves as Sinhalese also speak the Negombo Tamil dialect. This dialect has undergone considerable convergence with spoken Sinhala.\nFolk tales like \"Mahadana Muttha saha Golayo\" and \"Kawate Andare\" continue to entertain children today. \"Mahadana Muttha\" tells the tale of a fool cum Pundit who travels around the country with his followers (\"Golayo\") creating mischief through his ignorance. \"Kawate Andare\" tells the tale of a witty court jester and his interactions with the royal court and his son.\nIn the modern period, Sinhala writers such as Martin Wickremasinghe and G.\u00a0B. Senanayake have drawn widespread acclaim. Other writers of repute include Mahagama Sekera and Madewela S. Ratnayake. Martin Wickramasinghe wrote the immensely popular children's novel \"Madol Duwa\". Munadasa Cumaratunga's \"Hath Pana\" is also widely known.\nReligion.\nThe form of Buddhism in Sri Lanka is known as Theravada (school of elders). The Pali chronicles (e.g., the Mahavansa) claim that the Sinhalese as an ethnic group are destined to preserve and protect Buddhism. In 1988 almost 93% of the Sinhala-speaking population in Sri Lanka were Buddhist. Observations of current religious beliefs and practices demonstrate that the Sinhalese, as a religious community, have a complex worldview as Buddhists. Due to the proximity and on some occasions similarity of certain doctrines, there are many areas where Buddhists and Hindus share religious views and practices. Sinhalese Buddhists have adopted religious elements from Hindu traditions in their religious practices. Some of these practices may relate to ancient indigenous beliefs and traditions on spirits (folk religion), and the worship of Hindu deities. Some of these figures are used in healing rituals and may be native to the island. Gods and goddess derived from Hindu deities are worshiped by Sinhalese. Kataragama Deviyo from Kartikeya, Upulvan from Vishnu and Ayyanayake from Aiyanar can be named as examples. Though these gods take the same place as their Hindu counterparts in mythology, some of their aspects are different compared to the original gods.\nProminent Sri Lankan anthropologists Gananath Obeyesekere and Kitsiri Malalgoda used the term \"Protestant Buddhism\" to describe a type of Buddhism that appeared among the Sinhalese in Sri Lanka as a response to Protestant Christian missionaries and their evangelical activities during the British colonial period. This kind of Buddhism involved emulating the Protestant strategies of organising religious practices. They saw the need to establish Buddhist schools for educating Buddhist youth and organising Buddhists with new organisations such as the Young Men's Buddhist Association, as well as printing pamphlets to encourage people to participate in debates and religious controversies to defend Buddhism.\nChristianity.\nThere is a significant Sinhalese Christian community, in the maritime provinces of Sri Lanka. Christianity was brought to the Sinhalese by Portuguese, Dutch, and British missionary groups during their respective periods of rule. Most Sinhalese Christians are Roman Catholic; a minority are Protestant. Their cultural centre is Negombo.\nReligion is considered very important among the Sinhalese. According to a 2008 Gallup poll, 99% of Sri Lankans considered religion an important aspect of their daily lives.\nGenetics.\nA 2023 genetics study by Singh et al. using higher resolution markers than previous studies found strong affinity between Sri Lankan and South Asian maternal gene pools as well as a high level of West Eurasian maternal ancestry among the Sinhalese. The analyses show strong gene flow between the Sinhalese and Sri Lankan Tamils, and higher gene flow from South Indian as well as some North and Northwest Indian populations. Among the Indian populations, the Sinhalese are closest genetically to certain South Indian subgroups, but the analyses also reveal deeply rooted common genetic ancestry with the Maratha. Some older studies however pointed towards a predominantly Bengali contribution and a minor Tamil influence. Gujarati and Punjabi lineages are also visible.\nIn relation to the former, other studies also show the Sinhalese possess some genetic admixture from Southeast Asian populations, especially from Austroasiatic groups. Certain Y-DNA and mtDNA haplogroups and genetic markers of immunoglobulin among the Sinhalese, for example, show Southeast Asian genetic influences many of which are also found among certain Northeast Indian populations to whom the Sinhalese display increased genetic affinities.\nCulture.\nSinhalese culture is a unique one dating as far back as 2600 years and has been nourished by Theravada Buddhism. Its main domains are sculpture, fine arts, literature, dancing, poetry and a wide variety of folk beliefs and rituals traditionally. Ancient Sinhala stone sculpture and inscriptions are known worldwide and is a main foreign attraction in modern tourism. Sigiriya is famous for its frescoes. Folk poems were sung by workers to accompany their work and narrate the story of their lives. Ideally these poems consisted of four lines and, in the composition of these poems, special attention had been paid to the rhyming patterns. Buddhist festivals are dotted by unique music using traditionally Sinhalese instruments. More ancient rituals like (devil exorcism) continue to enthral audiences today and often praised and invoked the good powers of the Buddha and the gods in order to exorcise the demons.\nDress.\nTraditionally during recreation the Sinhalese wear a sarong (\"sarama\" in Sinhala). Men may wear a long-sleeved shirt with a sarong. Clothing varies by region for women. Low country Sinhalese women wear a white Long sleeved jacket, and a tight wrap around skirt, which usually is embedded with a floral or pattern design. As for the up country Sinhalese, women wear a similar outfit, but with a puffed up shoulder jacket, and a tucked in frill that lines the top of the skirt (Reda and Hatte in Sinhala). Traditionally, high caste Kandyan women wear a Kandyan style sari, which is similar to the Maharashtrian sari, with the drape but with a frill lining the bottom half and sometimes puffed up sleeves. It is also called an Osariya. The low country high caste women wear a South Indian style saree. Within the more populated areas, Sinhalese men also wear Western-style clothing \u2014 wearing suits while the women wear skirts and blouses. For formal and ceremonial occasions women wear the traditional Kandyan (\"Osariya\") style, which consists of a full blouse which covers the midriff completely, and is partially tucked in at the front. However, modern intermingling of styles has led to most wearers baring the midriff. The Kandyan style is considered as the national dress of Sinhalese women. In many occasions and functions, even the \"saree\" plays an important role in women's clothing and has become the de facto clothing for female office workers especially in government sector. An example of its use is the uniform of air hostesses of Sri Lankan Airlines.\nArt and architecture.\nMany forms of Sri Lankan arts and crafts take inspiration from the island's long and lasting Buddhist culture which in turn has absorbed and adopted countless regional and local traditions. In most instances Sri Lankan art originates from religious beliefs, and is represented in many forms such as painting, sculpture, and architecture. One of the most notable aspects of Sri Lankan art are caves and temple paintings, such as the frescoes found at Sigiriya, and religious paintings found in temples in Dambulla and Temple of the Tooth Relic in Kandy. Other popular forms of art have been influenced by both natives as well as outside settlers. For example, traditional wooden handicrafts and clay pottery are found around the hill country while Portuguese-inspired lacework and Indonesian-inspired Batik have become notable. It has many different and beautiful drawings.\nDeveloped upon Indo-Aryan architectural skills in the late sixth century BCE Sinhalese people who lived upon greater kingdoms such as Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa have built so many architectural examples such as Ruwanwelisaya, Jetavanaramaya \u2013 second tallest brick building in the ancient world after Great Pyramid of Giza, and Abayagiriya \u2013 third tallest brick building in the ancient world. And also with the ancient hydraulic technology which is also unique to Sinhalese people to build ancient tanks, systematic ponds with fountains moats and Irrigational reservoirs such as Parakrama Samudra, Kaudulla and Kandalama. Sigiriya which is considered by many as the eighth wonder of the world, it is a combination of natural and man made fortress, which consists so many architectural aspects.\nMusic.\nThere are extensive folk poems relating to specific jobs of the ancient society. These poems were communal songs which had a rhythm that were sung when performing day-to-day tasks like harvesting and sowing.\nConcerning popular music, Ananda Samarakoon developed the reflective and poignant Sarala gee style with his work in the late 1930s/early 1940s. He has been followed by artists of repute such as Sunil Shantha, W. D. Amaradeva, Premasiri Khemadasa, Nanda Malini, Victor Ratnayake, Austin Munasinghe, T. M. Jayaratne, Sanath Nandasiri, Sunil Edirisinghe, Neela Wickremasinghe, Gunadasa Kapuge, Malini Bulathsinghala and Edward Jayakody.\nFilm and theatre.\nDramatist Ediriweera Sarachchandra revitalised the drama form with \"Maname\" in 1956. The same year, film director Lester James Peries created the artistic masterwork \"Rekava\" which sought to create a uniquely Sinhalese cinema with artistic integrity. Since then, Peries and other directors like Vasantha Obeysekera, Dharmasena Pathiraja, Mahagama Sekera, W. A. B. de Silva, Dharmasiri Bandaranayake, Sunil Ariyaratne, Siri Gunasinghe, G. D. L. Perera, Piyasiri Gunaratne, Titus Thotawatte, D. B. Nihalsinghe, Ranjith Lal, Dayananda Gunawardena, Mudalinayake Somaratne, Asoka Handagama, and Prasanna Vithanage have developed an artistic Sinhalese cinema. Sinhala cinema is often made colourful with the incorporation of songs and dance adding more uniqueness to the industry.\nIn the recent years high budget films like Aloko Udapadi, Aba (film) and Maharaja Gemunu based on Sinhalese epic historical stories gain huge success.\nPerforming arts.\nPerforming arts of the Sinhalese people can be categorised into few groups:\nMartial arts.\nAngampora is the traditional martial art of the Sinhalese people. It combines combat techniques, self-defence, sport, exercise and meditation. Key techniques observed in \"Angampora\" are: \"Angam\", which incorporates hand-to-hand fighting, and \"Illangam\", which uses indigenous weapons such as \"Velayudaya\", staves, knives and swords. Its most distinct feature is the use of pressure point attacks to inflict pain or permanently paralyse the opponent. Fighters usually make use of both striking and grappling techniques, and fight until the opponent is caught in a submission lock that they cannot escape. Usage of weapons is discretionary. Perimeters of fighting are defined in advance, and in some of the cases is a pit. \"Angampora\" became nearly extinct after the country came under British rule in 1815, but survived in a few families until the country regained independence.\nScience and education.\nThe Sinhalese have a long history of literacy and formal learning. Instruction in basic fields like writing and reading by Buddhist Monks pre-date the birth of Christ. This traditional system followed religious rule and was meant to foster Buddhist understanding. Training of officials in such skills as keeping track of revenue and other records for administrative purposes occurred under this institution.\nTechnical education such as the building of reservoirs and canals was passed down from generation to generation through home training and outside craft apprenticeships.\nThe arrival of the Portuguese and Dutch and the subsequent colonisation maintained religion as the centre of education though in certain communities under Catholic and Presbyterian hierarchy. The British in the 1800s initially followed the same course. Following 1870 however they began a campaign for better education facilities in the region. Christian missionary groups were at the forefront of this development contributing to a high literacy among Christians.\nBy 1901 schools in the South and the North were well tended. The inner regions lagged behind however. Also, English education facilities presented hurdles for the general populace through fees and lack of access.\nMedicine.\nTraditional Sinhalese villages in early days had at least one chief Medical personnel called Weda Mahaththaya (Doctor). These people practice their clinical activities by inheritance. Sinhalese Medicine resembles some of Ayurvedic practices in contrast for some treatments they use Buddhist Chantings (Pirith) in order to strengthen the effectiveness.\nAccording to the Mahavamsa, the ancient chronicle, Pandukabhaya of Sri Lanka (437\u2013367 BC) had lying-in-homes and Ayurvedic hospitals (Sivikasotthi-Sala) built in various parts of the country. This is the earliest documentary evidence we have of institutions specifically dedicated to the care of the sick anywhere in the world. Mihintale Hospital is the oldest in the world.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "29363", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29363", "title": "Subcontinent", "text": "A large, relatively self-contained landmass forming a subdivision of a continent"}
{"id": "29364", "revid": "37557686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29364", "title": "Spiel des Jahres", "text": "German award for board games and card games\nThe Spiel des Jahres (, 'Game of the Year') is an award for board and card games, created in 1978 with the purpose of rewarding family-friendly game design and promoting excellent games in the German market. It is thought that the existence and popularity of the award was one of the major drivers of the quality of games coming out of Germany, particularly in the 1980s and 1990s. A \"Spiel des Jahres\" nomination can increase the typical sales of a game from 500\u20133,000 copies to around 10,000, and the winner can usually expect to sell as many as 500,000 copies.\nAward criteria.\nThe award is given by a jury of German-speaking board game critics from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, who review games released in Germany in the preceding twelve months. The games considered for the award are family-style games. War games, role-playing games, collectible card games, and other complicated, highly competitive, or hobbyist games are outside the scope of the award. Since 1989, there has been a separate award for children's games. The jury is not subject to public scrutiny and members of the public are not offered the opportunity to influence the voting.\nOn occasion, the jury has awarded a special prize for more complex games, such as Agricola in 2008 or World Without End in 2010. Prior to 2011, this award was an exceptional award which was not necessarily awarded annually. In 2011, however, this practice was formalized when the jury created a new category for more complex games called \"Kennerspiel des Jahres\". Along with the nominations, the jury also gives a list of recommended games, and occasionally gives out special prizes for games which will not be considered for the main award. The criteria on which a game is evaluated are:\nThe jury does not release its scoring system or provide insight into how the categories are weighted.\nAwards and nominees.\n1979 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1979 awards were:\n1980 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1980 awards were: \n1981 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1981 awards were:\n1982 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1982 awards were:\n1983 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1983 awards were:\n1984 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1984 awards were:\n1985 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1985 awards were:\n1998 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1998 awards were:\n1999 awards.\nThe games receiving recognition at the 1999 awards were:\n2001 awards.\nThis was the first year the Children's Game of the Year award was given, an award for more simple games:\n2005 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2005 award were announced on May 8, 2005, and the winner on June 27, 2005:\n2006 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2006 award were announced on May 28, 2006, and the winner on July 17, 2006:\nAlong with the nominations, the jury also assigned two special prizes for games which it felt were too demanding to count as 'family style' games:\n2007 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2007 award were announced on May 20, 2007, and the winner on June 25, 2007:\n2008 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2008 award were announced on May 25, 2008, and the winner on June 30, 2008:\n2009 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2009 award were announced on May 24, 2009 and the winner on June 29, 2009:\n2010 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2010 award were announced on May 31, 2010, and the winner on June 28, 2010:\n2011 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2011 awards were announced on May 23, 2011, and the winners on June 27, 2011. This was the first year the Connoisseur-gamer Game of the Year award was given, an award for more complex games:\n2012 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2012 awards were announced on May 21, 2012, and the winners on July 9, 2012:\n2013 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2013 awards were announced on May 21, 2013, and the Spiel and Kennerspiel winners were announced on July 8, 2013. The Kinderspiel (Children's) Game of the Year was announced on June 12, 2013:\n2014 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2014 awards were announced on May 19, 2014. The Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 23, and the Game of the Year and Connoisseur's Game of the Year were announced on July 14:\n2015 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2015 awards were announced on May 18, 2015. The Kinderspiel des Jahres winner were announced on Monday, June 8, 2015, and the Spiel and Kennerspiel winners were announced on Monday, July 6, 2015:\n2016 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2016 awards were announced on May 23, 2016, and the winners on Monday July 18, 2016:\n2017 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2017 award were announced on May 22, 2017. The winner for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 19, 2017. The winners for Game of the Year and Connoisseur-gamer Game of the Year were announced on July 17, 2017.\n2018 awards.\nThe nominations and the special prize for the 2018 award were announced on May 14, 2018. The winner for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 11, 2018. The winners for Game of the Year and Connoisseur-gamer Game of the Year were announced on July 23, 2018.\n2019 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2019 award were announced on May 20, 2019. The winner for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 24, 2019\n2020 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2020 award were announced on May 18, 2020. The award for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 15, 2020. The winners were announced on July 20, 2020.\n2021 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2021 award were announced on May 18, 2021. The award for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 14, 2021. The winners were announced on July 19, 2021.\n2022 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2022 award were announced on May 23, 2022. The award for Children's Game of the Year was announced on June 20, 2022.\nThe winners were announced on July 17, 2022.\n2023 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2023 award were announced on May 22, 2023. The winners were announced on July 21, 2023.\n2024 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2024 award were announced on June 11, 2024. The winners were announced on July 21, 2024.\n2025 awards.\nThe nominations for the 2025 award were announced on May 20, 2025. The winners were announced on July 13, 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29365", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29365", "title": "Synthetic element", "text": "Chemical elements that do not occur naturally\nA synthetic element is a known chemical element that does not occur naturally on Earth: it has been created by human manipulation of fundamental particles in a nuclear reactor, a particle accelerator, or the explosion of an atomic bomb; thus, it is called \"synthetic\", \"artificial\", or \"man-made\". The synthetic elements are those with atomic numbers 95\u2013118, as shown in purple on the accompanying periodic table: these 24 elements were first created between 1944 and 2010. The mechanism for the creation of a synthetic element is to force additional protons into the nucleus of an element with an atomic number lower than 95. All known (see: Island of stability) synthetic elements are unstable, but they decay at widely varying rates; the half-lives of their longest-lived isotopes range from microseconds to millions of years. \nFive more elements that were first created artificially are strictly speaking not \"synthetic\" because they were later found in nature in trace quantities: technetium (43Tc), promethium (61Pm), astatine (85At), neptunium (93Np), and plutonium (94Pu); although they are sometimes classified as synthetic alongside exclusively artificial elements. The first, technetium, was created in 1937. Plutonium, first synthesized in 1940, is another such element. It is the element with the largest number of protons (atomic number) to occur in nature, but it does so in such tiny quantities that it is far more practical to synthesize it. Plutonium is known mainly for its use in atomic bombs and nuclear reactors.\nNo elements with atomic numbers greater than 99 have any uses outside of scientific research, since they have extremely short half-lives, and thus have never been produced in large quantities.\nProperties.\nAll elements with atomic number greater than 94 decay quickly enough into lighter elements such that any atoms of these that may have existed when the Earth formed (about 4.6\u00a0billion years ago) have long since decayed. Synthetic elements now present on Earth are the product of atomic bombs or experiments that involve nuclear reactors or particle accelerators, via nuclear fusion or neutron absorption.\nAtomic mass for natural elements is based on weighted average abundance of natural isotopes in Earth's crust and atmosphere. For synthetic elements, there is no \"natural isotope abundance\". Therefore, for synthetic elements the total nucleon count (protons plus neutrons) of the most stable isotope, i.e., the isotope with the longest half-life\u2014is listed in brackets as the atomic mass.\nHistory.\nTechnetium.\nThe first element to be synthesized, rather than discovered in nature, was technetium in 1937. This discovery filled a gap in the periodic table, and the fact that technetium has no stable isotopes explains its natural absence on Earth (and the gap). With the longest-lived isotope of technetium, 97Tc, having a 4.21-million-year half-life, no technetium remains from the formation of the Earth. Only minute traces of technetium occur naturally in Earth's crust\u2014as a product of spontaneous fission of 238U, or from neutron capture in molybdenum\u2014but technetium is present naturally in red giant stars.\nCurium.\nThe first entirely synthetic element to be made was curium, synthesized in 1944 by Glenn T. Seaborg, Ralph A. James, and Albert Ghiorso by bombarding plutonium with alpha particles.\nEight others.\nSynthesis of americium, berkelium, and californium followed soon. Einsteinium and fermium were discovered by a team of scientists led by Albert Ghiorso in 1952 while studying the composition of radioactive debris from the detonation of the first hydrogen bomb. The isotopes synthesized were einsteinium-253, with a half-life of 20.5 days, and fermium-255, with a half-life of about 20 hours. The creation of mendelevium, nobelium, and lawrencium followed.\nRutherfordium and dubnium.\nDuring the height of the Cold War, teams from the Soviet Union and the United States independently created rutherfordium and dubnium. The naming and credit for synthesis of these elements remained unresolved for many years, but eventually, shared credit was recognized by IUPAC/IUPAP in 1992. In 1997, IUPAC decided to give dubnium its current name, honoring the city of Dubna where the Russian team worked since American-chosen names had already been used for many existing synthetic elements, while the name \"rutherfordium\" (chosen by the American team) was accepted for element 104.\nThe last thirteen.\nMeanwhile, the American team had created seaborgium, and the next six elements had been created by a German team: bohrium, hassium, meitnerium, darmstadtium, roentgenium, and copernicium. Element 113, nihonium, was created by a Japanese team; the last five known elements, flerovium, moscovium, livermorium, tennessine, and oganesson, were created by Russian\u2013American collaborations and complete the seventh row of the periodic table.\nList of synthetic elements.\nThe following elements do not occur naturally on Earth. All are transuranium elements and have atomic numbers of 95 and higher.\nOther elements usually produced through synthesis.\nAll elements with atomic numbers 1 through 94 occur naturally at least in trace quantities, but the following elements are often produced through synthesis.\n\u2021 These five elements were discovered through synthesis before being found in nature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29366", "revid": "50745159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29366", "title": "Shoghi Effendi", "text": "Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith from 1921 to 1957\nShogh\u00ed Effendi (; ; 1896 or 1897 \u2013 4 November 1957) was Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith from 1922 until his death in 1957. As the grandson and successor of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, he was charged with guiding the development of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, including the creation of its global administrative structure and the prosecution of a series of teaching plans that oversaw the expansion of the religion to a number of new countries. As the authorized interpreter of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Writings his translations of the primary written works of the Faith's central figures, provided unity of understanding about essential teachings of the Faith and safeguarded its followers from division. Upon his death in 1957, leadership passed to the Hands of the Cause, and in 1963 the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the world elected the Universal House of Justice, an institution which had been described and planned by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu\u2019llah.\nShoghi Effendi, an Afn\u00e1n, was born Shogh\u00ed Rabb\u00e1n\u00ed in \u02bbAkk\u00e1 (Acre) where he spent his early life, but later went on to study in Haifa and Beirut, gaining an arts degree from the Syrian Protestant College in 1918 and then serving as \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's secretary and translator. In 1920, he attended Balliol College, Oxford, where he studied political science and economics, but before completing his studies news reached him of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's death, requiring him to return to Haifa. Shortly after his return at the end of December 1921 he learned that in his Will and Testament \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1' had named him as the Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Shoghi Effendi's clear vision for the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith's progress was inherited from \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and based on the original writings of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu\u2019llah, two particularly important aspects of his leadership focused on building its administration and spreading the faith worldwide.\nDuring his 36 years as Guardian Shoghi Effendi translated and expounded on many of the writings of Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, established plans by which the faith was enabled to spread globally, and sent more than 17,500 letters. He kept in touch with progress in all existing Bah\u00e1\u2019i communities as well as monitoring and responding to the situation in the Middle East, where the believers were still suffering persecution. He also began work on establishing Haifa, Palestine, as the Bah\u00e1\u2019i World Center, and created an International Bah\u00e1\u2019i Council to aid him in his work, several members being newly appointed Hands of the Cause. He also presided over the community's enlargement from 1,034 localities in 1935 to 2,700 in 1953, and further to 14,437 localities in 1963. From the beginning to the end of his leadership, the total population of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds around the world grew from 100,000 to 400,000.\nShoghi Effendi died during a visit to London in 1957, having contracted Asian flu, and is buried at New Southgate Cemetery in the city of London.\nBackground.\nBorn in \u02bbAkk\u00e1 in the Acre Sanjak of the Ottoman Empire in 1896 or 1897, Shoghi Effendi was related to the B\u00e1b through his father, M\u00edrz\u00e1 H\u00e1d\u00ed Sh\u00edr\u00e1z\u00ed, and to Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h through his mother, \u1e0c\u00edy\u00e1\u02bc\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num, the eldest daughter of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, who provided much of his initial training, greatly influenced Shoghi Effendi from the early years of his life. Shoghi Effendi learned prayers from his grandfather, who encouraged him to chant. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 also insisted that people address the child as \"Shoghi Effendi\", (\"Effendi\" signifies \"Sir\"), rather than simply as \"Shoghi\", as a mark of respect towards him.\nAs a child Shoghi Effendi was aware of the difficulties endured by the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in \u02bbAkk\u00e1, which included attacks by M\u00edrz\u00e1 Muhammad \u02bbAl\u00ed against \u02bbAbdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1. Mirza Muhammad-\u2018Ali, who was \u02bbAbdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1's younger half-brother, and who was aggrieved at \u02bbAbdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1's designation as Bah\u00e1\u02bcu\u2019llah's successor, began plotting to discredit him by falsely making it known that he was the cause of the uprising in Ottoman Syria. The problems which this caused in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community were felt as far away as Iran and beyond. As a young boy, he was aware of the desire of Sultan Abdul Hamid II (reigned 1876\u20131909) to banish \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 to the deserts of North Africa, where he was expected to perish.\nTablet from \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1.\nBeing \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's eldest grandson, the first son of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's eldest daughter \u1e0c\u00edy\u00e1\u02bc\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num, Shoghi Effendi had a special relationship with his grandfather. Zia Baghdadi, a contemporary Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, relates that when Shoghi Effendi was only five years of age, he pestered his grandfather to write a tablet for him, which \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 obliged:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He is God! O My Shoghi, I have no time to talk, leave me alone! You said write, I have written. What else should be done? Now is not the time for you to read and write. It is the time for jumping about and chanting O My God! Therefore, memorize the prayers of the Blessed Beauty and chant them that I may hear them. Because there is no time for anything else.\nShoghi Effendi then set out to memorize a number of prayers, and chanted them as loud as he could. This caused family members to ask \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 to quieten him down, a request which he apparently refused.\nEducation.\nShoghi Effendi's early education took place at home with other children from the household, and was taken care of by private tutors who gave him instruction in Arabic, Persian, French, English, and literature. From 1907 to 1909 he attended the College des Freres, a Jesuit institution in Haifa, where he studied Arabic,\u00a0 Turkish, French and English. In 1910, during the time that \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 was residing in Egypt prior to his journeys to the West, Shoghi Effendi was briefly enrolled in the college des Freres in Ramleh. Plans for him to accompany his grandfather on his travels fell through when the port authorities in Naples prevented him from continuing, ostensibly due to health issues. On his return to Egypt sometime after March 1912 he was sent to a Jesuit boarding school in Beirut, transferring in October to the preparatory school attached to the Syrian Protestant College in Beirut, graduating in 1913. Later that year Shoghi Effendi returned to the Syrian Protestant College as an undergraduate, achieving a BA in 1917, but despite enrolling there as a graduate student, he returned to Haifa without completing his degree. During his time at the Syrian Protestant College he spent his visits home to Haifa assisting \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 in translation, becoming his full time secretary and translator from the end of 1918.\nBy the spring of 1919 the intensity of Shoghi Effendi's secretarial work had taken its toll on his health, resulting in recurring occurrences of malaria, and by the spring of 1920 he was so unwell that \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 arranged for him to convalesce at a sanatorium in Paris. Following his recovery he enrolled in the Non-Collegiate Delegacy at Balliol College, Oxford, in order to improve his English translation skills.\nDeath of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1.\nWhile Shoghi Effendi was studying in England he learned of the passing of \u02bbAbdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1 during the early hours of 28 November 1921, news which came as a grievous shock since he had been unaware that his grandfather was ill. Following his return to Haifa on 29 December 1921 the prerequisites of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's Will and Testament were announced, unequivocally stating that Shoghi Effendi was to be appointed as \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's successor and Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. The institution of the Guardianship had been conceived by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu\u2019llah, with \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 outlining its specific functions and jurisdiction in his Will and Testament, two particularly important functions being the interpretation of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings and guiding the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community.\nPrivate life and marriage.\nShoghi Effendi's personal life was largely subordinate to his work as Guardian, and it was not until 1950 that he was able to secure the secretarial support he required in order to deal with mounting correspondence. By then he had established a timetable involving continuous hard work when he was in Haifa, with breaks during the summer during which he spent time in Europe, initially in the Swiss Alps, traversing Africa from south to north in 1929 and 1940. In 1937 he married Mary Maxwell, daughter of the Canadian architect William Sutherland Maxwell and May Maxwell, conferring on her the name R\u00fah\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num. Shoghi Effendi had first met Mary in 1923 when she went on pilgrimage with her mother, and it was during a third pilgrimage in 1937 that Shoghi Effendi asked her mother for her daughter's hand in marriage. The marriage took place in Haifa on 25 March 1937, in the room of Bah\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num in the House of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Following the ceremony a cable was sent to America, stating, \"Announce Assemblies celebration marriage beloved Guardian. Inestimable honour conferred upon handmaid of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h Ruhiyyih Khanum Miss Mary Maxwell. Union of East and West proclaimed by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith cemented. Ziaiyyih mother of Guardian.\" R\u00fah\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num, as she was now known, was to become not only his wife but also his lifelong assistant in his work. Shoghi Effendi held Iranian (Persian) nationality throughout his life and travelled on an Iranian passport, although he never visited Iran.\nLeadership style.\nShoghi Effendi was 24 when he became Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, and following a short break in which he prepared himself for what this entailed, he began to address the task in hand. With his Western education and Western dress, Shoghi Effendi\u2019s leadership style was noticeably different from that of his grandfather \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. His letters to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were signed \"your true brother\u201d, and rather than referring to his personal role as Guardian his focus was instead on the institute of the guardianship. He expended his energy on building the Faith worldwide, laying the foundations for its world administrative center in the Holy Land, and relying on extensive correspondence rather than direct travel to communicate advice to a growing global community. He spent time with the many Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds who visited Haifa on pilgrimage, inspiring and teaching them and often using them as emissaries on returning to their various home communities.\nAdministration.\nOne of Shoghi Effendi\u2019s main objectives on becoming Guardian was to organise the administrative work of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre, with an initial focus on sustaining correspondence with a growing number of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds throughout the world. This involved the need for secretarial assistance which in the early years came from his father and two Persian Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds who had served as secretaries to \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Between late 1924 and 1927 he received assistance initially from Dr John Esslemont, and following his untimely death a year later, from Ethel Rosenberg, both of them Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds from the UK. He was also assisted in this work by several members of his family. In an attempt to reduce his correspondence, Shoghi Effendi encouraged Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed communities to publish and distribute newsletters to other communities, the newsletter generated from Haifa including news from the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed activities around the world, thus alleviating the need for Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds to send him letters asking for information. As an extension of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre he established a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Bureau in Geneva, representing the community at international forums and meetings as well as international organisations which had their headquarters in Geneva.\nDuring the early years of his guardianship Shoghi Effendi focused on the formation and nurturing of national and local Spiritual Assemblies by way of encouraging the spread of the Faith and as a prerequisite for the election of the Universal House of Justice.\u00a0National bodies were elected according to \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1\u2019s instructions and using procedures set down by Shoghi Effendi, who took on responsibility for defining the requirements for their election, detailing their authority, outlining and evaluating rules for their functioning, and managing the application of these criteria in various situations and social conditions. The first three national spiritual assemblies were established at Shoghi Effendi\u2019s instruction in Great Britain, India and Germany in 1923.\nIn 1951 Shoghi Effendi began expanding international Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed institutions, appointing twelve Hands of the Cause as stipulated as one of his responsibilities by \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 in his will. In the same year he established the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council, a secretariat and advisory body whose members were initially appointed and subsequently elected, and which increasingly took on responsibility for communicating with the community and interacting with the government of Israel. In 1952 he appointed seven further Hands of the Cause, adding another eight in 1957. In 1954 he asked the Hands of the Cause to appoint 36 people to serve on five continental Auxiliary Boards in order to assist them in their work. The purpose in forming these international institutions appeared to be the provision of support in carrying out expansion goals for the Ten Year Crusade in conjunction with preparation for the election of the Universal House of Justice.\nShoghi Effendi was instrumental in developing the\u00a0 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre, initially buying the mansion at Bahji, near Akko (formerly Acre), in which Baha\u2019u\u2019llah lived until he died in 1892, where the Shrine of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h is situated, and around which he purchased extra land and created extensive gardens. He supervised the construction of the\u00a0 golden-domed building over the Shrine of the B\u00e1b, developed the surrounding land and erected the International Archives building in the vicinity. He also endorsed plans involving the establishment of a centre which was to evolve into a network of buildings, landscaped gardens and shrines, and which was to be recognised by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds worldwide as the centre of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn 1937 Shoghi Effendi instructed the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the United States and Canada to complete the exterior of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois, as one of the goals of their Seven Year Plan. This was finally completed in 1943, with the temple\u2019s dedication taking place in May 1953. On 23 August 1955 Shoghi Effendi announced that Africa would build its first House of Worship, to be situated in Kampala, Uganda; the temple was dedicated in January 1961.\nGrowth.\nDuring the years in which Shoghi Effendi was Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith the number of believers expanded to more than 400,000, and the plans which he instituted during this time surpassed their goals. Before the first plan was initiated in 1935 there were 139 spiritual assemblies throughout the world, with Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds living in 1,034 locations. These numbers had increased to 670 spiritual assemblies and 2,700 locations by 1953, and it was during that year that he launched a 10-year global crusade whose purpose was to establish the faith worldwide, the faith spreading widely in parts of Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa, India, Southeast Asia, and the Pacific islands. Although Shoghi Effendi died in 1957, by 1963 the geographical presence of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in the world had increased to 14,437 localities,\u00a0with 56 national assemblies and 3,551 local spiritual assemblies.\nOther.\nIn a more secular cause, prior to World War II he supported the work of restoration-forester Richard St. Barbe Baker to reforest Palestine, introducing him to religious leaders from the major faiths of the region, from whom backing was secured for reforestation.\nTranslations and writings.\nShoghi Effendi\u00a0 wrote extensively in English and Persian, and as Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 had assigned to him the responsibility of\u00a0interpreting the word of God, with the authority to impart the meaning and implications of the words of both Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Since Shoghi Effendi\u2019s interpretations are regarded as being authoritative and irrevocable, his writings are regarded as being a primary element in forming modern Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief. He was also instrumental in translating many of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's writings, including the \"Hidden Words\" in 1929, the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n\" in 1931, \"Gleanings\" in 1935 and \"Epistle to the Son of the Wolf\" in 1941. He also translated such historical texts as \"The Dawn-Breakers\". His significance is not just that of a translator, but also that of the designated and authoritative interpreter of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings. His translations, therefore, are a guideline for all future translations of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings.\nThe vast majority of his writings were in the style of letters to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds from all parts of the globe. These letters, of which 17,500 have been collected thus far, are believed to number a total of 34,000 unique works. They ranged from routine correspondence regarding the affairs of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds around the world to lengthy letters to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the world addressing specific themes. Some of his longer letters and collections of letters include \"World Order of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\", \"Advent of Divine Justice\", and \"Promised Day is Come\".\nOther letters included statements on Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed beliefs, history, morality, principles, administration and law. He also wrote obituaries of some distinguished Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Many of his letters to individuals and assemblies have been compiled into several books which stand out as significant sources of literature for Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds around the world. The only actual book he ever wrote was \"God Passes By\" in 1944 to commemorate the centennial anniversary of the religion. The book, which is in English, is an interpretive history of the first century of the B\u00e1b\u00ed and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faiths. A shorter Persian language version was also written.\nOpposition.\nM\u00edrz\u00e1 Muhammad \u02bbAl\u00ed was \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's half brother and was mentioned by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h as having a station \"beneath\" that of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Muhammad \u02bbAli later challenged \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 for leadership and was ultimately excommunicated, along with several others in the Haifa/\u02bbAkk\u00e1 area who supported him. When Shoghi Effendi was appointed Guardian Muhammad \u02bbAli tried to revive his claim to leadership, suggesting that Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's mention of him in the Kit\u00e1b-i-'Ahd amounted to a succession of leadership. But Mu\u1e25ammad-\u2018Al\u00ed had forfeited his right to that station by opposing the authority of \u2018Abdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1, and his attempt at leadership was widely ignored.\nIt was generally anticipated that the Universal House of Justice would be elected soon after \u2018Abdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1\u2019s passing, but Shoghi Effendi determined that the Faith\u2019s global administrative structure must be built up first, as \u2018Abdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1\u2019s Will called for the House of Justice to be elected by the national Spiritual Assemblies, which had not yet come into existence.\nThroughout Shoghi Effendi's life, nearly all remaining family members and descendants of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 were declared by him as covenant-breakers when they didn't abide by Shoghi Effendi's request to cut contact with covenant-breakers, as specified by \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Other branches of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's family had already been declared Covenant-breakers in \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's Will and Testament. At the time of his death, there were no living descendants of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h that remained loyal to him.\nUnexpected death.\nShoghi Effendi's death came unexpectedly in London, on 4 November 1957, as he was travelling to Britain and caught the Asian Flu, during the pandemic which killed two million worldwide, and he is buried there in New Southgate Cemetery. His wife sent the following cable:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Shoghi Effendi beloved of all hearts sacred trust given believers by Master passed away sudden heart attack in sleep following Asiatic flu. Urge believers remain steadfast cling institution Hands lovingly reared recently reinforced emphasized by beloved Guardian. Only oneness heart oneness purpose can befittingly testify loyalty all National Assemblies believers departed Guardian who sacrificed self utterly for service Faith.\u2014\u200a\nFuture hereditary Guardians were envisioned in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed scripture by appointment from one to the next. Each Guardian was to be appointed by the previous from among the male descendants of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, preferably according to primogeniture. The appointment was to be made during the Guardian's lifetime and clearly assented to by a group of Hands of the Cause. At the time of Shoghi Effendi's death, all living male descendants of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h had been declared Covenant-breakers by either \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 or Shoghi Effendi, leaving no suitable living candidates. This created a severe crisis of leadership. The 27 living Hands gathered in a series of six conclaves (or signed agreements if they were absent) to decide how to navigate the uncharted situation. The Hands of the Cause unanimously voted it was impossible to legitimately recognize and assent to a successor. They made an announcement on 25 November 1957 to assume control of the Faith, certified that Shoghi Effendi had left no will or appointment of successor, said that no appointment could have been made, and elected nine of their members to stay at the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre in Haifa to exercise the executive functions of the Guardian (these were known as the Custodians).\nMinistry of the Custodians.\nIn Shoghi Effendi's final message to the Baha'i World, dated October 1957, he named the Hands of the Cause of God, \"the Chief Stewards of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's embryonic World Commonwealth.\" Following the death of Shoghi Effendi, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith was temporarily stewarded by the Hands of the Cause, who elected among themselves nine \"Custodians\" to serve in Haifa as the head of the Faith. They oversaw the transition of the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council into the Universal House of Justice. This stewardship oversaw the execution of the final years of Shoghi Effendi's ordinances of the ten year crusade (which lasted until 1963) culminating and transitioning to the election and establishment of the Universal House of Justice, at the first Baha'i World Congress in 1963.\nAs early as January 1959, Mason Remey, one of the custodial Hands, declared that he was the second Guardian and successor to Shoghi Effendi, even though he met none of the criteria of Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1's will and had signed the Proclamations of the Hands of the Cause affirming that Shoghi Effendi had not, and could not have, appointed a successor. That summer after a conclave of the Hands in Haifa, Remey abandoned his position and moved to Washington D.C., then soon after announced his claim to absolute leadership, and attracted about 100 followers, mostly in the United States. Remey was excommunicated by a unanimous decision of the remaining 26 Hands. Although initially disturbed, the mainstream Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds paid little attention to his movement within a few years.\nElection of the Universal House of Justice.\nAt the end of the Ten Year Crusade in 1963, the Universal House of Justice was first elected. It was authorized to adjudicate on situations not covered in scripture. As its first order of business, the Universal House of Justice evaluated the situation caused by the fact that the Guardian had not appointed a successor. It determined that under the circumstances, given the criteria for succession described in the \"Will and Testament of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1\", there was no legitimate way for another Guardian to be appointed. Therefore, although the \"Will and Testament of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1\" leaves provisions for a succession of Guardians, Shoghi Effendi remains the first and last occupant of this office. Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h envisioned a scenario in the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas in which the line of Guardians would be broken prior to the establishment of the Universal House of Justice, and in the interim the Hands of the Cause of God would administer the affairs of the Baha'i community.\nGuardianship.\nThe institution of the 'Guardian' (Arabic: W\u0101li or Vali from \u0648\u0644\u06cc\u0651) provided a hereditary line of heads of the religion, in many respects similar to the Shia Imamate. Each Guardian was to be appointed by the previous from among the male descendants of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, preferably according to primogeniture. The appointment was to be made during the Guardian's lifetime and clearly assented to by a group of Hands of the Cause. The Guardian would be the head of the Universal House of Justice, and had the authority to expel its members. He would also be responsible for the receipt of Huq\u00faqu'll\u00e1h, appoint new Hands of the Cause, provide \"authoritative and binding\" interpretations of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings, and excommunicate Covenant-breakers.\nThe issue of successorship to \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 was in the minds of early Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, and although the Universal House of Justice was an institution mentioned by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the institution of the Guardianship was not clearly introduced until the \"Will and Testament of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1\" was publicly read after his death.\nIn the will, Shoghi Effendi found that he had been designated as \"the Sign of God (Farsi: Ayatollah from \u0622\u06cc\u062a \u0627\u0644\u0644\u0651\u0647), the chosen branch, the Guardian of the Cause of God\". He also learned that he had been designated as this when he was still a small child. As Guardian, he was appointed as head of the religion, someone to whom the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds had to look for guidance.\nShoghi Effendi on the Guardianship.\nBuilding on the foundation that had been established in \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's will, Shoghi Effendi elaborated on the role of the Guardian in several works, including \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Administration\" and the \"World Order of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\". In those works, he went to great lengths to emphasize that he himself and any future Guardian should never be viewed as equal to \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, or regarded as a holy person. He asked Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds not to celebrate his birthday or have his picture on display. In his correspondences, Shoghi Effendi signed his letters to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds as \"brother\" and \"co-worker,\" to the extent that even when addressing youth, he referred to himself as \"Your True Brother.\"\nShoghi Effendi wrote that the infallibility of his interpretations only extended to matters relating to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith and not subjects such as economics and science.\nShoghi Effendi explained that the successor appointed in \u2018Abdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1\u2019s Will was not just the Guardianship; it was the Administrative Order, headed by the Universal House of Justice, which was first elected in 1963. With this understanding, Shoghi Effendi delineated a distinct separation of powers between the \"twin pillars\" of the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice. The roles of the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice are complementary, the former providing authoritative interpretation, and the latter providing flexibility and the authority to adjudicate on \"questions that are obscure and matters that are not expressly recorded in the Book.\" Shoghi Effendi went into detail explaining that the institutions are interdependent and had their own specific spheres of jurisdiction. For example, the Guardian could define the sphere of legislative action and request that a particular decision be reconsidered, but could not dictate the constitution, override the decisions, or influence the election of the Universal House of Justice. In explaining the importance of the Guardianship, Shoghi Effendi wrote that without it the World Order of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h would be \"mutilated.\" At the same time, Shoghi Effendi indicated that \u201cSevered from the no less essential institution of the Universal House of Justice this same System of the Will of \u2018Abdu\u2019l\u2011Bah\u00e1 would be paralyzed in its action and would be powerless to fill in those gaps which the Author of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas has deliberately left in the body of His legislative and administrative ordinances.\u201d In its legislation the Universal House of Justice turns to the mass of interpretation left by Shoghi Effendi. The existence of the institution of the Guardianship for 36 years under Shoghi Effendi and its ongoing interpretative authority in the decision making of the Universal House of Justice demonstrates how the Administrative Order is neither \"mutiliated\" nor \"paralyzed.\". The House of Justice has explained that the Will and Testament of \"\u02bb\"Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 had allowed for different possibilities for the Faith\u2019s future leadership after the first Guardian - a House of Justice with and without a Guardian. Thus, in not appointing another Guardian, Shoghi Effendi had been faithful to the inherent logic of \u2018Abdu\u2019l-Bah\u00e1\u2019s Will, and as foreshadowed in verse 42 of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas, the line of Guardians ended with the Faith under the direction of the Universal House of Justice alone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29368", "revid": "50937039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29368", "title": "Slope", "text": "Mathematical term\nIn mathematics, the slope or gradient of a line is a number that describes the direction of the line on a plane. Often denoted by the letter \"m\", slope is calculated as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change (\"rise over run\") between two distinct points on the line, giving the same A slope is the ratio of the vertical distance (rise) to the horizontal distance (run) between two points, not a direct distance or a direct angle for any choice of points. To explain, a slope is the ratio of the vertical distance (rise) to the horizontal distance (run) between two points, not a direct distance or a direct angle\nThe line may be physical \u2013 as set by a road surveyor, pictorial as in a diagram of a road or roof, or abstract.\nAn application of the mathematical concept is found in the grade or gradient in geography and civil engineering. \nThe \"steepness\", incline, or grade of a line is the absolute value of its slope: greater absolute value indicates a steeper line. The line trend is defined as follows: \nSpecial directions are:\nIf two points of a road have altitudes \"y\"1 and \"y\"2, the rise is the difference (\"y\"2 \u2212 \"y\"1) = \u0394\"y\". Neglecting the Earth's curvature, if the two points have horizontal distance \"x\"1 and \"x\"2 from a fixed point, the run is (\"x\"2 \u2212 \"x\"1) = \u0394\"x\". The slope between the two points is the difference ratio:\nformula_5\nThrough trigonometry, the slope \"m\" of a line is related to its angle of inclination \"\u03b8\" by the tangent function\nformula_6\nThus, a 45\u00b0 rising line has slope \"m =\" +1, and a 45\u00b0 falling line has slope \"m =\" \u22121.\nGeneralizing this, differential calculus defines the slope of a plane curve at a point as the slope of its tangent line at that point. When the curve is approximated by a series of points, the slope of the curve may be approximated by the slope of the secant line between two nearby points. When the curve is given as the graph of an algebraic expression, calculus gives formulas for the slope at each point. Slope is thus one of the central ideas of calculus and its applications to design.\nNotation.\nThere seems to be no clear answer as to why the letter \"m\" is used for slope, but it first appears in English in O'Brien (1844) who introduced the equation of a line as \"\"y\" = \"mx\" + \"b\", and it can also be found in Todhunter (1888) who wrote \"y\" = \"mx\" + \"c\"\".\nDefinition.\nThe slope of a line in the plane containing the \"x\" and \"y\" axes is generally represented by the letter \"m\", and is defined as the change in the \"y\" coordinate divided by the corresponding change in the \"x\" coordinate, between two distinct points on the line. This is described by the following equation:\nformula_7\nGiven two points formula_8 and formula_9, the change in formula_10 from one to the other is formula_11 (\"run\"), while the change in formula_12 is formula_13 (\"rise\"). Substituting both quantities into the above equation generates the formula:\nformula_14\nThe formula fails for a vertical line, parallel to the formula_12 axis (see Division by zero), where the slope can be taken as infinite, so the slope of a vertical line is considered undefined.\nExamples.\nSuppose a line runs through two points: \"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0(1,\u00a02) and \"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a0(13,\u00a08). By dividing the difference in formula_12-coordinates by the difference in formula_10-coordinates, one can obtain the slope of the line:\nformula_18\nSince the slope is positive, the direction of the line is increasing. Since |\"m\"| &lt; 1, the incline is not very steep (incline &lt;\u200945\u00b0).\nAs another example, consider a line which runs through the points (4,\u00a015) and (3,\u00a021). Then, the slope of the line is \nformula_19\nSince the slope is negative, the direction of the line is decreasing. Since |\"m\"| &gt; 1, this decline is fairly steep (decline &gt;\u200945\u00b0).\nAlgebra and geometry.\nExamples.\nFor example, consider a line running through points (2,8) and (3,20). This line has a slope, \"m\", of \n formula_20\nOne can then write the line's equation, in point-slope form:\n formula_21\nor: \n formula_22\nThe angle \u03b8 between \u221290\u00b0 and 90\u00b0 that this line makes with the \"x\"-axis is \nformula_23\nConsider the two lines: \"y\" = \u22123\"x\" + 1 and \"y\" = \u22123\"x\" \u2212 2. Both lines have slope \"m\" = \u22123. They are not the same line. So they are parallel lines.\nConsider the two lines \"y\" = \u22123\"x\" + 1 and \"y\" = \u2212 2. The slope of the first line is \"m\"1 = \u22123. The slope of the second line is \"m\"2 =. The product of these two slopes is \u22121. So these two lines are perpendicular.\nStatistics.\nIn statistics, the gradient of the least-squares regression best-fitting line for a given sample of data may be written as:\nformula_24,\nThis quantity \"m\" is called as the \"regression slope\" for the line formula_25. The quantity formula_26 is Pearson's correlation coefficient, formula_27 is the standard deviation of the y-values and formula_28 is the standard deviation of the x-values. This may also be written as a ratio of covariances:\nformula_29\nCalculus.\nThe concept of a slope is central to differential calculus. For non-linear functions, the rate of change varies along the curve. The derivative of the function at a point is the slope of the line tangent to the curve at the point and is thus equal to the rate of change of the function at that point.\nIf we let \u0394\"x\" and \u0394\"y\" be the distances (along the \"x\" and \"y\" axes, respectively) between two points on a curve, then the slope given by the above definition,\nformula_30,\nis the slope of a secant line to the curve. For a line, the secant between any two points is the line itself, but this is not the case for any other type of curve.\nFor example, the slope of the secant intersecting \"y\" = \"x\"2 at (0,0) and (3,9) is 3. (The slope of the tangent at \"x\" = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442 is also 3\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\" consequence of the mean value theorem.)\nBy moving the two points closer together so that \u0394\"y\" and \u0394\"x\" decrease, the secant line more closely approximates a tangent line to the curve, and as such the slope of the secant approaches that of the tangent. Using differential calculus, we can determine the limit, or the value that \u0394\"y\"/\u0394\"x\" approaches as \u0394\"y\" and \u0394\"x\" get closer to zero; it follows that this limit is the exact slope of the tangent. If \"y\" is dependent on \"x\", then it is sufficient to take the limit where only \u0394\"x\" approaches zero. Therefore, the slope of the tangent is the limit of \u0394\"y\"/\u0394\"x\" as \u0394\"x\" approaches zero, or d\"y\"/d\"x\". We call this limit the derivative.\nformula_31\nThe value of the derivative at a specific point on the function provides us with the slope of the tangent at that precise location. For example, let \"y\" = \"x\"2. A point on this function is (\u22122,4). The derivative of this function is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;d\"y\"\u2044d\"x\" = 2\"x\". So the slope of the line tangent to \"y\" at (\u22122,4) is 2 \u22c5 (\u22122) = \u22124. The equation of this tangent line is: \"y\" \u2212 4 = (\u22124)(\"x\" \u2212 (\u22122)) or \"y\" = \u22124\"x\" \u2212 4.\nDifference of slopes.\nAn extension of the idea of angle follows from the difference of slopes. Consider the shear mapping \nformula_32\nThen formula_33 is mapped to formula_34. The slope of formula_33 is zero and the slope of formula_34 is formula_37. The shear mapping added a slope of formula_37. For two points on formula_39 with slopes formula_40 and formula_41, the image\nformula_42\nhas slope increased by formula_37, but the difference formula_44 of slopes is the same before and after the shear. This invariance of slope differences makes slope an angular invariant measure, on a par with circular angle (invariant under rotation) and hyperbolic angle, with invariance group of squeeze mappings.\nSlope (pitch) of a roof.\nThe slope of a roof, traditionally and commonly called the roof pitch, in carpentry and architecture in the US is commonly described in terms of integer fractions of one foot (geometric tangent, rise over run), a legacy of British imperial measure. Other units are in use in other locales, with similar conventions. For details, see roof pitch.\nSlope of a road or railway.\nThere are two common ways to describe the steepness of a road or railroad. One is by the angle between 0\u00b0 and 90\u00b0 (in degrees), and the other is by the slope in a percentage. See also steep grade railway and rack railway.\nThe formulae for converting a slope given as a percentage into an angle in degrees and vice versa are: \n formula_45 (this is the inverse function of tangent; see trigonometry)\nand\n formula_46\nwhere \"angle\" is in degrees and the trigonometric functions operate in degrees. For example, a slope of 100% or 1000\u2030 is an angle of 45\u00b0.\nA third way is to give one unit of rise in say 10, 20, 50 or 100 horizontal units, e.g. 1:10. 1:20, 1:50 or 1:100 (or \"1 \"in\" 10\", \"1 \"in\" 20\", etc.) 1:10 is steeper than 1:20. For example, steepness of 20% means 1:5 or an incline with angle 11.3\u00b0.\nRoads and railways have both longitudinal slopes and cross slopes.\nOther uses.\nThe concept of a slope or gradient is also used as a basis for developing other applications in mathematics:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29369", "revid": "46302453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29369", "title": "Sex organ", "text": "Biological part involved in sexual reproduction\nA sex organ, also known as a reproductive organ, is a part of an organism that is involved in sexual reproduction. Sex organs constitute the primary sex characteristics of an organism. Sex organs are responsible for producing and transporting gametes, as well as facilitating fertilization and supporting the development and birth of offspring. Sex organs are found in many species of animals and plants, with their features varying depending on the species.\nSex organs are typically differentiated into male and female types. \nIn animals (including humans), the male sex organs include the testicles, epididymides, and penis; the female sex organs include the clitoris, ovaries, oviducts, and vagina. The testicle in the male and the ovary in the female are called the \"primary sex organs\". All other sex-related organs are known as \"secondary sex organs\". The outer parts are known as the genitals or external genitalia, visible at birth in both sexes, while the inner parts are referred to as internal genitalia, which in both sexes, are always hidden.\nIn plants, male reproductive structures include stamens in flowering plants, which produce pollen. Female reproductive structures, such as pistils in flowering plants, produce ovules and receive pollen for fertilization. Mosses, ferns, and some similar plants have gametangia for reproductive organs, which are part of the gametophyte. The flowers of flowering plants produce pollen and egg cells, but the sex organs themselves are inside the gametophytes within the pollen and the ovule. Coniferous plants likewise produce their sexually reproductive structures within the gametophytes contained within the cones and pollen. The cones and pollen are not themselves sexual organs.\nTogether, the sex organs constitute an organism's reproductive system.\nTerminology.\nThe \"primary sex organs\" are the gonads, a pair of internal sex organs, which diverge into testicles following male development or into ovaries following female development. As primary sex organs, gonads generate reproductive gametes containing inheritable DNA. They also produce most of the primary hormones that affect sexual development, and regulate other sexual organs and sexually differentiated behaviors.\n\"Secondary sex organs\" are the rest of the reproductive system, whether internal or external. The Latin term \"genitalia\", sometimes anglicized as \"genitals\", is used to describe the externally visible sex organs.\nIn general zoology, given the great variety in organs, physiologies, and behaviors involved in copulation, male genitalia are more strictly defined as \"all male structures that are inserted in the female or that hold her near her gonopore during sperm transfer\"; female genitalia are defined as \"those parts of the female reproductive tract that make direct contact with male genitalia or male products (sperm, spermatophores) during or immediately after copulation\".\nEvolution.\nIt is hard to find a common origin for gonads. However, gonads most likely evolved independently several times. At first, testes and ovaries evolved due to natural selection.\nA consensus has emerged that sexual selection represents a primary factor for genital evolution. Male genitalia show traits of divergent evolution that are driven by sexual selection.\nAnimals.\nVertebrates.\nMammals.\nThe visible portion of eutherian mammalian genitals for males consists of the penis and scrotum; for females, it consists of the vulva.\nMale placental mammals urinate and ejaculate through one urethral opening in the penis, while females have two separate vaginal and urethral openings. Male and female genitals have many nerve endings, resulting in pleasurable and highly sensitive touch. In most human societies, particularly in conservative ones, exposure of the genitals is considered a public indecency.\nIn humans, sex organs include:\nDevelopment.\nIn typical prenatal development, sex organs originate from a common primordium during early gestation and differentiate into male or female sexes. The SRY gene, usually located on the Y chromosome and encoding the testis determining factor, determines the direction of the differentiation. The absence of it allows the gonads to continue to develop into ovaries.\nThe development of the internal and external reproductive organs is determined by hormones produced by certain fetal gonads (ovaries or testicles) and the cells' response to them. The initial appearance of the fetal genitalia looks female-like: a pair of urogenital folds with a small protuberance in the middle, and the urethra behind the protuberance. If the fetus has testes and the testes produce testosterone, and if the cells of the genitals respond to the testosterone, the outer urogenital folds swell and fuse in the midline to produce the scrotum; the protuberance grows larger and straighter to form the penis; the inner urogenital swellings grow, wrap around the penis, and fuse in the midline to form the penile raphe. Each organ/body part in one sex has a homologous counterpart.\nThe process of sexual differentiation includes the development of secondary sexual characteristics, such as patterns of pubic and facial hair and female breasts that emerge at puberty.\n Because of the strong sexual selection affecting the structure and function of genitalia, they form an organ system that evolves rapidly. A great variety of genital form and function may therefore be found among animals.\nOther animals.\nIn many other vertebrates, a single posterior orifice (the cloaca) serves as the only opening for the reproductive, digestive, and urinary tracts (if present) in both sexes. All amphibians, birds, reptiles, some fish, and a few mammals (monotremes, tenrecs, golden moles, and marsupial moles) have this orifice, from which they excrete both urine and feces in addition to serving reproductive functions. Excretory systems with analogous purpose in certain invertebrates are also sometimes referred to as cloacae.\nPenile and clitoral structures are present in some birds and many reptiles.\nSexing teleost fish is determined by the shape of a fleshy tube behind the anus known as genital papilla.\nInvertebrates.\nInsects.\nThe organs concerned with insect mating and the deposition of eggs are known collectively as the external genitalia, although they may be largely internal; their components are very diverse in form.\nSlugs and snails.\nThe reproductive system of gastropods (slugs and snails) varies greatly from one group to another.\nPlanaria.\nPlanaria are flat worms widely used in biological research. There are sexual and asexual planaria. Sexual planaria are hermaphrodites, possessing both testicles and ovaries. Each planarian transports its excretion to the other planarian, giving and receiving sperm.\nPlants.\nIn most plant species, an individual has both male and female sex organs (a hermaphrodite).\nThe life cycle of land plants involves alternation of generations between a sporophyte and a haploid gametophyte. The gametophyte produces sperm or egg cells by mitosis. The sporophyte produces spores by meiosis, which in turn develop into gametophytes. Any sex organs that are produced by the plant will develop on the gametophyte. The seed plants, which include conifers and flowering plants, have small gametophytes that develop inside the pollen grains (male) and the ovule (female).\nFlowers.\nIn flowering plants, the flowers contain the sex organs.\nSexual reproduction in flowering plants involves the union of the male and female germ cells, sperm and egg cells respectively. Pollen is produced in stamens and is carried to the pistil or carpel, which has the ovule at its base where fertilization can take place. Within each pollen grain is a male gametophyte, which consists of only three cells. In most flowering plants, the female gametophyte within the ovule consists of only seven cells. Thus there are no sex organs as such.\nFungi.\nThe sex organs in fungi are known as gametangia. In some fungi, the organs are indistinguishable from each other but, in other cases, male and female sex organs are clearly different.\nSimilar gametangia that are similar are known as isogametangia. While male and female gametangia are known as heterogametangia, which occurs in the majority of fungi.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29370", "revid": "49942921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29370", "title": "Snake", "text": "Limbless, scaly, elongate reptile\nSnakes are elongated limbless reptiles of the suborder Serpentes (). Cladistically squamates, snakes are ectothermic, amniote vertebrates covered in overlapping scales much like other members of the group. Many species of snakes have skulls with several more joints than their lizard ancestors and relatives, enabling them to swallow prey much larger than their heads (cranial kinesis). To accommodate their narrow bodies, snakes' paired organs (such as kidneys) appear one in front of the other instead of side by side, and most only have one functional lung. Some species retain a pelvic girdle with a pair of vestigial claws on either side of the cloaca. Lizards have independently evolved elongate bodies without limbs or with greatly reduced limbs at least twenty-five times via convergent evolution, leading to many lineages of legless lizards. These resemble snakes, but several common groups of legless lizards have eyelids and external ears, which snakes lack, although this rule is not universal (see Amphisbaenia, Dibamidae, and Pygopodidae).\nLiving snakes are found on every continent except Antarctica, and on most smaller land masses; exceptions include some large islands, such as Ireland, Iceland, Greenland, and the islands of New Zealand, as well as many small islands of the Atlantic and central Pacific oceans. Additionally, sea snakes are widespread throughout the Indian and Pacific oceans. Around thirty families are currently recognized, comprising about 520 genera and about more than 4,170 species. They range in size from the tiny, Barbados threadsnake to the reticulated python of in length. The fossil species \"Titanoboa cerrejonensis\" was long. Snakes are thought to have evolved from either burrowing or aquatic lizards, perhaps during the Jurassic period, with the earliest known fossils dating to between 143 and 167\u00a0Ma ago. The diversity of modern snakes appeared during the Paleocene epoch (c.\u00a066 to 56\u00a0Ma ago, after the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event). The oldest preserved descriptions of snakes can be found in the Brooklyn Papyrus.\nMost species of snake are nonvenomous and those that have venom use it primarily to kill and subdue prey rather than for self-defense. Some possess venom that is potent enough to cause painful injury or death to humans. Nonvenomous snakes either swallow prey alive or kill by constriction.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"snake\" comes from Old English , itself from Proto-Germanic (cf. Germanic 'ring snake', Swedish 'grass snake'), from Proto-Indo-European root 'to crawl to creep', which also gave \"sneak\" as well as Sanskrit 'snake'. The word ousted \"adder\", as \"adder\" went on to narrow in meaning, though in Old English was the general word for snake. The other term, \"serpent\", is from French, ultimately from Indo-European 'to creep', which also gave Ancient Greek () 'I crawl' and Sanskrit 'snake'.\nTaxonomy.\nAll modern snakes are grouped within the suborder Serpentes in Linnean taxonomy, part of the order Squamata, though their precise placement within squamates remains controversial.\nThe two infraorders of Serpentes are Alethinophidia and Scolecophidia. This separation is based on morphological characteristics and mitochondrial DNA sequence similarity. Alethinophidia is sometimes split into Henophidia and Caenophidia, with the latter consisting of \"colubroid\" snakes (colubrids, vipers, elapids, hydrophiids, and atractaspids) and acrochordids, while the other alethinophidian families comprise Henophidia. While not extant today, the Madtsoiidae, a family of giant, primitive, python-like snakes, lived until 50,000 years ago in Australia, represented by genera such as \"Wonambi\".\nRecent molecular studies support the monophyly of the clades of modern snakes, scolecophidians, typhlopids + anomalepidids, alethinophidians, core alethinophidians, uropeltids (\"Cylindrophis\", \"Anomochilus\", uropeltines), macrostomatans, booids, boids, pythonids and caenophidians.\nLegless lizards.\nWhile snakes are limbless reptiles, evolved from (and grouped with) lizards, there are many other species of lizards that have lost their limbs independently but which superficially look similar to snakes. These include the slowworm, glass snake, and amphisbaenians.\nEvolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in biology\nDid snakes evolve from burrowing lizards or aquatic lizards?\nMore unsolved problems in biology\nThe fossil record of snakes is relatively poor because snake skeletons are typically small and fragile making fossilization uncommon. Fossils readily identifiable as snakes (though often retaining hind limbs) first appear in the fossil record during the Cretaceous period. The earliest known true snake fossils (members of the crown group Serpentes) come from the marine simoliophiids, the oldest of which is the Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian age) \"Haasiophis terrasanctus\" from the West Bank, dated to between 112 and 94 million years old.\nBased on genomic analysis it is certain that snakes descend from lizards. This conclusion is also supported by comparative anatomy, and the fossil record.\nPythons and boas\u2014primitive groups among modern snakes\u2014have vestigial hind limbs: tiny, clawed digits known as anal spurs, which are used to grasp during mating. The families Leptotyphlopidae and Typhlopidae also possess remnants of the pelvic girdle, appearing as horny projections when visible.\nFront limbs are nonexistent in all known snakes. This is caused by the evolution of their Hox genes, controlling limb morphogenesis. The axial skeleton of the snakes' common ancestor, like most other tetrapods, had regional specializations consisting of cervical (neck), thoracic (chest), lumbar (lower back), sacral (pelvic), and caudal (tail) vertebrae. Early in snake evolution, the Hox gene expression in the axial skeleton responsible for the development of the thorax became dominant. As a result, the vertebrae anterior to the hindlimb buds (when present) all have the same thoracic-like identity (except from the atlas, axis, and 1\u20133 neck vertebrae). In other words, most of a snake's skeleton is an extremely extended thorax. Ribs are found exclusively on the thoracic vertebrae. Neck, lumbar and pelvic vertebrae are very reduced in number (only 2\u201310 lumbar and pelvic vertebrae are present), while only a short tail remains of the caudal vertebrae. However, the tail is still long enough to be of important use in many species, and is modified in some aquatic and tree-dwelling species.\nMany modern snake groups originated during the Paleocene, alongside the adaptive radiation of mammals following the extinction of (non-avian) dinosaurs. The expansion of grasslands in North America also led to an explosive radiation among snakes. Previously, snakes were a minor component of the North American fauna, but during the Miocene, the number of species and their prevalence increased dramatically with the first appearances of vipers and elapids in North America and the significant diversification of Colubridae (including the origin of many modern genera such as \"Nerodia\", \"Lampropeltis\", \"Pituophis\", and \"Pantherophis\").\nFossils.\nThere is fossil evidence to suggest that snakes may have evolved from burrowing lizards during the Cretaceous Period. An early fossil snake relative, \"Najash rionegrina\", was a two-legged burrowing animal with a sacrum, and was fully terrestrial. \"Najash\", which lived 95 million years ago, also had a skull with several features typical for lizards, but had evolved some of the mobile skull joints that define the flexible skull in most modern snakes. The species did not show any resemblances to the modern burrowing blind snakes, which have often been seen as the most primitive group of extant forms. One extant analog of these putative ancestors is the earless monitor \"Lanthanotus\" of Borneo (though it is also semiaquatic). Subterranean species evolved bodies streamlined for burrowing, and eventually lost their limbs. According to this hypothesis, features such as the transparent, fused eyelids (brille) and loss of external ears evolved to cope with fossorial difficulties, such as scratched corneas and dirt in the ears. Some primitive snakes are known to have possessed hindlimbs, but their pelvic bones lacked a direct connection to the vertebrae. These include fossil species like \"Haasiophis\", \"Pachyrhachis\" and \"Eupodophis\", which are slightly older than \"Najash\".\nThis hypothesis was strengthened in 2015 by the discovery of a 113-million-year-old fossil of a four-legged snake in Brazil that has been named \"Tetrapodophis amplectus\". It has many snake-like features, is adapted for burrowing and its stomach indicates that it was preying on other animals. It is currently uncertain if \"Tetrapodophis\" is a snake or another species, in the squamate order, as a snake-like body has independently evolved at least 26 times. \"Tetrapodophis\" does not have distinctive snake features in its spine and skull. A study in 2021 places the animal in a group of extinct marine lizards from the Cretaceous period known as dolichosaurs and not directly related to snakes.\nAn alternative hypothesis, based on morphology, suggests the ancestors of snakes were related to mosasaurs\u2014extinct aquatic reptiles from the Cretaceous\u2014forming the clade Pythonomorpha. According to this hypothesis, the fused, transparent eyelids of snakes are thought to have evolved to combat marine conditions (corneal water loss through osmosis), and the external ears were lost through disuse in an aquatic environment. This ultimately led to an animal similar to today's sea snakes. In the Late Cretaceous, snakes recolonized land, and continued to diversify into today's snakes. Fossilized snake remains are known from early Late Cretaceous marine sediments, which is consistent with this hypothesis; particularly so, as they are older than the terrestrial \"Najash rionegrina\". Similar skull structure, reduced or absent limbs, and other anatomical features found in both mosasaurs and snakes lead to a positive cladistical correlation, although some of these features are shared with varanids.\nGenetic studies in recent years have indicated snakes are not as closely related to monitor lizards as was once believed\u2014and therefore not to mosasaurs, the proposed ancestor in the aquatic scenario of their evolution. However, more evidence links mosasaurs to snakes than to varanids. Fragmented remains found from the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous indicate deeper fossil records for these groups, which may potentially refute either hypothesis.\nGenetic basis of snake evolution.\nBoth fossils and phylogenetic studies demonstrate that snakes evolved from lizards, hence the question became which genetic changes led to limb loss in the snake ancestor. Limb loss is actually very common in extant reptiles and has happened dozens of times within skinks, anguids, and other lizards.\nIn 2016, two studies reported that limb loss in snakes is associated with DNA mutations in the Zone of Polarizing Activity Regulatory Sequence (ZRS), a regulatory region of the sonic hedgehog gene which is critically required for limb development. More advanced snakes have no remnants of limbs, but basal snakes such as pythons and boas do have traces of highly reduced, vestigial hind limbs. Python embryos even have fully developed hind limb buds, but their later development is stopped by the DNA mutations in the ZRS.\nDistribution.\nThere are about 3,900 species of snakes, ranging as far northward as the Arctic Circle in Scandinavia and southward through Australia. Snakes can be found on every continent except Antarctica, as well as in the sea, and as high as in the Himalayan Mountains of Asia. There are numerous islands from which snakes are absent, such as Ireland, Iceland, and New Zealand (although New Zealand's northern waters are infrequently visited by the yellow-bellied sea snake and the banded sea krait).\nBiology.\nSize.\nThe now extinct \"Titanoboa cerrejonensis\" was in length. By comparison, the largest extant snakes are the reticulated python, measuring about long, and the green anaconda, which measures about long and is considered the heaviest snake on Earth at .\nAt the other end of the scale, the smallest extant snake is \"Leptotyphlops carlae\", with a length of about . Most snakes are fairly small animals, approximately in length.\nPerception.\nThe sensory systems of snakes, particularly those of the Crotalidae family, commonly known as pit vipers, are among the most specialized in the animal kingdom. Pit vipers, which include rattlesnakes and related species, possess all the sensory organs found in other snakes, as well as additional adaptations. These include specialized infrared-sensitive receptors, known as pits, located on either side of the head between the nostrils and eyes. These pits, which resemble an additional pair of nostrils, are highly developed and allow pit vipers to detect minute temperature changes. Each pit consists of two cavities: a larger outer cavity positioned just behind and below the nostril, and a smaller inner cavity. These cavities are connected internally by a membrane containing nerves highly sensitive to thermal variations. The forward-facing pits create a combined field of detection, enabling pit vipers to distinguish objects from their surroundings and accurately judge distances. The sensitivity of these pits allows them to detect temperature differences as small as one-third of a degree Fahrenheit. Other infrared-sensitive snakes, such as those in the Boidae family, possess multiple smaller labial pits along the upper lip, just below the nostrils.\nSnakes rely heavily on their sense of smell to track prey. They collect particles from the air, ground, or water using their forked tongue, which are then transferred to the vomeronasal organ (also known as Jacobson's organ) in the mouth for analysis. The forked structure of the tongue provides directional information of smell which helps locate prey or predators. In aquatic species, such as the anaconda, the tongue functions efficiently underwater. When the tongue is retracted, the forked tips are pressed into the cavities of the Jacobson's organ, enabling a combined taste-smell analysis that provides the snake with detailed information about its environment.\n Until the mid-20th century, it was widely believed that snakes were unable to hear. However, snakes possess two distinct auditory systems. One system, the somatic system, involves the transmission of vibrations through ventral skin receptors to the spine. The other system involves vibrations transmitted through the snake's elongated lung to the brain via cranial nerves. Snakes exhibit high sensitivity to vibrations, allowing them to detect even subtle sounds, such as soft speech, in quiet environments.\nSnake vision varies significantly among species. While some snakes have keen eyesight, others can only distinguish light from dark. However, most snakes possess visual acuity sufficient to track movement. Arboreal snakes generally have better vision than burrowing species. Some snakes, such as the Asian vine snake, possess binocular vision, enabling both eyes to focus on the same point. Most snakes focus by moving the lens back and forth relative to the retina. Diurnal snakes typically have round pupils, while many nocturnal species have slit pupils. Most snakes possess three visual pigments, allowing them to perceive two primary colors in daylight. Certain species, such as the annulated sea snake and members of the genus Helicops, have regained significant color vision as an adaptation to their aquatic environments. Research suggests that the last common ancestor of all snakes had UV-sensitive vision. However, many diurnal snakes have evolved lenses that filter out UV light, likely improving contrast and sharpening their vision.\nSkin.\nThe skin of a snake is covered in scales. Contrary to the popular notion of snakes being slimy (because of possible confusion of snakes with worms), snakeskin has a smooth, dry texture. Most snakes use specialized belly scales to travel, allowing them to grip surfaces. The body scales may be smooth, keeled, or granular. The eyelids of a snake are transparent \"spectacle\" scales, also known as brille, which remain permanently closed.\nFor a snake, the skin has been modified to its specialized form of locomotion. Between the inner layer and the outer layer lies the dermis, which contains all the pigments and cells that make up the snake's distinguishing pattern and color. The epidermis, or outer layer, is formed of a substance called keratin, which in mammals is the same basic material that forms nails, claws, and hair. The snake's epidermis of keratin provides it with the armor it needs to protect its internal organs and reduce friction as it passes over rocks. Parts of this keratin armor are rougher than others. The less restricted portion overlaps the front of the scale beneath it. Between them lies a folded back connecting material, also of keratin, also part of the epidermis. This folded back material gives as the snake undulates or eats things bigger than the circumference of its body.\nThe shedding of scales is called \"ecdysis\" (or in normal usage, \"molting\" or \"sloughing\"). Snakes shed the complete outer layer of skin in one piece. Snake scales are not discrete, but extensions of the epidermis\u2014hence they are not shed separately but as a complete outer layer during each molt, akin to a sock being turned inside out.\nSnakes have a wide diversity of skin coloration patterns which are often related to behavior, such as the tendency to have to flee from predators. Snakes that are at a high risk of predation tend to be plain, or have longitudinal stripes, providing few reference points to predators, thus allowing the snake to escape without being noticed. Plain snakes usually adopt active hunting strategies, as their pattern allows them to send little information to prey about motion. Blotched snakes usually use ambush-based strategies, likely because it helps them blend into an environment with irregularly shaped objects, like sticks or rocks. Spotted patterning can similarly help snakes to blend into their environment.\nThe shape and number of scales on the head, back, and belly are often characteristic and used for taxonomic purposes. Scales are named mainly according to their positions on the body. In \"advanced\" (Caenophidian) snakes, the broad belly scales and rows of dorsal scales correspond to the vertebrae, allowing these to be counted without the need for dissection.\nMolting.\nMolting (or \"ecdysis\") serves a number of purposes - it allows old, worn skin to be replaced and can be synced to mating cycles, as with other animals. Molting occurs periodically throughout the life of a snake. Before each molt, the snake regulates its diet and seeks defensible shelter. Just before shedding, the skin becomes grey and the snake's eyes turn silvery. The inner surface of the old skin liquefies, causing it to separate from the new skin beneath it. After a few days, the eyes clear and the snake reaches out of its old skin, which splits. The snake rubs its body against rough surfaces to aid in the shedding of its old skin. In many cases, the castaway skin peels backward over the body from head to tail in one piece, like taking the dust jacket off a book, revealing a new, larger, brighter layer of skin which has formed underneath. Renewal of the skin by molting supposedly increases the mass of some animals such as insects, but in the case of snakes this has been disputed. Shedding skin can release pheromones and revitalize color and patterns of the skin to increase attraction of mates.\nSnakes may shed four or five times a year, depending on the weather conditions, food supply, age of the snake, and other factors. It is theoretically possible to identify the snake from its cast skin if it is reasonably intact. Mythological associations of snakes with symbols of healing and medicine, as pictured in the Rod of Asclepius, are derivative of molting.\nOne can attempt to identify the sex of a snake when the species is not distinctly sexually dimorphic by counting scales. The cloaca is probed and measured against the subcaudal scales. Counting scales determines whether a snake is a male or female, as the hemipenes of a male being probed is usually longer.\nSkeleton.\nThe skull of a snake differs from a lizards in several ways. Snakes have more flexible jaws, that is, instead of a juncture at the upper and lower jaw, the snake's jaws are connected by a bone hinge that is called the quadrate bone. Between the two halves of the lower jaw at the chin there is an elastic ligament that allows for a separation. This allows the snake to swallow food larger in proportion to their size and go longer without it, since snakes ingest relatively more in one feeding. Because the sides of the lower jaw can move independently of one another, a snake resting its jaw on a surface has stereo auditory perception, used for detecting the position of prey. The jaw\u2013quadrate\u2013stapes pathway is capable of detecting vibrations on the angstrom scale, despite the absence of an outer ear and the lack of an impedance matching mechanism\u2014provided by the ossicles in other vertebrates. In a snake's skull the brain is well protected. As brain tissues could be damaged through the palate, this protection is especially valuable. The solid and complete neurocranium of snakes is closed at the front.\nThe skeleton of most snakes consists solely of the skull, hyoid, vertebral column, and ribs, though henophidian snakes retain vestiges of the pelvis and rear limbs. The hyoid is a small bone located posterior and ventral to the skull, in the 'neck' region, which serves as an attachment for the muscles of the snake's tongue, as it does in all other tetrapods. The vertebral column consists of between 200 and 400 vertebrae, or sometimes more. The body vertebrae each have two ribs articulating with them. The tail vertebrae are comparatively few in number (often less than 20% of the total) and lack ribs. The vertebrae have projections that allow for strong muscle attachment, enabling locomotion without limbs.\nCaudal autotomy (self-amputation of the tail), a feature found in some lizards, is absent in most snakes. In the rare cases where it does exist in snakes, caudal autotomy is intervertebral (meaning the separation of adjacent vertebrae), unlike that in lizards, which is intravertebral, i.e. the break happens along a predefined fracture plane present on a vertebra.\nIn some snakes, most notably boas and pythons, there are vestiges of the hindlimbs in the form of a pair of pelvic spurs. These small, claw-like protrusions on each side of the cloaca are the external portion of the vestigial hindlimb skeleton, which includes the remains of an ilium and femur.\nSnakes are polyphyodonts with teeth that are continuously replaced.\nInternal organs.\nSnakes and other non-archosaur (crocodilians, dinosaurs + birds and allies) reptiles have a three-chambered heart that controls the circulatory system via the left and right atrium, and one ventricle. Internally, the ventricle is divided into three interconnected cavities: the cavum arteriosum, the cavum pulmonale, and the cavum venosum. The cavum venosum receives deoxygenated blood from the right atrium and the cavum arteriosum receives oxygenated blood from the left atrium. Located beneath the cavum venosum is the cavum pulmonale, which pumps blood to the pulmonary trunk.\nThe snake's heart is encased in a sac, called the \"pericardium\", located at the bifurcation of the bronchi. The heart is able to move around, owing to the lack of a diaphragm; this adjustment protects the heart from potential damage when large ingested prey is passed through the esophagus. The spleen is attached to the gall bladder and pancreas and filters the blood. The thymus, located in fatty tissue above the heart, is responsible for the generation of immune cells in the blood. The cardiovascular system of snakes is unique for the presence of a renal portal system in which the blood from the snake's tail passes through the kidneys before returning to the heart.\nThe circulatory system of a snake is basically like those of any other vertebrae. However, snakes do not regulate internally the temperature of their blood. Called cold-blooded, snakes actually have blood that is responsive to the varying temperature of the immediate environment. Snakes can regulate blood temperature by moving. Too long in direct sunlight, the snakes' blood is heated beyond tolerance. Left in the ice or snow, the snake may freeze. In temperate zones with pronounced seasonal changes, snakes denning together have adapted to the onslaught of winter.\nThe vestigial left lung is often small or sometimes even absent, as snakes' tubular bodies require all of their organs to be long and thin. In the majority of species, only one lung is functional. This lung contains a vascularized anterior portion and a posterior portion that does not function in gas exchange. This 'saccular lung' is used for hydrostatic purposes to adjust buoyancy in some aquatic snakes and its function remains unknown in terrestrial species. Many organs that are paired, such as kidneys or reproductive organs, are staggered within the body, one located ahead of the other.\nThe snake with its particular arrangement of organs may achieve a greater efficiency. For example, the lung encloses at the part nearest the head and throat an oxygen intake organ, while the other half is used for air reserve. The esophagus-stomach-intestine arrangement is a straight line. It ends where intestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts open, in a chamber called the cloaca.\nSnakes have no lymph nodes.\nVenom.\nCobras, vipers, and closely related species use venom to immobilize, injure, or kill their prey. The venom is modified saliva, delivered through fangs. The fangs of 'advanced' venomous snakes like viperids and elapids are hollow, allowing venom to be injected more effectively, and the fangs of rear-fanged snakes such as the boomslang simply have a groove on the posterior edge to channel venom into the wound. Snake venoms are often prey-specific, and their role in self-defense is secondary.\nVenom, like all salivary secretions, is a predigestant that initiates the breakdown of food into soluble compounds, facilitating proper digestion. Even nonvenomous snakebites (like any animal bite) cause tissue damage.\nCertain birds, mammals, and other snakes (such as kingsnakes) that prey on venomous snakes have developed resistance and even immunity to certain venoms. Venomous snakes include three families of snakes, and do not constitute a formal taxonomic classification group.\nThe colloquial term \"poisonous snake\" is generally an incorrect label for snakes. A poison is inhaled or ingested, whereas venom produced by snakes is injected into its victim via fangs. There are, however, two exceptions: \"Rhabdophis\" sequesters toxins from the toads it eats, then secretes them from nuchal glands to ward off predators; and a small unusual population of garter snakes in the US state of Oregon retains enough toxins in their livers from ingested newts to be effectively poisonous to small local predators (such as crows and foxes).\nSnake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins, and are stored in venom glands at the back of the head. In all venomous snakes, these glands open through ducts into grooved or hollow teeth in the upper jaw. The proteins can potentially be a mix of neurotoxins (which attack the nervous system), hemotoxins (which attack the circulatory system), cytotoxins (which attack the cells directly), bungarotoxins (related to neurotoxins, but also directly affect muscle tissue), and many other toxins that affect the body in different ways. Almost all snake venom contains \"hyaluronidase\", an enzyme that ensures rapid diffusion of the venom.\nVenomous snakes that use hemotoxins usually have fangs in the front of their mouths, making it easier for them to inject the venom into their victims. Some snakes that use neurotoxins (such as the mangrove snake) have fangs in the back of their mouths, with the fangs curled backwards. This makes it difficult both for the snake to use its venom and for scientists to milk them. Elapids, however, such as cobras and kraits are \"proteroglyphous\"\u2014they possess hollow fangs that cannot be erected toward the front of their mouths, and cannot \"stab\" like a viper. They must actually bite the victim.\nIt has been suggested that all snakes may be venomous to a certain degree, with harmless snakes having weak venom and no fangs. According to this theory, most snakes that are labelled \"nonvenomous\" would be considered harmless because they either lack a venom delivery method or are incapable of delivering enough to endanger a human. The theory postulates that snakes may have evolved from a common lizard ancestor that was venomous, and also that venomous lizards like the gila monster, beaded lizard, monitor lizards, and the now-extinct mosasaurs, may have derived from this same common ancestor. They share this \"venom clade\" with various other saurian species.\nVenomous snakes are classified in two taxonomic families:\nThere is a third family containing the \"opistoglyphous\" (rear-fanged) snakes (as well as the majority of other snake species):\nReproduction.\nAlthough a wide range of reproductive modes are used by snakes, all employ internal fertilization. This is accomplished by means of paired, forked hemipenes, which are stored, inverted, in the male's tail. The hemipenes are often grooved, hooked, or spined\u2014designed to grip the walls of the female's cloaca. The clitoris of the female snake consists of two structures located between the cloaca and the scent glands.\nMost species of snakes lay eggs which they abandon shortly after laying. However, a few species (such as the king cobra) construct nests and stay in the vicinity of the hatchlings after incubation. Most pythons coil around their egg-clutches and remain with them until they hatch. A female python will not leave the eggs, except to occasionally bask in the sun or drink water. She will even \"shiver\" to generate heat to incubate the eggs.\nSome species of snake are ovoviviparous and retain the eggs within their bodies until they are almost ready to hatch. Several species of snake, such as the boa constrictor and green anaconda, are fully viviparous, nourishing their young through a placenta as well as a yolk sac; this is highly unusual among reptiles, and normally found in requiem sharks or placental mammals. Retention of eggs and live birth are most often associated with colder environments.\nSexual selection in snakes is demonstrated by the 3,000 species that each use different tactics in acquiring mates. Ritual combat between males for the females they want to mate with includes topping, a behavior exhibited by most viperids in which one male will twist around the vertically elevated fore body of its opponent and force it downward. It is common for neck-biting to occur while the snakes are entwined.\nFacultative parthenogenesis.\nParthenogenesis is a natural form of reproduction in which growth and development of embryos occur without fertilization. \"Agkistrodon contortrix\" (copperhead) and \"Agkistrodon piscivorus\" (cottonmouth) can reproduce by facultative parthenogenesis, meaning that they are capable of switching from a sexual mode of reproduction to an asexual mode. The most likely type of parthenogenesis to occur is automixis with terminal fusion, a process in which two terminal products from the same meiosis fuse to form a diploid zygote. This process leads to genome-wide homozygosity, expression of deleterious recessive alleles, and often to developmental abnormalities. Both captive-born and wild-born copperheads and cottonmouths appear to be capable of this form of parthenogenesis.\nReproduction in squamate reptiles is almost exclusively sexual. Males ordinarily have a ZZ pair of sex-determining chromosomes, and females a ZW pair. However, the Colombian Rainbow boa (\"Epicrates maurus\") can also reproduce by facultative parthenogenesis, resulting in production of WW female progeny. The WW females are likely produced by terminal automixis.\nEmbryonic development.\nSnake embryonic development initially follows similar steps as any vertebrate embryo. The snake embryo begins as a zygote, undergoes rapid cell division, forms a germinal disc, also called a blastodisc, then undergoes gastrulation, neurulation, and organogenesis. Cell division and proliferation continues until an early snake embryo develops and the typical body shape of a snake can be observed. Multiple features differentiate the embryologic development of snakes from other vertebrates, two significant factors being the elongation of the body and the lack of limb development.\nThe elongation in snake body is accompanied by a significant increase in vertebra count (mice have 60 vertebrae, whereas snakes may have over 300). This increase in vertebrae is due to an increase in somites during embryogenesis, leading to an increased number of vertebrae which develop. Somites are formed at the presomitic mesoderm due to a set of oscillatory genes that direct the somitogenesis clock. The snake somitogenesis clock operates at a frequency 4 times that of a mouse (after correction for developmental time), creating more somites, and therefore creating more vertebrae. This difference in clock speed is believed to be caused by differences in \"Lunatic fringe\" gene expression, a gene involved in the somitogenesis clock.\nThere is ample literature focusing on the limb development/lack of development in snake embryos and the gene expression associated with the different stages. In basal snakes, such as the python, embryos in early development exhibit a hind limb bud that develops with some cartilage and a cartilaginous pelvic element, however this degenerates before hatching. This presence of vestigial development suggests that some snakes are still undergoing hind limb reduction before they are eliminated. There is no evidence in basal snakes of forelimb rudiments and no examples of snake forelimb bud initiation in embryo, so little is known regarding the loss of this trait. Recent studies suggest that hind limb reduction could be due to mutations in enhancers for the SSH gene, however other studies suggested that mutations within the Hox Genes or their enhancers could contribute to snake limblessness. Since multiple studies have found evidence suggesting different genes played a role in the loss of limbs in snakes, it is likely that multiple gene mutations had an additive effect leading to limb loss in snakes.\nBehavior and life history.\nWinter dormancy.\nIn regions where winters are too cold for snakes to tolerate while remaining active, local species will enter a period of brumation. Unlike hibernation, in which the dormant mammals are actually asleep, brumating reptiles are awake but inactive. Individual snakes may brumate in burrows, under rock piles, or inside fallen trees, or large numbers of snakes may clump together in hibernacula.\nFeeding and diet.\nAll snakes are strictly carnivorous, preying on small animals including lizards, frogs, other snakes, small mammals, birds, eggs, fish, snails, worms, and insects. Snakes cannot bite or tear their food to pieces so must swallow their prey whole. The eating habits of a snake are largely influenced by body size; smaller snakes eat smaller prey. Juvenile pythons might start out feeding on lizards or mice and graduate to small deer or antelope as an adult, for example.\nThe snake's jaw is a complex structure. Contrary to the popular belief that snakes can dislocate their jaws, they have an extremely flexible lower jaw, the two halves of which are not rigidly attached, and numerous other joints in the skull, which allow the snake to open its mouth wide enough to swallow prey whole, even if it is larger in diameter than the snake itself. For example, the African egg-eating snake has flexible jaws adapted for eating eggs much larger than the diameter of its head. This snake has no teeth, but does have bony protrusions on the inside edge of its spine, which it uses to break the shell when eating eggs.\nThe majority of snakes eat a variety of prey animals, but there is some specialization in certain species. King cobras and the Australian bandy-bandy consume other snakes. Species of the family Pareidae have more teeth on the right side of their mouths than on the left, as they mostly prey on snails and the shells usually spiral clockwise.\nSome snakes have a venomous bite, which they use to kill their prey before eating it. Other snakes kill their prey by constriction, while some swallow their prey when it is still alive.\nAfter eating, snakes become dormant to allow the process of digestion to take place; this is an intense activity, especially after consumption of large prey. In species that feed only sporadically, the entire intestine enters a reduced state between meals to conserve energy. The digestive system is then 'up-regulated' to full capacity within 48\u00a0hours of prey consumption. Being ectothermic (\"cold-blooded\"), the surrounding temperature plays an important role in the digestion process. The ideal temperature for snakes to digest food is . There is a huge amount of metabolic energy involved in a snake's digestion, for example the surface body temperature of the South American rattlesnake (\"Crotalus durissus\") increases by as much as during the digestive process. If a snake is disturbed after having eaten recently, it will often regurgitate its prey to be able to escape the perceived threat. When undisturbed, the digestive process is highly efficient; the snake's digestive enzymes dissolve and absorb everything but the prey's hair (or feathers) and claws, which are excreted along with waste.\nHooding and spitting.\nHooding (expansion of the neck area) is a visual deterrent, mostly seen in cobras (elapids), and is primarily controlled by rib muscles. Hooding can be accompanied by spitting venom towards the threatening object, and producing a specialized sound; hissing. Studies on captive cobras showed that 13\u201322% of the body length is raised during hooding.\nLocomotion.\nThe lack of limbs does not impede the movement of snakes. They have developed several different modes of locomotion to deal with particular environments. Unlike the gaits of limbed animals, which form a continuum, each mode of snake locomotion is discrete and distinct from the others; transitions between modes are abrupt.\nLateral undulation.\nLateral undulation is the sole mode of aquatic locomotion, and the most common mode of terrestrial locomotion. In this mode, the body of the snake alternately flexes to the left and right, resulting in a series of rearward-moving \"waves\". While this movement appears rapid, snakes have rarely been documented moving faster than two body-lengths per second, often much less. This mode of movement has the same net cost of transport (calories burned per meter moved) as running in lizards of the same mass.\nTerrestrial lateral undulation is the most common mode of terrestrial locomotion for most snake species. In this mode, the posteriorly moving waves push against contact points in the environment, such as rocks, twigs, irregularities in the soil, etc. Each of these environmental objects, in turn, generates a reaction force directed forward and towards the midline of the snake, resulting in forward thrust while the lateral components cancel out. The speed of this movement depends upon the density of push-points in the environment, with a medium density of about 8 along the snake's length being ideal. The wave speed is precisely the same as the snake speed, and as a result, every point on the snake's body follows the path of the point ahead of it, allowing snakes to move through very dense vegetation and small openings.\nWhen swimming, the waves become larger as they move down the snake's body, and the wave travels backwards faster than the snake moves forwards. Thrust is generated by pushing their body against the water, resulting in the observed slip. In spite of overall similarities, studies show that the pattern of muscle activation is different in aquatic versus terrestrial lateral undulation, which justifies calling them separate modes. All snakes can laterally undulate forward (with backward-moving waves), but only sea snakes have been observed reversing the motion (moving backwards with forward-moving waves).\nSidewinding.\nMost often employed by colubroid snakes (colubrids, elapids, and vipers) when the snake must move in an environment that lacks irregularities to push against (rendering lateral undulation impossible), such as a slick mud flat, or a sand dune, sidewinding is a modified form of lateral undulation in which all of the body segments oriented in one direction remain in contact with the ground, while the other segments are lifted up, resulting in a peculiar \"rolling\" motion. The sidewinder moves forward by throwing a loop of itself and then pulling itself up by it. By lowering its head the snake gets leverage, straightening itself out and pressing itself against the ground, it brings itself forward and at an angle that leaves it ready for the next jump. The head and the loop are in effect the two feet upon which the snake walks. The snake's body, appearing roughly perpendicular to its direction, may bewilder the observer, since preconception may lead one to associate snake movement with a head that leads and a body that follows. It appears the sidewinder is going sideways - but precisely where the snake is going, where it wants to go, the head gives clear indication. The snake leaves behind a trail that looks like a series of hooks one after the next. Snakes can move backwards to retreat from an enemy, though they normally do not. This mode of locomotion overcomes the slippery nature of sand or mud by pushing off with only static portions on the body, thereby minimizing slipping. The static nature of the contact points can be shown from the tracks of a sidewinding snake, which show each belly scale imprint, without any smearing. This mode of locomotion has very low caloric cost, less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 of the cost for a lizard to move the same distance. Contrary to popular belief, there is no evidence that sidewinding is associated with the sand being hot.\nConcertina.\nWhen push-points are absent, but there is not enough space to use sidewinding because of lateral constraints, such as in tunnels, snakes rely on concertina locomotion. In this mode, the snake braces the posterior portion of its body against the tunnel wall while the front of the snake extends and straightens. The front portion then flexes and forms an anchor point, and the posterior is straightened and pulled forwards. This mode of locomotion is slow and very demanding, up to seven times the cost of laterally undulating over the same distance. This high cost is due to the repeated stops and starts of portions of the body as well as the necessity of using active muscular effort to brace against the tunnel walls.\nArboreal.\nThe movement of snakes in arboreal habitats has only recently been studied. While on tree branches, snakes use several modes of locomotion depending on species and bark texture. In general, snakes will use a modified form of concertina locomotion on smooth branches, but will laterally undulate if contact points are available. Snakes move faster on small branches and when contact points are present, in contrast to limbed animals, which do better on large branches with little 'clutter'.\nGliding snakes (\"Chrysopelea\") of Southeast Asia launch themselves from branch tips, spreading their ribs and laterally undulating as they glide between trees. These snakes can perform a controlled glide for hundreds of feet depending upon launch altitude and can even turn in midair.\nRectilinear.\nThe slowest mode of snake locomotion is rectilinear locomotion, which is also the only one where the snake does not need to bend its body laterally, though it may do so when turning. In this mode, the belly scales are lifted and pulled forward before being placed down and the body pulled over them. Waves of movement and stasis pass posteriorly, resulting in a series of ripples in the skin. The ribs of the snake do not move in this mode of locomotion and this method is most often used by large pythons, boas, and vipers when stalking prey across open ground as the snake's movements are subtle and harder to detect by their prey in this manner.\nInteractions with humans.\nBite.\nSnakes do not ordinarily prey on humans. Unless startled or injured, most snakes prefer to avoid contact and will not attack humans. With the exception of large constrictors, nonvenomous snakes are not a threat to humans. The bite of a nonvenomous snake is usually harmless; their teeth are not adapted for tearing or inflicting a deep puncture wound, but rather grabbing and holding. Although the possibility of infection and tissue damage is present in the bite of a nonvenomous snake, venomous snakes present far greater hazard to humans. The World Health Organization (WHO) lists snakebite under the \"other neglected conditions\" category.\nDocumented deaths resulting from snake bites are uncommon. Nonfatal bites from venomous snakes may result in the need for amputation of a limb or part thereof. Of the roughly 725 species of venomous snakes worldwide, only 250 are able to kill a human with one bite. Australia averages only one fatal snake bite per year. In India, 250,000 snakebites are recorded in a single year, with as many as 50,000 recorded initial deaths. The WHO estimates that on the order of 100,000 people die each year as a result of snake bites, and around three times as many amputations and other permanent disabilities are caused by snakebites annually.\nThe health of people is seriously threatened by snakebites, especially in areas where there is a great diversity of snakes and little access to medical care such as the Amazon Rainforest region in South America. Snakebite is classified by the World Health Organization (WHO) as \"other neglected conditions\". Although there aren't many recorded snakebite deaths, the bites can cause serious complications and permanent impairments. The most successful treatment for snakebites is still antivenom, which is made from snake venom. However, access to antivenom differs greatly by location, with rural areas frequently experiencing difficulties with both cost and availability. Clinical studies, serum preparation, and venom extraction are among the intricate procedures involved in the manufacturing of antivenom. The development of alternative treatments and increased accessibility and affordability of antivenom are essential for reducing the global impact of snake bites on human populations.\nSnake charmers.\nIn some parts of the world, especially in India, snake charming is a roadside show performed by a charmer. In such a show, the snake charmer carries a basket containing a snake that he seemingly charms by playing tunes with his flutelike musical instrument, to which the snake responds. The snake is in fact responding to the movement of the flute, not the sound it makes, as snakes lack external ears (though they do have internal ears).\nThe Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 in India technically prohibits snake charming on the grounds of reducing animal cruelty. Other types of snake charmers use a snake and mongoose show, where the two animals have a mock fight; however, this is not very common, as the animals may be seriously injured or killed. Snake charming as a profession is dying out in India because of competition from modern forms of entertainment and environment laws proscribing the practice. Many Indians have never seen snake charming and it is becoming a folktale of the past.\nTrapping.\nThe \"Irulas\" tribe of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in India have been hunter-gatherers in the hot, dry plains forests, and have practiced the art of snake catching for generations. They have a vast knowledge of snakes in the field. They generally catch the snakes with the help of a simple stick. Earlier, the \"Irulas\" caught thousands of snakes for the snake-skin industry. After the complete ban of the snake-skin industry in India and protection of all snakes under the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, they formed the Irula Snake Catcher's Cooperative and switched to catching snakes for removal of venom, releasing them in the wild after four extractions. The venom so collected is used for producing life-saving antivenom, biomedical research and for other medicinal products. The \"Irulas\" are also known to eat some of the snakes they catch and are very useful in rat extermination in the villages.\nDespite the existence of snake charmers, there have also been professional snake catchers or wranglers. Modern-day snake trapping involves a herpetologist using a long stick with a V-shaped end. Some television show hosts, like Bill Haast, Austin Stevens, Steve Irwin, and Jeff Corwin, prefer to catch them using bare hands.\nConsumption.\nConsuming snake flesh and related goods is a reflection of many cultures around the world, especially in Asian nations like China, Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Because of its supposed health benefits and aphrodisiac qualities, snake meat is frequently regarded as a delicacy and ingested. It is customary to drink wine laced with snake blood in an attempt to increase virility and vigor. Traditional Chinese medicine holds that snake wine, a traditional beverage infused with whole snakes, offers medicinal uses. Snake wine's origins are in Chinese culture. However, using snake goods creates moral questions about conservation and animal welfare. It is important to pay attention to and regulate the sustainable harvesting of snakes for human food, particularly in areas where snake populations are in decline as a result of habitat degradation and overexploitation.\nPets.\nIn the Western world, some snakes are kept as pets, especially docile species such as the ball python and corn snake. To meet the demand, a captive breeding industry has developed. Snakes bred in captivity are considered preferable to specimens caught in the wild and tend to make better pets. Compared with more traditional types of companion animal, snakes can be very low-maintenance pets; they require minimal space, as most common species do not exceed in length, and can be fed relatively infrequently\u2014usually once every five to fourteen days. Certain snakes have a lifespan of more than 40 years if given proper care.\nSymbolism.\nIn ancient Mesopotamia, Nirah, the messenger god of I\u0161taran, was represented as a serpent on \"kudurrus\", or boundary stones. Representations of two intertwined serpents are common in Sumerian art and Neo-Sumerian artwork and still appear sporadically on cylinder seals and amulets until as late as the thirteenth century BC. The horned viper (\"Cerastes cerastes\") appears in Kassite and Neo-Assyrian kudurrus and is invoked in Assyrian texts as a magical protective entity. A dragon-like creature with horns, the body and neck of a snake, the forelegs of a lion, and the hind-legs of a bird appears in Mesopotamian art from the Akkadian Period until the Hellenistic Period (323 BC\u201331 BC). This creature, known in Akkadian as the \"mu\u0161\u1e2bu\u0161\u0161u\", meaning \"furious serpent\", was used as a symbol for particular deities and also as a general protective emblem. It seems to have originally been the attendant of the Underworld god Ninazu, but later became the attendant to the Hurrian storm-god Tishpak, as well as, later, Ninazu's son Ningishzida, the Babylonian national god Marduk, the scribal god Nabu, and the Assyrian national god Ashur.\nIn Egyptian history, the snake occupies a primary role with the Nile cobra adorning the crown of the pharaoh in ancient times. It was worshipped as one of the gods and was also used for sinister purposes: murder of an adversary and ritual suicide (Cleopatra). The ouroboros was a well-known ancient Egyptian symbol of a serpent swallowing its own tail. The precursor to the ouroboros was the \"Many-Faced\", a serpent with five heads, who, according to the Amduat, the oldest surviving Book of the Afterlife, was said to coil around the corpse of the sun god Ra protectively. The earliest surviving depiction of a \"true\" ouroboros comes from the gilded shrines in the tomb of Tutankhamun. In the early centuries AD, the ouroboros was adopted as a symbol by Gnostic Christians and chapter 136 of the \"Pistis Sophia\", an early Gnostic text, describes \"a great dragon whose tail is in its mouth\". In medieval alchemy, the ouroboros became a typical western dragon with wings, legs, and a tail.\nIn the Bible, King Nahash of Ammon, whose name means \"Snake\", is depicted very negatively, as a particularly cruel and despicable enemy of the ancient Hebrews.\nThe ancient Greeks used the Gorgoneion, a depiction of a hideous face with serpents for hair, as an apotropaic symbol to ward off evil. In a Greek myth described by Pseudo-Apollodorus in his \"Bibliotheca\", Medusa was a Gorgon with serpents for hair whose gaze turned all those who looked at her to stone and was slain by the hero Perseus. In the Roman poet Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", Medusa is said to have once been a beautiful priestess of Athena, whom Athena turned into a serpent-haired monster after she was raped by the god Poseidon in Athena's temple. In another myth referenced by the Boeotian poet Hesiod and described in detail by Pseudo-Apollodorus, the hero Heracles is said to have slain the Lernaean Hydra, a multiple-headed serpent which dwelt in the swamps of Lerna.\nThe legendary account of the foundation of Thebes mentioned a monster snake guarding the spring from which the new settlement was to draw its water. In fighting and killing the snake, the companions of the founder Cadmus all perished\u2014leading to the term \"Cadmean victory\" (i.e. a victory involving one's own ruin).\nThree medical symbols involving snakes that are still used today are Bowl of Hygieia, symbolizing pharmacy, and the Caduceus and Rod of Asclepius, which are symbols denoting medicine in general.\nOne of the etymologies proposed for the common female first name \"Linda\" is that it might derive from Old German \"Lindi\" or \"Linda\", meaning a serpent.\nIndia is often called the land of snakes and is steeped in tradition regarding snakes. Snakes are worshipped as gods even today with many women pouring milk on snake pits (despite snakes' aversion for milk). The cobra is seen on the neck of Shiva and Vishnu is depicted often as sleeping on a seven-headed snake or within the coils of a serpent. There are also several temples in India solely for cobras sometimes called \"Nagraj\" (King of Snakes) and it is believed that snakes are symbols of fertility. There is a Hindu festival called Nag Panchami each year on which day snakes are venerated and prayed to. See also \"N\u0101ga\".\nThe snake is one of the 12 celestial animals of Chinese zodiac, in the Chinese calendar.\nMany ancient Peruvian cultures worshipped nature. They emphasized animals and often depicted snakes in their art.\nReligion.\nSnakes are used in Hinduism as a part of ritual worship. In the annual Nag Panchami festival, participants worship either live cobras or images of N\u0101gas. Lord Shiva is depicted in most images with a snake coiled around his neck. Puranic literature includes various stories associated with snakes, for example Shesha is said to hold all the planets of the Universe on his hoods and to constantly sing the glories of Vishnu from all his mouths. Other notable snakes in Hinduism are Vasuki, Takshaka, Karkotaka, and Pingala. The term \"N\u0101ga\" is used to refer to entities that take the form of large snakes in Hinduism and Buddhism.\nSnakes have been widely revered in many cultures, such as in ancient Greece where the serpent was seen as a healer. Asclepius carried a serpent wound around his wand, a symbol seen today on many ambulances. In Judaism, the snake of brass is also a symbol of healing, of one's life being saved from imminent death.\nIn religious terms, the snake and jaguar were arguably the most important animals in ancient Mesoamerica. \"In states of ecstasy, lords dance a serpent dance; great descending snakes adorn and support buildings from Chichen Itza to Tenochtitlan, and the Nahuatl word \"coatl\" meaning serpent or twin, forms part of primary deities such as Mixcoatl, Quetzalcoatl, and Coatlicue.\" In the Maya and Aztec calendars, the fifth day of the week was known as Snake Day.\nIn some parts of Christianity, the redemptive work of Jesus Christ is compared to saving one's life through beholding the Nehushtan (serpent of brass). Snake handlers use snakes as an integral part of church worship, to demonstrate their faith in divine protection. However, more commonly in Christianity, the serpent has been depicted as a representative of evil and sly plotting, as seen in the description in Genesis of a snake tempting Eve in the Garden of Eden. Saint Patrick is purported to have expelled all snakes from Ireland while converting the country to Christianity in the 5th century, thus explaining the absence of snakes there.\nIn Christianity and Judaism, the snake makes its infamous appearance in the first book of the Bible when a serpent appears before Adam and Eve and tempts them with the forbidden fruit from the Tree of Knowledge. The snake returns in the Book of Exodus when Moses turns his staff into a snake as a sign of God's power, and later when he makes the Nehushtan, a bronze snake on a pole that when looked at cured the people of bites from the snakes that plagued them in the desert. The serpent makes its final appearance symbolizing Satan in the Book of Revelation: \"And he laid hold on the dragon the old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.\"\nIn Neo-Paganism and Wicca, the snake is seen as a symbol of wisdom and knowledge. Additionally, snakes are sometimes associated with Hecate, the Greek goddess of witchcraft.\nMedicine.\nSeveral compounds from snake venoms are being researched as potential treatments or preventatives for pain, cancers, arthritis, stroke, heart disease, hemophilia, and hypertension, as well as to control bleeding (e.g., during surgery).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
