{"id": "20582", "revid": "19297870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20582", "title": "Mediation", "text": "Dispute resolution with assistance of a moderator\nMediation is a form of dispute resolution that resolves disputes between two or more parties, facilitated by an independent neutral third party known as the mediator. It is a structured, interactive process where the mediator assists the parties to negotiate a resolution or settlement through the use of specialized communication and negotiation techniques. All participants in mediation are encouraged to participate in the process actively. Mediation is \"party-centered,\" focusing on the needs, interests, and concerns of the individuals involved, rather than imposing a solution from an external authority. The mediator uses a wide variety of techniques to guide the process in a constructive direction and to help the parties find their optimal solution.\nMediation can take different forms, depending on the mediator's approach. In facilitative mediation, the mediator assists parties by fostering communication and helping them understand each other's viewpoints. In evaluative mediation, the mediator may assess the issues, identify possible solutions, and suggest ways to reach an agreement, but without prescribing a specific outcome. Mediation can be evaluative in that the mediator analyzes issues and relevant norms (\"reality-testing\"), while refraining from providing prescriptive advice to the parties (e.g., \"You should do...\"). Unlike a judge or arbitrator, mediators do not have the authority to make binding decisions, ensuring that the resolution reflects the voluntary agreement of the parties involved.\nThe term mediation broadly refers to any instance in which a third party helps others reach an agreement. More specifically, mediation has a structure, timetable, and dynamics that \"ordinary\" negotiation lacks. The process is private and confidential, possibly enforced by law. Participation is typically voluntary. The mediator acts as a neutral third party and facilitates rather than directs what the outcome of the process must be.\nMediation is becoming an internationally accepted way to end disputes. The Singapore Mediation Convention offers a relatively fast, inexpensive and predictable means of enforcing settlement agreements arising out of international commercial disputes. Mediation can be used to resolve disputes of any magnitude.\nMediation is not identical in all countries. In particular, there are some differences between mediation in countries with Anglo-Saxon legal traditions and countries with civil law traditions.\nMediators use various techniques to open, or improve, dialogue and empathy between disputants, aiming to help the parties reach an agreement. Much depends on the mediator's skill and training. As the practice has gained popularity, training programs, certifications and licensing have produced trained and professional mediators committed to their discipline.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe activity of mediation appeared in ancient times. The practice developed in Ancient Greece which knew the non-marital mediator as a \"proxenetas\"(\u03c0\u03c1\u03bf - pro = before + \u03be\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 - xenos =strangers), then in Roman civilization. (Roman law, starting from Justinian's \"Digest\" of 530\u2013533 CE) recognized mediation. The Romans called mediators by a variety of names, including \"internuncius\", \"medium\", \"intercessor\", \"philantropus\", \"interpolator\", \"conciliator\", \"interlocutor\", \"interpres\", and finally \"mediator\".\nFollowing the war against Rome, the Kushites sent mediators to Augustus, who was in Samos, and in the year 21/20 BC, a peace treaty was concluded.\nNow mediation is a form of professional service, and mediators are professionally trained for mediation.\nBenefits.\nThe benefits of mediation include:\nUses.\nIn addition to dispute resolution, mediation can function as a means of dispute prevention, such as facilitating the process of contract negotiation. Governments can use mediation to inform and to seek input from stakeholders in formulation or fact-seeking aspects of policy-making.\nMediation is applicable to disputes in many areas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWithin business and commercial mediation, frequently a distinction is made between business-to-business (B2B), business-to-employee (B2E) and business-to-consumer (B2C) situations.\nIndustrial relations.\nAustralia.\nADR, Alternative Dispute Resolution, began in industrial relations in Australia long before the arrival of the modern ADR movement. One of the first statutes passed by the Commonwealth parliament was the Conciliation\nand Arbitration Act 1904 (Cth). This allowed the Federal Government to pass laws on conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one state. Conciliation has been the most prominently used form of ADR, and is generally far removed from modern mediation.\nSignificant changes in state policy took place from 1996 to 2007. The 1996 Workplace Relations Act (Cth) sought to shift the industrial system away from a collectivist approach, where unions and the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (AIRC) had strong roles, to a more decentralized system of individual bargaining between employers and employees. The Act diminished the traditional role of the AIRC by placing the responsibility of resolving disputes at the enterprise level. This allowed mediation to be used to resolve industrial relations disputes instead of traditional conciliation.\nIn industrial relations under the 2006 WorkChoices amendments to the Workplace Relations Act. Examples of this use of mediation can be seen in recent enterprise bargaining negotiations.\nThe Australian government claimed the benefits of mediation to include the following:\nWorkplace matters.\nThe implementation of human resource management (HRM) policies and practices has evolved to focus on the individual worker, and rejects all other third parties such as unions and AIRC. HRM together with the political and economic changes undertaken by Australia's Howard government created an environment where private ADR can be fostered in the workplace.\nThe decline of unionism and the rise of the individual encouraged the growth of mediation. This is demonstrated in the industries with the lowest unionization rates such as in the private business sector having the greatest growth of mediation.\nThe 2006 Work Choices Act made further legislative changes to deregulate industrial relations. A key element of the new changes was to weaken the AIRC by encouraging competition with private mediation.\nA great variety of disputes occur in the workplace, including disputes between staff members, allegations of harassment, contractual disputes and workers compensation claims. At large, workplace disputes are between people who have an ongoing working relationship within a closed system, which indicate that mediation or a workplace investigation would be appropriate as dispute resolution processes. However the complexity of relationships, involving hierarchy, job security and competitiveness can complicate mediation.\nParty-directed mediation (PDM) is an emerging mediation approach particularly suited for disputes between co-workers, colleagues or peers, especially deep-seated interpersonal conflict, multicultural or multiethnic disputes. The mediator listens to each party separately in a pre-caucus or pre-mediation before ever bringing them into a joint session. Part of the pre-caucus also includes coaching and role plays. The idea is that the parties learn how to converse directly with their adversary in the joint session. Some unique challenges arise when organizational disputes involve supervisors and subordinates. The negotiated performance appraisal (NPA) is a tool for improving communication between supervisors and subordinates and is particularly useful as an alternate mediation model because it preserves the hierarchical power of supervisors while encouraging dialogue and dealing with differences in opinion.\nCommunity mediation.\nCommunity mediation centers, known also as Community Dispute Resolution (CDR) Programs, Community Conflict Resolution Programs, and Neighborhood Justice Centers, help individuals or groups in communities handle interpersonal or community disputes outside of formal court processes. Such organizations often serve populations that cannot afford to utilize the courts or professional ADR-providers, and use trained volunteer mediators to assist with their cases. Community programs typically provide mediation for disputes between landlords and tenants, members of homeowners associations, small businesses and consumers, and families. Many community programs offer their services for free or at a nominal fee. Some organizations also serve as a mediation training institute, and provide opportunities for community members to become certified in basic mediation training, or additional specialized mediation training. \nExperimental community mediation programs using volunteer mediators began in the early 1970s in several major U.S. cities. These proved to be so successful that hundreds of programs were founded throughout the country in the following two decades. In some jurisdictions, such as California, the parties have the option of making their agreement enforceable in court.\nIn Australia mediation was incorporated extensively into family law Family Law Act 1975 and the 2006 Amendments Mandatory, subject to certain exceptions, Family Dispute Resolution Mediation is required before courts will consider disputed parenting arrangements. The Family Dispute Resolution Practitioners who provide this service are accredited by the Attorney-General's Department.\nCommunity accountability is a community-based strategy for a group of friends, a family, a neighborhood, etc. come together outside of the criminal justice system or any punitive system and hold people accountable as a community using transformative justice, which may or may not include mediation.\nCommunity mediation centers often use restorative practices, which are deeply rooted in ancient and indigenous traditions worldwide, to build and repair relationships, particularly within schools and juvenile justice systems. \nPeer mediation.\nA peer mediator is one who resembles the disputants, such as being of similar age, attending the same school or having similar status in a business. Purportedly, peers can better relate to the disputants than an outsider.\nPeer mediation promotes social cohesion and aids development of protective factors that create positive school climates. The National Healthy School Standard (Department for Education and Skills, 2004) highlighted the significance of this approach to reducing bullying and promoting pupil achievement. Schools adopting this process recruit and train interested students to prepare them.\nPeace Pals is an empirically validated peer mediation program. It was studied over a 5-year period and revealed several positive outcomes including a reduction in elementary school violence and enhanced social skills, while creating a more positive, peaceful school climate.\nPeer mediation helped reduce crime in schools, saved counselor and administrator time, enhanced self-esteem, improved attendance and encouraged development of leadership and problem-solving skills among students. Such conflict resolution programs increased in U.S. schools 40% between 1991 and 1999.\nPeace Pals was studied in a diverse, suburban elementary school. Peer mediation was available to all students (N = 825). Significant and long-term reductions in school-wide violence over a five-year period occurred. The reductions included both verbal and physical conflict. Mediator knowledge made significant gains pertaining to conflict, conflict resolution and mediation, which was maintained at 3-month follow-up. Additionally, mediators and participants viewed the \"Peace Pals\" program as effective and valuable, and all mediation sessions resulted in successful resolution.\nCommercial disputes.\nThe commercial domain remains one of the most common applications of mediation, as measured by the number of mediators and the total value of disputes. The result of business mediation is typically a bilateral contract.\nCommercial mediation includes work in finance, insurance, ship-brokering, procurement and real estate. In some areas, mediators have specialized designations and typically operate under special laws. Generally, mediators cannot themselves practice commerce in markets for goods in which they work as mediators.\nProcurement mediation comprises disputes between a public body and a private body. In common law jurisdictions only regulatory stipulations on creation of supply contracts that derive from the fields of State Aids (EU Law and domestic application) or general administrative guidelines extend ordinary laws of commerce. The general law of contract applies in the UK accordingly. Procurement mediation occurs in circumstances after creation of the contract where a dispute arises in regard to the performance or payments. A Procurement mediator in the UK may choose to specialise in this type of contract or a public body may appoint an individual to a specific mediation panel.\nNative-title mediation.\nIn response to the Mabo decision, the Australian Government sought to engage the population and industry on Mabo's implications for land tenure and use by enacting the Native Title Act 1993 (Cth), which required mediation as a mechanism to determine future native title rights. The process incorporated the Federal Court and the National Native Title Tribunal (NNTT). Mediation can occur in parallel with legal challenges, such as occurred in Perth.\nSome features of native title mediation that distinguish it from other forms include lengthy time frames, the number of parties (ranging on occasion into the hundreds) and that statutory and case law prescriptions constrain some aspects of the negotiations.\nGlobal relevance.\nMediation's effectiveness in trans-border disputes has been questioned, but an understanding of fundamental mediation principles points to the unlimited potential of mediation in such disputes. Mediators explicitly address and manage cultural and language differences in detail during the process. Voluntary referral to mediation is not required\u2014much mediation to reach the table through binding contractual provisions, statutes, treaties, or international agreements and accords. The principle of voluntariness applies to the right of parties to self-determination once they are in the mediation\u2014not to the mechanism for initiating the mediation process. Much mediation also results form mutual consent because they are non-binding and they encourage the exploration of interests and mutual benefits of an agreement. Because the parties, themselves, create the terms of agreement, compliance with mediated settlement agreements is relatively high. Any compliance or implementation issues can be addressed by follow-up mediation, regular compliance monitoring, and other processes.\nProcess.\nRoles.\nMediation is in contrast to the process common in a court of law where advocates engage in contentious litigation on behalf of their clients, arguing before a parental figure such as a judge or arbitrator. Both advocates and arbitrator effectively deprive the disputants of any responsibility for the outcome by imposing a solution.\nDuring mediation the participants have to take personal responsibility for resolving their issues. The mediator takes no part other than to reduce the emotional temperature and facilitate full and frank exchange of views, \"reframing\" aggressive or insulting language into a rational, neutral statement of fact.\nMediator.\nThe mediator's primary role is to act as a neutral third party who facilitates discussions between the parties. In addition, a mediator serves in an evaluative role when they analyze, assess the issues, and engage in reality-testing. A mediator is neutral and they are not the agent of any party. In their role, mediators do not offer prescriptive advice (e.g., \"You should settle this case,\" or, \"Your next offer should be X.\"). Mediators also manage the interaction between the parties and encourage constructive communication through the use of specialized communication techniques.\nFinally, the mediator should restrict pressure, aggression and intimidation, demonstrate how to communicate through employing good speaking and listening skills, and paying attention to non-verbal messages and other signals emanating from the context of the mediation and possibly contributing expertise and experience. The mediator should direct the parties to focus on issues and stay away from personal attacks.\nParties.\nThe role of the parties varies according to their motivations and skills, the role of legal advisers, the model of mediation, the style of mediator and the culture in which the mediation takes place. Legal requirements may also affect their roles. Party-directed mediation (PDM) is an emerging approach involving a pre-caucus between the mediator and each of the parties before going into the joint session. The idea is to help the parties improve their interpersonal negotiation skills so that in the joint session they can address each other with little mediator interference.\nAuthority.\nOne of the general requirements for successful mediation is that those representing the respective parties have full authority to negotiate and settle the dispute. If this is not the case, then there is what Spencer and Brogan refer to as the \"empty chair\" phenomenon, that is, the person who ought to be discussing the problem is simply not present.\nPreparation.\nThe parties' first role is to consent to mediation, possibly before preparatory activities commence. Parties then prepare in much the same way they would for other varieties of negotiations. Parties may provide position statements, valuation reports and risk assessment analysis. The mediator may supervise/facilitate their preparation and may require certain preparations.\nDisclosure.\nAgreements to mediate, mediation rules, and court-based referral orders may have disclosure requirements. Mediators may have express or implied powers to direct parties to produce documents, reports and other material. In court-referred mediations parties usually exchange with each other all material which would be available through discovery or disclosure rules were the matter to proceed to hearing, including witness statements, valuations and statement accounts.\nParticipation.\nMediation requires direct input from the parties. Parties must attend and participate in the mediation meeting. Some mediation rules require parties to attend in person. Participation at one stage may compensate for absence at another stage.\nMeeting.\nThe typical mediation has no formal compulsory elements, although some elements usually occur:\nIndividual mediators vary these steps to match specific circumstances, given that the law does not ordinarily govern mediators' methods.\nPost-mediation activities.\nRatification and review.\nRatification and review provide safeguards for mediating parties. They also provide an opportunity for persons not privy to the mediation to undermine the result.\nSome mediated agreements require ratification by an external body\u2014such as a board, council or cabinet. In some situations, the sanctions of a court or other external authority must explicitly endorse a mediation agreement. Thus if a grandparent or other non-parent is granted residence rights in a family dispute, a court counselor will be required to furnish a report to the court on the merits of the proposed agreement to aid the court's ultimate disposition of the case.\nIn other situations, it may be agreed to have agreements reviewed by lawyers, accountants or other professional advisers.\nThe implementation of mediated agreements must comply with the statues and regulations of the governing jurisdiction.\nParties to a private mediation may also wish to obtain court sanction for their decisions. Under the Queensland regulatory scheme on court-connected mediation, mediators are required to file with a registrar a certificate about the mediation in a form prescribed in the regulations. A party may subsequently apply to a relevant court an order giving effect to the agreement reached. Where court sanction is not obtained, mediated settlements have the same status as any other agreements.\nReferrals.\nMediators may at their discretion refer one or more parties to psychologists, accountants, social workers or others for post-mediation professional assistance.\nMediator debriefing.\nIn some situations, a post-mediation debriefing and feedback session is conducted between co-mediators or between mediators and supervisors. It involves a reflective analysis and evaluation of the process. In many community mediation services debriefing is compulsory and mediators are paid for the debriefing session.\nMeasuring effectiveness.\nIn addition to the fact of reaching a settlement, party satisfaction and mediator competence can be measured. Surveys of mediation parties reveal strong levels of satisfaction with the process. Of course, if parties are generally satisfied post-settlement, then such measures may not be particularly explanatory.\nMediators.\nEducation and training.\nThe educational requirements for accreditation as a mediator differ between accrediting groups and from country to country. In some cases legislation mandates requirements; in others professional bodies impose accreditation standards. Many US universities offer graduate studies in mediation.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, there are two educational standards. One for entry level mediators and another for professionals wanting to become Family Dispute Resolution Practitioners (Family Law Mediators).\nBoth levels of accreditation have requirements regarding ongoing professional development, professional indemnity insurance and good character.\nNot all kinds of mediation-work require academic qualifications, as some deal more with practical skills than with theoretical knowledge. Membership organizations can be recognised under AMDRAS to provide training courses.\nInternationally a similar approach to the training of mediators is taken by organizations such as the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution, CEDR. Based in London, it has trained over 5000 CEDR mediators from different countries to date.\nNo legislated national standards on the level of education apply to all practitioners' organizations. However, organizations such as the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory Council (NADRAC) advocate for a wide scope on such issues. Other systems apply in other jurisdictions such as Germany, which advocates a higher level of educational qualification for practitioners of mediation.\nCodes of conduct.\nCommon elements of codes of conduct include:\nAustralia.\nIn Australia mediation codes of conduct are articulated in the AMDRAS which includes practice expectations and a code of conduct superseding the NMAS in 2025.\nA number of professional associations for mediators and law societies also have developed Codes of Conduct or similar.\nEurope\nThe CPR/Georgetown Ethics Commission, the Mediation Forum of the Union International des Avocats, and the European Commission have promulgated codes of conduct for mediators.\nCanada.\nIn Canada codes of conduct for mediators are set by professional organizations. In Ontario three distinct professional organizations maintain codes of conduct for mediators. The Family Dispute Resolution Institute of Ontario and the Ontario Association of Family Mediators set standards for their members who mediate family matters and the Alternative Dispute Resolution Institute of Ontario who sets standards for their members.\nThe Alternative Dispute Resolution Institute of Ontario, a regional affiliate of the Alternative Dispute Resolution Institute of Canada, uses the code of conduct from the federal organization to regulate the conduct of its members. The Code's three objectives are to provide guiding principles for the conduct of mediators; to promote confidence in mediation as a process for resolving disputes; and to provide protection for members of the public who use mediators who are members of the institute.\nIn British Columbia, Mediate BC Society sets and maintains Standards of Conduct for its Registered Roster Mediators (RRMs) and Associates and Standards of Conduct for Med-Arbitrators on its Med-Arb roster. Mediate BC Society is a non-profit society that \"serves and protects the public by promoting professionalism and quality in mediation and other collaborative dispute resolution processes.\"\nFrance.\nIn France, professional mediators have created an organization to develop a rational approach to conflict resolution. This approach is based on a \"scientific\" definition of a person and a conflict. These definitions help to develop a structured mediation process. Mediators have adopted a code of ethics which guarantees professionalism.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, the process and responsibilities of a mediator are legally defined in the Mediation Act 2012 (\"Mediationsgesetz\"). The Act codifies the general process (facilitation by a neutral, 3rd-party mediator without evaluation or solution proposals) and specific terms (e.g. \"funktionaler Mediator\"). Mediators have certain information and disclosure obligations as well as limitations of practice. In particular, a person who has previously provided any form of counseling to any party in the conflict (legal, social, financial, etc.) may not act as a mediator in the case. The Act applies to practitioners even if they refer to their approach not as mediation, but facilitation (\"Prozessbegleitung\"), conciliation (\"Schlichtung\"), conflict counseling (\"Konflikt-Beratung\") or anything else.\nAccreditation.\nAustralia.\nA range of organisations within Australia accredit mediators under the standards set by AMDRAS.\nThe National Mediator Accreditation System (NMAS) commenced operation on 1 January 2008. It is an industry-based scheme which relies on voluntary compliance by mediator organisations that agree to accredit mediators in accordance with the requisite standards. It was replaced in 2024 - 2025 by the AMDRAS.\nMediator organisations have varying ideals of what makes a good mediator which reflect the training and accreditation of that particular organisation but to be recognised as AMDRAS training they must comply to certain norms.\nGermany.\nAccording to sec. 6 German Mediation Act the German government on June 21, 2016, has released the German regulation about education and training of the so-called (legal term) \"certified mediators\" which from Sept. 1, 2017 postulates a minimum of 120 hours of initial specialized mediator training as well as case supervision and further ongoing training of 40 hours within 4 years. Beyond this basic qualification, the leading mediation associations (BAFM, BM, BMWA and DGM) have agreed on quality standards higher than the minimum standards of the national regulation to certify their mediators. To become an accredited mediator of these associations one has to complete an accredited mediation training program of a minimum of 200 hours incl. 30 hours of supervision as well as ongoing training (30\u201340 hours within three years).\"\nSelection.\nMediator selection is of practical significance given varying models of mediation, mediators' discretion in structuring the process and the impact of the mediator's professional background and personal style on the result.\nIn community mediation programs the director generally assigns mediators. In New South Wales, for example, when the parties cannot agree on a mediator, the registrar contacts a nominating entity, such as the Bar Association which supplies the name of a qualified and experienced mediator.\nAs of 2006, formal mechanisms for objecting to the appointment of a particular mediator had not been established. Parties could ask the mediator to withdraw for reasons of conflict of interest. In some cases, legislation establishes criteria for mediators.\nThe Australian Attorney Generals Department maintains a register of registered Family Dispute Resolution Practitioners and Government Funded FDR Services located at https://\nCriteria.\nThe following are useful criteria for selecting a mediator:\nThird party nomination.\nContracts that specify mediation may also specify a third party to suggest or impose an individual. Some third parties simply maintain a list of approved individuals, while others train mediators. Lists may be \"open\" (any person willing and suitably qualified can join) or a \"closed\" panel (invitation only).\nIn the UK and internationally, lists are generally open, such as The Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution. Alternatively, private panels co-exist and compete for appointments e.g., Savills Mediation.\nLiability.\nLegal liability may stem from a mediation. For example, a mediator could be liable for misleading the parties or for even inadvertently breaching confidentiality. Despite such risks, follow-on court action is quite uncommon. Only one case reached that stage in Australia as of 2006. Damage awards are generally compensatory in nature. Proper training is mediators' best protection.\nLiability can arise for the mediator from Liability in Contract; Liability in Tort; and Liability for Breach of Fiduciary Obligations.\nLiability in Contract arises if a mediator breaches (written or verbal) contract with one or more parties. The two forms of breach are \"failure to perform\" and \"anticipatory breach\". Limitations on liability include the requirement to show actual causation.\nLiability in Tort arises if a mediator influences a party in any way (compromising the integrity of the decision), defames a party, breaches confidentiality, or most commonly, is negligent. To be awarded damages, the party must show actual damage, and must show that the mediator's actions (and not the party's actions) were the actual cause of the damage.\nLiability for Breach of Fiduciary Obligations can occur if parties misconceive their relationship with a mediator as something other than neutrality. Since such liability relies on a misconception, court action is unlikely to succeed.\nTapoohi v Lewenberg (Australia).\nAs of 2008 Tapoohi v Lewenberg was the only case in Australia that set a precedent for mediators' liability.\nThe case involved two sisters who settled an estate via mediation. Only one sister attended the mediation in person: the other participated via telephone with her lawyers present. An agreement was executed. At the time it was orally expressed that before the final settlement, taxation advice should be sought as such a large transfer of property would trigger capital gains taxes.\nTapoohi paid Lewenberg $1.4\u00a0million in exchange for land. One year later, when Tapoohi realized that taxes were owed, she sued her sister, lawyers and the mediator based on the fact that the agreement was subject to further taxation advice.\nThe original agreement was verbal, without any formal agreement. Tapoohi, a lawyer herself, alleged that the mediator breached his contractual duty, given the lack of any formal agreement; and further alleged tortious breaches of his duty of care.\nAlthough the court dismissed the summary judgment request, the case established that mediators owe a duty of care to parties and that parties can hold them liable for breaching that duty of care. Habersberger J held it \"not beyond argument\" that the mediator could be in breach of contractual and tortious duties. Such claims were required to be assessed at a trial court hearing.\nThis case emphasized the need for formal mediation agreements, including clauses that limit mediators' liability.\nUnited States.\nWithin the United States, the laws governing mediation vary by state. Some states have clear expectations for certification, ethical standards and confidentiality. Some also exempt mediators from testifying in cases they've worked on. However, such laws only cover activity within the court system. Community and commercial mediators practising outside the court system may not have such legal protections. State laws regarding lawyers may differ widely from those that cover mediators. Professional mediators often consider the option of liability insurance.\nVariants.\nEvaluative mediation.\nEvaluative mediation is focused on providing the parties with an evaluation of their case and directing them toward settlement. During an evaluative mediation process, when the parties agree that the mediator should do so, the mediator will express a view on what might be a fair or reasonable settlement. The Evaluative mediator has somewhat of an advisory role in that he/she evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of each side's argument and make some predictions about what would happen should they go to court. Facilitative and transformative mediators do not evaluate arguments or direct the parties to a particular settlement.\nIn Germany, due to national regulation \"evaluative mediation\" is seen as an oxymoron and not allowed by the German mediation Act. Therefore, in Germany mediation is purly facilitative. In Australia, the industry accepted definition of mediation involves a mediator adopting a non advisory and non determinative approach. However, there is also provision under the National Mediator Accreditation Standards for mediators to offer a 'blended' approach provided that participants consent to such a process in writing, the mediator is appropriately insured and has the expertise required.\nFacilitative mediation.\nFacilitative mediators typically do not evaluate a case or direct the parties to a particular settlement. Instead, the Facilitative mediator facilitates the conversation. These mediators act as guardian of the process, not the content or the outcome. During a facilitative mediation session the parties in dispute control both what will be discussed and how their issues will be resolved. Unlike the transformative mediator, the facilitative mediator is focused on helping the parties find a resolution to their dispute and to that end, the facilitative mediator provides a structure and agenda for the discussion.\nTransformative mediation.\nTransformative mediation looks at conflict as a crisis in communication. Success is not measured by settlement but by the parties shifts toward (a) personal strength, (b) interpersonal responsiveness, (c) constructive interaction, (d) new understandings of themselves and their situation, (e) critically examining the possibilities, (f) feeling better about each other, and (g) making their own decisions. Those decisions can include settlement agreements or not. Transformative mediation practice is focused on supporting empowerment and recognition shifts, by allowing and encouraging deliberation, decision-making, and perspective-taking. A competent transformative mediator practices with a microfocus on communication, identifying opportunities for empowerment and recognition as those opportunities appear in the parties' own conversations, and responding in ways that provide an opening for parties to choose what, if anything, to do with them.\nNarrative mediation.\nThe narrative approach to mediation shares with narrative therapy an emphasis on constructing stories as a basic human activity in understanding our lives and conflict. This approach emphasizes the sociological/psychological nature of conflict-saturated narratives, and values human creativity in acting and reacting to these narratives. \"The narrative metaphor draws attention to the ways in which we use stories to make sense of our lives and our relationship.\" Narrative mediation advocates changing the way we speak about conflicts. In objectifying the conflict narrative, participants become less attached to the problem and more creative in seeking solutions. \"The person is not the problem; the problem is the problem\" according to narrative mediation.\nMediation with arbitration.\nMediation has sometimes been utilized to good effect when coupled with arbitration, particularly binding arbitration, in a process called 'mediation/arbitration'. The process begins as a standard mediation, but if mediation fails, the mediator becomes an arbiter.\nThis process is more appropriate in civil matters where rules of evidence or jurisdiction are not in dispute. It resembles, in some respects, criminal plea-bargaining and Confucian judicial procedure, wherein the judge also plays the role of prosecutor\u2014rendering what, in Western European court procedures, would be considered an arbitral (even 'arbitrary') decision.\nMediation/arbitration hybrids can pose significant ethical and process problems for mediators. Many of the options and successes of mediation relate to the mediator's unique role as someone who wields no coercive power over the parties or the outcome. The parties awareness that the mediator might later act in the role of judge could distort the process. Using a different individual as the arbiter addresses this concern.\nOnline.\nOnline mediation employs online technology to provide disputants access to mediators and each other despite geographic distance, disability or other barriers to direct meeting. Online approaches also facilitate mediation when the value of the dispute does not justify the cost of face-to-face contact. Online mediation can also combine with face-to-face mediation\u2014to allow mediation to begin sooner and/or to conduct preliminary discussions.\nThe global pandemic provided the opportunity for online mediation to expand and thrive with many mediators continue to offer their services fully or partially via online mediation.\nBiased mediation.\nVarious criteria exist to determine whether a mediator is biased, including their prejudices from before the mediation process, their performance during the mediation itself, and the end goal they pursue through their mediation. Neutral mediators enter into a conflict with the main intention in ending a conflict. This goal tends to hasten a mediator to reach a conclusion. Biased mediators enter into a conflict with specific biases in favor of one party or another. Biased mediators look to protect their parties interest thus leading to a better, more lasting resolution.\nAlternatives.\nMediation is one of several approaches to resolving disputes. It differs from adversarial resolution processes by virtue of its simplicity, informality, flexibility, and economy. Mediation provides the opportunity for parties to agree terms and resolve issues by themselves, without the need for legal representation or court hearings.\nNot all disputes lend themselves well to mediation. Success is unlikely unless:\nConciliation.\n\"Conciliation\" sometimes serves as an umbrella term that covers mediation and facilitative and advisory dispute-resolution processes. Neither process determines an outcome, and both share many similarities. For example, both processes involve a neutral third-party who has no enforcing powers.\nOne significant difference between conciliation and mediation lies in the fact that conciliators possess expert knowledge of the domain in which they conciliate. The conciliator can make suggestions for settlement terms and can give advice on the subject-matter. Conciliators may also use their role to actively encourage the parties to come to a resolution. In certain types of dispute the conciliator has a duty to provide legal information. This helps ensure that agreements comply with relevant statutory frameworks. Therefore, conciliation may include an advisory aspect.\nMediation is purely facilitative: the mediator has no advisory role. Instead, a mediator seeks to help parties to develop a shared understanding of the conflict and to work toward building a practical and lasting resolution.\nBoth mediation and conciliation work to identify the disputed issues and to generate options that help disputants reach a mutually satisfactory resolution. They both offer relatively flexible processes. Any settlement reached generally must have the agreement of all parties. This contrasts with litigation, which normally settles the dispute in favour of the party with the strongest legal argument. In-between the two operates collaborative law, which uses a facilitative process where each party has counsel.\nCounselling.\nA counsellor generally uses therapeutic techniques. Some\u2014such as a particular line of questioning\u2014may be useful in mediation. But the role of the counsellor differs from the role of the mediator. The list below is not exhaustive but it gives an indication of important distinctions:\nEarly neutral evaluation.\nThe technique of \"early neutral evaluation\" (ENE) have focus on market ineterships, and\u2014based on that focus\u2014offers a basis for sensible case-management or a suggested resolution of the entire case in its very early stages.\nIn early neutral evaluation, an evaluator acts as a neutral person to assess the strengths and weaknesses of each of the parties and to discuss the same with parties jointly or in caucuses, so that parties gain awareness (via independent evaluation) of the merits of their case.\nParties generally call on a senior counsel or on a panel with expertise and experience in the subject-matter under dispute in order to conduct ENE.\nArbitration.\nBinding Arbitration is a more direct substitute for the formal process of a court. Binding Arbitration is typically conducted in front of one or three arbitrators. The process is much like a mini trial with rules of evidence, etc. Arbitration typically proceeds faster than court and typically at a lower cost. The Arbiter makes the ultimate decision rather than the parties. Arbiters' decisions are typically final and appeals are rarely successful even if the decision appears to one party to be completely unreasonable.\nLitigation.\nIn litigation, courts impose their thoughts to both parties Courts in some cases refer litigants to mediation. Mediation is typically less costly, less formal and less complex. Unlike courts, mediation does not ensure binding agreements and the mediator does not decide the outcome.\nShuttle diplomacy.\nWhile mediation implies bringing disputing parties face-to-face with each other, the strategy of \"shuttle diplomacy\", where the mediator serves as a liaison between disputing parties, also sometimes occurs as an alternative.\nPhilosophy.\nConflict prevention.\nMediation can anticipate difficulties between parties before conflict emerges. Complaint handling and management is a conflict prevention mechanism designed to handle a complaint effectively at first contact, minimising the possibility of a dispute. One term for this role is \"dispute preventer\".\nConfidentiality.\nOne of the hallmarks of mediation is that the process is strictly confidential. Two competing principles affect confidentiality. One principle encourages confidentiality to encourage people to participate, while the second principle states that all related facts should be available to courts.\nThe mediator must inform the parties of their responsibility for confidentiality.\nSteps put in place during mediation to help ensure this privacy include:\nConfidentiality is a powerful and attractive feature of mediation. It lowers the risk to participants of disclosing information and emotions and encourages realism by eliminating the benefits of posturing. In general, information discussed in mediation cannot be used as evidence in the event that the matter proceeds to court, in accord with the mediation agreement and common law.\nFew mediations succeed unless the parties can communicate fully and openly without fear of compromising a potential court case. The promise of confidentiality mitigates such concerns. Organisations often see confidentiality as a reason to use mediation in lieu of litigation, particularly in sensitive areas. This contrasts with the public nature of courts and other tribunals. However mediation need not be private and confidential. In some circumstances the parties agree to open the mediation in part or whole. Laws may limit confidentiality. For example, mediators must disclose allegations of physical or other abuse to authorities. The more parties in a mediation, the less likely that perfect confidentiality will be maintained. Some parties may even be required to give an account of the mediation to outside constituents or authorities.\nMost countries respect mediator confidentiality.\nWithout-prejudice privilege.\nThe without-prejudice privilege in common law denotes that in honest attempts to reach settlement, any offers or admissions cannot be used in court when the subject matter is the same. This applies to the mediation process. The rule comes with exceptions.\nThe without-prejudice privilege does not apply if it was excluded by either party or if the privilege was waived in proceedings. Although mediation is private and confidential, the disclosure of privileged information in the presence of a mediator does not represent a waiver of the privilege.\nLegal implications.\nParties who enter into mediation do not forfeit legal rights or remedies. If mediation does not result in settlement, each side can continue to enforce their rights through appropriate court or tribunal procedures. However, if mediation produces a settlement, legal rights and obligations are affected in differing degrees. In some situations, the parties may accept a memorandum or moral force agreement; these are often found in community mediations. In other instances, a more comprehensive deed of agreement, when registered with a court, is legally binding. It is advisable to have a lawyer draft or provide legal advice about the proposed terms.\n\"Court systems are eager to introduce mandatory mediation as a means to meet their needs to reduce case loads and adversarial litigation, and participants who understand the empowerment of mediation to self-determine their own agreements are equally as eager to embrace mediation as an alternative to costly and potentially harmful litigation.\"\nPrinciples.\nPrinciples of mediation include non-adversarialism, responsiveness, self-determination and party autonomy.\nNon-adversarialism is based on the actual process of mediation. It treats the parties as collaborating in the construction of an agreement. By contrast, litigation is explicitly adversarial in that each party attempts to subject the other to its views. Mediation is designed to conclude with an agreement rather than a winner and loser.\nResponsiveness reflects the intent to allow the parties to craft a resolution outside of the strict rules of the legal system. A responsive mediation process also is informal, flexible and collaborative.\nSelf-determination and party autonomy allow and require parties to choose the area of agreement, rather than ceding the decision to an outside decision-maker such as a judge. This turns the responsibility for the outcome onto the parties themselves.\nIn the United States, mediator codes-of-conduct emphasize \"client-directed\" solutions rather than imposed solutions. This has become a common, definitive feature of mediation in the US and UK.\nEthics.\nTheorists, notably Rushworth Kidder, who founded the Institute for Global Ethics in 1980, claimed that mediation is the foundation of a 'postmodern' ethics\u2014and that it sidesteps traditional ethical issues with pre-defined limits of morality.\nMediation can also be seen as a form of harm reduction or de-escalation, especially in its large-scale application in peace and similar negotiations, or the bottom-up way it is performed in the peace movement where it is often called mindful mediation. This form derived from methods of Quakers in particular.\nConflict management.\nSociety perceives conflict as something that one should resolve as quickly as possible. Mediators see conflict as a fact of life that when properly managed can benefit the parties. The benefits of conflict include the opportunity to renew relationships and make positive changes for the future.\nMediation in Ukraine.\nMediation in Ukraine has evolved significantly since the country's independence in 1991. Initially, mediation practices were informal and lacked a standardized legal framework. The adoption of the Law of Ukraine \"On Mediation\" in November 2021 marked a pivotal moment, formally recognizing mediation as an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) method within the Ukrainian legal system. This legislation defines mediation, establishes its principles, outlines the scope of its application, and sets forth requirements for mediators, including their rights and obligations\nThe law permits mediation across various legal domains, such as civil, commercial, labor, administrative, and certain criminal matters at any stage of judicial or arbitration proceedings. It also aligns with European standards for access to justice, as stipulated in Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\nProfessional organizations have played a crucial role in advancing mediation in Ukraine. The National Association of Mediators of Ukraine (NAMU), established in 2014, serves as a central body for mediators, promoting best practices and professional development. Additionally, the Ukrainian Academy of Mediation (UAM) focuses on training and certifying mediators, providing mediation for Ukrainians. The largest specialized event in Ukraine is International Forum \"Mediation and Law\", brought together professionals from Ukraine and abroad to assess the implementation of mediation and promote best practices in alternative dispute resolution.\nThe war in Ukraine has underscored the importance of mediation in addressing both interpersonal and broader societal disputes. Organizations like the League of Mediators of Ukraine have been instrumental in providing mediation services, particularly in family disputes exacerbated by the war.\nDespite these advancements, challenges persist. Public awareness of mediation remains limited, and there is a need for increased institutional support and integration of mediation into the broader justice system.\nRole in nonviolent conflict resolution.\nMediation can be used as a tool in nonviolent conflict resolution by enabling people to resolve conflict, express their needs, and build understanding without the use of violence. Mediation creates a structured space for dialogue where parties can express their perspectives and interests, and may reduce escalation that is fueled by misunderstanding or mistrust. Mediation is not only about resolving a single or small set of disputes, but it can model nonviolent communication, teach collaborative problem-solving skills, and strengthen a community's capacity to address future conflicts, ultimately supporting a culture that is less dependent on punitive systems and that provides individuals and communities with greater opportunities to self-govern conflict and its resolution. By creating a space where parties can articulate harms and create agreements that address such harms by voluntary means, mediation reinforces the idea that accountability is not the same as punishment. Mediation also serves as an alternative process to address conflict through a faster, more accessible, and participatory approach that does not rely on formal systems that can further perpetuate harm, such as courts and policing. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20583", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20583", "title": "Misdemeanor", "text": "\"Lesser\" criminal act in some common law legal systems\nA misdemeanor (American English, spelled misdemeanour elsewhere) is any \"lesser\" criminal act in some common law legal systems. Misdemeanors are generally punished less severely than more serious felonies, but theoretically more so than administrative infractions (also known as minor, petty, or summary offences) and regulatory offences. Typically, misdemeanors are punished with prison time of no longer than one year, monetary fines, or community service.\nDistinction between felonies and misdemeanors.\nA misdemeanor is considered a crime of lesser seriousness, and a felony one of greater seriousness. The maximum punishment for a misdemeanor is less than that for a felony under the principle that the punishment should fit the crime. One standard for measurement is the degree to which a crime affects others or society. Measurements of the degree of seriousness of a crime have been developed.\nIn the United States, the federal government generally considers a crime punishable with incarceration for not more than one year, or lesser penalty, to be a misdemeanor. All other crimes are considered felonies. Many US states also employ the same or a similar distinction.\nThe distinction between felonies and misdemeanors has been abolished by several common law jurisdictions, notably the UK and Australia. These jurisdictions have generally adopted some other classification (in the UK the substance of the original distinction remains, only slightly altered): in the Commonwealth nations of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, the crimes are divided into summary offences and indictable offences. The Republic of Ireland, a former member of the Commonwealth, also uses these divisions.\nIn some jurisdictions, those who are convicted of a misdemeanor are known as misdemeanants (as contrasted with those convicted of a felony who are known as \"felons\"). Depending on the jurisdiction, examples of misdemeanors may include: petty theft, prostitution, public intoxication, simple assault, disorderly conduct, trespass, shoplifting, vandalism, reckless driving, indecent exposure, forcible touching, and possession of cannabis for personal use.\nWhen a misdemeanor becomes a felony.\nIn the United States, even if a criminal charge for the defendant's conduct is normally a misdemeanor, sometimes a repeat offender will be charged with a felony offense. For example, the first time a person commits certain crimes, such as spousal assault, it is normally a misdemeanor, but the second time it may become a felony. Other misdemeanors may be upgraded to felonies based on context. For example, in some jurisdictions the crime of indecent exposure might normally be classified as a misdemeanor, but be charged as a felony when committed in front of a minor.\nPenalties.\nMisdemeanors usually do not result in the restriction of civil rights, but may result in loss of privileges, such as professional licenses, public offices, or public employment. Such effects are known as the collateral consequences of criminal charges. This is more common when the misdemeanor is related to the privilege in question (such as the loss of a taxi driver's license after a conviction for reckless driving), or when the misdemeanor is deemed to involve moral turpitude\u2014and in general is evaluated on a case-by-case basis.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, misdemeanors are typically crimes with a maximum punishment of 12 months of incarceration, typically in a local jail. This contrasts with felons, who are typically incarcerated in a prison. Jurisdictions such as Massachusetts and Pennsylvania are notable exceptions: the maximum punishment of some misdemeanors in Massachusetts is up to 2.5 years' imprisonment and up to five years' imprisonment in Pennsylvania for first-degree misdemeanors. People who are convicted of misdemeanors are often punished with probation, community service, short jail term, or part-time incarceration such as a sentence that may be served on the weekends.\nThe United States Constitution provides that the President may be impeached and subsequently removed from office if found guilty by Congress for \"high crimes and misdemeanors\". As used in the Constitution, the term \"misdemeanor\" refers broadly to criminal acts as opposed to employing the felony-misdemeanor distinction used in modern criminal codes. The definition of what constitutes \"high crimes and misdemeanors\" for purposes of impeachment is left to the judgment of Congress.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, defendants found guilty of misdemeanors are generally given a jail sentence for a number of months, but with certain specific crimes, suspects are sentenced to a harsher sentence. An example is the penalty imposed for vandalism, which is a fine not exceeding S$2,000 or imprisonment not exceeding three years, and also corporal punishment of not less than three strokes and not more than eight strokes with the use of a cane - an example was the Caning of Michael Fay.\nMisdemeanor classes.\nDepending on the jurisdiction, several classes of misdemeanors may exist. The forms of punishment can vary widely between those classes. For example, the federal and some state governments in the United States divide misdemeanors into several classes, with certain classes punishable by jail time and others carrying only a fine. In New York law, a Class A Misdemeanor, which among other things includes the sex crime of forcible touching, carries a maximum sentence of one year of imprisonment, while a Class B Misdemeanor \"shall not exceed three months\".\nFor example, Virginia has four classes of misdemeanors, with Class 1 and Class 2 misdemeanors being punishable by twelve-month and six-month jail sentences, respectively, and Class 3 and Class 4 misdemeanors being non-jail offenses payable by fines. New York has three classes of misdemeanors: A, B, and Unclassified.\nUnclassified misdemeanors.\nIn the United States, when a statute does not specify the class of a misdemeanor, it may be referred to as an \"unclassified misdemeanor\".\nEngland and Wales.\nAll distinctions between felony and misdemeanour were abolished by section 1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1967.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20584", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20584", "title": "Morgan Freeman", "text": "American actor and producer (born 1937)\nMorgan Freeman (born June 1, 1937) is an American actor, producer, and narrator. In a career spanning six decades, he has received numerous accolades, including an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award, as well as a nomination for a Grammy Award and a Tony Award. He was honored with the Kennedy Center Honor in 2008, an AFI Life Achievement Award in 2011, the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2012, and Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award in 2018. In a 2022 readers' poll by \"Empire\", he was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time.\nBorn in Memphis, Tennessee, Freeman was raised in Mississippi, where he began acting in school plays. He studied theater arts in Los Angeles and appeared in stage productions in his early career. He rose to fame in the 1970s for his role in the children's television series \"The Electric Company.\" Freeman then appeared in the Shakespearean plays \"Coriolanus\" and \"Julius Caesar\", the former of which earned him an Obie Award. In 1978, he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play for his role as Zeke in the Richard Wesley play \"The Mighty Gents\".\nFreeman received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor playing a former boxer in Clint Eastwood's sports drama \"Million Dollar Baby\" (2004). He was Oscar-nominated for \"Street Smart\" (1987), \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989), \"The Shawshank Redemption\" (1994), and \"Invictus\" (2009). He also acted in \"Glory\" (1989), \"Lean on Me\" (1989), \"\" (1991), \"Unforgiven\" (1992), \"Se7en\" (1995), \"Amistad\" (1997), \"Deep Impact\" (1998), \"Gone Baby Gone\" (2007), and \"The Bucket List\" (2007). He also portrayed Lucius Fox in Christopher Nolan's \"Dark Knight\" trilogy (2005\u20132012) and acted in the action films \"Wanted\" (2008), \"Red\" (2010), \"Oblivion\" (2013), the \"Now You See Me\" films (2013\u20132025), and \"Lucy\" (2014).\nKnown for his distinctive voice, he has narrated numerous documentaries including \"The Long Way Home\" (1997), \"March of the Penguins\" (2005), \"Through the Wormhole\" (2010\u20132017), \"The Story of God with Morgan Freeman\" (2016\u20132019), \"Our Universe\" (2022) and \"Life on Our Planet\" (2023). He made his directorial debut with the drama \"Bopha!\" (1993). He founded the film production company Revelations Entertainment with business partner Lori McCreary in 1996, under which they produced projects such as the CBS political drama \"Madam Secretary\" (2014\u20132019).\nEarly life and education.\nFreeman was born on June 1, 1937 in Memphis, Tennessee. He is the son of Mamie Edna (n\u00e9e\u00a0Revere; 1912\u20132000), a teacher, and Morgan Porterfield Freeman (July 6, 1915 \u2013 April 27, 1961), a barber, who died of cirrhosis in 1961. He has three older siblings. Some of Morgan's great-great-grandparents were slaves who migrated from North Carolina to Mississippi. He later discovered that his white maternal great-great-grandfather had lived with and was buried beside Freeman's black great-great-grandmother in the segregated South, as the two could not legally marry at the time. The DNA test suggested that among all of his African ancestors, a little over one-quarter came from the area that stretches from present-day Senegal to Liberia and three-quarters came from the Congo-Angola region.\nAs an infant, Freeman was sent to his paternal grandmother in Charleston, Mississippi. He moved frequently during his childhood, living in Greenwood, Mississippi, Gary, Indiana, and finally Chicago. He made his acting debut aged nine, playing the lead role in a school play. He then attended Broad Street High School, a building which serves today as Threadgill Elementary School in Greenwood. At the age of 12, he won a statewide drama competition, and while settling into school, discovered music and theater. When Freeman was 16 years old, he contracted pneumonia.\nFreeman graduated high school in 1955, but turned down a partial drama scholarship from Jackson State University, opting instead to enlist in the United States Air Force. He served as an Automatic Tracking Radar repairman, rising to the rank of airman first class. After serving from 1955 to 1959, he moved to Los Angeles and took acting classes at the Pasadena Playhouse. He also studied theater arts at Los Angeles City College, where a teacher encouraged him to embark on a dance career.\nCareer.\n1964\u20131988: Early work and rise to prominence.\nFreeman worked as a dancer at the 1964 World's Fair and was a member of the Opera Ring musical theater group in San Francisco. He acted in a touring company version of \"The Royal Hunt of the Sun\", and also appeared as an extra in Sidney Lumet's 1965 drama film \"The Pawnbroker\" starring Rod Steiger. Between acting and dancing jobs, Freeman realized that acting was where his heart lay. \"After [\"The Royal Hunt of the Sun\"], my acting career just took off\", he later recalled. Freeman made his Off-Broadway debut in 1967, opposite Viveca Lindfors in \"The Niggerlovers\", a show about the Freedom Riders during the American Civil Rights Movement, before debuting on Broadway in 1968's all-black version of \"Hello, Dolly!\" that also starred Pearl Bailey and Cab Calloway. In 1969, Freeman also performed on stage in \"The Dozens\".\nBeginning in 1971, Freeman starred in the PBS children's television show \"The Electric Company\", which gave him financial stability and recognition among American audiences. His work on the show was tiring, so he quit in 1975. Television producer Joan Ganz Cooney said that Freeman loathed appearing in \"The Electric Company\", saying \"it was a very unhappy period in his life\". Freeman later acknowledged that he does not think about the show, but he was grateful to have been a part of it. His first credited appearance in a feature film was in 1971's \"Who Says I Can't Ride a Rainbow!\", a family drama starring Jack Klugman. Also that year, Freeman performed in a theater production of \"Purlie.\" After a short career break, he returned to work in 1978, appearing in two stage productions: 1978's \"The Mighty Gents\", winning a Drama Desk Award and a Clarence Derwent Award for his role as a wino, and \"White Pelicans.\" Freeman continued to work in theater and a year later, appeared in the Shakespearean tragedies \"Coriolanus\", receiving the Obie Award in 1980 for the title role as well as \"Julius Caesar\".\nIn 1980, he had a small role as Walter in the drama \"Brubaker\", which starred Robert Redford as a prison warden. Freeman next appeared in the television film, \"Attica\" (1980), which is about the 1971 Attica Prison riot and its aftermath. A year later he had a lead role in Peter Yates' \"Eyewitness\" with co-stars William Hurt and Sigourney Weaver. From 1982 to 1984, Freeman was a cast member of the soap opera \"Another World\", playing architect Roy Bingham. After several small roles in dramas, he starred in \"Marie\" (1985), a film adaptation of \"Marie: A True Story\" by Peter Maas; he portrayed Charles Traughber. He also appeared in the miniseries \"The Atlanta Child Murders\". Freeman also had a small role in the drama \"That Was Then... This Is Now\", based on the novel of the same name by S. E. Hinton. In the mid-1980s, he began accepting prominent supporting roles in feature films, earning him a reputation for depicting wise, fatherly characters.\nIn addition to television films, in 1987, Freeman played a violent street hustler, a role that diverged from his previous roles, in \"Street Smart\" co-starring Christopher Reeve and Kathy Baker. Freeman's performance was praised by film critics, including Roger Ebert who wrote: \"Freeman has the flashier role, as a smart, very tough man who can be charming or intimidating-whatever's needed... Freeman creates such an unforgettable villain.\" Freeman's performance earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. He later said that he considered \"Street Smart\" to be his breakthrough role. In his next film, he played Craig in the drama \"Clean and Sober\" with co-stars Michael Keaton and Kathy Baker. Although the film was not a box-office hit, it gained fair reviews; Roger Ebert gave the film 3&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 out of 4 stars and called the performances \"superb\". Freeman also received Obie Awards for his roles as a preacher in the musical \"The Gospel at Colonus\", and as Hoke Colburn in the play \"Driving Miss Daisy\", respectively.\n1989\u20131996: Hollywood breakthrough.\nFreeman had four film releases in 1989. In the first, he starred as Sergeant Major John Rawlins in \"Glory\", directed by Edward Zwick, about the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, the Union Army's second African-American regiment in the American Civil War. Writing for \"The Washington Post\", Desson Thomson praised Freeman and co-star Denzel Washington for their \"warming sense of fraternity\". \"Glory\" was nominated for five Academy Awards and won three: Best Supporting Actor for Washington, Best Cinematography, and Best Sound. Next, Freeman starred in the comedy-drama \"Driving Miss Daisy\", alongside Jessica Tandy and Dan Aykroyd. Based on Alfred Uhry's play of the same name in which Freeman had appeared previously, he reprises his role of Hoke Colburn, chauffeur for a Jewish widow. The film was a commercial success and grossed US$145 million worldwide. Film critics were mainly positive; Henry Sheehan from \"The Hollywood Reporter\" opined that Freeman and Tandy's performances complemented each other while retaining their \"individual star-quality\". The film was nominated for nine Academy Awards (and received four, Best Picture being one of them), including Best Actor for Freeman.\nHis third release was the biographical drama \"Lean on Me\", in which he portrays the principal of an under-performing and drug- and crime-ridden New Jersey high school. Jane Galbraith of \"Variety\" magazine thought Freeman's casting was \"wonderful\". Lastly in 1989, he starred in Walter Hill's \"Johnny Handsome\", a crime drama in which he plays a New Orleans police officer. In a 1990 interview, Freeman said that \"Glory\" was one of his favorite releases\u2014\"The Black legacy is as noble, is as heroic, is as filled with adventure and conquest and discovery as anybody else's. It's just that nobody knows it.\" In 1990, Freeman provided the voice of Frederick Douglass in \"The Civil War\", a television miniseries about the American Civil War. In the same year he played a key role in the critically panned \"The Bonfire of the Vanities.\" According to the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 16% based on 51 reviews. In the summer of 1990, he played Petruchio, a role he had been thinking about for six years, in Shakespeare's \"The Taming of the Shrew\", which opened at Delacorte theater in New York City. \"[Petruchio] seems to have a lot of fun in life\", he said. In 1991, Freeman had a supporting role in \"\", an action-adventure starring Kevin Costner. The film was a commercial success, but garnered mixed reviews from critics; \"The New York Times\"' Vincent Canby thought Freeman played Azeem with \"wit and humor\" despite the \"muddled\" plot.\nFreeman also narrated \"The True Story of Glory Continues\", a documentary about the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment. In 1992, he appeared in Clint Eastwood's western \"Unforgiven\", which won four Academy Awards including Best Picture. The film depicts William Munny (Eastwood), an aging outlaw and killer who takes on one more job with old friend Ned Logan (Freeman). \"Unforgiven\" was widely acclaimed, with one critic calling Freeman's performance \"outstanding\". \nAlso in 1992 Freeman starred in the John G. Avildsen directed drama \"The Power of One\" acting opposite Stephen Dorf and John Gielgud in a loose adaptation of Bryce Courtenay's 1989 novel of the same name, in which he plays boxing coach Geel Piet. In 1993, Freeman made his directorial debut with the drama \"Bopha!\", which tells the story of a black policeman (Danny Glover) during South Africa's apartheid era. \"Bopha!\" was well-received, in particular for Freeman's directing. Hal Hinson of \"The Washington Post\" wrote: \"Freeman lays out the father-son dynamics with great skill and very little fuss. There's no hysteria in his approach; instead, he sticks to the facts, relying on his cast to provide the emotion. The result is a surprisingly powerful, insightful film.\" Kenneth Turan from \"Los Angeles Times\" also complimented Freeman's direction but thought the film was \"more predictable than powerful\".\nIn 1994, Freeman portrayed Red, the redeemed convict in Frank Darabont's acclaimed drama \"The Shawshank Redemption\", with co-star Tim Robbins. It is based on the 1982 Stephen King novella \"Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption\". Freeman was cast at the suggestion of producer Liz Glotzer, despite the novella's character of a white Irishman. Filming proved to be challenging, mainly because of Darabont's need for multiple takes. Freeman said, \"The answer [I'd give him] was no... having to do something again and again for no discernible reason tends to be a bit debilitating to the energy.\" Nevertheless, his performance was described as \"quietly impressive\" and \"moving\" by \"The New York Times\". At the 67th Academy Awards the film received Academy Award nominations for Best Picture and a nomination for Freeman for Best Actor losing to Tom Hanks in \"Forrest Gump\" (1994). Since its release, \"The Shawshank Redemption\" has remained popular among audiences. In 1994, Freeman served as a member of the jury at the 44th Berlin International Film Festival.\n\"Outbreak\" (1995), a medical thriller directed by Wolfgang Petersen, was Freeman's next film. He played General Billy Ford, a doctor dealing with an outbreak of a fictional virus in a small town. The film stars Dustin Hoffman, Rene Russo, and Donald Sutherland. \"Outbreak\" was a box-office success, grossing $189.8 million worldwide, but gained a mixed critics' response. Mick LaSelle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" credited Freeman for his performance which may have been unappreciated by viewers. In 1995, Freeman starred with Brad Pitt in David Fincher's crime thriller \"Seven\", the story of two detectives who attempt to identify a serial killer who bases his murders on the Christian seven deadly sins. Freeman's performance generated a positive response; Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote: \"Freeman plays nearly every scene in a doleful hush; he makes you lean in to hear his words, to ferret out the hints of anger and regret that haunt this weary knight.\" The critic from \"Variety\" magazine called Freeman's acting \"supremely nuanced\".\nWhile filming \"Outbreak\", Freeman expressed an interest in starting a film production company. He turned to McCreary, the producer of \"Bopha!\", to be his business partner. Freeman explained that he wanted to achieve representation on screen, explore challenging issues and reveal hidden truths, so they chose to name their firm Revelations Entertainment. A year later, he appeared in \"Chain Reaction\" as Paul Shannon, a science-fiction thriller co-starring Keanu Reeves and Rachel Weisz. The film was a critical and commercial disappointment. Next, he was cast opposite Robin Wright in 1996's \"Moll Flanders\", a period drama based on the novel of the same name. The film received a mixed reception; Greg Evans from \"Variety\" magazine said Freeman gave a \"sweet\" performance, while \"The New York Times\" critic thought he was miscast.\n1997\u20132004: Critical success and established actor.\nIn 1997, Freeman narrated the Academy Award-winning documentary \"The Long Way Home\", about Jewish refugees' liberation after World War II and the establishment of Israel. He also appeared in Steven Spielberg's historical epic \"Amistad\" alongside Djimon Hounsou, Anthony Hopkins, and Matthew McConaughey. Based on the events in 1839 aboard the slave ship \"La Amistad\", the film was mostly well-received and earned four nominations at the Academy Awards. The critic from \"Salon\" magazine, however, thought the film lacked inspiration and Freeman's role was \"utterly cryptic\". In that same year, he was cast as psychologist Alex Cross in \"Kiss the Girls\", a thriller based on James Patterson's 1995 novel of the same name. In a mixed review, Peter Stack of \"San Francisco Chronicle\" thought Freeman and co-star Ashley Judd gave strong performances despite the lengthy plot.\nFreeman went on to star in \"Deep Impact\" (1998), a science-fiction disaster film in which he played President Tim Beck. The story depicts humanity's attempt to destroy a 7-mile (11\u00a0km) wide comet set to collide with Earth and cause a mass extinction. The film was a box-office hit, despite competition from \"Armageddon\", another summer blockbuster of the year. Continuing with the disaster genre, he then starred opposite Christian Slater in 1998's \"Hard Rain\", centering on a heist and man-made treachery amidst a natural disaster in a small Indiana town. The film was unpopular with critics; Lawrence Van Gelder of \"The New York Times\" called the characters \"one-dimensional\" and the film \"routine\". Freeman returned to the screen in 2000 with the lead role of Charlie in the comedy \"Nurse Betty\", featuring Ren\u00e9e Zellweger, Chris Rock, and Greg Kinnear. The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival to mainly positive reviews; the critic from \"Variety\" magazine thought Freeman and Rock had \"wonderful chemistry\". Next, he appeared in \"Under Suspicion\" (2000), a thriller remake of the 1981 French film \"Garde \u00e0 vue\". The film had been \"carting round\" for twelve years before Freeman was able to produce it under Revelations Entertainment. He co-starred with Gene Hackman; \"Working with Gene was wonderful. I didn't find it too hard working with an icon I so respected\", Freeman said. Upon release, \"Under Suspicion\" was met with lukewarm reception; CNN's Paul Tatara praised the actors but thought the film was \"too tawdry to be completely entertaining, and too static to generate much excitement\".\nIn 2001, Freeman reprised his role of Alex Cross in \"Along Came a Spider\", a sequel to 1997's \"Kiss the Girls\". The film received mixed-to-negative reviews. Susan Wloszczyna of \"USA Today\" observed that \"Freeman strides with noble authority\" but thought the overall film was unmemorable. In 2002, Freeman was cast opposite Ben Affleck in the spy thriller \"The Sum of All Fears\". It is based on Tom Clancy's 1991 novel of the same name, about a plot by an Austrian Neo-Nazi to trigger a nuclear war between the United States and Russia, so that he can establish a fascist superstate in Europe. \"The Sum of All Fears\" received moderate reviews, but was a commercial success, grossing $193.9 million worldwide. Next, Freeman starred alongside Ashley Judd and Jim Caviezel in \"High Crimes\" (2002), a legal thriller based on Joseph Finder's 1998 novel of the same name. The story follows lawyer Claire (Judd), whose husband (Caviezel) is arrested and placed on trial for the murder of villagers while he was in the Marines. Although several critics were unimpressed with the story, they credited Freeman and Judd for their chemistry and performances. In 2003, Freeman appeared as God in the hit comedy \"Bruce Almighty\" with Jim Carrey and Jennifer Aniston.\nNext, he starred in the science fiction horror \"Dreamcatcher\", adapted from Stephen King's 2001 novel of the same name. The film was a box-office flop, and garnered mostly negative reviews; \"Dreamcatcher\" has an approval rating of 28% on review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes. Also in 2003, Freeman starred in two other dramas that were not widely seen, \"Levity\" and \"Guilty by Association.\" His 2004 releases were comedy \"The Big Bounce\" and sports drama \"Million Dollar Baby\". In the latter, directed by Clint Eastwood, Freeman portrayed an elderly former boxer. The film won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actress (Hilary Swank), and Best Supporting Actor, earning Freeman his first Academy Award. Freeman was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award in the same category. Roger Ebert complimented Freeman's \"flat and factual\" narration, and \"Timeout\" magazine thought the cast fully inhabited their roles.\n2005\u20132014: Continued success.\nFreeman made six appearances in various films in 2005. In the drama \"An Unfinished Life\", Freeman plays Mitch, a neighbor of a Wyoming rancher (Robert Redford). The film had a mixed response; \"The Guardian\" critic thought it was amiable but questioned the purpose of Freeman's \"sidekick\" role. Freeman's authoritative voice led to his narration of two documentaries; Steven Spielberg's \"War of the Worlds\" and the Academy Award-winning \"March of the Penguins\". He also appeared in Christopher Nolan's \"Batman Begins\", the first installment in what would become \"The Dark Knight Trilogy\", as the fictional Lucius Fox. After this, he co-starred with Jet Li in the action-thriller \"Unleashed\", playing Sam, a blind piano tuner who helps Li's character turn his life around. The film gained a mixed-to-positive reception; Peter Hartlaub of \"San Francisco Chronicle\" was confused with the genre and thought Freeman's character interrupted the narrative. Freeman's next role was in the thriller \"Edison\", which bombed at the box office. In his last release of 2005, he provided the voice of Neil Armstrong in the documentary \".\"\nFreeman starred in 2006's \"The Contract\", as assassin Frank Carden opposite John Cusack. The film was released direct-to-video, which critic John Cornelius suggests was unsurprising, considering the generic formula of the thriller. Freeman next appeared in \"Lucky Number Slevin\" (2006), a crime thriller directed by Paul McGuigan. Starring a principal cast of Josh Hartnett, Bruce Willis, Lucy Liu, Stanley Tucci, and Ben Kingsley, the film garnered mixed reception. David Mattin of BBC wrote: \"Kingsley and Freeman shine individually, but their inevitable, climactic clash of heads lacks force. Like its leading man [Hartnett], this movie presents a charming fa\u00e7ade with nothing much underneath.\" Next, Freeman portrayed himself in the low-budget comedy \"10 Items or Less\" opposite Paz Vega\".\" Two weeks after its theatrical release, \"10 Items or Less\" was made available for download from ClickStar, a film distribution company that Freeman co-founded that year.\nIn 2007, Freeman reprised his role as God in \"Evan Almighty\", a sequel to 2003's \"Bruce Almighty\", with Steve Carell. \"Evan Almighty\" was a box-office failure and negatively received; \"The Guardian\" critic wrote: \"A cast full of people who have been frequently funny elsewhere flounder in this deluge of sentimentality and CGI. Avoid like the Ten Plagues.\" The drama \"Feast of Love\" was Freeman's second release of 2007. It is based on the 2000 novel \"The Feast of Love\" by Charles Baxter, about a group of friends living in suburban Oregon who come into contact with a free spirit who changes their outlook on life; Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" sarcastically remarked that it was great to see Freeman in a challenging role. Freeman had a supporting part in \"Gone Baby Gone\" (2007), a mystery thriller that was also Ben Affleck's directorial debut. Adapted from the 1998 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane, Freeman plays Captain Jack Doyle of the Boston Police Department. The story and cast performances were positively received; \"Time Out\" magazine called it \"flawed but impressive\". Afterward, he starred in Rob Reiner's 2007 comedy \"The Bucket List\" opposite Jack Nicholson. The plot follows two terminally ill men on a road trip with a list of things to do before they die. The film grossed $175 million worldwide.\nIn 2008, Freeman was cast in the action-thriller \"Wanted\", a loose adaptation of the comic book miniseries by Mark Millar and J. G. Jones. The plot revolves around Wesley Gibson (James McAvoy), a frustrated account manager who discovers that he is the son of a professional assassin and decides to join the Fraternity, a secret society of which Sloan (Freeman) is the leader. Principal photography took place in Chicago; co-star rapper Common remarked on the set atmosphere: \"Freeman is a cool guy. He'd be walking around joking and singing and just dancing. You know, artists are free and I just felt the freedom in him.\" The film received generally favorable reviews; Peter Howell of \"Toronto Star\" thought it was original and one of Freeman's bolder performances to date. Freeman narrated \"The Love Guru\" (2008), before appearing in \"The Dark Knight\" (2008), the second installment of Christopher Nolan's \"Dark Knight Trilogy\", in which he reprised his role as Lucius Fox. Freeman returned to Broadway in 2008 after an eighteen-year absence to co-star with Frances McDormand and Peter Gallagher in Clifford Odets' play, \"The Country Girl\", directed by Mike Nichols.\nFreeman continued to accept roles in a diverse range of genres. In 2009, Freeman starred opposite Antonio Banderas in the heist movie \"Thick as Thieves\". Next, he collaborated with Christopher Walken and William H. Macy for the comedy \"The Maiden Heist\". For some time, Freeman expressed a desire to do a film based on Nelson Mandela. Initially, he wanted to adapt Mandela's autobiography \"Long Walk to Freedom\" into a screenplay, but plans were never finalized. Instead, he purchased the film rights to John Carlin's book: \"Playing the Enemy: Nelson Mandela and the Game That Made a Nation\". The book was adapted into a film which Clint Eastwood directed, \"Invictus\", starring Freeman as Mandela and Matt Damon as rugby team captain Francois Pienaar. The biographical drama received positive reviews for Freeman's performance; Roger Ebert wrote: \"Freeman does a splendid job of evoking the man Nelson Mandela ... He shows him as genial, confident, calming, over what was clearly a core of tempered steel.\" Freeman received Best Actor nominations at the Academy Awards and Golden Globes, as well as a nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor at the Screen Actors Guild Awards. The same year he provided the narration for Janet Langhart's \"Anne and Emmett\", a play featuring an imaginary conversation between Emmett Till and Anne Frank, both killed as young teenagers because of racial persecution.\nFreeman's sole film release of 2010 was \"Red\" with co-stars Bruce Willis, Helen Mirren, and John Malkovich. \"Red\" is loosely adapted from the comic-book series Red, created by Warren Ellis and Cully Hamner and published by the DC Comics imprint Homage. Freeman plays CIA mentor Joe, who helps retired fellow agent Frank (Willis) to uncover some assassins. The film was a critical and commercial success; writing for Melbourne's \"The Age\", Jim Schembri praised Freeman and the cast who \"bring an infectious comic energy to their roles\".\nBesides film, Freeman worked on other projects. In January 2010, he replaced Walter Cronkite as the voiceover introduction to the \"CBS Evening News\" presented by Katie Couric. CBS gave the need for consistency in introductions for regular news broadcasts and special reports as the basis for the change. Deborah Myers, head of Science Channel, approached Freeman to be the presenter of \"Through the Wormhole\" (2010\u201317)\".\" She had heard that he was \"really interested in space and the universe\", and the pair agreed to develop the series together.\nIn 2011, Freeman narrated the fantasy \"Conan the Barbarian\" and appeared in the family drama \"Dolphin Tale\", as prosthetic specialist Dr. McCarthy. Returning to theater in 2011, Freeman was featured with John Lithgow in the Broadway debut of Dustin Lance Black's play, \"8\", a staged reenactment of \"Perry v. Brown\", the federal trial that overturned California's Proposition 8 ban on same-sex marriage. Freeman played Attorney David Boies. The production was held at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre in New York City to raise money for the American Foundation for Equal Rights. Freeman had a lead role in the 2012 drama \"The Magic of Belle Isle\", as an alcoholic novelist trying to write again. The film fared poorly with critics, gaining only a 29% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Lastly in 2012, Freeman reprised his role as Lucius Fox for the third time in \"The Dark Knight Rises.\"\nA number of box office hits were released in 2013. Freeman appeared in the action-thriller \"Olympus Has Fallen\", the first installment in what would become the \"Has Fallen\" film series; he portrays Speaker of the House Allan Trumbull. The \"San Francisco Chronicle\" critic gave \"Olympus Has Fallen\" 3 out of 4 stars and opined that Freeman gave an amicable supporting performance. He then starred in the science fiction drama \"Oblivion\", with co-star Tom Cruise, as veteran soldier Malcolm Beech, and appeared in the thriller \"Now You See Me\", as an ex-magician. Lastly, he played a retiree in \"Last Vegas\", with co-stars Michael Douglas, Robert De Niro, Kevin Kline, and Mary Steenburgen. Filmed in Las Vegas and Atlanta, \"Last Vegas\" was praised for its cast's chemistry, and one critic thought Freeman brought the most amusement.\nIn 2014, Freeman voiced the character Vitruvius in \"The Lego Movie\", a commercially successful 3D animation. He starred in \"Transcendence\", a science fiction thriller directed by Wally Pfister in his directorial debut, in which Freeman plays scientist Joseph Tagger. Critic reviews of the film were generally mixed, according to Metacritic. Next, he co-starred in the action \"Lucy\" (2014), about a woman (Scarlett Johansson) who gains psychokinetic abilities when a nootropic drug is absorbed into her bloodstream. Freeman plays Professor Samuel Norman, who helps her research the condition. Producer Virginie Silla wanted Freeman for the part because of his experience in portraying a character of wisdom. \"He was the perfect actor\", she said. Upon the release of \"Lucy\", critical reception ranged from mixed-to-positive. In the same year Freeman appeared in \"Dolphin Tale 2\", the sequel to 2011's \"Dolphin Tale\", and \"5 Flights Up\", a comedy-drama. At the end of 2014, Freeman appeared as himself, among other celebrities, in the documentary \"Lennon or McCartney.\"\n2015\u20132024: Independent films, return to television, and box office bombs.\nKazuaki Kiriya's action-thriller \"Last Knights\" was Freeman's first film of 2015, starring opposite Clive Owen. The plot centers on a band of warriors who seek to avenge the loss of their master at the hands of a corrupt minister. Reviews were largely underwhelming; Sara Stewart of \"New York Post\" called it \"bloody bad\", adding: \"Once-proud box office names are its first casualties.\" Freeman next joined the cast of \"Ted 2\", a comedy sequel to \"Ted\", directed by Seth MacFarlane. The story follows the talking teddy bear Ted as he fights for civil rights in order to be recognized as a person. Freeman portrays Patrick Meighan, a highly respected civil rights attorney. A television series, \"Madam Secretary\", also occupied Freeman's time. He played Chief Justice Frawley of the United States Supreme Court in a recurring role in the series\".\" He and his producing partner Lori McCreary were executive producers. Freeman directed the first episode; McCreary remarked of his directing style, \"What's riveting is that he can achieve a complete tonal change in performance with the least amount of direction... Everybody behaves better when Morgan is there... but he's very fun.\" At the end of 2015, Freeman played a U.S. senator in the thriller \"Momentum\".\nReprising his role as Allan Trumbull, Freeman appeared in \"London Has Fallen\", the 2016 sequel to \"Olympus Has Fallen\". The film follows a plot to assassinate the world leaders of the G7 as they attend the British Prime Minister's funeral in London, as well as Secret Service agent Mike Banning's efforts to protect U.S. President Benjamin Asher (Aaron Eckhart) from being killed. The film was a commercial success; however, writing for \"The A.V. Club\", Ignatiy Vishnevetsky criticized the cheap filmmaking, saying: \"The movie periodically cuts to overqualified supporting actors\u2014including Freeman, Melissa Leo, and Robert Forster... (As it turns out, it's possible to write something that will sound like garbage even when spoken in Freeman's sonorous voice.)\" Next, Freeman reprised his role as Thaddeus Bradley, starring in \"Now You See Me 2\" (2016), the sequel to \"Now You See Me\", the sequel grossing a successful $334.9 million worldwide. Finally, he had a leading role in the historical drama \"Ben-Hur\", the fifth film adaptation of the 1880 novel \"\" by Lew Wallace. Freeman expressed interest in playing Sheik Ilderim, a wealthy Nubian sheik, stating: \"This character has quite a bit of power in the story. And I like playing power. It's something about my own personal ego.\" \"Ben-Hur\" turned out to be one of 2016's biggest box-office bombs.\nIn 2017, Freeman appeared in two comedies: \"Going in Style\" and \"Just Getting Started.\" The first one is a remake of the 1979 film with the same name, co-starring Michael Caine and Alan Arkin; in it they play bank robbers after their pensions are canceled. It opened to a mixed response; \"The Telegraph\"'s Robbie Collin thought the trio of actors looked tired before the end of it. \"Just Getting Started\", in which Freeman starred with Tommy Lee Jones and Rene Russo, was critically panned by reviewers. The plot follows an ex-FBI agent (Jones) who must put aside his personal feud with a former mob lawyer (Freeman) at a retirement home when the mafia comes to kill the pair. Freeman also hosted the National Geographic \"The Story of God with Morgan Freeman\" and \"The Story of Us with Morgan Freeman\", in 2016 and 2017, respectively.\nIn 2018, Freeman narrated \"Alpha\", a historical drama set in the last ice age. He then starred in Disney's \"The Nutcracker and the Four Realms\", a retelling of E. T. A. Hoffmann's short story \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\" and Marius Petipa's and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\". Finally he had an uncredited role as Jerome in the biographical drama \"Brian Banks\", a high-school football player who was falsely accused of rape and upon his release attempted to fulfill his dream of making the NFL. In 2019, Freeman starred opposite John Travolta in \"The Poison Rose\", an adaptation of the novel by Richard Salvatore. In \"Angel Has Fallen\", Freeman reprised his role as Allan Trumbull, the third installment in the \"Has Fallen\" film series, following \"Olympus Has Fallen\" and \"London Has Fallen\". Although critical reception was mixed, the film was a box office success, earning $147.5 million worldwide.\nFreeman next appeared alongside an ensemble cast in George Gallo's crime comedy \"The Comeback Trail\" (2020) and in \"Coming 2 America\" (2021), a sequel to the 1988 film. On November 20, 2022, Freeman performed with Ghanim Al-Muftah at the opening ceremony of the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar. In 2021 he took a guest starring role acting opposite Michael Douglas and Alan Arkin in the Netflix comedy \"The Kominsky Method\" for which he was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. Since 2023 he has portrayed a United States Secretary of State in the Taylor Sheridan created Paramount+ spy thriller series \"Lioness\" starring Nicole Kidman and Zoe Saldana. Freeman stated he joined the show due to Sheridan telling \"TV Insider\", \"I'm so enamored of him and his work. He's so prolific, and it's always good.\" \n2025-present: Later work.\nFreeman is set to return to the heist franchise acting in \"\" which is set to release November 2025. It marks his first theatrical release in several years. Speaking about the possibility of retiring, Freeman said: \"Sometimes the idea of retirement would float past me but, as soon as my agent says there's a job or somebody wants you or they've made an offer, the whole thing just boils back into where it was yesterday. 'how much you're going to pay, where we\u2019re gonna be?' The appetite is still there. I will concede that it's dimmed a little. But not enough to make a serious difference.\"\nOther ventures.\nEnvironmental activism.\nIn 2004, Freeman helped form the Grenada Relief Fund to aid people affected by Hurricane Ivan on the island of Grenada. The fund has since become PLANIT NOW, an organization that seeks to provide preparedness resources for people living in areas affected by hurricanes and severe storms. In 2014, he narrated a clip titled \"What's Possible\" which had its debut at the United Nations climate summit. Freeman has donated to the Mississippi Horse Park in Starkville, Mississippi, part of Mississippi State University and Freeman has several horses that he takes there.\nAfter learning about the decline of honeybees, Freeman decided to turn his 124-acre ranch into a bee sanctuary in July 2014 beginning with 26 beehives.\nFreeman is a supporter of Oceana and ocean conservation.\nPolitical activism.\nIn 2005, Freeman criticized the celebration of Black History Month, saying: \"I don't want a black history month. Black history is American history.\" He opined that the only way to end racism is to stop talking about it, and he noted that there is no \"white history month\". In an interview with \"60 Minutes\"'s Mike Wallace, Freeman said: \"I am going to stop calling you a white man and I'm going to ask you to stop calling me a black man.\" Freeman supported the defeated proposal to change the Mississippi state flag, which incorporated the Confederate battle flag at the time. In an interview on CNN's \"Piers Morgan Tonight\", Freeman drew controversy when he accused the Tea Party movement of racism. Regarding the 2015 Baltimore protests, Freeman said he was \"absolutely\" supportive of the protesters. \"That unrest [in Baltimore] has nothing to do with terrorism at all, except the terrorism we suffer from the police... Because of the technology\u2014everybody has a smartphone\u2014now in reaction to the death of Freddie Gray we can see what the police are doing. We can show the world, 'Look, this is what happened in that situation.' So why are so many people dying in police custody? And why are they all Black? And why are all the police killing them white? What is that? The police have always said, 'I feared for my safety.' Well, now we know. OK. You feared for your safety while a guy was running away from you, right?\"\nDuring the 2008 presidential election, Freeman endorsed Barack Obama's presidential bid, although he said he would not join Obama's campaign. He provided the voice of the narrator for Disney World's The Hall of Presidents when Obama was added to the exhibit, and when The Hall of Presidents re-opened on July 4, 2009, at Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida. On day four of the 2016 Democratic National Convention, Freeman provided the voiceover for the video introduction of Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. On September 19, 2017, Freeman appeared in a video by the Committee to Investigate Russia group, in which he declared \"we [United States] are at war\" and accusing Russia of \"launching cyber attacks and spreading false information\". Freeman also endorsed his friend Bill Luckett, who unsuccessfully ran for Governor of Mississippi in 2011.\nIn June 2021, he and Linda Keena, a professor at the University of Mississippi, donated $1 million to the university, establishing the Center for Evidence-Based Policing and Reform.\nBusiness ventures.\nIn 1997, Freeman and business partner Lori McCreary founded Revelations Entertainment, a film production company. They also founded ClickStar in 2006, a film download company, with investment from Intel Corporation. ClickStar ceased operations in 2008. Freeman owns and operates Ground Zero, a blues club in Clarksdale, Mississippi; he is the former co-owner of Madidi, a fine dining restaurant in the same city.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and family.\nFreeman was married to Jeanette Adair Bradshaw from October 22, 1967, until November 18, 1979. He married Myrna Colley-Lee on June 16, 1984, the couple separated in December 2007 and divorced on September 15, 2010. Freeman has four children: Alfonso, Deena, Morgana, and Saifoulaye. Freeman and Colley-Lee also raised Freeman's step-granddaughter from his first marriage, E'dena Hines. On August 16, 2015, 33-year-old Hines was murdered in New York City.\nInterests.\nFreeman resides in Charleston, Mississippi, and maintains a home in New York City. He earned a private pilot's license at the age of 65 and owns\u2014or has owned\u2014at least three private aircraft, including both a Cessna Citation 501 and Cessna 414 as well as an Emivest SJ30.\nIn December 2010, Freeman joined former President Bill Clinton, president of the United States Soccer Federation Sunil Gulati, and soccer player Landon Donovan in Zurich for a presentation to bid for the U.S. hosting rights for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Freeman's favorite film that he did not work on is \"Moulin Rouge!\". He later reaffirmed this during his tribute speech at Nicole Kidman's AFI Life Achievement Award ceremony.\nFaith and beliefs.\nWhen asked if he believed in God, Freeman said: \"It's a hard question because as I said at the start, I think we invented God. So if I believe in God, and I do, it's because I think I'm God.\" He later said that his experience working on \"The Story of God with Morgan Freeman\" did not change his views on religion, further stating that he sees Zoroastrianism being a belief system, that, \"is intrinsically me: 'Good thoughts, good words, good deeds' sums it up. How many of us that believe in that?\".\nHealth and accident.\nOn the evening of August 3, 2008, Freeman was injured in an automobile crash when his 1997 Nissan Maxima was involved in a rollover near Ruleville, Mississippi. He and his passenger, Demaris Meyer, had to be cut free from the vehicle with hydraulic tools. Freeman was conscious after the crash and joked with a photographer at the scene. He was taken via helicopter to The Regional Medical Center (The Med) hospital in Memphis. His left shoulder, arm, and elbow had been broken, and he received surgery on August 5. Doctors operated on him for four hours to repair nerve damage in his shoulder and arm. His publicist announced he was expected to make a full recovery. Although alcohol was not considered a factor in the crash, Meyer sued Freeman for negligence, claiming that he had been consuming alcohol, but the suit was eventually settled for an undisclosed amount. \nFreeman developed fibromyalgia following the incident, and had to switch dominant hands as his left was paralyzed.\nAllegation of misconduct.\nOn May 24, 2018, CNN published an investigation in which eight women accused Freeman of \"what some called harassment and others called inappropriate behavior\". In response, Freeman made the statement, \"Anyone who knows me or has worked with me knows I am not someone who would intentionally offend or knowingly make anyone feel uneasy. I apologize to anyone who felt uncomfortable or disrespected\u2014that was never my intent.\" One of the women named as an accuser, Tyra Martin, spoke out against her portrayal in CNN's report, saying, \"I'm not, never was [a victim]. CNN totally misrepresented the video and took my remarks out of context.\" According to \"Essence\", Martin \"saw many of his [Freeman] comments, though inappropriate, to be said in jest.\" Freeman's lawyer demanded CNN retract the story. After a period of deliberation, the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) decided not to take any action against Freeman.\nArtistry and legacy.\nFreeman's deep voice is considered to be distinctive, iconic, and recognizable which frequently makes him a preferable choice for narration in films and documentaries. The journalist Radhika Sanghani writes that his \"deeply reassuring voice, with its mellifluous tones and authoritative presence, is why an entire generation still hear his trademark tones when they think of the almighty\". Freeman said that his voice developed in this way while taking speech classes in college; he found that most people speak in a voice either too fast or too high and he developed a commanding voice by speaking in a lower octave and enunciating each word.\nAccording to author Miriam DeCosta-Willis, Freeman is an intuitive actor. He likes to select his roles carefully, and study the character to ensure he portrays them with depth, sensitivity, and substance. Commenting on Freeman's persona, Beverly Todd, who co-starred with him in \"Lean on Me\" (1989) and \"The Bucket List\" (2007) said: \"The world knows he is such a consummate actor. He's a very sharing actor and such a nice guy. He's not the kind of actor who demands that he has all of the scenes and all the dialogues and all the emphasis is on him\". Freeman has said he is interested in playing character roles and values the importance of listening carefully while filming scenes: \"The big danger in acting is to wait for your line. That's what I never do. I always listen, no matter how many times we do it.\"\nOn October 28, 2006, Freeman was honored at the first Mississippi's Best Awards in Jackson, Mississippi with the Lifetime Achievement Award for his work in film and theater. He received an honorary Doctor of Arts and Letters degree from Delta State University during the school's commencement exercises on May 13, 2006. In 2013, Boston University presented him with an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree. On November 12, 2014, he was bestowed the honor of Freedom of the City by the City of London.\nIn 2008, Freeman was chosen as a Kennedy Center Honoree at the John F. Kennedy Center in Washington D.C. In 2011, he received the AFI Life Achievement Award in recognition of his contribution to the film industry. Those who honored Freeman included Sidney Poitier, Samuel L. Jackson, Forest Whitaker, Rita Moreno, Helen Mirren, Clint Eastwood, Cuba Gooding Jr., and Matthew Broderick. In 2012, he was awarded the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, which recognizes lifetime achievement in the film industry. In August 2017, he was named the 54th recipient of the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award for career achievement and humanitarian accomplishment. His co-star Rita Moreno from \"The Electric Company\" presented him the award in the following January.\nActing credits.\nProlific in film since 1964, Freeman is known for his roles in genres ranging from dramas, historical epics, thrillers, action adventure, science fiction, and comedies. His most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include the following:\nAccolades.\nFreeman has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:\nFreeman has been nominated for five Golden Globe Awards, winning one for Best Actor in \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989). He has also been nominated for three Screen Actors Guild Awards, winning one for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role in \"Million Dollar Baby\" (2004)\".\" He earned an Obie Award for each theater role in \"Coriolanus\" (1979)\", Mother Courage and Her Children\" (1980), and \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1987\u201390).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20585", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20585", "title": "March 27", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 27 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20586", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20586", "title": "March 29", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 29 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20587", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20587", "title": "March 31", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 31 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20588", "revid": "410653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20588", "title": "Mimas (disambiguation)", "text": "Mimas is a moon of Saturn marked by a giant crater on its surface.\nMimas may also refer to:\nPronounced with a final /z/ sound, it may be:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20589", "revid": "8571592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20589", "title": "M107", "text": "M107 most often refers to:\nM107 may also refer to:\nOther uses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "20590", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20590", "title": "Mathematical model", "text": "Description of a system using mathematical concepts and language\nA mathematical model is an abstract description of a concrete system using mathematical concepts and language. The process of developing a mathematical model is termed mathematical modeling. Mathematical models are used in many fields, including applied mathematics, natural sciences, social sciences and engineering. In particular, the field of operations research studies the use of mathematical modelling and related tools to solve problems in business or military operations. A model may help to characterize a system by studying the effects of different components, which may be used to make predictions about behavior or solve specific problems. \nElements of a mathematical model.\nMathematical models can take many forms, including dynamical systems, statistical models, differential equations, or game theoretic models. These and other types of models can overlap, with a given model involving a variety of abstract structures. In many cases, the quality of a scientific field depends on how well the mathematical models developed on the theoretical side agree with results of repeatable experiments. Lack of agreement between theoretical mathematical models and experimental measurements often leads to important advances as better theories are developed. In the physical sciences, a traditional mathematical model contains most of the following elements:\nClassifications.\nMathematical models are of different types:\nLinear vs. nonlinear.\nIf all the operators in a mathematical model exhibit linearity, the resulting mathematical model is defined as linear. All other models are considered nonlinear. The definition of linearity and nonlinearity is dependent on context, and linear models may have nonlinear expressions in them. For example, in a statistical linear model, it is assumed that a relationship is linear in the parameters, but it may be nonlinear in the predictor variables. Similarly, a differential equation is said to be linear if it can be written with linear differential operators, but it can still have nonlinear expressions in it. In a mathematical programming model, if the objective functions and constraints are represented entirely by linear equations, then the model is regarded as a linear model. If one or more of the objective functions or constraints are represented with a nonlinear equation, then the model is known as a nonlinear model.\nLinear structure implies that a problem can be decomposed into simpler parts that can be treated independently or analyzed at a different scale, and therefore that the results will remain valid if the initial is recomposed or rescaled.\nNonlinearity, even in fairly simple systems, is often associated with phenomena such as chaos and irreversibility. Although there are exceptions, nonlinear systems and models tend to be more difficult to study than linear ones. A common approach to nonlinear problems is linearization, but this can be problematic if one is trying to study aspects such as irreversibility, which are strongly tied to nonlinearity. \nStatic vs. dynamic.\nA \"dynamic\" model accounts for time-dependent changes in the state of the system, while a \"static\" (or steady-state) model calculates the system in equilibrium, and thus is time-invariant. Dynamic models are typically represented by differential equations or difference equations.\nExplicit vs. implicit.\nIf all of the input parameters of the overall model are known, and the output parameters can be calculated by a finite series of computations, the model is said to be \"explicit\". But sometimes it is the \"output\" parameters which are known, and the corresponding inputs must be solved for by an iterative procedure, such as Newton's method or Broyden's method. In such a case the model is said to be \"implicit\". For example, a jet engine's physical properties such as turbine and nozzle throat areas can be explicitly calculated given a design thermodynamic cycle (air and fuel flow rates, pressures, and temperatures) at a specific flight condition and power setting, but the engine's operating cycles at other flight conditions and power settings cannot be explicitly calculated from the constant physical properties.\nDiscrete vs. continuous.\nA discrete model treats objects as discrete, such as the particles in a molecular model or the states in a statistical model; while a continuous model represents the objects in a continuous manner, such as the velocity field of fluid in pipe flows, temperatures and stresses in a solid, and electric field that applies continuously over the entire model due to a point charge.\nDeterministic vs. probabilistic (stochastic).\nA deterministic model is one in which every set of variable states is uniquely determined by parameters in the model and by sets of previous states of these variables; therefore, a deterministic model always performs the same way for a given set of initial conditions. Conversely, in a stochastic model\u2014usually called a \"statistical model\"\u2014randomness is present, and variable states are not described by unique values, but rather by probability distributions.\nDeductive, inductive, or floating.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;deductive model is a logical structure based on a theory. An inductive model arises from empirical findings and generalization from them. If a model rests on neither theory nor observation, it may be described as a 'floating' model. Application of mathematics in social sciences outside of economics has been criticized for unfounded models. Application of catastrophe theory in science has been characterized as a floating model.\nStrategic vs. non-strategic.\nModels used in game theory are distinct in the sense that they model agents with incompatible incentives, such as competing species or bidders in an auction. Strategic models assume that players are autonomous decision makers who rationally choose actions that maximize their objective function. A key challenge of using strategic models is defining and computing solution concepts such as the Nash equilibrium. An interesting property of strategic models is that they separate reasoning about rules of the game from reasoning about behavior of the players.\nConstruction.\nIn business and engineering, mathematical models may be used to maximize a certain output. The system under consideration will require certain inputs. The system relating inputs to outputs depends on other variables too: decision variables, state variables, exogenous variables, and random variables. Decision variables are sometimes known as independent variables. Exogenous variables are sometimes known as parameters or constants. The variables are not independent of each other as the state variables are dependent on the decision, input, random, and exogenous variables. Furthermore, the output variables are dependent on the state of the system (represented by the state variables).\nObjectives and constraints of the system and its users can be represented as functions of the output variables or state variables. The objective functions will depend on the perspective of the model's user. Depending on the context, an objective function is also known as an \"index of performance\", as it is some measure of interest to the user. Although there is no limit to the number of objective functions and constraints a model can have, using or optimizing the model becomes more involved (computationally) as the number increases. For example, economists often apply linear algebra when using input\u2013output models. Complicated mathematical models that have many variables may be consolidated by use of vectors where one symbol represents several variables.\n\"A priori\" information.\nMathematical modeling problems are often classified into black box or white box models, according to how much a priori information on the system is available. A black-box model is a system of which there is no a priori information available. A white-box model (also called glass box or clear box) is a system where all necessary information is available. Practically all systems are somewhere between the black-box and white-box models, so this concept is useful only as an intuitive guide for deciding which approach to take.\nUsually, it is preferable to use as much a priori information as possible to make the model more accurate. Therefore, the white-box models are usually considered easier, because if you have used the information correctly, then the model will behave correctly. Often the a priori information comes in forms of knowing the type of functions relating different variables. For example, if we make a model of how a medicine works in a human system, we know that usually the amount of medicine in the blood is an exponentially decaying function, but we are still left with several unknown parameters; how rapidly does the medicine amount decay, and what is the initial amount of medicine in blood? This example is therefore not a completely white-box model. These parameters have to be estimated through some means before one can use the model.\nIn black-box models, one tries to estimate both the functional form of relations between variables and the numerical parameters in those functions. Using a priori information we could end up, for example, with a set of functions that probably could describe the system adequately. If there is no a priori information we would try to use functions as general as possible to cover all different models. An often used approach for black-box models are neural networks which usually do not make assumptions about incoming data. Alternatively, the NARMAX (Nonlinear AutoRegressive Moving Average model with eXogenous inputs) algorithms which were developed as part of nonlinear system identification can be used to select the model terms, determine the model structure, and estimate the unknown parameters in the presence of correlated and nonlinear noise. The advantage of NARMAX models compared to neural networks is that NARMAX produces models that can be written down and related to the underlying process, whereas neural networks produce an approximation that is opaque.\nSubjective information.\nSometimes it is useful to incorporate subjective information into a mathematical model. This can be done based on intuition, experience, or expert opinion, or based on convenience of mathematical form. Bayesian statistics provides a theoretical framework for incorporating such subjectivity into a rigorous analysis: we specify a prior probability distribution (which can be subjective), and then update this distribution based on empirical data.\nAn example of when such approach would be necessary is a situation in which an experimenter bends a coin slightly and tosses it once, recording whether it comes up heads, and is then given the task of predicting the probability that the next flip comes up heads. After bending the coin, the true probability that the coin will come up heads is unknown; so the experimenter would need to make a decision (perhaps by looking at the shape of the coin) about what prior distribution to use. Incorporation of such subjective information might be important to get an accurate estimate of the probability.\nComplexity.\nIn general, model complexity involves a trade-off between simplicity and accuracy of the model. Occam's razor is a principle particularly relevant to modeling, its essential idea being that among models with roughly equal predictive power, the simplest one is the most desirable. While added complexity usually improves the realism of a model, it can make the model difficult to understand and analyze, and can also pose computational problems, including numerical instability. Thomas Kuhn argues that as science progresses, explanations tend to become more complex before a paradigm shift offers radical simplification.\nFor example, when modeling the flight of an aircraft, we could embed each mechanical part of the aircraft into our model and would thus acquire an almost white-box model of the system. However, the computational cost of adding such a huge amount of detail would effectively inhibit the usage of such a model. Additionally, the uncertainty would increase due to an overly complex system, because each separate part induces some amount of variance into the model. It is therefore usually appropriate to make some approximations to reduce the model to a sensible size. Engineers often can accept some approximations in order to get a more robust and simple model. For example, Newton's classical mechanics is an approximated model of the real world. Still, Newton's model is quite sufficient for most ordinary-life situations, that is, as long as particle speeds are well below the speed of light, and we study macro-particles only. Note that better accuracy does not necessarily mean a better model. Statistical models are prone to overfitting which means that a model is fitted to data too much and it has lost its ability to generalize to new events that were not observed before.\nTraining, tuning, and fitting.\nAny model which is not pure white-box contains some parameters that can be used to fit the model to the system it is intended to describe. If the modeling is done by an artificial neural network or other machine learning, the optimization of parameters is called \"training\", while the optimization of model hyperparameters is called \"tuning\" and often uses cross-validation. In more conventional modeling through explicitly given mathematical functions, parameters are often determined by \"curve fitting.\"\nEvaluation and assessment.\nA crucial part of the modeling process is the evaluation of whether or not a given mathematical model describes a system accurately. This question can be difficult to answer as it involves several different types of evaluation.\nPrediction of empirical data.\nUsually, the easiest part of model evaluation is checking whether a model predicts experimental measurements or other empirical data not used in the model development. In models with parameters, a common approach is to split the data into two disjoint subsets: training data and verification data. The training data are used to estimate the model parameters. An accurate model will closely match the verification data even though these data were not used to set the model's parameters. This practice is referred to as cross-validation in statistics.\nDefining a metric to measure distances between observed and predicted data is a useful tool for assessing model fit. In statistics, decision theory, and some economic models, a loss function plays a similar role. While it is rather straightforward to test the appropriateness of parameters, it can be more difficult to test the validity of the general mathematical form of a model. In general, more mathematical tools have been developed to test the fit of statistical models than models involving differential equations. Tools from nonparametric statistics can sometimes be used to evaluate how well the data fit a known distribution or to come up with a general model that makes only minimal assumptions about the model's mathematical form.\nScope of the model.\nAssessing the scope of a model, that is, determining what situations the model is applicable to, can be less straightforward. If the model was constructed based on a set of data, one must determine for which systems or situations the known data is a \"typical\" set of data. The question of whether the model describes well the properties of the system between data points is called interpolation, and the same question for events or data points outside the observed data is called extrapolation.\nAs an example of the typical limitations of the scope of a model, in evaluating Newtonian classical mechanics, we can note that Newton made his measurements without advanced equipment, so he could not measure properties of particles traveling at speeds close to the speed of light. Likewise, he did not measure the movements of molecules and other small particles, but macro particles only. It is then not surprising that his model does not extrapolate well into these domains, even though his model is quite sufficient for ordinary life physics.\nPhilosophical considerations.\nMany types of modeling implicitly involve claims about causality. This is usually (but not always) true of models involving differential equations. As the purpose of modeling is to increase our understanding of the world, the validity of a model rests not only on its fit to empirical observations, but also on its ability to extrapolate to situations or data beyond those originally described in the model. One can think of this as the differentiation between qualitative and quantitative predictions. One can also argue that a model is worthless unless it provides some insight which goes beyond what is already known from direct investigation of the phenomenon being studied.\nAn example of such criticism is the argument that the mathematical models of optimal foraging theory do not offer insight that goes beyond the common-sense conclusions of evolution and other basic principles of ecology. It should also be noted that while mathematical modeling uses mathematical concepts and language, it is not itself a branch of mathematics and does not necessarily conform to any mathematical logic, but is typically a branch of some science or other technical subject, with corresponding concepts and standards of argumentation.\nSignificance in the natural sciences.\nMathematical models are of great importance in the natural sciences, particularly in physics. Physical theories are almost invariably expressed using mathematical models. Throughout history, more and more accurate mathematical models have been developed. Newton's laws accurately describe many everyday phenomena, but at certain limits theory of relativity and quantum mechanics must be used.\nIt is common to use idealized models in physics to simplify things. Massless ropes, point particles, ideal gases and the particle in a box are among the many simplified models used in physics. The laws of physics are represented with simple equations such as Newton's laws, Maxwell's equations and the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. These laws are a basis for making mathematical models of real situations. Many real situations are very complex and thus modeled approximately on a computer, a model that is computationally feasible to compute is made from the basic laws or from approximate models made from the basic laws. For example, molecules can be modeled by molecular orbital models that are approximate solutions to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. In engineering, physics models are often made by mathematical methods such as finite element analysis.\nDifferent mathematical models use different geometries that are not necessarily accurate descriptions of the geometry of the universe. Euclidean geometry is much used in classical physics, while special relativity and general relativity are examples of theories that use geometries which are not Euclidean.\nSome applications.\nOften when engineers analyze a system to be controlled or optimized, they use a mathematical model. In analysis, engineers can build a descriptive model of the system as a hypothesis of how the system could work, or try to estimate how an unforeseeable event could affect the system. Similarly, in control of a system, engineers can try out different control approaches in simulations.\nA mathematical model usually describes a system by a set of variables and a set of equations that establish relationships between the variables. Variables may be of many types; real or integer numbers, Boolean values or strings, for example. The variables represent some properties of the system, for example, the measured system outputs often in the form of signals, timing data, counters, and event occurrence. The actual model is the set of functions that describe the relations between the different variables.\n formula_1 where\n*formula_2\n*formula_3\n*formula_4\n*formula_5 and\n*formula_6 is defined by the following state-transition table:\nThe state formula_7 represents that there has been an even number of 0s in the input so far, while formula_8 signifies an odd number. A 1 in the input does not change the state of the automaton. When the input ends, the state will show whether the input contained an even number of 0s or not. If the input did contain an even number of 0s, formula_9 will finish in state formula_10 an accepting state, so the input string will be accepted.\nThe language recognized by formula_9 is the regular language given by the regular expression 1*( 0 (1*) 0 (1*) )*, where \"*\" is the Kleene star, e.g., 1* denotes any non-negative number (possibly zero) of symbols \"1\".\nNote this model assumes the particle is a point mass, which is certainly known to be false in many cases in which we use this model; for example, as a model of planetary motion.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral reference\nPhilosophical"}
{"id": "20591", "revid": "32681339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20591", "title": "Fujiwara no Mototsune", "text": "Japanese statesman, courtier and aristocrat\n, also known as , was a Japanese statesman, courtier and aristocrat of the early Heian period. He was the first \"kampaku\", a regent of an adult emperor, in Japanese history\".\"\nBiography.\nHe was born the third son of Fujiwara no Nagara, but was adopted by his powerful uncle Fujiwara no Yoshifusa, who had no sons. Mototsune followed in Yoshifusa's footsteps, holding power in the court in the position of regent for four successive emperors.\nMototsune invented the position of \"kampaku\" regent for himself in order to remain in power even after an emperor reached maturity. This innovation allowed the Fujiwara clan to tighten its grip on power right throughout an emperor's reign.\nMototsune is referred to as \"Sh\u014dsen K\u014d\" (\u662d\u5ba3\u516c) (posthumous name as Daij\u014d Daijin).\nGenealogy.\nThis member of the Fujiwara clan was the son of Fujiwara no Nagara, who was one of the brothers of Fujiwara no Yoshifusa. Mototsune was adopted as son and heir of Yoshifusa. In other words, Yoshifusa was Mototsune's uncle, and father through adoption.\nHe was married to a daughter of Imperial Prince Saneyasu (son of Emperor Ninmy\u014d).\nTheir children were\nHe was also married to Princess \"S\u014dshi\" (\u64cd\u5b50\u5973\u738b), a daughter of Imperial Prince Tadara (son of Emperor Saga).\nTheir children were\nHis other children were\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20592", "revid": "38931021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20592", "title": "Fujiwara no Michinaga", "text": "Japanese statesman\n was a Japanese statesman. The Fujiwara clan's control over Japan and its politics reached its zenith under his leadership.\nEarly life.\nMichinaga was born in Ky\u014dto, the son of Kaneie. Kaneie had become Regent in 986, holding the position until the end of his life in 990. Due to the hereditary principle of the Fujiwara Regents, Michinaga was now in line to become Regent after his brothers, Michitaka and Michikane.\nCareer.\nStruggle with Korechika.\nMichitaka was regent from 990 until 995, when he died. Michikane then succeeded him, famously ruling as Regent for only seven days before he too died of disease. With his two elder brothers dead, Michinaga then struggled with Fujiwara no Korechika, Michitaka's eldest son and the successor he had named. The mother of Ichijo, Fujiwara no Senshi, coerced Ichijo into granting Michinaga the title of Nairan (\u5185\u89a7) in the fifth month of 995. Korechika's position was ruined by a scandal that took place the following year, likely arranged by Michinaga.\nKorechika had been seeing a mistress in one of the Fujiwara palaces. He was told that the retired Emperor Kazan had been visiting the same house during the night; Korechika presumed that Kazan had been seeing the same mistress. Consequently, he and his brother Takaie ambushed the Emperor, shooting at him. An arrow struck Kazan's sleeve. Michinaga and his supporters then pressed charges of l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9. Though the jurists examining the case found the servants of Kaneie and Takaie at fault. Korechika was accused of putting a curse on Senshi.\nDuring their struggle, Michinaga had gained the position of Minister of the Right, or Udaijin (\u53f3\u5927\u81e3), on the 19th day of the 6th month of 995. Later, in 996, Michinaga became Minister of the Left, Sadaijin (\u5de6\u5927\u81e3), the most senior position in government apart from that of Chancellor (Daij\u014d-daijin).\nRule as Mido Kampaku.\nDuring his lifetime, Michinaga was called the Mido Kampaku, a title referencing the name of his residence, Mido, and that he was Regent in all but name. Although Ichijo already had an Empress, Teishi, Michinaga made her \"Kogo\" empress and had his first daughter, Shoshi, also marry him as \"Ch\u016bg\u016b\" empress. When Teishi died of childbirth in 1001, Michinaga's influence over Ichijo was absolute. Kenshi, Michinaga's second daughter, married the future Emperor Sanj\u014d. Ichijo and Shoshi had two sons, both future emperors, and it was to these that Michinaga's third and fourth daughters were married: Ichijo's eldest son, Go-Ichij\u014d, married the third daughter, Ishi; and Ichijo's second son, Go-Suzaku, married the fourth daughter, Kishi.\nMichinaga made alliances with the Minamoto (or more specifically, the Seiwa Genji); his wives were both Minamoto. Minamoto no Yorimitsu and Minamoto no Yorinobu were his two principal commanders. Michinaga never formally took the title of Kampaku. In 1011, he was granted the privilege of travelling to and from the court by ox-drawn cart. In the same year, Ichijo's second son, Atsunari, was proclaimed Crown Prince.\nDuring Sanj\u014d's reign as Emperor, he and Michinaga often came into conflict. Consequently, Michinaga attempted to pressure Sanj\u014d into retirement. In 1016, he was successful. The youth of Go-Ichij\u014d meant that Michinaga ruled as Sessh\u014d, the Regency assumed. He briefly became Chancellor in the final month of 1017 before resigning in the second month of the following year. A month after his resignation, he also resigned from the position of Sessh\u014d in favour of Yorimichi, his eldest son. In 1019, he took the tonsure, becoming a monk at the H\u014dj\u014d-ji, which he had built. He took the Dharma name Gy\u014dkan (\u884c\u89b3), which was later changed to Gy\u014dkaku (\u884c\u899a).\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 3 January 1028, Michinaga died at the age of sixty-two. He is said to have called out to Amida on his deathbed, asking for entry to Paradise. He left a diary, the Mid\u014d Kanpakuki, which is about the Heian court at the height of Fujiwara power. In the \"Tale of Genji\", the eponymous Genji is believed to be in part based on Michinaga as well as Korechika.\nGenealogy.\nHe was married to Minamoto no Rinshi, otherwise known as Michiko (\u6e90\u502b\u5b50), daughter of Sadaijin Minamoto no Masanobu. They had six children.\nHe was also married to Minamoto no Meishi (\u6e90\u660e\u5b50), daughter of Sadaijin Minamoto no Takaakira. They had six children.\nMichinaga had one daughter from an unknown woman.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20593", "revid": "50840560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20593", "title": "Lesser Poland Voivodeship", "text": "Province of Poland\nLesser Poland Voivodeship ( ) is a voivodeship in southern Poland. It has an area of , and a population of 3,404,863 (2019). Its capital and largest city is Krak\u00f3w.\nThe province's name recalls the traditional name of a historic Polish region, Lesser Poland, or in Polish: . The current Lesser Poland Voivodeship, however, covers only a small part of the broader ancient Ma\u0142opolska region, which stretched far north, to Radom and Siedlce, also including such cities as Lublin, Kielce, Cz\u0119stochowa, and Sosnowiec.\nThe province is bounded on the north by the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Mountains (), on the west by \"Jura Krakowsko-Cz\u0119stochowska\" (a broad range of hills stretching from Krak\u00f3w to Cz\u0119stochowa), and on the south by the Tatra, Pieniny and Beskidy Mountains. Politically, it is bordered by Silesian Voivodeship to the west, \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Voivodeship to the north, Subcarpathian Voivodeship to the east, and Slovakia (Pre\u0161ov Region and \u017dilina Regions) to the south.\nAlmost all of Lesser Poland lies in the Vistula River catchment area. The city of Krak\u00f3w was one of the European Cities of Culture in 2000. Krak\u00f3w has railway and road connections with Katowice (expressway), Warsaw, Wroc\u0142aw and Rzesz\u00f3w. It lies at the crossroads of major international routes linking Dresden with Kyiv, and Gda\u0144sk with Budapest. Located here is the second largest international airport in Poland (after Warsaw's), the John Paul II International Airport.\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was \u20ac40.4 billion in 2018, accounting for 8.1% of the Polish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac19,700 or 65% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 72% of the EU average.\nThe region's economy includes high technology, banking, chemical and metallurgical industries, coal, ore, food processing, and spirit and tobacco industries. The most industrialized city of the voivodeship is Krak\u00f3w. The largest regional enterprise operates here, the Tadeusz Sendzimir Steelworks in Nowa Huta, employing 17,500 people. Another major industrial center is located in the west, in the neighborhood of Chrzan\u00f3w (chiefly the production of railway engines) and O\u015bwi\u0119cim (chemical works). Krak\u00f3w Park Technologiczny, a special economic zone, has been established within the voivodeship. There are almost 210,000 registered economic entities operating in the voivodeship, mostly small and medium-sized, of which 234 belong to the state-owned sector. Foreign investment, growing in the region, reached approximately US$18.3 billion by the end of 2006.\nUniversities.\nA total of 130,000 students attend fifteen Krak\u00f3w institutions of higher learning. The Jagiellonian University, the largest university in the city (44,200 students), was founded in 1364 as Cracow Academy. Nicolaus Copernicus and Karol Wojty\u0142a (Pope John Paul II) graduated from it. The AGH University of Science and Technology (29,800 students) is considered to be the best technical university in Poland. The Academy of Economics, the Pedagogical University, the Krak\u00f3w University of Technology and the Agricultural Academy are also very highly regarded. There are also the Fine Arts Academy, the State Theatre University and the Musical Academy. Nowy S\u0105cz has become a major educational center in the region thanks to its Higher School of Business and Administration, with an American curriculum, founded in 1992. The school has 4,500 students. There are also two private higher schools in Tarn\u00f3w.\nHistory.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, the territory was inhabited by the Vistulans, an old Polish tribe. It formed part of Poland since its establishment in the 10th century, with the regional capital Krak\u00f3w becoming the seat of one of Poland's oldest dioceses, est. in 1000, contributing to the Christianization of Poland. In 1038, Krak\u00f3w became the capital of Poland by decision of Casimir I the Restorer, retaining its role for several centuries with short-term breaks. It also became the location of the Jagiellonian University, Poland's oldest university and one of world's oldest, established by King Casimir III the Great. In the Late Middle Ages, O\u015bwi\u0119cim and Zator were ducal seats of local lines of the Piast dynasty. Following the late-18th-century Partitions of Poland, the region witnessed several uprisings against foreign rule, i.e. the Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising of 1794, Krak\u00f3w uprising of 1846 and January Uprising of 1863\u20131864, and Krak\u00f3w remained one of the main cultural centers of partitioned Poland, taking advantage of the more relaxed policies of the Austrian partitioners than those of the Prussians and Russians. In the interbellum, the region was part of reborn independent Poland.\nDuring World War II, it was occupied by Germany, with the occupiers committing their genocidal policies against Poles and Jews in the region, massacring civilians and prisoners of war, including at Szczucin and Olkusz, operating prisons, forced labour camps and, most notably, the Auschwitz concentration camp with a network of subcamps in various localities. There was also a German prisoner-of-war camp for French, Belgian, Dutch and Soviet prisoners of war. \nThe Lesser Poland Voivodeship was created on 1 January 1999 out of the former Krak\u00f3w, Tarn\u00f3w, Nowy S\u0105cz and parts of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, Katowice, Kielce and Krosno Voivodeships, pursuant to the Polish local government reforms adopted in 1998.\nClimate.\nLocated in Southern Poland, Lesser Poland is the warmest place in Poland with average summer temperatures between and during the day, often reaching to in July and August, the two warmest months of the year. The city of Tarn\u00f3w, which is located in Lesser Poland, is the hottest place in Poland all year round, average temperatures being around during the day in the three summer months and during the day in the three winter months. In the winter the weather patterns alter each year; usually winters are mildly cold with temperatures ranging from to , but the winter season changes often to a more humid and warmer winter, or more continental and cold, depending on the many various wind patterns that affect Poland from different regions of the world. B\u0142\u0119d\u00f3w Desert, the only desert in Poland, is located in Lesser Poland, where temperatures can often reach in the summer.\nTourism.\nLesser Poland Voivodeship is the voivodeship with the highest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Poland with six entries, encompassing the Krak\u00f3w Old Town with the Wawel Royal Castle, former main royal residence and burial site of Polish monarchs, the old salt mines of Bochnia (Europe's oldest) and Wieliczka, the pilgrimage town of Kalwaria Zebrzydowska, the former Nazi German concentration camp Auschwitz in O\u015bwi\u0119cim, the wooden churches of Southern Lesser Poland, and the wooden Tserkvas of the Carpathian Region in Poland and Ukraine.\nFour national parks and numerous reserves have been established in the voivodeship to protect the environment of Lesser Poland. The region has areas for tourism and recreation, including Zakopane (Poland's most popular winter resort) and the Tatra, Pieniny and Beskidy Mountains. There are ten spa towns: Krynica-Zdr\u00f3j, Muszyna, Piwniczna-Zdr\u00f3j, Rabka-Zdr\u00f3j, Szczawnica, Wapienne, Wieliczka, Wysowa-Zdr\u00f3j, Zakopane, \u017begiest\u00f3w. The natural landscape features many historic sites.\nThe voivodeship is rich in historic architecture ranging from Romanesque and Gothic to Renaissance, Baroque and Art Nouveau. Numerous towns possess preserved historic market squares and town halls, as in Krak\u00f3w and Tarn\u00f3w. At Wadowice, birthplace of John Paul II (50 kilometers southwest of Krak\u00f3w) is a museum dedicated to the late pope's childhood.\nThe voivodeship, especially Krak\u00f3w, is home to various museums, art galleries and cultural institutions. Major museums include the National Museum in Krak\u00f3w with the branch Czartoryski Museum, one of the oldest museums of Poland, which contains works by various artists including Leonardo da Vinci, Rembrandt and Krak\u00f3w-native Jan Matejko, and the Archaeological Museum of Krak\u00f3w, the oldest archaeological museum in Poland. There are museums dedicated to painters Jan Matejko and J\u00f3zef Mehoffer at their former homes in Krak\u00f3w, to composer and pianist Karol Szymanowski and writer Kornel Makuszy\u0144ski at their homes in Zakopane, to writer W\u0142adys\u0142aw Orkan at his home in Por\u0119ba Wielka and to writer Emil Zegad\u0142owicz in his manor in Gorze\u0144 G\u00f3rny. Manggha, the largest Polish museum of Japanese art, is located in Krak\u00f3w.\nThere are numerous World War II memorials in the province, including a museum at the site of the former Nazi concentration camps Auschwitz-I and Auschwitz-II-Birkenau, as well as the Auschwitz Jewish Center, visited annually by a million people. There are memorials at the sites of German-perpetrated massacres of Poles, German-operated forced labour camps, etc.\nThe voivodeship is abundant in castles, including Mir\u00f3w, Niedzica, Niepo\u0142omice, Nowy Wi\u015bnicz, Pieskowa Ska\u0142a and Wawel.\nList of cities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The voivodeship contains 4 cities and 58 towns. These are listed below in descending order of population (according to official figures for 2019):\nAdministrative division.\nLesser Poland Voivodeship is divided into 22 counties (powiats): 3 city counties and 19 land counties. These are further divided into 182 gminas.\nThe counties are listed in the following table (ordering within categories is by decreasing population).\nProtected areas.\nProtected areas in Lesser Poland Voivodeship include six National Parks and 11 Landscape Parks. These are listed below.\nSymbols.\nLesser Poland Voivodeship's symbols can be blazoned as follows:\nCoat of arms: \n\"A traditional Iberian shield gules, an eagle argent displayed armed, legged, beaked, langued and crowned Or.\"\nFlag:\n\"Per fess argent and gules, a narrow fess Or.\"\nCuisine.\nIn addition to traditional nationwide Polish cuisine, the voivodeship is known for its variety of regional and local traditional foods, which include especially various cheeses, including the Bundz, Oscypek and Bryndza Podhala\u0144ska from mountain areas, meat products, especially local types of kie\u0142basa and bacon, honeys and various dishes and meals, officially protected by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland. There are local types of pierogi, kluski, ko\u0142acz and various soups. Local specialities include obwarzanek krakowski and kr\u00f3wki from Regulice.\nLocal beverages include several types of nalewki and \u015bliwowica, including \u015aliwowica \u0142\u0105cka.\nInternational relations.\nThe Lesser Poland Voivodeships has partnerships with the following regions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn February 2020, the French region of Centre-Val de Loire suspended its partnership with the Lesser Poland Voivodeship as a response to the anti-LGBT resolution passed by the voivodeship's authorities. In September 2021, the voivodeships's authorities revoked the controversial declaration.\nSports.\nFootball, ice hockey and motorcycle speedway enjoy the largest following and greatest success in the voivodeship. Cracovia and Wis\u0142a Krak\u00f3w contest the Krak\u00f3w Derby, nicknamed the Holy War, considered the fiercest rivalry in Poland and one of the fiercest in Europe. Most accomplished hockey teams are Podhale Nowy Targ, Cracovia and Unia O\u015bwi\u0119cim. Top speedway team is Unia Tarn\u00f3w.\nSince the establishment of the province, various major international sports competitions were co-hosted by the province, including the 2014 FIVB Volleyball Men's World Championship, 2016 European Men's Handball Championship, 2017 Men's European Volleyball Championship, 2021 Men's European Volleyball Championship, 2023 World Men's Handball Championship, 2023 European Games.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20595", "revid": "36384157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20595", "title": "Man'y\u014dsh\u016b", "text": "Oldest extant collection of Japanese poetry\nThe is the oldest extant collection of Japanese (poetry in Classical Japanese), compiled sometime after AD\u00a0759 during the Nara period. The anthology is one of the most revered of Japan's poetic compilations. The compiler, or the last in a series of compilers, is today widely believed to be \u014ctomo no Yakamochi, although numerous other theories have been proposed. The chronologically last datable poem in the collection is from AD\u00a0759 (No.\u00a04516). It contains many poems from a much earlier period, with the bulk of the collection representing the period between AD\u00a0600 and 759. The precise significance of the title is not known with certainty.\nThe comprises more than 4,500 poems in 20 volumes, and is broadly divided into three genres: , songs at banquets and trips; , songs about love between men and women; and , songs to mourn the death of people. These songs were written by people of various statuses, such as the Emperor, aristocrats, junior officials, soldiers ( songs), street performers, peasants, and folk songs (Eastern songs). There are more than 2,100 poems by unknown authors.\nThe collection is divided into 20 parts or books; this number was followed in most later collections. The collection contains 265 (long poems), 4,207 (short poems), one (short connecting poem), one (a poem in the form 5-7-5-7-7-7; named for the poems inscribed on the Buddha's footprints at Yakushi-ji in Nara), four (Chinese poems), and 22 Chinese prose passages. Unlike later collections, such as the , there is no preface.\nThe is widely regarded as being a particularly unique Japanese work, though its poems and passages did not differ starkly from its contemporaneous (for Yakamochi's time) scholarly standard of Chinese literature and poetics; many entries of the have a continental tone, earlier poems having Confucian or Taoist themes and later poems reflecting on Buddhist teachings. However, the is considered singular, even in comparison with later works, in choosing primarily Ancient Japanese themes, extolling Shint\u014d virtues of and . In addition, the language of many entries of the exerts a powerful sentimental appeal to readers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]his early collection has something of the freshness of dawn [...] There are irregularities not tolerated later, such as hypometric lines; there are evocative place names and ; and there are evocative exclamations such as , whose appeal is genuine even if incommunicable. In other words, the collection contains the appeal of an art at its pristine source with a romantic sense of venerable age and therefore of an ideal order since lost.\nThe compilation of the also preserves the names of earlier Japanese poetic compilations, these being the , several texts called the , as well as at least four family or individual anthologies known as belonging to Kakimoto no Hitomaro, Kasa no Kanamura, Takahashi no Mushimaro and Tanabe no Sakimaro.\nName.\nThe literal translation of the kanji that make up the title () is \"ten thousand \u2014 leaves \u2014 collection\".\nThe principal interpretations of this name, according to the 20th century scholar Sen'ichi Hisamatsu, are:\nOf these, supporters of the first interpretation can be further divided into:\nFurthermore, supporters of the second interpretation of the name can be divided into:\nThe third interpretation of the name - that it refers to a poetry collection that uses a large quantity of paper - was proposed by Y\u016bkichi Takeda in his , but Takeda also accepted the second interpretation; his theory that the title refers to the large volume of paper used in the collection has not gained much traction among other scholars.\nPeriodization.\nThe collection is customarily divided into four periods. The earliest dates to prehistoric or legendary pasts, from the time of Emperor Y\u016bryaku (r.\u00a0c.\u2009456\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009479) to those of the little-documented Emperor Y\u014dmei (r.\u00a0585\u2013587), Saimei (r.\u00a0642-645, 655-661), and finally Tenji (r.\u00a0668\u2013671) during the Taika Reforms and the time of Fujiwara no Kamatari (614\u2013669). The second period covers the end of the 7th century, coinciding with the popularity of Kakinomoto no Hitomaro, one of Japan's greatest poets. The third period spans 700\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009730 and covers the works of such poets as Yamabe no Akahito, \u014ctomo no Tabito and Yamanoue no Okura. The fourth period spans 730\u2013760 and includes the work of the last great poet of this collection, the compiler \u014ctomo no Yakamochi himself, who not only wrote many original poems but also edited, updated and refashioned an unknown number of ancient poems.\nPoets.\nThe vast majority of the poems of the were composed over a period of roughly a century, with scholars assigning the major poets of the collection to one or another of the four \"periods\" discussed above. Princess Nukata's poetry is included in that of the first period (645\u2013672), while the second period (673\u2013701) is represented by the poetry of Kakinomoto no Hitomaro, generally regarded as the greatest of poets and one of the most important poets in Japanese history. The third period (702\u2013729) includes the poems of Takechi no Kurohito, whom Donald Keene called \"[t]he only new poet of importance\" of the early part of this period, when Fujiwara no Fuhito promoted the composition of (poetry in classical Chinese). Other \"third period\" poets include: Yamabe no Akahito, a poet who was once paired with Hitomaro but whose reputation has suffered in modern times; Takahashi no Mushimaro, one of the last great poets, who recorded a number of Japanese legends such as that of Ura no Shimako; and Kasa no Kanamura, a high-ranking courtier who also composed but not as well as Hitomaro or Mushimaro. But the most prominent and important poets of the third period were \u014ctomo no Tabito, Yakamochi's father and the head of a poetic circle in the Dazaifu, and Tabito's friend Yamanoue no Okura, possibly an immigrant from the Korean kingdom of Paekche, whose poetry is highly idiosyncratic in both its language and subject matter and has been highly praised in modern times. Yakamochi himself was a poet of the fourth period (730\u2013759), and according to Keene he \"dominated\" this period. He composed the last dated poem of the anthology in 759.\nLinguistic significance.\nIn addition to its artistic merits, the is significant for using the earliest Japanese writing system, the cumbersome . Though it was by no means the first use of this writing system\u2014which was used to compose the (712),\u2014it was influential enough to give the writing system its modern name, as means \"the of the \". This system uses Chinese characters in a variety of functions: logographically to represent Japanese words, phonetically to represent Japanese sounds, and frequently in a combination of these. Such usage of Chinese characters to phonetically represent Japanese syllables eventually led to the birth of , as they were created from simplified cursive forms () and fragments () of .\nLike the majority of surviving Old Japanese literature, the vast majority of the is written in Western Old Japanese, the dialect of the capital region around Kyoto and Nara. However, specific parts of the collection, particularly volumes\u00a014 and 20, are also highly valued by historical linguists for the information they provide on other Old Japanese dialects, as these volumes collectively contain over 300 poems from the Azuma provinces of eastern Japan\u2014what is now the regions of Ch\u016bbu, Kanto, and southern T\u014dhoku.\nTranslations.\nJulius Klaproth produced some early, severely flawed translations of poetry. Donald Keene explained in a preface to the Nihon Gakujutsu Shink\u014d Kai edition of the :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One \"envoy\" () to a long poem was translated as early as 1834 by the celebrated German orientalist Heinrich Julius Klaproth (1783\u20131835). Klaproth, having journeyed to Siberia in pursuit of strange languages, encountered some Japanese castaways, fishermen, hardly ideal mentors for the study of 8th\u00a0century poetry. Not surprisingly, his translation was anything but accurate.\nIn 1940, Columbia University Press published a translation created by a committee of Japanese scholars and revised by the English poet, Ralph Hodgson. This translation was accepted in the Japanese Translation Series of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).\nDutch scholar Jan L. Pierson completed an English translation of the Man'y\u014dsh\u016b between 1929 and 1963, although this is described by Alexander Vovin as \"seriously outdated\" due to Pierson having \"ignored or misunderstood many facts of Old Japanese grammar and phonology\" which had been established in the 20th century. Japanese scholars Honda Heihachiro (1967) and Suga Teruo (1991) both produced complete literary translations into English, with the former using rhymed iambic feet and preserving the 31-syllable count of tanka and the latter preserving the 5-7 pattern of syllables in each line. Ian Hideo Levy published the first of what was intended to be a four volume English translation in 1981 for which he received the Japan\u2013U.S. Friendship Commission Prize for the Translation of Japanese Literature.\nIn 2009, Alexander Vovin published the first volume of his English translation of the \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\", including commentaries, the original text, and translations of the prose elements in-between poems. He completed, in order, volumes 15, 5, 14, 20, 17, 18, 1, 19, 2, and 16 before his death in 2022, with volume 10 set to be released posthumously.\nIn premodern Japan, officials used wooden slips or tablets of various sizes, known as , for recording memoranda, simple correspondence, and official dispatches. Three that have been excavated contain text from the . A excavated in Kizugawa, Kyoto, contains the first 11\u00a0characters of poem\u00a02205 from volume\u00a010, written in . It is dated between 750 and 780, and its size is . Inspection with an infrared camera revealed other characters, suggesting that the was used for writing practice. Another , excavated in 1997 from the Miyamachi archaeological site in K\u014dka, Shiga, contains poem\u00a03807 in volume\u00a016. It is dated to the middle of the 8th\u00a0century, and is wide by thick. Lastly, a excavated at the Ishigami archaeological site in Asuka, Nara, contains the first 14\u00a0characters of poem\u00a01391, in volume\u00a07, written in . Its size is , and it is dated to the late 7th\u00a0century, making it the oldest of the three.\nPlant species cited.\nMore than 150 species of grasses and trees are mentioned in approximately 1,500 entries of the . A is a botanical garden that attempts to contain every species and variety of plant mentioned in the anthology. There are dozens of these gardens around Japan. The first opened in Kasuga Shrine in 1932.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20596", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20596", "title": "Mieszko II Lambert", "text": "King of Poland (r. 1025\u201331); Duke of Poland (r. 1032\u201334)\nMieszko II Lambert (; c. 990 \u2013 10/11 May 1034) was King of Poland from 1025 to 1031 and Duke from 1032 until his death.\nHe was the second son of Boles\u0142aw I the Brave but the eldest born from his third wife, Emnilda of Lusatia. He organized two devastating invasions of Saxony in 1028 and 1030. Then, he ran a defensive war against Germany, Bohemia and the Kievan princes. Mieszko II was forced to escape from the country in 1031 after an attack by Yaroslav I the Wise, who installed Mieszko's older half-brother Bezprym on the Polish throne. Mieszko II took refuge in Bohemia, where he was imprisoned by Duke Oldrich. In 1032 he regained power in one of Poland's three districts, then united the country, making good use of the remaining power structures. At this time, several Polish territorial acquisitions of his father were lost: Upper Lusatia (also known as ), part of Lower Lusatia, Red Ruthenia, the western and central parts of Upper Hungary (now Slovakia) and probably Moravia.\nMieszko II was very well educated for the period. He was able to read and write and knew both Greek and Latin. He is unjustly known as Mieszko II (the \"Lazy\", \"Stagnant\" or \"Slothful\"). He received that epithet due to the unfortunate way his reign ended, but in the beginning he acted as a skillful and talented ruler.\nEarly years.\nMieszko was a son of King Boles\u0142aw the Brave. He was probably named after his paternal grandfather, Mieszko I. His second name, Lambert, sometimes erroneously considered to be a sobriquet, was given to him as a reference to Saint Lambert. However, it is also probable that the name was chosen after Boles\u0142aw's half-brother Lambert Mieszkowic. It is thought that the choice of this name for his son was an expression of warming relations between Boles\u0142aw I and his stepmother Oda of Haldensleben.\nSince Mieszko II was politically active before his father's death, Boles\u0142aw appointed him as his successor. He participated mainly in German politics, both as a representative of his father and the commander of the Polish troops.\nIn 1013, Mieszko II went to Magdeburg, where he paid homage to Emperor Henry II. \nA few months later, Boles\u0142aw I paid homage in person. The real purpose of Mieszko II's visit is unclear, especially since soon afterwards, his father paid homage to the Holy Roman Empire. Presumably, the young prince paid homage to Milsko, Lusatia and Moravia. The relevant treaty stipulated that it was only a personal tribute, not entailing any legal obligations. Another hypothesis assumes that the territories were transferred by Boles\u0142aw to him, and as a result made Mieszko II a vassal of the Empire.\nThe position of the young prince, at both the Polish and Imperial courts, became stronger in 1013 when he married Richeza, daughter of Count Palatine Ezzo of Lotharingia and niece of Emperor Otto III. Ezzo was a prince of considerable influence as a great leader of the opposition against Henry II. Through marriage with his daughter, Mieszko II entered the circle of the Imperial family. Probably after the wedding, and in accordance with prevailing custom, Boles\u0142aw I the Brave gave a separate district to Mieszko II to rule: Krak\u00f3w. One of his towns, Wawel (now part of the city), was chosen by the prince as his residence.\nIn the year 1014, Mieszko II was sent by his father to Bohemia as an emissary. He had to persuade Duke Old\u0159ich to make an alliance against Emperor Henry II. The mission failed as Old\u0159ich imprisoned Mieszko II. He was released only after the intervention of the Emperor, who, despite the planned betrayal of Boles\u0142aw I, loyally acted on behalf of his vassal. As a result, Mieszko II was sent to the Imperial court in Merseburg as a hostage. Henry II probably wanted to force the presence of Boles\u0142aw I in Merseburg and make him explain his actions. The plan failed however, because, under pressure from his relatives, the Emperor soon agreed to release Mieszko II.\nA year later, Mieszko II stood at the head of Polish troops in the next war against the Emperor. The campaign was not favorable to Henry. His army needed over a month to reach the line of the Oder River, and once there, his troops encountered strong resistance led by Mieszko II and his father. Henry II sent a delegation to the Polish rulers, in an effort to induce them to conclude a peace settlement. Mieszko II refused, and after the Emperor's failure to defeat his troops in battle, Henry decided to begin retreating to Dziadoszyce. The Polish prince went in pursuit and inflicted heavy losses on the German army. When the Polish army advanced to Meissen, Mieszko II unsuccessfully tried to besiege the castle of his brother-in-law, Margrave Herman I (husband of his sister Regelinda). The fighting stopped in autumn and was resumed only in 1017 after the failure of peace talks. Imperial forces bypassed the main defensive site near Krosno Odrza\u0144skie and besieged Niemcza. At the same time, at the head of ten legions, Mieszko II went to Moravia and planned an allied attack together with Bohemia against the Emperor. This action forced the Emperor to give up on any plan of a frontal attack. A year later, the Peace of Bautzen (30 January 1018) was concluded, with terms extremely favorable to the Polish side.\nBeginning in 1028, Mieszko II successfully waged war against the Holy Roman Empire. He was able to repel its invading army, and later even invaded Saxony. He allied Poland with Hungary, resulting in a temporary Hungarian occupation of Vienna. This war was probably prompted by family connections of Mieszko II's in Germany who opposed Emperor Conrad II.\nDue to the death of Thietmar of Merseburg, the principal chronicler of that period, there is little information about Mieszko II's life from 1018 until 1025, when he finally took over the government of Poland. Only Gallus Anonymus mentions the then Prince on the occasion of the description of his father's trip to Rus in 1018: \"due to the fact that his son (...) Mieszko wasn't considered yet capable of taking the government by himself, he established a regent among his family during his trip to Rus\". This statement was probably the result of the complete ignorance of the chronicler since in 1018, Mieszko II was 28 years old and was already fully able to exercise power by himself.\nKingship.\nAccession.\nKing Boles\u0142aw died on 17 June 1025. Six months later, on Christmas Day, Mieszko II Lambert was crowned king of Poland by the archbishop of Gniezno, Hipolit, in the Gniezno Cathedral. Contemporary German chroniclers considered this to be an abuse of power on the part of the Archbishop, which was made necessary by the existing political situation. After his father's death, Mieszko II inherited a vast territory, which in addition to Greater Poland, Lesser Poland, Silesia and Gda\u0144sk Pomerania, also included Lusatia, Red Ruthenia and the territory of present-day Slovakia. Whether Moravia was still under his reign or was lost earlier is disputed. Once his solo reign had begun, as an important Central European ruler, he was now very important to the Holy Roman Empire.\nLater developments during his reign had their source in dynastic and familial issues. His older half-brother Bezprym was the son of the Hungarian princess Judith, Boles\u0142aw's second wife. Mieszko II also had a younger full-brother, Otto. According to Slavonic custom, a father was expected to divide his legacy among all his sons. However, since Boles\u0142aw I did not wish to break up the kingdom, Mieszko II's brothers received nothing from their father's legacy.\nAs Bezprym was the oldest son, there were some who felt that he should have succeeded his father as king. Bezprym had, however, always been disliked by his father, as indicated by his name (the Piasts tended to give names such as \"Boles\u0142aw\", \"Mieszko\" and later \"Kazimierz\", \"W\u0142adys\u0142aw\" and emperors' names, such as \"Otto\", \"Konrad\" (Conrad), and \"Henryk\" (Heinrich). \"Bezprym\" was rather a commoner's name, which implied that Boles\u0142aw did not wish Bezprym to succeed him). For that reason, Bezprym was sent to a monastery.\nAccording to some chroniclers, Mieszko II expelled his two brothers from the country. Otto took refuge in Germany and Bezprym escaped to the Kievan Rus.\nRole in German conflict.\nIn 1026, King Conrad II of Germany went to Italy for his Imperial coronation. His absence increased the activity of the opposition centered around Dukes Ernest II of Swabia and Frederick II of Upper Lorraine. Conrad II's opponents conspired to acquire Mieszko's favor. Historical evidence of these efforts is in the prayer book sent to Mieszko by Frederick's wife, Matilda of Swabia, around 1027. The volume is entitled: . In it, a miniature showed the Duchess presenting the Book to Mieszko II while sitting on a throne. The gift was accompanied by a letter, wherein Matilda named him a distinguished king and a model for the spread of Christianity. Also written was praise of the merits of Mieszko II in the building of new churches, as well his knowledge of Latin, very unusual in those times when Greek was more widely used. In this book are found the earliest records of the Kingdom of Poland: neumes at the margins of the sequence \"Ad c\u00e9l\u00e8bres rex celica\". The gift caused the expected effect, and Mieszko II promised to take military action. The preparations for the war began in the autumn of 1027. In the middle of that year, Conrad II returned to Germany and began to fight the rebels. Soon, he defeated Duke Ernest II, depriving him of his lands. Only when the rebel fight was nearly lost did Mieszko II arrive to their aid. In 1028, Polish troops invaded Saxony and took a number of prisoners. The devastation was so great that, according to Saxon sources, \"where Mieszko II's troops put their feet grass never thence grew\". The Emperor accused the Polish ruler of an illegal coronation as King and declared him a usurper. This invasion involved the lands of the Lutici tribe. In October 1028, the Emperor's opportunity came as the Lutici district of P\u00f6hlde asked the Emperor to defend against the attacks of Mieszko II, promising support in the fight against the Polish ruler.\nRetaliatory expeditions.\nDespite the treaty which secured peace between Poland and Germany, the Emperor soon armed a retaliatory expedition against Mieszko II. Conrad II's army arrived to Lusatia in the autumn of 1029 and began the siege of Bautzen, but the German troops did not receive the promised support of the Lutici tribe and the expedition failed. Threatened by the Hungarians, the Emperor was forced to retreat.\nProbably in this same year, the son of Old\u0159ich, Bretislaus I, attacked and took Moravia.\nIn 1030, Mieszko II secured an alliance with Hungary and once again invaded Saxony. In the meanwhile, his southern ally attacked Bavaria and temporarily occupied Vienna.\nIn response, the Emperor organized another expedition against the Polish king, this time by organizing a coalition against Mieszko II. Already in 1030, Yaroslav I the Wise began the offensive and conquered Red Ruthenia and some Be\u0142z castles.\nIn 1031, the Emperor concluded a peace with the Kingdom of Hungary. Probably in exchange for Stephen I's support, Conrad II ceded to Hungary the territories between the Leitha and Fischa Rivers. Now that the Emperor was less concerned about an attack from the south, in the autumn of 1031, he went on the offensive against Poland and besieged Milsko. The offensive ended with a complete success, and Mieszko II was forced to surrender some lands. As a result, the Polish King lost portions of the lands taken by his father, who warred often against Emperor Henry II.\nDeposition and division.\nHistorians estimate that the reason for the rapid capitulation of Mieszko II was the bad internal situation in the country. Boles\u0142aw left an unstable kingdom to his son, who had to defend his autonomy and position amongst neighboring rulers. Also, the cost of Mieszko II's extensive war against Emperor Conrad II caused his popularity to decline among his subjects, despite the fact that during the invasion of Saxony the King only defended their territory. Furthermore, the final loss of the war against the Holy Roman Empire weakened the position of the King, who had to face several rebellions from the opposition, who claimed that the previous war did not produce the expected benefits. An additional problem was a dynastic crisis: Mieszko II's brothers continued their attempts to gain power with the help of foreign forces.\nThe brother who caused the first problems to Mieszko II was most likely Bezprym, who allegedly won the alliance of Kiev in order to take power with the support of Otto. When Mieszko II was busy defending Lusatia from the troops of Conrad II, the Kievan expedition came from the east with Yaroslav I the Wise as the leader. In 1031, Poland was invaded and then Bezprym was settled on the throne. Mieszko II and his family were forced to flee the country. Queen Richeza and her children found refuge in Germany. The King could not escape to Hungary because, during his travel, he was stopped by Rus' troops. King Stephen I of Hungary was not favorable to accepting him in his country. Without alternatives, Mieszko II went to Bohemia. Duke Old\u0159ich once again imprisoned him. This time, the King could not count on Imperial support. Mieszko II was not only imprisoned but also castrated, which was to be a punishment to Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, who blinded Duke Boleslaus III the Red (Old\u0159ich's brother) thirty years before. Mieszko II and his wife never reunited again; according to some sources, they were either officially divorced, or only separated.\nBezprym probably made bloody persecutions against the followers of Mieszko II. At the time, power was exercised in the face of mutiny by the people, an event known as the \"Pagan Reaction\". Having degraded the structure of power, the Duke's authority collapsed, and he was forced to send the Polish regalia to the Emperor. After only one year of reign, Bezprym was murdered (1032), probably at the instigation of his brothers.\nAfter the death of Bezprym, the Polish throne remained vacant. Mieszko II was still imprisoned in Bohemia and Otto probably in Germany. German sources report that the Emperor organized an expedition in order to invade Poland. It is unknown what happened after this, but certainly Mieszko II was released by Duke Old\u0159ich and he could return to the country. After his recent opponent had regained power, the Emperor immediately reacted and began the preparations for the expedition against Poland. Mieszko II was not prepared for the confrontation, so he used his influence in the German court in order to resolve the conflict.\nOn 7 July 1032, in Merseburg, a meeting took place between Conrad II and the surviving heirs of the Piast dynasty. Without alternatives, Mieszko II was forced to surrender the crown and agreed to the division of Poland between him and the other two competitors: his brother Otto and a certain Dytryk () \u2014his cousin, grandson of Duke Mieszko I and his third wife, Oda von Haldensleben. Mieszko II probably received Lesser Poland and Masovia, Otto obtained Silesia, and Dytryk took Greater Poland. According to another hypothesis, Mieszko II received Greater Poland, and other neighborhoods were given to Otto and Dytryk. Although the distribution was uncertain, this division was short-lived: in 1033, Otto was killed by one of his own men, and Mieszko II took his domains. Shortly afterwards, he likely had Dytryk expelled and thus was able to reunite the whole country in his hands. Mieszko II regained full power, but he still had to fight against the nobility and his own subjects. In Poland, his renunciation of the crown was disregarded, and after 1032, he was still called king in the chronicles.\nDeath.\nMieszko II died suddenly on either 10 or 11 May 1034, probably in Pozna\u0144. The Polish chronicles clearly stated that he died of natural causes; the information given by the chronicles of Gottfried of Viterbo that he was murdered by the sword-bearer (Miecznik) refers in fact to Bezprym. He was buried in the Cathedral of St. Peter and St. Paul.\nAfter Mieszko II's death, Poland's peasants revolted in a \"pagan reaction\". The exact reasons and date are unknown. Mieszko II's only son and heir, Casimir I, was either expelled by this insurrection, or the insurrection was caused by the aristocracy's expulsion of him. Some modern historians argue that the insurrection was caused more by economic than by religious issues, such as new taxes for the Church and the militarization of the early Polish polity. Priests, monks and knights were killed; cities, churches and monasteries were burned. The chaos became still greater when, unexpectedly, the Czechs invaded Silesia and Greater Poland from the south (1039). The land became divided among local rulers, one of whom is known by name: Miec\u0142aw, ruler of Masovia. Greater Poland was so devastated that it ceased to be the core of the Polish Kingdom. The capital was moved to Krak\u00f3w, in Lesser Poland.\nMarriage and issue.\nIn Merseburg ca. 1013, Mieszko II married Richeza, daughter of Count Palatine Ezzo, Count Palatine of Lotharingia and Matilda of Germany, Countess Palatine of Lotharingia. They had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20597", "revid": "12744189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20597", "title": "Mieszko I", "text": "Duke of Poland (c. 930\u2013992) (ruled c. 960\u2013992)\nMieszko I (; c.\u2009930 \u2013 25 May 992) was Duke of Poland from 960 until his death in 992 and the founder of the first unified Polish state, the Civitas Schinesghe. A member of the Piast dynasty, he was the first Christian ruler of Poland and continued the policies of both his father Siemomys\u0142 and his grandfather Lestek, who initiated a process of unification among the Polish tribes and the creation of statehood.\nAccording to existing sources, Mieszko I was a potent politician, a talented military leader and a charismatic ruler. Through both alliances and military force, he extended ongoing Polish conquests. Early in his reign, he subjugated Kuyavia and likely Gda\u0144sk Pomerania and Masovia. For most of his reign, Mieszko I waged war for control of Western Pomerania. He eventually annexed it to the vicinity of the lower Oder River. His internal reforms were aimed at expanding and improving the so-called war monarchy system. During the last years of his life, he fought the Bohemian state and captured Silesia and lands now constituting Lesser Poland. \nIn foreign policy, Mieszko I placed the interests of his country foremost and entered into agreements with his former foes. He successfully used diplomacy by concluding alliances with Bohemia, Sweden and the Holy Roman Empire. Mieszko's alliance with the Czech prince Boleslaus the Cruel was strengthened by his marriage in 965 to the P\u0159emyslid princess Dobrawa, who is said to have brought the Christian faith to Poland. Mieszko's baptism in 966 placed him and his country in the cultural sphere of Western Christianity; he is sometimes called the \"Clovis of Poland\" for his role in laying the foundations for a Christian Poland. On his death, he left to his son and successor, Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, a country with greatly expanded territories and a well-established position in Europe.\nHe also had a daughter who went to become a queen consort of Denmark and used to be identified with figure of Scandinavian queen Sigrid the Haughty. Through his daughter, Mieszko became grandfather of Canute the Great and the great-grandfather of Gunhilda of Denmark, Canute the Great's daughter and wife of Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor.\nMieszko I also enigmatically appeared as \"Dagome\" in a papal document dating to about 1085, called \"Dagome iudex\", which mentions a gift or dedication of Mieszko's land to the Pope almost a hundred years earlier. The term possibly refers to Mieszko's adopted Christian name, Dagobert, which often features in historical writing. \nIt is roughly to his borders that Poland was returned in 1945.\nEarly life.\nThere is no certain information on Mieszko's life before he took control over his lands. Only the \"Lesser Poland Chronicle\" gives the date of his birth as somewhere between the years 920\u2013931 (depending on the version of the manuscript); however, modern researchers do not recognize the chronicle as a reliable source. Several historians on the basis of their investigations postulated the date of Mieszko's birth to have been between 922\u2013945; the activity of the Duke in his final years of life puts the date of his birth closer to the latter year.\nMieszko's name has traditionally been thought to be a diminutive of Mieczys\u0142aw but this is refuted by the majority of modern historians. According to a legend first described by Gallus Anonymus, Mieszko was blind during his first seven years of life. This typical medieval allegory referred to his paganism rather than an actual disability. Another name of Mieszko, \"Dagome\", appears in the \"Dagome iudex\" document, though its origin is uncertain. Historians speculate that it was derived from Mieszko's adopted Christian name Dagobert or an abbreviation of the two names \u2013 \"Dago\" for Dagobert and \"me\" for Mieszko.\nReign.\nEarly reign.\nMieszko I took over the rule after his father's death c.\u2009950\u2013960, probably closer to the latter date. Due to the lack of sources it is not possible to determine exactly which lands he inherited. Certainly among them were the areas inhabited by the Polans and Goplans, as well as the Sieradz-\u0141\u0119czyca lands and Kuyavia. It is possible that this state included also Masovia and Gda\u0144sk Pomerania. Soon the new ruler faced the task of integrating the relatively large, ethnically and culturally heterogeneous territory. Although the residents of areas controlled by Mieszko spoke mostly one language, had similar beliefs and reached a similar level of economic and general development, they were socially connected primarily by tribal structures. It appears that the elders cooperating with the Duke first felt the need for super-tribal unity, as expansion allowed them to broaden their influence.\nMieszko and his people were described around 966 by Abraham ben Jacob, a Sephardi Jewish traveller, who at that time visited the Prague court of Duke Boleslaus I the Cruel. Abraham presented Mieszko I as one of the four Slavic \"kings\", reigning over a vast \"northern\" area, with a highly regarded and substantial military force at his disposal. More precise contemporary records regarding Mieszko were compiled by Widukind of Corvey, and, half a century later, by Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg.\nBy the time Mieszko I took over from his father, the Polans' tribal federation of Greater Poland had for some time been actively expanding. Continuing this process, perhaps in the first years of Mieszko's reign, if it had not been done already by his father, Mieszko I conquered Masovia. Likely also during that period or earlier, at least part of Gda\u0144sk Pomerania was obtained. Mieszko's interests were then concentrated mainly on areas occupied by the eastern (\"i.e.\", near the Oder River) branches of the Polabian Slavs.\nIn 963 Margrave Gero of Meissen conquered territories occupied by the Polabian Lusatian and S\u0142upian tribes, and as a result came into direct contact with the Polish state. At the same time (about 960) Mieszko I began his expansion against the Velunzani and Lutici tribes. The war was recorded by the traveller Abraham ben Jacob. According to him, Mieszko I had fought against the Weltaba tribe, commonly identified with the Veleti. Wichmann the Younger, a Saxon nobleman who was then a leader of a band of Polabian Slavs, defeated Mieszko twice, and around 963 a brother of Mieszko, whose name is unknown, was killed in the fighting. The frontiers at the mouth of the Oder River were also desired by the German margraves. In addition, the Veleti Bohemia, which at that time possessed Silesia and Lesser Poland regions, constituted a danger for the young state of the Polans.\nMargrave Gero's war; Mieszko's homage to the Emperor.\nThe chronicle of Thietmar poses some problems of interpretation of the information regarding the attack of Margrave Gero on the Slavic tribes, as a result of which he purportedly \"subordinated to the authority of the Emperor Lusatia and the Selpuli [\"viz.\", the S\u0142upian tribes] and also Mieszko with his subjects\". According to the majority of modern historians, Thietmar made an error summarizing the chronicle of Widukind, placing the Gero raid there instead of the fighting that Mieszko conducted at that time against Wichmann the Younger. Other sources make no mention of such conquest and of putting the Polans state on the same footing with the Polabian Slavs. On the other hand, the supporters of the Gero's invasion theory believe that the Margrave did actually carry out a successful invasion, as a result of which Mieszko I was forced to pay tribute to the Emperor and also was compelled to adopt Catholicism through the German Church. The thesis that proposes the introduction of Catholicism as a result of this war finds no confirmation in German sources.\nThe homage is then a separate issue, since, according to the chronicle of Thietmar, Mieszko actually paid tribute to the Emperor from the lands \"usque in Vurta fluvium\" (up to the Warta River). In all probability Mieszko decided to pay tribute in order to avoid an invasion similar to the one that Lusatia had suffered. This homage would take place in 965, or in 966 at the latest. Very likely the tribute applied only to the Lubusz land, which was in the German sphere of influence. This understanding of the tribute issue explains why already in 967 Mieszko I was described in the Saxon chronicles as the Emperor's friend (or ally, supporter, Latin: \"amicus imperatoris\").\nMarriage and conversion to Christianity.\nProbably in 964 Mieszko began negotiations with Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia. As a result, in 965 Mieszko married his daughter Dobrawa (also named \"Dobrava\", \"Doubravka\" or \"D\u0105br\u00f3wka\"). This political Polish-Bohemian alliance is likely to have been initiated by the Polish ruler. It is probable that the marriage was officially arranged in February 965.\nThe next step was the baptism of Mieszko. There are different hypotheses concerning this event. Most often it is assumed that it was a political decision, intended to bring Mieszko's state closer to the Czechs and to facilitate his activities in the Polabian Slavs area. At the same time, the baptism decreased the likelihood of future attacks by German margraves and deprived them of the opportunity to attempt Christianization of Mieszko's lands by force. An additional reason could be Mieszko's desire to remove from power the influential pagan priest class, which may have been blocking his efforts to establish a more centralized rule.\nA different hypothesis is linked with the above-mentioned acceptance of the veracity of Gero's invasion of Poland. According to it, it was the attack of the Margrave that forced the Catholicization, which was to be an act of subordination to the Emperor, done without the mediation of the Pope.\nStill other motives were responsible according to Gallus Anonymus, who claimed that it was Dobrawa who convinced her husband to change his religion. Likewise chronicler Thietmar attributes Mieszko's conversion to Dobrawa's influence. There are no reasons to negate Dobrawa's role in Mieszko's acceptance of Roman Catholicism; however, crediting rulers' wives with positive influence over their husbands' actions was a common convention at that time.\nIt is generally recognized that the baptism of Mieszko I took place in 966. The place is unknown; it could have had happened in any of the cities of the Empire (possibly Regensburg), but also in one of the Polish towns like Gniezno or Ostr\u00f3w Lednicki. The belief that the baptism was accomplished through the Czechs in order to avoid the dependence on Germany and the German Church is incorrect, because Bohemia would not have its own church organization until 973. At the time of the baptism of Mieszko the existing Bohemian church establishment was a part of the Regensburg diocese. Thus, if the Polish ruler accepted the baptism through Prague's mediation, it had to be sanctioned in Regensburg. However, the religious vocabulary (words like baptism, sermon, prayer, church, apostle, bishop or confirmation) were adopted from the Czech language and had to come from Dobrawa's entourage and the church elements that arrived with her. Perhaps with her also came the first Polish bishop, Jordan. It could be that the reason for the Czech preference of Mieszko was the existence in Bohemia of a mission which followed the precepts of the Byzantine Greek brothers and later saints Cyril and Methodius, who developed and performed the liturgy in the Slavic rite, more readily understood by Mieszko and his subjects. The Slavic rite church branch had survived in Bohemia for another hundred years after Mieszko's baptism.\nConquest of Pomerania.\nAfter the normalization of relations with the Holy Roman Empire and Bohemia, Mieszko I returned to his plans to conquer the western part of Pomerania. On 21 September 967 the Polish-Bohemian troops prevailed in the decisive battle against the Wolinians led by Wichmann the Younger, which gave Mieszko control over the mouth of the Odra River. The German margraves had not opposed Mieszko's activities in Pomerania, perhaps even supported them; the death of the rebellious Wichmann, who succumbed to his wounds soon after the battle, may have been in line with their interests. A telling incident took place after the battle, a testimony to Mieszko's high standing among the Empire's dignitaries, just one year after his baptism: Widukind of Corvey reported that the dying Wichmann asked Mieszko to hand over Wichmann's weapons to Emperor Otto I, to whom Wichmann was related. For Mieszko the victory had to be a satisfying experience, especially in light of his past defeats inflicted by Wichmann.\nThe exact result of Mieszko's fighting in the west of Pomerania is not known. Subsequent loss of the region by Mieszko's son Boles\u0142aw suggests that the conquest was difficult and the hold over that territory rather tenuous. In one version of the legend of Saint Adalbert of Prague (known in Polish as \"Wojciech\") it is written that Mieszko I had his daughter married to a Pomeranian prince, who previously voluntarily \"was washed with the holy water of the baptism\" in Poland. The above information, as well as the fact that Boles\u0142aw lost Western Pomerania, suggest that the region was not truly incorporated into the Polish state, but only became a fief. This conjecture seems to be confirmed in the introduction of the first volume of the chronicles of Gallus Anonymus concerning the Pomeranians: \"Although often the leaders of the forces defeated by the Polish duke sought salvation in baptism, as soon as they regained their strength, they repudiated the Christian faith and started the war against Christian anew\".\nWar against Margrave Odo I of Ostmark.\nIn 972 Poland was attacked by Odo I, Margrave of the Saxon Ostmark. According to the chronicles of Thietmar, Odo acted unilaterally, without the Emperor's consent: \"Meanwhile, the noble Margrave Hodo, having collected his army attacked Mieszko, who has been faithfully paying tribute to the Emperor (for the lands) up the Warta river.\"\nThere are different hypotheses concerning the reasons for this invasion. Possibly Margrave Odo wanted to stop the growing power of the Polish state. Very likely Odo wanted to protect the Wolinian state, which he considered his zone of influence, from the Polish take-over. Possibly the Wolinians themselves called the Margrave and asked his help. In any event, Odo's forces moved in and on 24 June 972 twice engaged Mieszko's army at the village of \"Cidini\", commonly identified with Cedynia. At first, the Margrave defeated Mieszko's forces; subsequently the Duke's brother Czcibor defeated the Germans in the decisive stage, inflicting great losses among their troops. It may be that Mieszko intentionally staged the retreat, which was followed by a surprise attack on the flank of the German pursuing troops. After this battle, Mieszko and Odo were called to the Imperial Diet in Quedlinburg in 973 to explain and justify their conduct. The exact judgment of the Emperor is unknown, but it is certain that the sentence was not carried out because he died a few weeks after the Diet. It is commonly assumed that the sentence was unfavorable to the Polish ruler. The \"Annals of Altaich\" indicates that Mieszko was not present in Quedlinburg during the gathering; instead, he had to send his son Boles\u0142aw as a hostage.\nMieszko's conflict with Odo I was a surprising event because, according to Thietmar, Mieszko respected the Margrave highly. Thietmar wrote that \"Mieszko would never wear his outdoor garment in a house where Odo was present, or remain seated after Odo had gotten up.\"\nIt is believed that in practical terms the victory at Cedynia sealed Western Pomerania's fate as Mieszko's dependency.\nAcquisitions in the east.\nAccording to archaeological research, during the 970s the Sandomierz region and the Przemy\u015bl area inhabited by the Lendians became incorporated into the Polish state. None of it is certain for the lack of written sources. It is possible that especially the Przemy\u015bl area, also inhabited the White Croats, belonged at that time to Bohemia, which supposedly extended up to the Bug River and Styr River. The Primary Chronicle states that in 981 Vladimir of the Rurik Dynasty \"went towards the Lachy and took their towns: Przemy\u015bl, Czerwie\u0144 and other strongholds (...)\". The exact interpretation of this passage is uncertain, because the Ruthenian word \"Lachy\" meant both the Poles in general and the southeastern Lendians. Mieszko's conquest of Sandomierz could also have taken place later, together with the takeover of the Vistulans (western and central Lesser Poland). However, Widukind in the 10th century mentions Mieszko ruled over the \"Sclavi\" tribe of \"Licicaviki\", which is identified with the Lendians.\nSome historians suggest that the regions of Sandomierz, Lublin and Czerwie\u0144 (western Red Ruthenia) were indeed annexed by Mieszko's state in the 970s, as lands valuable for trade reasons and as a starting point for a future attack against what was to become Lesser Poland, then in the hands of Bohemia. Sandomierz under this scenario was the central hub of the area, with Czerwie\u0144, Przemy\u015bl and Che\u0142m assuming the function of defensive borderland strongholds.\nInvolvement in German internal disputes; Second marriage.\nAfter the death of Emperor Otto I in 973 Mieszko, like his brother-in-law, Duke Boleslaus II of Bohemia, joined the German opposition in support of the attempted imperial succession of Henry II, Duke of Bavaria. Mieszko may have been motivated by revenge because of the (presumably) negative verdict of the Quedlinburg summit, but, more importantly, he may have wanted more favorable terms for his cooperation with Germany. The participation of Mieszko in the conspiracy against Otto II was documented in only one source, the chronicles of the monastery in Altaich in its entry for the year 974. The Duke of Bavaria was defeated, and Emperor Otto II regained full power. Shortly afterwards, the young emperor waged a retaliatory expedition against Bohemia, in 978 forcing Duke Boleslaus into submission.\nIn 977 Mieszko's wife, Dobrawa, died. At first there were no apparent repercussions, as the Polish ruler had maintained his alliance with Bohemia.\nIn 979 Otto II supposedly attacked Poland. Mention of this event can be found in the \"Chronicle of the Bishops of Cambrai\" from the 11th century. The effects of this expedition are unknown, but it is suspected that the Emperor did not succeed. Due to bad weather, the Emperor was back at the border of Thuringia and Saxony in December of that year. It is uncertain whether the invasion actually took place. The chronicle only stated that it was an expedition \"against the Slavs\". Archaeological discoveries appear to support the thesis of Otto's invasion. In the last quarter of the 10th century there had been a radical expansion of the fortifications at Gniezno and Ostr\u00f3w Lednicki, which may be associated with the Polish-German war, or the expectation of such. The duration of the expedition suggests that it may have reached as far east as the vicinity of Pozna\u0144.\nThe Polish-German agreement was concluded in the spring or possibly summer of 980, because in November of that year Otto II left his country and went to Italy. It appears that during this time Mieszko I married Oda, daughter of Dietrich of Haldensleben, Margrave of the Northern March, after abducting her from the monastery of Kalbe. Chronicler Thietmar described the event as follows:\n\"When Boles\u0142aw's mother died his father married, without permission from the Church, a nun from the monastery in Kalbe, daughter of Margrave Dietrich. Oda was her name and her guilt was great. For she scorned her vows to God, and gave preference to the man of war before him (...). But because of the concern for the well-being of the homeland and the necessity to secure its peace, the event caused no break of relations, instead a proper way was found to restore concord. For thanks to Oda the legion of followers of Christ became augmented, many prisoners returned to their country, the shackled had their chains taken off, and the gates of prisons were opened for the trespassers.\"\nAlthough Thietmar made no mention of warfare that possibly took place on this occasion, the information on the return of the accord, acting for the good of the country and release of prisoners indicate that a conflict actually did occur.\nThe marriage with Oda considerably affected the position and prestige of Mieszko, who entered the world of Saxon aristocracy. As a son-in-law of Margrave Dietrich, he gained an ally in one of the most influential politicians of the Holy Roman Empire. As the Margrave was a distant relative of the Emperor, Mieszko became a member of the circle connected to the imperial ruling house.\nCooperation with Sweden and the war against Denmark.\nProbably in the early 980s Mieszko allied his country with Sweden against Denmark. The alliance was thought to be sealed with the marriage of Mieszko's daughter \u015awi\u0119tos\u0142awa with the Swedish king Erik, though it appears it likely was not the case. The content of the treaty is known from the traditional account\u2014not entirely reliable, but originating directly from the Danish court\u2014given by Adam of Bremen. In this text, probably as a result of confusion, he gives instead of Mieszko's name the name of his son Boles\u0142aw:\n\"The King of the Swedes, Erik, entered into an alliance with the very powerful King of the Polans, Boles\u0142aw. Boles\u0142aw gave Erik his daughter or sister. Because of this cooperation the Danes were routed by the Slavs and the Swedes.\"\nMieszko decided on the alliance with Sweden probably in order to help protect his possessions in Pomerania from the Danish King Harald Bluetooth and his son Sweyn. They may have acted in cooperation with the Wolinian autonomous entity. The Danish were defeated c. 991 and their ruler was expelled. The dynastic alliance with Sweden had probably affected the equipment and composition of Mieszko's troops.\nParticipation in German civil war.\nIn 982 Emperor Otto II suffered a disastrous defeat against the Emirate of Sicily. The resulting weakness of the imperial power was exploited by the Lutici, who initiated a great uprising of the Polabian Slavs in 983. German authority in the area ceased to exist and the Polabian tribes began to threaten the Empire. The death of Otto II at the end of that year contributed further to the unrest. Ultimately the Lutici and the Obotrites were able to liberate themselves from German rule for the next two centuries.\nThe Emperor left a minor successor, Otto III. His regency was claimed by Henry II of Bavaria. Like in 973, Mieszko and the Czech duke Boleslaus II took the side of the Bavarian duke. This fact is confirmed in the chronicle of Thietmar, which noted that \"There arrived [at the Diet of Quedlinburg] also, among many other princes: Mieszko, M\u015bciwoj and Boleslaus and promised to support him under oath as the king and ruler\".\nIn 984 the Czechs took over Meissen, but in the same year Henry II gave up his pretension to the German throne.\nThe role played by Mieszko I in the subsequent struggles is unclear because the contemporary sources are scarce and not in agreement. Probably in 985 the Polish ruler ended his support for the Bavarian duke and moved to the side of the Emperor. It is believed that Mieszko's motivation was the threat posed to his interests by the Polabian Slavs uprising. The upheaval was a problem for both Poland and Germany, but not for Bohemia. In the \"Chronicle of Hildesheim\", in the entry for the year 985 it is noted that Mieszko came to help the Saxons in their fight against some Slavic forces, presumably the Polabians.\nOne year later, the Polish ruler had a personal meeting with the Emperor, an event mentioned in the \"Annals of Hersfeld\", which reported that \"Otto the boy-king ravaged Bohemia, but received Mieszko who arrived with gifts\".\nAccording to Thietmar and other contemporary chronicles the gift given by Mieszko to the Emperor was a camel. The meeting cemented the Polish-German alliance, with Mieszko joining Otto's expedition against a Slavic land, which \"together they wholly devastated (...) with fire and tremendous depopulation\". It is not clear which Slavic territory was invaded. Perhaps another raid against the Polabians took place. However, there are indications that it was an expedition against the Czechs, Mieszko's first against his southern neighbors. Possibly on this occasion the Duke of the Polans accomplished the most significant expansion of his state, the takeover of Lesser Poland.\nThietmar's narrative, however, raises doubts as to whether the joined military operation actually happened. The chronicler claims that a settlement was then concluded between the Emperor and the Bohemian ruler Boleslaus II the Pious, which is not mentioned in any other source and is contrary to the realities of the political situation at that time.\nAnother debatable point is Thietmar's claim that Mieszko \"subordinated himself to the King\". Most historians believe that it was only a matter of recognition of Otto's royal authority. Some suggest that a fealty relationship could have been involved.\nWar against Bohemia; incorporation of Silesia and Lesser Poland.\nWhether or not the German-Polish invasion of Bohemia actually happened, the friendly relations between the Czechs and the Poles came to an end. Bohemia resumed its earlier alliance with the Lutici, which, in 990, resulted in a war with Mieszko, who was supported by Empress Theophanu. Duke Boleslaus II was probably the first one to attack. As a result of the conflict Silesia was taken over by Poland. However, the annexation of Silesia possibly took place around 985, because during this year the major Piast strongholds in Wroc\u0142aw, Opole and G\u0142og\u00f3w were already being built.\nThe issue of the incorporation of Lesser Poland is also not completely resolved. Possibly Mieszko took the region before 990, which is indicated by the vague remark of Thietmar, who wrote of a country taken by Mieszko from Boleslaus. In light of this theory, the conquest of Lesser Poland could be a reason for the war, or its first stage. Many historians suggested that the Czech rule over Lesser Poland was only nominal and likely limited to the indirect control of Krak\u00f3w and perhaps a few other important centers. This theory is based on the lack of archaeological discoveries, which would indicate major building investments undertaken by the Bohemian state.\nAfter its incorporation, Lesser Poland supposedly became the part of the country assigned to Mieszko's oldest son, Boles\u0142aw, which is indirectly indicated in the chronicle of Thietmar.\nSome historians, on the basis of the chronicle of Cosmas of Prague, believe that the conquest of the lands around the lower Vistula River took place after Mieszko's death, specifically in 999. There is also a theory according to which during this transition period Lesser Poland was governed by Boles\u0142aw, whose authority was granted to him by the Bohemian duke.\nDagome iudex.\nAt the end of his life (c. 991\u2013992), Mieszko I, together with his wife Oda and their sons, issued a document called \"Dagome iudex\", where the Polish ruler placed his lands under the protection of the pope and described their borders. Only a later imprecise summary of the document has been preserved.\nThere are two main theories concerning reasons behind the issuing of \"Dagome iudex\":\n\"Dagome iudex\" is of capital importance for Polish history because it gives a general description of the Polish state's geographical location at the end of Mieszko's reign.\nLate reign, death and succession.\nDuring his last years of life Mieszko remained loyal to the alliance with the Holy Roman Empire. In 991 he arrived at a gathering in Quedlinburg, where he participated in the customary exchange of gifts with Otto III and Empress Theophanu. In the same year he took part in a joint expedition with the young king to Brandenburg.\nMieszko died on 25 May 992. Sources give no reasons to believe that his death occurred from causes other than natural. According to Thietmar the Polish ruler died \"in an old age, overcame with fever\". Probably he was buried in the Pozna\u0144 Cathedral. The remains of the first historical ruler of Poland have never been found and the place of his burial is not known with certainty. In 1836\u20131837 a cenotaph was built for Mieszko I and his successor Boles\u0142aw I the Brave in the Golden Chapel () at the Pozna\u0144 Cathedral, where the damaged remains found in the 14th-century tomb of Boles\u0142aw were placed.\nAccording to Thietmar Mieszko I divided his state before his death among a number of princes. They were probably his sons: Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, Mieszko and Lambert.\nIn 1999 the archeologist Hanna K\u00f3\u010dka-Krenz located what's left of Mieszko's palace-chapel complex in Pozna\u0144.\nLegacy.\nMieszko is chiefly credited with the unification of Polish lands. His state was the first state that could be called Poland. He is often considered the founder, the principal creator and builder of the Polish state. His acceptance of Roman Catholicism led to the inclusion of Poland in the mainstream civilization and political structures of Roman Catholic Europe. He sponsored the erection of churches. The Gniezno Cathedral was constructed during Mieszko's rule. It is very likely the Duke also founded the church at Ostr\u00f3w Tumski and the Pozna\u0144 Cathedral. Possibly during Mieszko's reign Poland began minting its own coin, the denarius, though according to S. Suchodolski, the monetary system was installed by Mieszko's grandson and namesake, Mieszko II Lambert.\nAt the end of his rule, Mieszko I left to his sons a territory at least twice as large as what he inherited from his father. The most significant were the additions of Silesia, Western Pomerania, and probably Lesser Poland including Krak\u00f3w. He was the first ruler to conduct efficient foreign policy, which included agreements with Germany, Bohemia and Sweden, and prudently used his military resources.\nMieszko is featured on the obverse of the 10 Polish z\u0142oty banknote.\nMarriages and issue.\nAccording to Gallus Anonymus, before becoming a Christian Mieszko had seven pagan wives, whom he was required to relinquish, leaving Dobrawa as his only spouse. Nothing is known of the fates of any possible children from these relationships. In 965, before his baptism, Mieszko married Dobrawa of Bohemia (b. 940/45 \u2013 d. 977). They had one known child:\nAccording to one hypothesis there was another daughter of Mieszko, married to a Pomeranian Slavic prince; she could be a daughter of Dobrawa or of one of the previous pagan wives. According to one theory, this unnamed daughter of Mieszko I and her Pomeranian husband were the parents of Zemuzil, Duke of Pomerania. Also, a theory exists (apparently based on Thietmar and supported by Oswald Balzer in 1895) that Vladivoj, who ruled as Duke of Bohemia in 1002\u20131003, was a son of Mieszko and Dobrawa. Although most modern historians reject this claim, Bohemian historiography supported the Piast parentage of Vladivoj.\nIn 978/79, Mieszko married Oda of Haldensleben (b. 955/60 \u2013 d. 1023), daughter of Dietrich of Haldensleben, Margrave of the Northern March. She was taken by her future husband from the monastery of Kalbe. They had three sons:\nAfter a struggle for power between Boles\u0142aw I and Oda with her minor sons (Boles\u0142aw's half-brothers), the eldest son of Mieszko I took control over all of his father's state and expelled his stepmother and her sons from Poland.\nBy unknown woman Mieszka had:\nShe was for long time identified as Sigrid the Haughty (b. 968/72 \u2013 d. c. 1016), wife of Eric the Victorious, King of Sweden, and then of Sweyn Forkbeard, King of Denmark, and the mother of Cnut the Great, King of Denmark, Norway and England. She was thought to be a child of Doubravka. This daughter's Polish name was incorrectly determined to be \"\u015awi\u0119tos\u0142awa\" and she has continued to be called that in historical discourse, despite no contemporary evidence suggesting this. Comprehensive comparison of Scandinavian, Polish and German sources suggests that Mieszko's daughter instead of being wife of two aforementioned kings, was married only to Sweyn, by whom she became mother of Cnut the Great, Harald II and \u015awi\u0119tos\u0142awa, and grandmother of Gunhild, the wife of Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor. She is known in Scandinavians sources as Gunhild of Wenden, and both this name and timeline suggests she was most likely the daughter of Oda, instead of Doubravka as was previously believed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20601", "revid": "106670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20601", "title": "Maggieknockater", "text": "Maggieknockater (, meaning \"field of the fuller\" or \"plain of the hilly ridge\") is a hamlet on the A95 road between Craigellachie and Mulben in Scotland in the Moray council area, in the county of Banffshire.\nUntil the early 1970s there was a large apiary which was well known in the region and has lived on in the Scottish country dance \"The Bees of Maggieknockater\". At nearby Gauldwell Castle (now only with one partial wall left standing), Mary, Queen of Scots is reputed to have spent the night. The school was closed in the 1960s and the chapel was turned into a home in the early 1970s. What was once a smithy is now a garage still in the hands of the Maclean family. Maggieknockater formerly had a post office; it opened in June 1876 and closed in 1940.\nMaggieknockater is situated in the heart of Scotland's Malt Whisky Trail, situated less than from Dufftown, home of the world-famous Glenfiddich Distillery.\nLess than heading east along the A95 from Maggieknockater is the site for Moray's most demanding mountain biking trails, \"The Moray Monster Trails\". The trails were regenerated and improved during 2005 and 2006.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20603", "revid": "3206409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20603", "title": "Mary, Queen of Scots", "text": "Queen of Scotland from 1542 to 1567\nMary, Queen of Scots (8 December 1542 \u2013 8 February 1587), also known as Mary Stuart or Mary I of Scotland, was Queen of Scotland from 14 December 1542 until her forced abdication on 24 July 1567.\nThe only surviving legitimate child of James V of Scotland, Mary was six days old when her father died and she inherited the throne. During her childhood, Scotland was governed by regents, first by the heir to the throne, James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, and then by her mother, Mary of Guise. In 1548, she was betrothed to Francis, the Dauphin of France, and was sent to be brought up in France, where she would be safe from invading English forces during the Rough Wooing. Mary married Francis in 1558, becoming queen consort of France from his accession in 1559 until his death in December 1560. Widowed, Mary returned to Scotland in August 1561. The tense religious and political climate following the Scottish Reformation that Mary encountered on her return to Scotland was further agitated by prominent Scots such as John Knox, who openly questioned whether her subjects had a duty to obey her. The early years of her personal rule were marked by pragmatism, tolerance, and moderation. She issued a proclamation accepting the religious settlement in Scotland as she had found it upon her return, retained advisers such as James Stewart, Earl of Moray (her illegitimate half-brother), and William Maitland of Lethington, and governed as the Catholic monarch of a Protestant kingdom.\nIn 1565, Mary married her half-cousin Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley; they had a son, James. Their marriage soured after Darnley orchestrated the murder of Mary's Italian secretary and close friend David Rizzio. In February 1567, Darnley's residence was destroyed by an explosion, and he was found murdered in the nearby garden. James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell, was generally believed to have orchestrated Darnley's death, but he was acquitted of the charge in April 1567 and in the following month he married Mary. Following an uprising against the couple, Mary was imprisoned in Lochleven Castle. In July 1567, she was forced to abdicate in favour of her one-year-old son James VI. After an unsuccessful attempt to regain the throne, she fled southward seeking the protection of her first cousin once removed, Elizabeth I of England.\nAs a great-granddaughter of Henry VII of England, Mary had once claimed Elizabeth's throne as her own and was considered the legitimate sovereign of England by many English Catholics, including participants in a rebellion known as the Rising of the North. Perceiving Mary as a threat, Elizabeth had her confined in various castles and manor houses in the interior of England. After eighteen and a half years in captivity, Mary was found guilty of plotting to assassinate Elizabeth in 1586 and was beheaded the following year at Fotheringhay Castle. Mary's life and execution established her in popular culture as a romanticised historical character.\nChildhood and early reign.\nMary was born on 8 December 1542 at Linlithgow Palace, Scotland, to King James V and his French second wife, Mary of Guise. She was said to have been born prematurely and was the only legitimate child of James to survive him. She was the great-granddaughter of King Henry VII of England through her paternal grandmother, Margaret Tudor. Margaret was Henry VIII's older sister so Mary was Henry VIII's great-niece. On 14 December, six days after her birth, she became Queen of Scotland when her father died, perhaps from the effects of a nervous collapse following the Battle of Solway Moss or from drinking contaminated water while on campaign.\nA popular tale, first recorded by John Knox, states that James, upon hearing on his deathbed that his wife had given birth to a daughter, ruefully exclaimed, \"It cam wi' a lass and it will gang wi' a lass!\" His House of Stuart had gained the throne of Scotland in the 14th century through \"a lass\"\u2014via the marriage of Marjorie Bruce, daughter of Robert the Bruce, to Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland\u2014and it would be lost from his family \"wi' a lass\". This legendary statement came true much later\u2014not through Mary, but through her great-great-granddaughter Anne, Queen of Great Britain.\nMary was christened at the nearby Church of St Michael shortly after she was born. Rumours spread that she was weak and frail, but an English diplomat, Ralph Sadler, saw the infant at Linlithgow Palace in March 1543, unwrapped by her nurse Jean Sinclair, and wrote, \"it is as goodly a child as I have seen of her age, and as like to live.\"\nAs Mary was an infant when she inherited the throne, Scotland was ruled by regents until she became an adult. From the outset, there were two claims to the regency: one from the Catholic Cardinal Beaton, and the other from the Protestant Earl of Arran, who was next in line to the throne. Beaton's claim was based on a version of the king's will that his opponents dismissed as a forgery. Arran, with the support of his friends and relations, became the regent until 1554 when Mary's mother managed to remove and succeed him.\nTreaty of Greenwich.\nHenry VIII of England took the opportunity of the regency to propose marriage between Mary and his own son and heir, Edward, hoping for a union of Scotland and England. On 1 July 1543, when Mary was six months old, the Treaty of Greenwich was signed, which promised that, at the age of ten, Mary would marry Edward and move to England, where Henry could oversee her upbringing. The treaty provided that the two countries would remain legally separate and, if the couple failed to have children, the temporary union would dissolve. Cardinal Beaton rose to power again and began to push a pro-Catholic pro-French agenda, angering Henry, who wanted to break the Scottish alliance with France.\nBeaton wanted to move Mary away from the coast to the safety of Stirling Castle. Regent Arran resisted the move but backed down when Beaton's armed supporters gathered at Linlithgow. The Earl of Lennox escorted Mary and her mother to Stirling on 27 July 1543 with 3,500 armed men. Mary was crowned in the castle chapel on 9 September 1543, with \"such solemnity as they do use in this country, which is not very costly\", according to the report of Ralph Sadler and Henry Ray.\nShortly before Mary's coronation, Henry arrested Scottish merchants headed for France and impounded their goods. The arrests caused anger in Scotland, and Arran joined Beaton and became a Catholic. The Treaty of Greenwich was rejected by the Parliament of Scotland in December. The rejection of the marriage treaty and the renewal of the alliance between France and Scotland prompted Henry's \"Rough Wooing\", a military campaign designed to impose the marriage of Mary to his son. English forces mounted a series of raids on Scottish and French territory. In May 1544, the English Earl of Hertford (later Duke of Somerset) raided Edinburgh, and the Scots took Mary to Dunkeld for safety.\nIn May 1546, Beaton was murdered by Protestant lairds, and on 10 September 1547, nine months after the death of Henry VIII, the Scots suffered a heavy defeat at the Battle of Pinkie. Mary's guardians, fearful for her safety, sent her to Inchmahome Priory for no more than three weeks and turned to the French for help.\nKing Henry II of France proposed to unite France and Scotland by marrying the young queen to his three-year-old son, the Dauphin Francis. On the promise of French military help and a French dukedom for himself, Arran agreed to the marriage. In February 1548, Mary was moved, again for her safety, to Dumbarton Castle. The English left a trail of devastation behind them once more and seized the strategic town of Haddington. In June, the much-awaited French help arrived at Leith to besiege and ultimately take Haddington. On 7 July 1548, a Scottish Parliament held at a nunnery near the town agreed to the French marriage treaty.\nLife in France.\nWith her marriage agreement in place, five-year-old Mary was sent to France to spend the next thirteen years at the French court. The French fleet sent by Henry II, commanded by Nicolas de Villegagnon, sailed with Mary from Dumbarton on 7 August 1548 and arrived a week or more later at Roscoff or Saint-Pol-de-L\u00e9on in Brittany.\nMary was accompanied by her own court including two illegitimate half-brothers, and the \"four Marys\" (four girls her own age, all named Mary), who were the daughters of some of the noblest families in Scotland: Beaton, Seton, Fleming, and Livingston. Janet, Lady Fleming, who was Mary Fleming's mother and James V's half-sister, was appointed governess. When Lady Fleming left France in 1551, she was succeeded by a French governess, Fran\u00e7oise de Paroy.\nVivacious, beautiful, and clever (according to contemporary accounts), Mary had a promising childhood. At the French court, she was a favourite with many people, except Henry II's wife Catherine de' Medici. Mary learned to play lute and virginals, was competent in prose, poetry, horsemanship, falconry, and needlework, and was taught French, Italian, Latin, Spanish, and Greek, in addition to her native Scots. Jehan Paulle, a \"balladin\", taught her to dance. Her future sister-in-law, Elisabeth of Valois, became a close friend of whom Mary \"retained nostalgic memories in later life\". Mary's maternal grandmother, Antoinette de Bourbon, was another strong influence on her childhood and acted as one of her principal advisors.\nPortraits of Mary show that she had a small, oval-shaped head, a long, graceful neck, bright auburn hair, hazel-brown eyes, under heavy lowered eyelids and finely arched brows, smooth pale skin, a high forehead, and regular, firm features. She was considered a pretty child and later, as a woman, strikingly attractive. At some point in her infancy or childhood, she caught smallpox, but it did not mark her features.\nMary was eloquent, and especially tall by 16th-century standards (she attained an adult height of 5 feet 11 inches or 1.80 m), while Henry II's son and heir, Francis, stuttered and was unusually short. Henry commented: \"from the very first day they met, my son and she got on as well together as if they had known each other for a long time\". On 4 April 1558, Mary signed a secret agreement bequeathing Scotland and her claim to England to the French crown if she died without issue. Twenty days later, she married the Dauphin at Notre Dame de Paris, and he became king consort of Scotland.\nClaim to the English throne.\nIn November 1558, Henry VIII's elder daughter, Mary I of England, was succeeded by her only surviving sibling, Elizabeth I. Under the Third Succession Act, passed in 1543 by the Parliament of England, Elizabeth was recognised as her sister's heir, and Henry VIII's last will and testament had excluded the Stuarts from succeeding to the English throne. Yet, in the eyes of many Catholics, Elizabeth was illegitimate and Mary Stuart was the rightful queen of England, as the senior surviving legitimate descendant of Henry VII through her grandmother, Margaret Tudor. Henry II of France proclaimed his eldest son and daughter-in-law king and queen of England. In France, the royal arms of England were quartered with those of Francis and Mary. Mary's claim to the English throne was a perennial sticking point between her and Elizabeth.\nWhen Henry II died on 10 July 1559, from injuries sustained in a joust, fifteen-year-old Francis and sixteen-year-old Mary became king and queen of France. Two of the Queen's uncles, the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorraine, were now dominant in French politics, enjoying an ascendancy called by some historians \"la tyrannie Guisienne\".\nIn Scotland, the power of the Protestant Lords of the Congregation was rising at the expense of Mary's mother, Mary of Guise, who maintained effective control only through the use of French troops. In early 1560, the Protestant lords invited English troops into Scotland in an attempt to secure Protestantism. A Huguenot uprising in France, the Tumult of Amboise, made it impossible for the French to send further support. Instead, the Guise brothers sent ambassadors to negotiate a settlement. On 11 June 1560, their sister, Mary's mother, died, and so the question of future Franco-Scots relations was a pressing one. Under the terms of the Treaty of Edinburgh, signed by Mary's representatives on 6 July 1560, France and England undertook to withdraw troops from Scotland. France recognised Elizabeth's right to rule England, but the seventeen-year-old Mary, still in France and grieving for her mother, refused to ratify the treaty.\nReturn to Scotland.\nFrancis II died on 5 December 1560 of a middle-ear infection that led to an abscess in his brain. Mary was grief-stricken. Her mother-in-law, Catherine de' Medici, became regent for the late king's ten-year-old brother Charles IX, who inherited the French throne. Mary returned to Scotland nine months later, arriving in Leith on 19 August 1561. Having lived in France since the age of five, Mary had little direct experience of the dangerous and complex political situation in Scotland.\nAs a devout Catholic, she was regarded with suspicion by many of her subjects, as well as by the Queen of England. Scotland was torn between Catholic and Protestant factions. Mary's illegitimate half-brother, the Earl of Moray, was a leader of the Protestants. The Protestant reformer John Knox preached against Mary, condemning her for hearing Mass, dancing, and dressing too elaborately. She summoned him to her presence to remonstrate with him but was unsuccessful. She later charged him with treason, but he was acquitted and released.\nTo the surprise and dismay of the Catholic party, Mary tolerated the newly established Protestant ascendancy, and kept her half-brother Moray as her chief advisor. Her privy council of 16 men, appointed on 6 September 1561, retained those who already held the offices of state. The council was dominated by the Protestant leaders from the reformation crisis of 1559\u20131560: the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn, and Moray. Only four of the councillors were Catholic: the Earls of Atholl, Erroll, Montrose, and Huntly, who was Lord Chancellor.\nModern historian Jenny Wormald found this remarkable and suggested that Mary's failure to appoint a council sympathetic to Catholic and French interests was an indication of her focus on the English throne, over the internal problems of Scotland. Even the one significant later addition to the council, Lord Ruthven in December 1563, was another Protestant whom Mary personally disliked. In this, she was acknowledging her lack of effective military power in the face of the Protestant lords, while also following a policy that strengthened her links with England. She joined with Moray in the destruction of Scotland's leading Catholic magnate, Lord Huntly, in 1562, after he led a rebellion against her in the Highlands.\nMary sent William Maitland of Lethington as an ambassador to the English court to put the case for Mary as the heir presumptive to the English throne. Elizabeth refused to name a potential heir, fearing that would invite conspiracy to displace her with the nominated successor. However, she assured Maitland that she knew no one with a better claim than Mary. In late 1561 and early 1562, arrangements were made for the two queens to meet in England at York or Nottingham in August or September 1562. In July, Elizabeth sent Henry Sidney to cancel Mary's visit because of the civil war in France.\nMary then turned her attention to finding a new husband from the royalty of Europe. When her uncle, the Cardinal of Lorraine, began negotiations with Archduke Charles of Austria without her consent, she angrily objected and the negotiations foundered. Her own attempt to negotiate a marriage to Don Carlos, the mentally unstable heir apparent of King Philip II of Spain, was rebuffed by Philip. Elizabeth attempted to neutralise Mary by suggesting that she marry English Protestant Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester. Dudley was Henry Sidney's brother-in-law and the English queen's own favourite, whom Elizabeth trusted and thought she could control. She sent an ambassador, Thomas Randolph, to tell Mary that if she married an English nobleman, Elizabeth would \"proceed to the inquisition of her right and title to be our next cousin and heir\". The proposal came to nothing, not least because the intended bridegroom was unwilling.\nIn contrast, a French poet at Mary's court, Pierre de Boscosel de Chastelard, was apparently besotted with Mary. In early 1563, he was discovered during a security search hidden underneath her bed, apparently planning to surprise her when she was alone and declare his love for her. Mary was horrified and banished him from Scotland. He ignored the edict. Two days later, he forced his way into her chamber as she was about to disrobe. She reacted with fury and fear. When Moray rushed into the room after hearing her cries for help, she shouted, \"Thrust your dagger into the villain!\" Moray refused, as Chastelard was already under restraint. Chastelard was tried for treason and beheaded. Maitland claimed that Chastelard's ardour was feigned and that he was part of a Huguenot plot to discredit Mary by tarnishing her reputation.\nMarriage to Lord Darnley.\nMary had briefly met her English-born half-cousin Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, in February 1561 when she was in mourning for Francis. Darnley's parents, the Earl and Countess of Lennox, were Scottish aristocrats as well as English landowners. They sent him to France ostensibly to extend their condolences, while hoping for a potential match between their son and Mary. Both Mary and Darnley were grandchildren of Margaret Tudor, sister of Henry VIII of England, and patrilineal descendants of the High Stewards of Scotland.\nDarnley shared a more recent Stewart lineage with the Hamilton family as a descendant of Mary Stewart, Countess of Arran, a daughter of James II of Scotland. They next met on Saturday 17 February 1565 at Wemyss Castle in Scotland. Mary fell in love with the \"long lad\", as Queen Elizabeth called him since he was over six feet tall. They married at Holyrood Palace on 29 July 1565, even though both were Catholic and a papal dispensation for the marriage of first cousins had not been obtained.\nEnglish statesmen William Cecil and the Earl of Leicester had worked to obtain Darnley's licence to travel to Scotland from his home in England. Although her advisors had brought the couple together, Elizabeth felt threatened by the marriage because as descendants of her aunt, both Mary and Darnley were claimants to the English throne. Their children, if any, would inherit an even stronger, combined claim. Mary's insistence on the marriage seems to have stemmed from passion rather than calculation; the English ambassador Nicholas Throckmorton stated \"the saying is that surely she [Queen Mary] is bewitched\", adding that the marriage could only be averted \"by violence\". The union infuriated Elizabeth, who felt the marriage should not have gone ahead without her permission, as Darnley was both her cousin and an English subject.\nMary's marriage to a leading Catholic precipitated Mary's half-brother, the Earl of Moray, to join with other Protestant lords, including Lords Argyll and Glencairn, in open rebellion. Mary set out from Edinburgh on 26 August 1565 to confront them. She carried a pistol, known as a \"dagg\", on her saddle. On the 30th, Moray entered Edinburgh but left soon afterwards, having failed to take the castle. Mary returned to Edinburgh the following month to raise more troops. In what became known as the Chaseabout Raid, Mary with her forces and Moray with the rebellious lords roamed around Scotland without ever engaging in direct combat. Mary's numbers were boosted by the release and restoration to favour of Lord Huntly's son and the return of James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell, from exile in France. Unable to muster sufficient support, Moray left Scotland in October for asylum in England. Mary broadened her privy council, bringing in both Catholics (Bishop of Ross John Lesley and Provost of Edinburgh Simon Preston of Craigmillar) and Protestants (the new Lord Huntly, Bishop of Galloway Alexander Gordon, John Maxwell of Terregles and James Balfour).\nBefore long, Darnley grew arrogant. Not content with his position as king consort, he demanded the Crown Matrimonial, which would have made him a co-sovereign of Scotland with the right to keep the Scottish throne for himself, if he outlived his wife. Mary refused his request, claiming he needed to wait until he was of age and their marriage grew strained, although they conceived by October 1565. He was jealous of her friendship with her Catholic private secretary, David Rizzio, who was rumoured to be the father of her child. By March 1566, Darnley had entered into a secret conspiracy with Protestant lords, including the nobles who had rebelled against Mary in the Chaseabout Raid. On 9 March, a group of the conspirators accompanied by Darnley stabbed Rizzio to death in front of the six months pregnant Mary at a dinner party in Holyrood Palace. Over the next two days, a disillusioned Darnley switched sides and Mary received Moray at Holyrood. On the night of 11\u201312 March, Darnley and Mary escaped from the palace. They took temporary refuge in Dunbar Castle before returning to Edinburgh on 18 March. The former rebels Lords Moray, Argyll and Glencairn were restored to the council.\nMurder of Darnley.\nMary's son by Darnley, James, was born on 19 June 1566 in Edinburgh Castle. However, the murder of Rizzio led to the breakdown of her marriage. In October 1566, while staying at Jedburgh in the Scottish Borders, Mary made a journey on horseback of at least four hours each way to visit the Earl of Bothwell at Hermitage Castle, where he lay ill from wounds sustained in a skirmish with John Elliot of Park. The ride was later used as evidence by Mary's enemies that the two were lovers, though no suspicions were voiced at the time and Mary had been accompanied by her councillors and guards.\nImmediately after her return to Jedburgh, she suffered a serious illness that included frequent vomiting, loss of sight, loss of speech, convulsions and periods of unconsciousness. She was thought to be dying. Her recovery from 25 October onwards was credited to the skill of her French physicians. The cause of her illness is unknown. Potential diagnoses include physical exhaustion and mental stress, haemorrhage of a gastric ulcer, and porphyria.\nAt Craigmillar Castle, near Edinburgh, at the end of November 1566, Mary and leading nobles held a meeting to discuss the \"problem of Darnley\". Divorce was discussed, but a bond was probably sworn between the lords present to remove Darnley by other means: \"It was thought expedient and most profitable for the common wealth\u00a0... that such a young fool and proud tyrant should not reign or bear rule over them;\u00a0... that he should be put off by one way or another; and whosoever should take the deed in hand or do it, they should defend.\" Darnley feared for his safety, and after the baptism of his son at Stirling and shortly before Christmas, he went to Glasgow to stay on his father's estates. At the start of the journey, he was afflicted by a fever: possibly smallpox, syphilis or the result of poison. He remained ill for some weeks.\nIn late January 1567, Mary prompted her husband to return to Edinburgh. He recuperated from his illness in a house belonging to the brother of James Balfour at the former abbey of Kirk o' Field, just within the city wall. Mary visited him daily, so that it appeared a reconciliation was in progress. On the night of 9\u201310 February 1567, Mary visited her husband in the early evening and then attended the wedding celebrations of a member of her household, Bastian Pagez. In the early hours of the morning, an explosion devastated Kirk o' Field. Darnley was found dead in the garden, apparently smothered. There were no visible marks of strangulation or violence on the body. Bothwell, Moray, Secretary Maitland, the Earl of Morton and Mary herself were among those who came under suspicion. Elizabeth wrote to Mary of the rumours:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I should ill fulfil the office of a faithful cousin or an affectionate friend if I did not\u00a0... tell you what all the world is thinking. Men say that, instead of seizing the murderers, you are looking through your fingers while they escape; that you will not seek revenge on those who have done you so much pleasure, as though the deed would never have taken place had not the doers of it been assured of impunity. For myself, I beg you to believe that I would not harbour such a thought.\nBy the end of February, Bothwell was generally believed to be guilty of Darnley's assassination. Lennox, Darnley's father, demanded that Bothwell be tried before the Estates of Parliament, to which Mary agreed, but Lennox's request for a delay to gather evidence was denied. In the absence of Lennox and with no evidence presented, Bothwell was acquitted after a seven-hour trial on 12 April. A week later, Bothwell managed to convince more than two dozen lords and bishops to sign the Ainslie Tavern Bond, in which they agreed to support his aim to marry the queen.\nImprisonment in Scotland and abdication.\nBetween 21 and 23 April 1567, Mary visited her son at Stirling for the last time. On her way back to Edinburgh on 24 April, Mary was abducted, willingly or not, by Lord Bothwell and his men and taken to Dunbar Castle, where he may have raped her. On 6 May, Mary and Bothwell returned to Edinburgh. On 15 May, at either Holyrood Palace or Holyrood Abbey, they were married according to Protestant rites. Bothwell and his first wife, Jean Gordon, who was the sister of Lord Huntly, had divorced twelve days previously.\nOriginally, Mary believed that many nobles supported her marriage, but relations quickly soured between the newly elevated Bothwell (created Duke of Orkney) and his former peers and the marriage proved to be deeply unpopular. Catholics considered the marriage unlawful since they did not recognise Bothwell's divorce or the validity of the Protestant service. Both Protestants and Catholics were shocked that Mary should marry the man accused of murdering her husband. The marriage was tempestuous, and Mary became despondent.\nTwenty-six Scottish peers, known as the confederate lords, turned against Mary and Bothwell and raised their own army. Mary and Bothwell confronted the lords at Carberry Hill on 15 June, but there was no battle, as Mary's forces dwindled away through desertion during negotiations. Bothwell was given safe passage from the field. The lords took Mary to Edinburgh, where crowds of spectators denounced her as an adulteress and murderer. The following night, she was imprisoned in Lochleven Castle on an island in the middle of Loch Leven. Between 20 and 23 July, Mary miscarried twins. On 24 July, she was forced to abdicate in favour of her one-year-old son James. Moray was made regent, while Bothwell was driven into exile. He was imprisoned in Denmark, became insane, and died in 1578.\nEscape and imprisonment in England.\nOn 2 May 1568, Mary escaped from Lochleven Castle with the aid of George Douglas, brother of William Douglas, the castle's owner. Managing to raise an army of 6,000 men, she met Moray's smaller forces at the Battle of Langside on 13 May. Defeated, she fled south, planning to seek asylum from Elizabeth. After spending the night at Dundrennan Abbey, she crossed the Solway Firth into England by fishing boat on 16 May. She landed at Workington in Cumberland in the north of England and stayed overnight at Workington Hall. On 18 May, local officials led by Richard Lowther took her into protective custody at Carlisle Castle.\nMary apparently expected Elizabeth to help her regain her throne. Elizabeth was cautious, ordering an inquiry into the conduct of the confederate lords and the question of whether Mary was guilty of Darnley's murder. In mid-July 1568, English authorities moved Mary to Bolton Castle, because it was farther from the Scottish border but not too close to London. Mary's clothes, sent from Lochleven Castle, arrived on 20 July. A commission of inquiry, or conference, as it was known, was held in York and later Westminster between October 1568 and January 1569. In Scotland, her supporters fought a civil war against Regent Moray and his successors.\nCasket letters.\nAs an anointed queen, Mary refused to acknowledge the power of any court to try her. She refused to attend the inquiry at York personally but sent representatives. Elizabeth forbade her attendance anyway. As evidence against Mary, Moray presented the so-called casket letters\u2014eight unsigned letters purportedly from Mary to Bothwell, two marriage contracts, and a love sonnet or sonnets. All were said to have been found in a silver-gilt casket just less than long and decorated with the monogram of King Francis II. Mary denied writing them and insisted they were forgeries, arguing that her handwriting was not difficult to imitate. They are widely believed to be crucial as to whether Mary shared the guilt for Darnley's murder. The head of the commission of inquiry, the Duke of Norfolk, described them as horrible letters and diverse fond ballads. He sent copies to Elizabeth, saying that if they were genuine, they might prove Mary's guilt.\nThe authenticity of the casket letters has been the source of much controversy among historians. It is impossible now to prove either way. The originals, written in French, were possibly destroyed in 1584 by Mary's son. The surviving copies, in French or translated into English, do not form a complete set. There are incomplete printed transcriptions in English, Scots, French, and Latin from the 1570s. Other documents scrutinised included Bothwell's divorce from Jean Gordon. Moray had sent a messenger in September to Dunbar to get a copy of the proceedings from the town's registers.\nMary's biographers, such as Antonia Fraser, Alison Weir, and John Guy, have concluded that either the documents were complete forgeries, or incriminating passages were inserted into genuine letters, or the letters were written to Bothwell by a different person or written by Mary to a different person. Guy points out that the letters are disjointed and that the French language and grammar employed in the sonnets are too poor for a writer with Mary's education but certain phrases in the letters, including verses in the style of Ronsard, and some characteristics of style are compatible with known writings by Mary.\nThe casket letters did not appear publicly until the Conference of 1568, although the Scottish privy council had seen them by December 1567. Mary had been forced to abdicate and held captive for the better part of a year in Scotland; the letters were never made public to support her imprisonment and forced abdication. Historian Jenny Wormald believes this reluctance on the part of the Scots to produce the letters and their destruction in 1584, whatever their content, constitute proof that they contained real evidence against Mary. In contrast, Weir thinks it demonstrates that the lords required time to fabricate them. At least some of Mary's contemporaries who saw the letters had no doubt that they were genuine. Among them was the Duke of Norfolk, who secretly conspired to marry Mary in the course of the commission, although he denied it when Elizabeth alluded to his marriage plans, saying \"he meant never to marry with a person, where he could not be sure of his pillow\".\nThe majority of the commissioners accepted the casket letters as genuine after a study of their contents and a comparison of the penmanship with examples of Mary's handwriting. Elizabeth, as she had wished, concluded the inquiry with a verdict that nothing was proven against either the Confederate lords or Mary. For overriding political reasons, Elizabeth wished neither to convict nor to acquit Mary of murder. There was never any intention to proceed judicially; the conference was intended as a political exercise. In the end, Moray returned to Scotland as regent and Mary remained in custody in England. Elizabeth succeeded in maintaining a Protestant government in Scotland, without either condemning or releasing her fellow sovereign. In Fraser's opinion, it was one of the strangest \"trials\" in legal history, ending with no finding of guilt against either party, one of whom was allowed to return home to Scotland while the other remained in custody.\nPlots.\nOn 26 January 1569, Mary was moved to Tutbury Castle and placed in the custody of George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury, and his formidable wife Bess of Hardwick. Elizabeth considered Mary's designs on the English throne to be a serious threat and so confined her to Shrewsbury's properties, including Tutbury, Sheffield Castle, Sheffield Manor Lodge, Wingfield Manor, and Chatsworth House, all located in the interior of England, halfway between Scotland and London and distant from the sea.\nMary was permitted her own domestic staff, which never numbered fewer than 16. She needed 30 carts to transport her belongings from house to house. Her chambers were decorated with fine tapestries and carpets, as well as her cloth of state on which she had the French phrase, \"En ma fin est mon commencement\" (\"In my end lies my beginning\"), embroidered. Her bed linen was changed daily, and her own chefs prepared meals with a choice of 32 dishes served on silver plates. She was occasionally allowed outside under strict supervision, spent seven summers at the spa town of Buxton, and spent much of her time doing embroidery. Her health declined, perhaps through porphyria or lack of exercise. By the 1580s, she had severe rheumatism in her limbs, rendering her lame.\nIn May 1569, Elizabeth attempted to mediate the restoration of Mary in return for guarantees of the Protestant religion, but a convention held at Perth rejected the deal overwhelmingly. Norfolk continued to scheme for a marriage with Mary, and Elizabeth imprisoned him in the Tower of London between October 1569 and August 1570. Early the following year, Moray was assassinated. His death occurred soon after an unsuccessful rebellion in the North of England, led by Catholic earls, which persuaded Elizabeth that Mary was a threat. English troops then intervened in the Scottish civil war, consolidating the power of the anti-Marian forces. Elizabeth's principal secretary William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and Francis Walsingham watched Mary carefully with the aid of spies placed in her household.\nIn 1571, Cecil and Walsingham (at that time England's ambassador to France) uncovered the Ridolfi Plot, a plan to replace Elizabeth with Mary with the help of Spanish troops and the Duke of Norfolk. Norfolk was executed and the English Parliament introduced a bill barring Mary from the throne, to which Elizabeth refused to give royal assent. To discredit Mary, the casket letters were published in London. Plots centred on Mary continued. Pope Gregory XIII endorsed one plan in the latter half of the 1570s to marry her to the governor of the Low Countries and illegitimate half-brother of Philip II of Spain, John of Austria, who was supposed to organise the invasion of England from the Spanish Netherlands.\nMary sent letters in cipher to the French ambassador to England, Michel de Castelnau, scores of which were discovered and decrypted in 2022\u20132023. After the Throckmorton Plot of 1583, Walsingham (now the queen's principal secretary) introduced the Bond of Association and the Act for the Queen's Safety, which sanctioned the killing of anyone who plotted against Elizabeth and aimed to prevent a putative successor from profiting from her murder.\nIn 1584, Mary proposed an \"association\" with her son, James. She announced that she was ready to stay in England, to renounce the Pope's bull of excommunication, and to retire, abandoning her pretensions to the English Crown. She also offered to join an offensive league against France. For Scotland, she proposed a general amnesty, agreed that James should marry with Elizabeth's knowledge, and accepted that there should be no change in religion. Her only condition was the immediate alleviation of the conditions of her captivity. James went along with the idea for a while, but eventually rejected it and signed an alliance treaty with Elizabeth, abandoning his mother. Elizabeth also rejected the association because she did not trust Mary to cease plotting against her during the negotiations.\nIn February 1585, William Parry was convicted of plotting to assassinate Elizabeth, without Mary's knowledge, although her agent Thomas Morgan was implicated. In April, Mary was placed in the stricter custody of Amias Paulet. At Christmas, she was moved to a moated manor house at Chartley.\nTrial.\nOn 11 August 1586, after being implicated in the Babington Plot, Mary was arrested while out riding and taken to Tixall Hall in Staffordshire. In a successful attempt to entrap her, Walsingham had deliberately arranged for Mary's letters to be smuggled out of Chartley. Mary was misled into thinking her letters were secure, while in reality they were deciphered and read by Walsingham. From these letters it was clear that Mary had sanctioned the attempted assassination of Elizabeth.\nMary was moved to Fotheringhay Castle in a four-day journey ending on 25 September. In October, she was put on trial for treason under the Act for the Queen's Safety before a court of 36 noblemen, including Cecil, Shrewsbury, and Walsingham. Spirited in her defence, Mary denied the charges. She told her triers, \"Look to your consciences and remember that the theatre of the whole world is wider than the kingdom of England.\" She protested that she had been denied the opportunity to review the evidence, that her papers had been removed from her, that she was denied access to legal counsel, and that as a foreign anointed queen she had never been an English subject and therefore could not be convicted of treason.\nShe was convicted on 25 October and sentenced to death with only one commissioner, Lord Zouche, expressing any form of dissent. Nevertheless, Elizabeth hesitated to order her execution, even in the face of pressure from the English Parliament to carry out the sentence. She was concerned that the killing of a queen set a discreditable precedent and was fearful of the consequences, especially if, in retaliation, Mary's son, James, formed an alliance with the Catholic powers and invaded England.\nElizabeth asked Paulet, Mary's final custodian, if he would contrive a clandestine way to \"shorten the life\" of Mary, which he refused to do on the grounds that he would not make \"a shipwreck of my conscience, or leave so great a blot on my poor posterity\". On 1 February 1587, Elizabeth signed the death warrant, and entrusted it to William Davison, a privy councillor. On 3 February, ten members of the Privy Council of England, having been summoned by Cecil without Elizabeth's knowledge, decided to carry out the sentence at once.\nExecution.\nAt Fotheringhay, on the evening of 7 February 1587, Mary was told she was to be executed the next morning. She spent the last hours of her life in prayer, distributing her belongings to her household, and writing her will and a letter to the King of France. The scaffold that was erected in the Great Hall was draped in black cloth. It was reached by two or three steps, and furnished with the block, a cushion for her to kneel on, and three stools for her and the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, who were there to witness the execution.\nThe executioner Bull and his assistant knelt before her and asked forgiveness, as it was typical for the executioner to request the pardon of the one being put to death. Mary replied, \"I forgive you with all my heart, for now, I hope, you shall make an end of all my troubles.\" Her servants, Jane Kennedy and Elizabeth Curle, and the executioners helped Mary remove her outer garments, revealing a velvet petticoat and a pair of sleeves in crimson brown, the liturgical colour of martyrdom in the Catholic Church, with a black satin bodice and black trimmings. She was blindfolded by Kennedy with a white veil embroidered in gold, knelt down on the cushion in front of the block on which she positioned her head, and stretched out her arms. Her last words were, \"In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum\" (\"Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit\").\nMary was not beheaded with a single strike. The first blow missed her neck and struck the back of her head. The second blow severed the neck, except for a small bit of sinew, which the executioner cut through using the axe. Afterwards, he held her head aloft and declared \"God save the Queen.\" At that moment, the auburn tresses in his hand turned out to be a wig and the head fell to the ground, revealing that Mary had very short, grey hair. Cecil's nephew, who was present at the execution, reported to his uncle that after her death, \"Her lips stirred up and down a quarter of an hour after her head was cut off\" and that a small dog owned by the queen emerged from hiding among her skirts\u2014though Emanuel Tomascon does not include those details in his contemporary account.\nWhen the news of the execution reached Elizabeth, she became indignant and asserted that Davison had disobeyed her instructions not to part with the warrant and that the Privy Council had acted without her authority. Elizabeth's vacillation and deliberately vague instructions gave her plausible deniability to attempt to avoid the direct stain of Mary's blood. Davison was arrested, thrown into the Tower of London, and found guilty of misprision. He was released nineteen months later, after Cecil and Walsingham interceded on his behalf.\nMary's request to be buried in France was refused by Elizabeth. Her body was embalmed and left in a secure lead coffin until her burial in a Protestant service at Peterborough Cathedral in late July 1587. Her entrails, removed as part of the embalming process, were buried secretly within Fotheringhay Castle. Her body was exhumed in 1612 when her son, James VI and I, ordered that she be reinterred in Westminster Abbey in a chapel opposite the tomb of Elizabeth. In 1867, her tomb was opened in an attempt to ascertain the resting place of her son, James I of England. He was ultimately found with Henry VII. Many of her other descendants, including Elizabeth of Bohemia, Prince Rupert of the Rhine and the children of Anne, Queen of Great Britain, were interred in her vault.\nLegacy.\nAssessments of Mary in the 16th century divided between Protestant reformers such as George Buchanan and John Knox, who vilified her mercilessly, and Catholic apologists such as Adam Blackwood, who praised, defended and eulogised her. After the accession of James I in England, historian William Camden wrote an officially sanctioned biography that drew from original documents. It condemned Buchanan's work as an invention, and \"emphasized Mary's evil fortunes rather than her evil character\". Differing interpretations persisted into the 18th century: William Robertson and David Hume argued that the casket letters were genuine and that Mary was guilty of adultery and murder, while William Tytler argued the reverse. In the latter half of the 20th century, the work of Antonia Fraser was acclaimed as \"more objective\u00a0... free from the excesses of adulation or attack\" that had characterised older biographies, and her contemporaries Gordon Donaldson and Ian B. Cowan also produced more balanced works.\nHistorian Jenny Wormald concluded that Mary was a tragic failure, who was unable to cope with the demands placed on her, but hers was a rare dissenting view in a post-Fraser tradition that Mary was a pawn in the hands of scheming noblemen. There is no concrete proof of her complicity in Darnley's murder or of a conspiracy with Bothwell. Such accusations rest on assumptions, and Buchanan's biography is today discredited as \"almost complete fantasy\". Mary's courage at her execution helped establish her popular image as the heroic victim in a dramatic tragedy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20604", "revid": "28078513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20604", "title": "Macbeth, King of Scotland", "text": "Scottish king from 1040 to 1057\nMacbethad mac Findl\u00e1ech (anglicised as Macbeth MacFinlay; died 15 August 1057), nicknamed the Red King (), was King of Scotland from 1040 until his death in 1057. He ruled during the period of Scottish history known as the Kingdom of Alba.\nLittle is known about Macbeth's early life, although he was the son of Findl\u00e1ech of Moray and may have been a grandson of Malcolm II, presumably through the latter's daughter Donada. He became Mormaer (Earl) of Moray \u2013 a semi-autonomous province \u2013 in 1032, and was probably responsible for the death of the previous mormaer, Gille Coemg\u00e1in. He subsequently married Gille Coemg\u00e1in's widow, Gruoch.\nIn 1040, Duncan I launched an attack into Moray and was killed in action by Macbeth's troops. Macbeth succeeded him as King of Alba, apparently with little opposition. His 17-year reign was mostly peaceful, although in 1054 he was faced with an English invasion, led by Siward, Earl of Northumbria, on behalf of Edward the Confessor. Macbeth was killed at the Battle of Lumphanan in 1057 by forces loyal to the future Malcolm III. He was buried on Iona, the traditional resting place of Scottish kings.\nMacbeth was succeeded by his stepson Lulach, but Lulach ruled for only a few months before also being killed in battle against Malcolm III, whose descendants ruled Scotland until the late 13th century. \nA fictionalized version of Macbeth is best known as the main character of William Shakespeare's tragedy of the same name and the many works that it has inspired. Shakespeare's Macbeth is based on \"Holinshed's Chronicles\" (published in 1577) and is not historically accurate.\nName.\nThe name \"Mac Bethad\" (or, in modern Gaelic, \"MacBheatha\"), from which the anglicized \"MacBeth\" is derived, means \"son of life\". Although it has the appearance of a Gaelic patronymic it does not have any meaning of filiation but instead carries an implication of a righteous man or religious man. An alternative proposed derivation is that it is a corruption of \"macc-bethad\" meaning \"one of the elect\".\nMacbeth's full name in Middle Irish (medieval Gaelic) was '. This is realised as ' in modern Scottish Gaelic, and is rendered \"Macbeth MacFinlay\" (also spelled \"Finley\", \"Findlay\", or \"Findley\") in modern English. \"Mac Findl\u00e1ech\" is a Gaelic patronymic meaning \"son of Findl\u00e1ech\", referring to his father Findl\u00e1ech of Moray.\nRoyal ancestry.\nSome sources make Macbeth a grandson of King Malcolm II, presumably through his daughter Donada, and thus a cousin to Duncan I, whom he succeeded. He was possibly also a cousin to Thorfinn the Mighty, Earl of Orkney and Caithness.\nMormaer and marriage.\nWhen Cnut the Great came north in 1031 to accept the submission of King Malcolm II, Macbeth too submitted to him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Malcolm, king of the Scots, submitted to him, and became his man, with two other kings, Macbeth and Iehmarc ... Some have seen this as a sign of Macbeth's power; others have seen his presence, together with Iehmarc, who may be Echmarcach mac Ragnaill, as proof that Malcolm II was overlord of Moray and of the Kingdom of the Isles. Whatever the true state of affairs in the early 1030s, it seems more probable that Macbeth was subject to the king of Alba, Malcolm II, who died at Glamis, on 25 November 1034. \"The Prophecy of Berch\u00e1n\", apparently alone in near-contemporary sources, says that Malcolm died a violent death: calling it a \"kinslaying\" without actually naming his killers. Tigernach's chronicle says only:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;M\u00e1el Coluim son of Cin\u00e1ed, king of Alba, the honour of western Europe, died.\nHe became Mormaer (Earl) of Moray \u2013 a semi-autonomous province \u2013 in 1032, and was probably responsible for the death of the previous mormaer, Gille Coemg\u00e1in. Macbeth's father Findl\u00e1ech of Moray had been killed by Gille Coemg\u00e1in. He subsequently married Gille Coemg\u00e1in's widow, Gruoch, but they had no children together. Macbeth later accepted her son from Gille Coemg\u00e1in, Lulach, as his heir. Gruoch may have had a claim to the Scottish throne herself, being the granddaughter of either Kenneth II or Kenneth III. It is unclear if Macbeth married Gruoch as an ally succoring the widow of a kinsman, or as a conqueror claiming the widow of an enemy. It is also possible he may have married her to retain power over Moray as well as increase his own claim to the Scottish throne using his marriage to a potential claimant to the same throne.\nMalcolm II's grandson Duncan (Donnchad mac Cr\u00edn\u00e1in), later King Duncan I, was acclaimed as king of Alba on 30 November 1034, apparently without opposition. Duncan appears to have been \"t\u00e1naise r\u00edg\", the king in waiting, so that, far from being an abandonment of tanistry, as has sometimes been argued, his kingship was a vindication of the practice. Previous successions had involved strife between various \"r\u00edgdomna\" \u00a0\u2013 men of royal blood. Far from being the aged King Duncan of Shakespeare's play, the real King Duncan was a young man in 1034, and even at his death in 1040 his youthfulness is remarked upon.\nDuncan's early reign was apparently uneventful. His later reign, in line with his description as \"the man of many sorrows\" in the \"Prophecy of Berch\u00e1n\", was not successful. In 1039, Strathclyde was attacked by the Northumbrians, and a retaliatory raid led by Duncan against Durham turned into a disaster. Duncan survived the defeat, but the following year he led an army north into Moray, Macbeth's domain, apparently on a punitive expedition against Moray. There he was killed in action, at the battle of Bothnagowan, now Pitgaveny, near Elgin, by the men of Moray led by Macbeth, probably on 14 August 1040.\nKing of Alba.\nOn Duncan's death, Macbeth became king. Had his reign not been universally accepted, resistance would have been expected, but none is known to have occurred. In 1045, Duncan's father Cr\u00edn\u00e1n of Dunkeld (a scion of the Scottish branch of the Cen\u00e9l Conaill and Hereditary Abbot of Iona) was killed in a battle between two Scottish armies. Duncan's younger brother Maldred of Allerdale is believed to have died in the same battle, the family fighting Macbeth in defence of Duncan I's young son Malcolm III.\nJohn of Fordun wrote that Duncan's wife fled Scotland, taking her children, including the future kings Malcolm III (M\u00e1el Coluim mac Donnchada) and Donald III (Domnall B\u00e1n mac Donnchada, or Donalbane) with her. On the basis of the authors' beliefs as to whom Duncan married, various places of exile, Northumbria and Orkney among them, have been proposed. However, E. William Robertson proposes the safest place for Duncan's widow and her children would be with her or Duncan's kin and supporters in Atholl.\nAfter the defeat of Cr\u00edn\u00e1n, Macbeth was evidently unchallenged. Marianus Scotus tells how the king made a pilgrimage to Rome in 1050, where, Marianus says, he gave money to the poor as if it were seed.\nKarl Hundason.\nThe \"Orkneyinga Saga\" says that a dispute between Thorfinn Sigurdsson, Earl of Orkney, and Karl Hundason began when Karl Hundason became \"King of Scots\" and claimed Caithness. The identity of Karl Hundason, unknown to Scots and Irish sources, has long been a matter of dispute, and it is far from clear that the matter is settled. The most common assumption is that Karl Hundason was an insulting byname (Old Norse for \"Churl, son of a Dog\") given to Macbeth by his enemies. William Forbes Skene's suggestion that he was Duncan I of Scotland has been revived in recent years. Lastly, the idea that the whole affair is a poetic invention has been raised.\nAccording to the \"Orkneyinga Saga\", in the war which followed, Thorfinn defeated Karl in a sea-battle off Deerness at the east end of the Orkney Mainland. Then Karl's nephew Mutatan or Muddan, appointed to rule Caithness for him, was killed at Thurso by Thorkel the Fosterer. Finally, a great battle at Tarbat Ness on the south side of the Dornoch Firth ended with Karl defeated and fugitive or dead. Thorfinn, the saga says, then marched south through Scotland as far as Fife, burning and plundering as he passed. A later note in the saga claims that Thorfinn won nine Scottish earldoms.\nWhoever Karl Hundason may have been, it appears that the saga is reporting a local conflict with a Scots ruler of Moray or Ross:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he whole narrative is consistent with the idea that the struggle of Thorfinn and Karl is a continuation of that which had been waged since the ninth century by the Orkney earls, notably Sigurd Rognvald's son, Ljot, and Sigurd the Stout, against the princes or \"mormaers\" of Moray, Sutherland, Ross, and Argyll, and that, in fine, Malcolm and Karl were \"mormaers\" of one of these four provinces.\nFinal years.\nIn 1052, Macbeth was involved indirectly in the strife in the Kingdom of England between Godwin, Earl of Wessex and Edward the Confessor when he received a number of Norman exiles from England in his court. In 1054, Edward's Earl of Northumbria, Siward, led a very large invasion of Scotland (Suthed, Duncan's widow and Malcolm's mother, was Northumbrian-born; it is probable but not proven that there was a family tie between Siward and Malcolm). The campaign led to a bloody battle at Dunsinane, in which the \"Annals of Ulster\" reported 3,000 Scots and 1,500 English dead, which can be taken as meaning very many on both sides. One of Siward's sons and a son-in-law were among the dead. The result of the invasion was that one M\u00e1el Coluim, \"son of the king of the Cumbrians\" (not to be confused with M\u00e1el Coluim mac Donnchada, the future Malcolm III of Scotland) was restored to his throne, i.e., as ruler of the kingdom of Strathclyde. It may be that the events of 1054 are responsible for the idea, which appears in Shakespeare's play, that Malcolm III was put in power by the English.\nMacbeth did not survive the English invasion for long, for he was defeated and mortally wounded or killed by the future Malcolm III (\"King Malcolm \"Ceann-mor\"\", son of Duncan I) on the north side of the Mounth in 1057, after retreating with his men over the Cairnamounth Pass to take his last stand at the battle at Lumphanan. \"The Prophecy of Berch\u00e1n\" has it that he was wounded and died at Scone, sixty miles to the south, some days later. Macbeth's stepson Lulach was installed as king soon after, but was killed in 1058 by Malcolm who succeeded him.\nUnlike later writers, no near-contemporary source remarks on Macbeth as a tyrant. The \"Duan Albanach,\" which survives in a form dating to the reign of Malcolm III, calls him \"Mac Bethad the renowned\". \"The Prophecy of Berch\u00e1n\", a verse history which purports to be a prophecy, describes him as \"the generous king of Fortriu\", and says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The red, tall, golden-haired one, he will be pleasant to me among them; Scotland will be brimful west and east during the reign of the furious red one.\nLife to legend.\nMacbeth's life, like that of King Duncan I, had progressed far towards legend by the end of the 14th century, when John of Fordun and Andrew of Wyntoun wrote their histories. Hector Boece, Walter Bower, and George Buchanan all contributed to the legend.\nWilliam Shakespeare's depiction and its influence.\nIn Shakespeare's play, which is based mainly upon Raphael Holinshed's account and probably first performed in 1606, Macbeth is initially a valiant and loyal general to the elderly King Duncan. After being manipulated by Three Witches and his wife, Lady Macbeth, Macbeth murders Duncan and usurps the throne. Ultimately, the prophecies of the witches prove misleading, and Macbeth becomes a murderous tyrant. Duncan's son Malcolm stages a revolt against Macbeth, during which a guilt-ridden Lady Macbeth commits suicide. During battle, Macbeth encounters Macduff, a refugee nobleman whose wife and children had earlier been murdered on Macbeth's orders. Upon realising that he will die if he duels with Macduff, Macbeth at first refuses to do so. But when Macduff explains that if Macbeth surrenders he will be subjected to ridicule by his former subjects, Macbeth vows, \"I will not yield to kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, to be baited by a rabble's curse.\" He chooses instead to fight Macduff to the death. Macduff kills and beheads Macbeth, and the play ends with Prince Malcolm becoming king.\nThe likely reason for Shakespeare's unflattering depiction of Macbeth is that King James VI and I was descended from Malcolm III via the House of Bruce and his own House of Stewart, whereas Macbeth's line died out with the death of Lulach six months after his step-father. King James was also thought to be a descendant of Banquo through Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland. Historian Peter Berresford Ellis suggested that Shakespeare's inaccurate portrayal of MacBeth was unintentional, as he only had access to sources written from the point of view of the English and 'Anglicized Scotsmen', detached culturally and linguistically from 11th-century Scotland. Ellis thus proposed that \"the degeneration of MacBeth of Scotland into a murdering usurper\" preceded Shakespeare by \"some 350 years after [MacBeth's] death at Lumphanan\".\nIn a 1959 essay, Boris Pasternak compared Shakespeare's characterisation of Macbeth to Raskolnikov, the protagonist of \"Crime and Punishment\" by Fyodor Dostoevsky. Pasternak explained that neither character begins as a murderer, but becomes one by a set of faulty rationalisations and a belief that he is above the law.\nLady Macbeth has also become famous in her own right. In his 1865 novel \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\", Nikolai Leskov updated \"The Tragedy of Macbeth\" so that it takes place among the Imperial Russian merchant class. In a twist on the source, however, Leskov reverses the gender roles: the woman is the murderer and the man is the instigator. Leskov's novel was the basis for Dmitri Shostakovich's 1936 opera of the same name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20606", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20606", "title": "Millbridge, Plymouth", "text": "Suburb of Plymouth, Devon\nMillbridge is a small neighbourhood of Plymouth, on the boundary of what used to be the towns of Plymouth and Devonport, in the English county of Devon.\nHistory.\nWhat was originally a self-standing village (which has now been subsumed within the city) lies to the north of the toll bridge, originally built by Sir Piers Edgcumbe in 1525. The bridge crossed what used to be the Deadlake or Stonehouse Creek, to the west of Pennycomequick, the south of Stoke village and to the east of Stoke Church. It derives its name from the old toll bridge (adjacent to a naval saw mill) across the creek between Eldad Hill and Molesworth Road, at one time the principal link between Plymouth and Devonport. The creek to the east of the bridge was filled in with material from the quarries at Cattedown and Oreston during the late 1890s and the ground created became a municipal park, Victoria Park, which was officially opened in 1903. The remainder of the creek to the west of Millbridge, up to Stonehouse Bridge and Pool, was filled in and by 1972 the whole area had been developed as rugby pitches. These pitches are often used by Devonport High School for Boys and the Old Boys RFC.\nEconomy.\nThere is a pub, the Millbridge Inn.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20607", "revid": "50744584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20607", "title": "ML (programming language)", "text": "General purpose functional programming language\nML (Meta Language) is a general-purpose, high-level, functional programming language. It is known for its use of the polymorphic Hindley\u2013Milner type system, which automatically assigns the data types of most expressions without requiring explicit type annotations (type inference), and ensures type safety; there is a formal proof that a well-typed ML program does not cause runtime type errors. ML provides pattern matching for function arguments, garbage collection, imperative programming, call-by-value and currying. While a general-purpose programming language, ML is used heavily in programming language research and is one of the few languages to be completely specified and verified using formal semantics. Its types and pattern matching make it well-suited and commonly used to operate on other formal languages, such as in compiler writing, automated theorem proving, and formal verification.\nOverview.\nFeatures of ML include a call-by-value evaluation strategy, first-class functions, automatic memory management through garbage collection, parametric polymorphism, static typing, type inference, algebraic data types, pattern matching, and exception handling. ML uses static scoping rules.\nML can be referred to as an \"impure\" functional language, because although it encourages functional programming, it does allow side-effects (like languages such as Lisp, but unlike a purely functional language such as Haskell). Like most programming languages, ML uses eager evaluation, meaning that all subexpressions are always evaluated, though lazy evaluation can be achieved through the use of closures. Thus, infinite streams can be created and used as in Haskell, but their expression is indirect.\nML's strengths are mostly applied in language design and manipulation (compilers, analyzers, theorem provers), but it is a general-purpose language also used in bioinformatics and financial systems.\nML was developed by Robin Milner and others in the early 1970s at the University of Edinburgh, and its syntax is inspired by ISWIM. Historically, ML was conceived to develop proof tactics in the LCF theorem prover (whose language, \"pplambda\", a combination of the first-order predicate calculus and the simply typed polymorphic lambda calculus, had ML as its metalanguage).\nToday there are several languages in the ML family; the three most prominent are Standard ML (SML), OCaml and F#. Ideas from ML have influenced numerous other languages, like Haskell, Cyclone, Nemerle, ATS, and Elm.\nExamples.\nThe following examples use the syntax of Standard ML. Other ML dialects such as OCaml and F# differ in small ways.\nFactorial.\nThe factorial function expressed as pure ML:\nfun fac (0 : int) : int = 1\n | fac (n : int) : int = n * fac (n - 1)\nThis describes the factorial as a recursive function, with a single terminating base case. It is similar to the descriptions of factorials found in mathematics textbooks. Much of ML code is similar to mathematics in facility and syntax.\nPart of the definition shown is optional, and describes the \"types\" of this function. The notation E : t can be read as \"expression E has type t\". For instance, the argument n is assigned type \"integer\" (int), and fac (n : int), the result of applying fac to the integer n, also has type integer. The function fac as a whole then has type \"function from integer to integer\" (int -&gt; int), that is, fac accepts an integer as an argument and returns an integer result. Thanks to type inference, the type annotations can be omitted and will be derived by the compiler. Rewritten without the type annotations, the example looks like:\nfun fac 0 = 1\n | fac n = n * fac (n - 1)\nThe function also relies on pattern matching, an important part of ML programming. Note that parameters of a function are not necessarily in parentheses but separated by spaces. When the function's argument is 0 (zero) it will return the integer 1 (one). For all other cases the second line is tried. This is the recursion, and executes the function again until the base case is reached.\nThis implementation of the factorial function is not guaranteed to terminate, since a negative argument causes an infinite descending chain of recursive calls. A more robust implementation would check for a nonnegative argument before recursing, as follows:\nfun fact n = let\n fun fac 0 = 1\n | fac n = n * fac (n - 1)\n in\n if (n &lt; 0) then raise Domain else fac n\n end\nThe problematic case (when n is negative) demonstrates a use of ML's exception system.\nThe function can be improved further by writing its inner loop as a tail call, such that the call stack need not grow in proportion to the number of function calls. This is achieved by adding an extra, \"accumulator\", parameter to the inner function. At last, we arrive at\nfun fact n = let\n fun fac 0 acc = acc\n | fac n acc = fac (n - 1) (n * acc)\n in\n if (n &lt; 0) then raise Domain else fac n 1\n end\nList reverse.\nThe following function \"reverses\" the elements in a list. More precisely, it returns a new list whose elements are in reverse order compared to the given list.\nfun reverse [] = []\n | reverse (x :: xs) = (reverse xs) @ [x]\nThis implementation of reverse, while correct and clear, is inefficient, requiring quadratic time for execution. The function can be rewritten to execute in linear time:\nfun 'a reverse xs : 'a list = List.foldl (op ::) [] xs\nThis function is an example of parametric polymorphism. That is, it can consume lists whose elements have any type, and return lists of the same type.\nModules.\nModules are ML's system for structuring large projects and libraries. A module consists of a signature file and one or more structure files. The signature file specifies the API to be implemented (like a C header file, or Java interfaces). The structure implements the signature (like a C source file or Java class file). For example, the following define an Arithmetic signature and an implementation of it using Rational numbers:\nsignature ARITH =\nsig\n type t\n val zero : t\n val succ : t -&gt; t\n val sum : t * t -&gt; t\nend\nstructure Rational : ARITH =\nstruct\n datatype t = Rat of int * int\n val zero = Rat (0, 1)\n fun succ (Rat (a, b)) = Rat (a + b, b)\n fun sum (Rat (a, b), Rat (c, d)) = Rat (a * d + c * b , b * d)\nend\nThese are imported into the interpreter by the 'use' command. Interaction with the implementation is only allowed via the signature functions, for example it is not possible to create a 'Rat' data object directly via this code. The 'structure' block hides all the implementation detail from outside.\nML's standard libraries are implemented as modules in this way.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20608", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20608", "title": "Messier object", "text": "Astronomical objects catalogued by Charles Messier\nThe Messier objects are a set of 110 astronomical objects catalogued by the French astronomer Charles Messier in his \"Catalogue des N\u00e9buleuses et des Amas d'\u00c9toiles\" (\"Catalogue of Nebulae and Star Clusters\"). Because Messier was interested only in finding comets, he created a list of those non-comet objects that frustrated his hunt for them. This list, which Messier created in collaboration with his assistant Pierre M\u00e9chain, is now known as the Messier catalogue. The Messier catalogue is one of the most famous lists of astronomical objects, and many objects on the list are still referenced by their Messier numbers. The catalogue includes most of the astronomical deep-sky objects that can be easily observed from Earth's Northern Hemisphere; many Messier objects are popular targets for amateur astronomers.\nA preliminary version of the catalogue first appeared in 1774 in the \"Memoirs\" of the French Academy of Sciences for the year 1771. The first version of Messier's catalogue contained 45\u00a0objects, which were not numbered. Eighteen of the objects were discovered by Messier; the rest had been previously observed by other astronomers. By 1780 the catalogue had increased to 70\u00a0objects. The final version of the catalogue containing 103\u00a0objects was published in 1781 in the \"Connaissance des Temps\" for the year 1784. However, due to what was thought for a long time to be the incorrect addition of Messier 102, the total number remained 102. Other astronomers, using side notes in Messier's texts, eventually expanded the list to 110 objects.\nThe catalogue consists of a diverse range of astronomical objects, from star clusters and nebulae to galaxies. For example, Messier\u00a01 is a supernova remnant, known as the Crab Nebula, and the great spiral Andromeda Galaxy is M31. Further inclusions followed.\nLists and editions.\nThe first edition of 1774 covered 45\u00a0objects (M1 to M45). The total list published by Messier in 1781 contained 103\u00a0objects, but the list was expanded through successive additions by other astronomers, motivated by notes in Messier's and M\u00e9chain's texts indicating that at least one of them knew of the additional objects. The first such addition came from Nicolas Camille Flammarion in 1921, who added Messier 104 after finding a note Messier made in a copy of the 1781 edition of the catalogue. M105 to M107 were added by Helen Sawyer Hogg in 1947, M108 and M109 by Owen Gingerich in 1960, and M110 by Kenneth Glyn Jones in 1967. M102 was observed by M\u00e9chain, who communicated his notes to Messier. M\u00e9chain later concluded that this object was simply a re-observation of M101, though some sources suggest that the object M\u00e9chain observed was the galaxy NGC 5866 and identify that as M102.\nMessier's final catalogue was included in the [\"Knowledge of the Times for the Year 1784\"], the French official yearly publication of astronomical ephemerides.\nMessier lived and conducted his astronomical work at the H\u00f4tel de Cluny (now the Mus\u00e9e national du Moyen \u00c2ge), in Paris, France. The list he compiled contains only objects found in the sky area he could observe from the north celestial pole to a celestial latitude of about \u221235.7\u00b0. He did not observe or list objects visible only from farther south, such as the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds.\nObservations.\nThe Messier catalogue comprises nearly all of the most spectacular examples of the five types of deep-sky object \u2013 diffuse nebulae, planetary nebulae, open clusters, globular clusters, and galaxies \u2013 visible from European latitudes. Furthermore, almost all of the Messier objects are among the closest to Earth in their respective classes, which makes them heavily studied with professional class instruments that today can resolve small and visually significant details in them. A summary of the astrophysics of each Messier object can be found in the \"Concise Catalog of Deep-sky Objects\".\nSince these objects could be observed visually with the relatively small-aperture refracting telescope (approximately 100\u00a0mm \u2248 4\u00a0inches) used by Messier to study the sky from downtown Paris, they are among the brightest and thus most attractive astronomical objects (of the class popularly called deep-sky objects) observable from Earth, and are popular targets for visual study and astrophotography available to modern amateur astronomers using larger aperture equipment. In early spring, astronomers sometimes gather for \"Messier marathons\", when all of the objects can be viewed over a single night.\nMessier objects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Open cluster\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Globular cluster\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Diffuse nebula\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Planetary nebula\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Supernova remnant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Galaxy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20609", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20609", "title": "Mambo (music)", "text": "Cuban music genre\nMambo is a genre of Cuban dance music pioneered by the charanga Arca\u00f1o y sus Maravillas in the late 1930s and later popularized in the big band style by P\u00e9rez Prado. It originated as a syncopated form of the danz\u00f3n, known as danz\u00f3n-mambo, with a final, improvised section, which incorporated the \"guajeos\" typical of son cubano (also known as \"montunos\"). These \"guajeos\" became the essence of the genre when it was played by big bands, which did not perform the traditional sections of the danz\u00f3n and instead leaned towards swing and jazz. By the late 1940s and early 1950s, mambo had become a \"dance craze\" in Mexico and the United States as its associated dance took over the East Coast thanks to P\u00e9rez Prado, Tito Puente, Tito Rodr\u00edguez and others. In the mid-1950s, a slower ballroom style, also derived from the danz\u00f3n, cha-cha-cha, replaced mambo as the most popular dance genre in North America. Nonetheless, mambo continued to enjoy some degree of popularity into the 1960s and new derivative styles appeared, such as dengue; by the 1970s it had been largely incorporated into salsa.\nHistory.\nOrigins in Cuba.\nThe earliest roots of mambo can be traced to the \"danz\u00f3n de nuevo ritmo\" (danz\u00f3n with a new rhythm), later known as danz\u00f3n-mambo, made popular by the charanga Arca\u00f1o y sus Maravillas conducted by flautist Antonio Arca\u00f1o.\nOrestes L\u00f3pez and his brother Israel L\u00f3pez \"Cachao\", main composers of the Maravillas, were the first to denominate a final upbeat, improvised section of the popular Cuban danz\u00f3n as a \"mambo\". This innovation was a key step in the process of evolution of the danz\u00f3n, which over the years had progressively lost its structural rigidity to the benefit of musicians and dancers alike. Prior to the \"danz\u00f3n de nuevo ritmo\", in 1910, Jos\u00e9 Urf\u00e9 had first added a montuno (typical son improvised closing section) as a final part of his composition \"El bomb\u00edn de Barreto\". This was a swinging section consisting of a repeated musical phrase, which introduced some elements of the son into the danz\u00f3n. During the mid-to-late 1930s, some members of the Arca\u00f1o group were saying \"vamos a mambear\" (\"let's mambo\") when referring to the montuno or final improvisation of the danz\u00f3n. It was Arca\u00f1o's cellist, Orestes L\u00f3pez, who created the first danz\u00f3n called \"Mambo\" (1938). In this piece, some syncopated motives taken from the son style were combined with improvised flute passages.\nAntonio Arca\u00f1o described the mambo as follows: \"Mambo is a type of syncopated \"montuno\" that possesses the rhythmic charm, informality and eloquence of the Cuban people. The pianist attacks the mambo, the flute picks it up and improvises, the violin executes rhythmic chords in double stops, the double bass inserts a \"tumbao\", the \"timbalero\" plays the cowbell, the \"g\u00fciro\" scrapes and plays the \"maracas\" rhythm, the indispensable \"tumba\" (conga drum) reaffirms the bass \"tumbao\" and strengthens the \"timbal\".\"\n1940-1952: \"Brass\" Mambo in Mexico City.\nD\u00e1maso P\u00e9rez Prado, a pianist and arranger from Matanzas, Cuba, established his residence in Havana at the beginning of the 1940s and began to work at night clubs and orchestras, such as Paulina Alvarez's and Casino de La Playa. In 1949 he traveled to Mexico looking for job opportunities and achieved great success with a new style, to which he assigned a name that had been already used by Antonio Arca\u00f1o, the \"mambo\".\nPerez Prado's style differed from the previous mambo concept. The new style possessed a greater influence from North-American jazz, and an expanded instrumentation consisting of four to five trumpets, four to five saxophones, double bass, drums, maracas, cowbell, congas and bongos. This new mambo included a catchy counterpoint between the trumpets and the saxophones that induced the body to move along with the rhythm, stimulated at the end of each musical phrase by a characteristic deep throat sound expression.\nBecause his music was aimed at an audience that lived primarily outside Cuba, P\u00e9rez Prado used a large number of international influences, especially North-American, in his arrangements. This is evident in his arrangements of songs such as \"Mambo Rock\", \"Patricia\" and \"Tequila\", where he uses a triple meter U.S. \"swing\" rhythm fused with elements from Cuban rumba and son. P\u00e9rez Prado gained hits such as \"Mambo No. 5\" and \"Mambo No. 8\" in 1950. The mambo boom peaked in the US in early 1950s, when P\u00e9rez Prado hit the American charts at number one with a cha-cha-ch\u00e1 version of \"Cherry Pink (and Apple Blossom White)\". P\u00e9rez Prado's repertoire included numerous international pieces such as \"Cerezo Rosa\", \"Mar\u00eda Bonita\", \"Tea for Two\", \"La Bikina\", \"Cuando Calienta El Sol\", \"Malague\u00f1a\" and \"En Un Pueblito Espa\u00f1ol\", among many others.\nPrado's recordings were meant for the Latin American and U.S. \"latino\" markets, but some of his most celebrated mambos, such as \"Mambo No. 5\" and \"Que Rico El Mambo\", quickly crossed over to a wider U.S. audience.\nCuban singer Beny Mor\u00e9 also lived in Mexico between 1945 and 1952. He composed and recorded some mambos there with Mexican orchestras, especially the one led by Rafael de Paz; they recorded \"Yiri Yiri Bon\", \"La Culebra\", \"Mata Siguaraya\", \"Solamente Una Vez\" and \"Bonito Y Sabroso\". Benny and Perez Prado recorded 28 mambo songs including \"La M\u00facura\", \"Rabo Y Oreja\", and \"Pachito E'ch\u00e9\". At this time Benny also recorded with the orchestra of Jes\u00fas \"Chucho\" Rodr\u00edguez.\nMambo in New York City: 1947-1960.\nMambo arrived in 1947 and mambo music and dance became popular soon after. Recording companies began to use \"mambo\" to label their records and advertisements for mambo dance lessons were in local newspapers. New York City had made mambo a transnational popular cultural phenomenon. In New York the mambo was played in a high-strung, sophisticated way that had the Palladium Ballroom, the famous Broadway dance-hall, jumping. The Ballroom soon proclaimed itself the \"temple of mambo\", for the city's best dancers\u2014the Mambo Aces, Cha Cha Taps, \"Killer Joe\" Piro, Augie and Margo Rodriguez. Augie and Margo were still dancing 50 years later (2006) in Las Vegas.\nSome of New York's biggest mambo dancers and bands of the 1950s included: Augie &amp; Margo, Michael Terrace &amp; Elita, Carmen Cruz &amp; Gene Ortiz, Larry Selon &amp; Vera Rodr\u00edguez, Mambo Aces(Anibal Vasquez and Samson Batalla), Cha Cha Taps (Carlos Arroyo and Mike Ramos), Killer Joe Piro, Paulito and Lilon, Louie Maquina, Pedro Aguilar (nicknamed \"Cuban Pete\"), Machito, Tito Rodr\u00edguez, Jose Curbelo, and Noro Morales.\nBy the early 1960s, tastes had shifted, and the Palladium closed in 1966, partly because a drug raid in 1961 led to the loss of its license to sell liquor. Dancers' and music fans' enthusiasm for the music was not entirely diminished, however.\nThe Village Gate in Greenwich Village offered Latin Night on Mondays and Wednesdays. Federico Pagani started Latin Nights with radio host Symphony Sid Torin and Joe Gaines. Federico Pagani offered a Latin Night at various clubs, including Tony Roma's El Corso on 86th Street andThird Avenue, Barney Googles, and the Cheetah, Casa Blanca, Caboroeno, Broadway 96, Trudiheller's Trix, Peppermint Lounge, Les Violins, Village Gate Nightclub, The Roseland, Manhattan Center, The 3 In One In Brooklyn Heights Prospect Park, St. George Hotel, La Epoca, Cerromar, Nightclub, Hippocampo, Caravana Club, Hunt's Point Palace, Bronx Casino, La Campana Bar Restaurant, and Carlos Ortiz El Tropicoro Bronx. These venues hosted \"the scene\" after the Palladium. Pagani was an advisor for \"Nuestra Cosa\" (\"Our Latin Thing\" ) at the Cheetah and The Red Garder with Symphony Sid Torrin.('Mambo Kings'). Pagani produced and was responsible for all the Latin concerts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20610", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20610", "title": "Montoneros", "text": "Argentine leftist guerrilla organization (1970\u20131983)\nMontoneros (, MPM) was an Argentine far-left Peronist, Camilist and Roman Catholic revolutionary guerrilla organization, which emerged in the 1970s during the \"Argentine Revolution\" dictatorship. Its name was a reference to the 19th-century cavalry militias called Montoneras, which fought for the Federalist Party in the Argentine civil wars. Radicalized by the political repression of anti-Peronist regimes, the influence of the Cuban Revolution and liberation theology worker-priests, the Montoneros emerged from the 1960s Catholic revolutionary guerrilla Comando Camilo Torres as a \"national liberation movement\", and became a convergence of revolutionary Peronism, Guevarism, and the revolutionary Catholicism of shaped by Camilism. They fought for the return of Juan Per\u00f3n to Argentina and the establishment of \"Christian national socialism\", based on 'indigenous' Argentine and Catholic socialism, seen as the ultimate conclusion of Peronist doctrine.\nIts first public action took place on 29 May 1970, with the kidnapping, subsequent revolutionary trial and assassination of the anti-Peronist ex-dictator Pedro Eugenio Aramburu, one of the leaders of the 1955 coup that had overthrown the constitutional government led by President Juan Domingo Per\u00f3n. Montoneros kidnapped the ex-dictator to put him on \"revolutionary trial\" for being a traitor to the homeland, for having shot 27 people to suppress the , and to recover the body of Eva Per\u00f3n that Aramburu had kidnapped and made disappear. Montoneros was the armed nucleus of a set of non-military social organizations (\"mass fronts\") known as the Tendencia Revolucionaria del Peronismo, or simply \"La Tendencia\", which included the Juventud Peronista Regionales (JP), the Juventud Universitaria Peronista (JUP), the Juventud Trabajadora Peronista (JTP), the Uni\u00f3n de Estudiantes Secundarios (UES), the Agrupaci\u00f3n Evita and the Movimiento Villero Peronista.\nIn 1972 it merged with Descamisados and in 1973 with the Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR), with which it had been acting together. Its actions contributed to the military dictatorship calling free elections in 1973, in which the multi-party electoral front of which it was a member (Frejuli) won, with the presidential candidacy of Peronist H\u00e9ctor Jos\u00e9 C\u00e1mpora, a man close to Montoneros, as well as several governors, parliamentarians, ministers and high-ranking government officials. C\u00e1mpora's government and its relationship with the Montoneros came under heavy pressure from the outset, from right-wing sectors and the Italian anti-communist lodge Propaganda Due and the CIA, and just 49 days later he had to resign after the Ezeiza massacre. \nAfter C\u00e1mpora's resignation as president on 12 July 1973, the Montoneros began to lose power and became progressively isolated, a situation that worsened after the assassination of trade union leader Jos\u00e9 Ignacio Rucci on 25 September 1973 \u2013 attributed to the organization \u2013 and above all after Per\u00f3n's death, on 1 July 1974, when a policy of state terrorism was unleashed by the right-wing para-police organisation known as the Triple A led by Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Rega, who became the right-hand man of President Isabel Per\u00f3n. Two months later, Montoneros decided to go underground again and restart the armed struggle. On 8 September 1975, Isabel Per\u00f3n issued Decree 2452/75 banning its activity and classifying it as a \"subversive group\".\nOn 24 March 1976, the constitutional government was overthrown and an anti-Peronist civilian-military dictatorship was established, which imposed a totalitarian regime focused on eliminating its opponents. Montoneros established its leadership in Mexico and fought the dictatorship, inflicting serious casualties on the civil-military government and suffering heavy losses, including a large number of militants and fighters who disappeared. In 1979 and 1980 it attempted two counter-offensives that failed militarily and politically. When democracy was restored in December 1983, the Montoneros organization no longer existed as a political-military structure and sought to insert itself into democratic political life, within Peronism, under the name of Juventud Peronista, under the leadership of Patricia Bullrich and Pablo Unamuno, without ever forming an autonomous political organization. In the following years, several Montoneros adherents occupied important political posts in democratic governments.\nIdeology.\nThe main political currents that shaped the Montoneros was the far-left liberation theology of Camilo Torres Restrepo, \"Christian national socialism\" of Juan Per\u00f3n, Marxist-Leninist Guevarism of Che Guevara, the option for the poor and anti-imperialism propagated by Catholic priest in his journal \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\", as well as the Peronist left-wing nationalism promoted by John William Cooke. The initial mentor of the group was also Carlos Mugica who saw Peronism as Argentinian version of Catholic socialism, but rejected armed struggle and revolution, stating: \"I am prepared to be killed but I am not prepared to kill\". This led radicalized youth that would then form the Montoneros to embrace more radical beliefs of Camilo Torres and Garc\u00eda Elorrio instead, with Torres arguing that \"The duty of every Catholic is to be a revolutionary\" and that \"The Catholic who is not a revolutionary is living in mortal sin\". The movement also glorified Eva Per\u00f3n, naming her as one of the inspirations behind the Montoneros and used the slogan \"Si Evita viviera, ser\u00eda Montonera\" (\"If Evita were alive she would be a Montonero\"), which became one of the best-known mottos of the group. In January 1975, the official organ of the Montoneros even took the name \"Evita Montonera\". Montoneros are considered the ideological staple of Revolutionary Peronism, which combined \"radical Catholic principles of justice, Peronist populism, and leftist nationalism.\" Montoneros remained committed to liberation theology throughout their entire existence, and the notion of Catholic martyrdom was a strong element in the Montonero imaginary and political practice. They were described as \"a combination of socialist ideas and violent catholic struggle in the fashion of Camillo Torres\".\nOther figures that the Montoneros were influenced by included who considered Peronism \"the vehicle of the nation doing battle with imperialism\", historian Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Rosa who defined Peronism as revolutionary anti-imperialism, dissident communist who promoted 'Peronist Marxism', and Arturo Jauretche who founded left-wing nationalist in 1935 and became a Peronist in 1940s. In the late 1960s, Jauretche and Arregui held regular discussions with the Montonero leadership, refining their ideology and rhetoric. Montoneros were also influenced by the polemic between their political mentors and inspirations \u2013 in 1969 Per\u00f3n expressed his interest in Elorrio's \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\" and wrote a letter to Elorrio that was later published in the journal, stating: \"The revolution that is beginning will call into question not only capitalist society but also industrial society. The consumer society must die a violent death. The alienated society [sic] must disappear from history. We are trying a new and original world. The imagination has taken power.\" Amongst the list of the political mentors of the Montoneros, Richard Gillespie names Camilo Torres as the most important inspiration, as evidenced by the name of the \"Camilo Torres Commando\", which was created in 1967 and was a precursor of the Montoneros, defining their ideology as \"Peronism, socialism, Catholic liberationism, and armed struggle\", and having \"Latin American and Third World liberation\" for its goal. \nLiberation theology.\nDespite its far-left ideology, Montoneros originated from middle-class and upper-middle-class Catholic and nationalist backgrounds. The core of Montonero ideology was Argentinian nationalism and Political Catholicism, which were later extended into Peronism and socialism. This connection was made possible by the influence of post-Vatican II Catholicism, as third-worldist and liberation theology Argentinian priests, also known as the worker-priests, would radicalize Catholic students into embracing these political currents. Priest Carlos Mugica, known for his work in shantytowns at the time, became a spiritual advisor of the Catholic students' organization at the National University of Central Buenos Aires, coming in contact with students that would become leading members of the Montoneros. Mugica promoted Peronism, arguing that he was \"absolutely convinced that the liberation of my people will be through the Peronist movement. I know from the Gospel, from Christ's attitude, that I must see human history through the poor. And in Argentina the majority of the poor are Peronists.\" Catholicism was so central to Montoneros that the group started correspondence with Pope John Paul II, and also had its own chaplain, Catholic priest Jorge Adur, who became the Montoneros' emissary to the Vatican.\nAround 1964 Mugica contacted former members of a 1950s Peronist resistance organization known as the Tacuaristas, and introduced them to his pupils. Mugica praised Peronism as effective realization of Catholicism, arguing that Peronism and Catholicism were united in their goals of \"love for the poor, for those persecuted for defending justice and for fighting against injustice\". Further radicalization came from the death of Camilo Torres, a revolutionary Catholic priest who joined the Marxist-Leninist National Liberation Army and was killed during one of the organization's operations. Six months after his death, first issue of Catholic socialist journal \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\", directed by Garc\u00eda Elorrio, was published. The journal promoted post-conciliar reforms in the Catholic Church as a turn towards Marxism, encouraged armed struggle as a truly Catholic way of seizing power, idealized Camilo Torres and Che Guevara as examples of anti-imperialist martyrs, and vindicated Peronism as the \"revolutionary key of national construction of socialism\". Most influential in regards to Montoneros was Elorrio's article from March 1967, which connected Camilo Torres' struggle to Peronism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are all in the same war; the question is on which side? There are no third ways\u2014clerical meditations or company truces. And there should not be. This is the challenge which reaction has thrown at us. From national frustration we must now move rapidly to confrontation. The government has already announced that the escalation phase has begun. This statement hides the only reality: official violence against the rebellion of the people. We are in the thick of violence and cannot be on the sidelines...\nAs martyr and symbol of the demand 'liberation or death', Camilo Torres died as a guerrilla a year ago. Camilo faithfully realized his personal road to revolution. Priest and sociologist, political fighter and agitator, student and mass leader, he satisfied his thirst for justice by joining the armed struggle when he understood that the oligarchy shuts all roads and confronts the people with its ultimate weapon\u2014violence ...\nCamilo represents contradiction, scandal, probing, unity, sacrifice, action, violence, and commitment. We accept him and uphold him in his totality. We do not parcel him out or divide him according to where our fear takes us. We want to be with him in our Argentine reality, fighting with the Peronist movement for the victory of the working class, for the realization of socialism in our national experience.\nUnder the banner of Camilo, we hereby declare total war on exploitation, on imperialism, on under-development, and on all people who betray our country from within or without. We also hereby affirm our declaration of revolutionary faith, revolutionary necessity, and revolutionary existence. We affirm a faith full of hope in the triumph of the people, a definite and permanent necessity, and an existence dictated by our Christianity.\nWith Camilo, we believe that revolution is the only efficient and meaningful way to achieve love for all.\u2014\u200a\nRichard Gillespie identifies \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\" as the decisive factor behind the radicalization of Catholic students and the creation of Montoneros, along with the Movement of Priests for the Third World. The journal made emotional appeals for sympathy for the oppressed and made radical Catholics identify themselves with the 'national liberation' struggles of the Third World, with Per\u00f3n and Guevara named as main examples. It also glorified militians, paid homages to them and portrayed their deaths as ultimate sacrifice in the name of love for the downtrodden. \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\" also defused dislike towards Peronism amongst Catholic and mainstream socialist circles - Elorrio regarded Catholic and socialist opposition to Peronism as mistake, which resonated with the hitherto anti-Peronist middle class who was now disillusioned with authoritarianism and corruption of post-Per\u00f3n Argentinian governments. Because of this, former anti-Peronists \"now embraced Peronism with the zeal of reformed sinners\". Elorrio also pushed his readers towards action and revolution, writing: \"I had to fight with the slaves, the people, as they fought, not as an elitist teacher who tells them what is good and what is evil and then goes back to his study to read Saint Augustine, but as a genuine participant, with them not for them, in their misery, their failings, their violence... Either I fought or I was a phony.\" Catholic influence remained strong for the entirety of Montoneros existence \u2013 Martha Crenshaw remarked that its members \"were regular church attenders right up to the moment of going underground\", and the organization established its own Catholic \"chaplaincy\" after resuming its clandestine resistance in September 1974. Montoneros' liberation theology also included a Cuban-inspired cult of martyrdom of its fallen members \u2013 \"guerrillero heroico\".\nThe arrival of Ongan\u00eda to power in Argentina through the 1966 coup d'\u00e9tat resulted in the group openly embracing the concepts of revolutionary struggle, not only because of the new government's neoliberal economic policies, but also because of suppression of the spheres of political and cultural participation, such as universities and political parties. Michael Goebel argues that government's actions made academics friendly to Per\u00f3n, which was a side effect of the mass exodus of intellectuals caused by university purges. The academic staff was replaced by professors and priests from Catholic universities, who were now friendly towards Per\u00f3n. In 1967, Camilo Torres Commando was formed, which became the armed precursor of the Montoneros. Donald C. Hodges notes that the ideology of Camilo Torres Commando was identical to that of Montoneros, representing \"a fusion of Camilist, Guevarist, and Cookist themes combined with the cult of Evita Peron\". In 1970, the Commando officially became the Montoneros, named after \"montoneras\", irregular popular troops that followed the federal caudillos of the Argentine interior in the 19th century. The ideology behind armed struggle was influenced by Foquismo of Che Guevara, together with the theory of urban guerrilla warfare written by Peronist Abraham Guill\u00e9n and Marxist-Leninist Tupamaros. \nRevolutionary Peronism.\nAlongside radicalized Catholic priests, John William Cooke became the second great influence on the Montoneros. Named the \"personal delegate\" by Per\u00f3n during his exile, Cooke was tasked with leading the Peronist resistance in Argentina, and spent several years in Cuba afterwards, adopting the Castro's anti-imperialism and becoming the main thinker of Revolutionary Peronism, describing Peronism as a leftist movement that would lead an anti-imperialist revolution of \"national liberation\" in Argentina. Heavily inspired by the Cuban Revolution, Cooke defined Peronism as \"antibureaucratic, socialist, profoundly national, and sister to all the\nworld's exploited\". Per\u00f3n embraced Cooke's ideas, praising the Cuban Revolution and making comparisons between himself and Castro. Although Guevara came from an Argentine anti-Peronist family, he visited Per\u00f3n in Madrid and was deeply impressed by his political thought, praising Peronism as \"indigenous Latin American socialism with which the Cuban Revolution could side\". Per\u00f3n confirmed this political alliance, galvanizing left-wing Peronists; upon Guevara's death in 1967, Per\u00f3n praised him as 'one of ours, perhaps the best'.\nCooke and Per\u00f3n formulated the idea of \"national socialism\" that would become the defining ideology of both the Montoneros and broader Peronist movement. The concept was based on combining social revolution with national liberation; Cooke wrote: \"The struggle for liberation starts from the definition of the real enemy, imperialism that acts through the native oligarchy and the political, economic, and cultural mechanisms at its service . . . the national question and the social question are indissolubly joined.\" Cooke also referred to the Peronist concept of justicalism, arguing that the essence of it was anti-imperialism and social revolution. This was complemented by Per\u00f3n redefining his \"Third Position\" in 1972, clarifying that it is not a centrist position nor a third way between capitalism and communism, but rather Peronist embrace of the Third World, arguing that Peronists must align themselves \"with movements of national and social liberation\", which Per\u00f3n listed as Castroist Cuba and Allende's Chile, among others. That year, the Peronist October Front described Peronism as \"the national expression of the socialism, to the extent that it represents, expresses and develops in action the aspirations of the popular masses and the Argentine working class\" and popularized the term of \"indigenous socialism\" that \"justicalismo\" was to represent. \nHodges remarked that \"the program of national liberation defended by the Montoneros was an evidently populist one, predicated on the establishment of a popular state which would control and plan the economy as a necessary condition of political and economic independence.\" In their program published in \"Cristianismo y Revoluci\u00f3n\" on behalf of Elorrio, Montoneros stayed loyal to the Per\u00f3n's vision of \"Christian national socialism\", introducing themselves as the \"armed wing of Peronism\", and stating: \"we set ourselves the objective of constituting with other organizations the Peronist armed movement, which together with other armed groups will develop the people's war for the seizure of power and the implementation of national socialism in which they become a reality our three flags: economic independence, social justice and political sovereignty.\" In the Cuban newspaper Granma, Montoneros further elaborated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are Peronists even though we come from different origins and trainings. Peronism has a doctrine created in 1945 that was reworked and updated during the subsequent 25 years. This doctrine is synthesized in the three flags of the movement: Economic Independence, Social Justice and Political Sovereignty. These three flags in 1970 are expressed through the need to achieve independent economic development and a fair distribution of wealth, within the framework of a socialist system that respects our history and our national culture. On the other hand, the doctrine was defined by its creator, General Per\u00f3n, as deeply national, humanist and Christian, respectful of the human person above all things.\u2014\u200a\nSocial conservatism.\nWhile revolutionary and far-left in character, Montoneros were conservative in their social and cultural outlook. In 1972, an English-language daily Buenos Aires Herald published an article by Robert Cox and Andrew Graham-Yooll, which presented a sexualised image of Eva Per\u00f3n. The Argentine opinion was said to express \"enormous revulsion\" at the article, and \"the most extreme form of literary criticism came from the heads of the Montonera guerrillas.\" Montoneros accused the newspaper of not only tarnishing the image of Eva Per\u00f3n, but also breaching the Catholic norms of Argentine society. In May 1972, the Montoneros decided to assassinate Graham-Yooll, but this order was later cancelled by the intervention of Peronist politician , who vouched for Graham-Yooll.\nArgentine journalist Miriam Lewin noted that the Montoneros were \"socially conservative and founded upon deep patriarchal structures\". Male homosexuality and feminism were opposed, and gender roles were enforced \u2013 feminine men were rejected, and women were considered to be caretakers, unsuitable for revolutionary acts. Montoneros denounced the concept of \"free love\" and instead embraced a heterosexual, monogamous model. Infidelity was a forbidden act as per their conduct code, the \"C\u00f3digo de Justicia Penal Revolucionario\" (Revolutionary Penal Code), along with casual sex and abortion, which were seen as 'petty bourgeois' acts. Couples within the Montoneros were required to have been together for more than six months before being allowed to move in together. Montoneros protested the infiltration of left-wing and Peronist causes by homosexual activists, and during their marches and protests, they chanted slogans such as \"We are not faggots, we are not drug addicts, we are the soldiers of Per\u00f3n and Montoneros!\" () or \"We're not faggots, we're not junkies, we're soldiers from FAR and Montoneros!\" (). \nThe moral code of the Montoneros was explicitly based on Catholic social teaching. Christian ascetism marked the everyday life of the Montoneros, and the members were to eat frugally and embrace Christian humility. Infidelity, defined as having sexual relations with someone other than one's partner, was equated with the crime of \"disloyalty\", and the Montoneros' code decreed that both parties involved in such an affair would be considered guilty, even if only one of them had a steady partner. Commenting on the rule, the guerilla's leader Mario Firmenich stated: \"The New Man cannot be irresponsible in his relationship with his partner. Among us, nobody marries and separates on a whim, just because they feel the urge. And we don't tolerate treachery [agachadas], we're very clear on that. We deal with traitors by executing them.\" Susanne Meachem writes that the attitude of Montoneros was influenced by machismo, and actions such as infidelity, homosexuality or taking drugs were seen as incompatible with being a 'soldier of Per\u00f3n'.\nTo reflect the structure of the Justicialist Party, which had a separate Female Peronist Party, the Montoneros had their own female branch \u2013 \"Agrupaci\u00f3n Evita\", in order \"to reach women in the factories, slums, and poor neighbourhoods of Argentina\". However, \"Agrupaci\u00f3n Evita\" was not a reflection on gender by Montoneros or encouragement of feminism. Instead, Montoneros \"insisted on heterosexuality and motherhood even in situations with the looming threat of imprisonment and an overall air of an uncertain future\". They proposed a romanticized concept of \"a new woman\" that would have \"children for a new beginning\", and expected women to fulfill their revolutionary role through motherhood. Meachem argues that the Montoneros' views on women \"were as reactionary as those of the ultra-right \u2013 a discourse of monogamy, orthodox politics and customs\". This was a part of the Montoneros' vision of \"compulsory heterosexuality, which was in promotion of an ideal revolutionary couple who was both monogamous and heterosexual\". \nThe adherence to Catholic moralism went beyond forbidding adultery \u2013 Montoneros practiced sexual self-restraint, and their personal lives were regulated by rigid rules. A former Montonero Graciela Daleo, wrote that the Montoneros \"observed very strict moral norms\"; she recalled that relationships within the organization were chaste, as displays of affection were limited to cheek kissing and a Montonero was expected to inform and obtain an approval of his parents before entering a relationship. Additionally, on par with its Catholic morality, Montoneros also enforced the tradition of getting married in religious ceremonies. Homosexuality was not tolerated within the Montoneros, and was denounced as \"sexual debauchery\", \"a threat to internal security\" and a sign of \"individualistic and liberal\" tendencies. Firmenich also firmly enforced the family-centered morality in the organization, combining both Peronist and Catholic traditions; he believed that the Montoneros should have five children (twice the amount of the average birthrate at the time) and pointed to his own family life as an example. As the movement believed in conservative family values, Montoneros also had \"Domingo Montonero\" (\"Montonero Sunday\"), days set aside for the revolutionaries to spend with their families. \nHodges notes that Montoneros had begun as Catholic nationalists and remained committed it throughout their activity, transforming Catholic nationalism into a far-left ideology. The Montoneros prided themselves in patriotism and following 'indigenous', Argentine forms of socialism and revolution, while rejecting what was described as \"imported\" or \"exotic\" models. While being considered a Marxist organisation, the Montoneros based their revolutionary beliefs on writings of Cooke and Per\u00f3n rather than Marx. Likewise, Montoneros' embrace of revolutionary violence came not from Marxism, but from Camilo Torres Restrepo and Juan Garcia Ellorio, who reconciled Catholic moralism with violent revolution. The Montonero idealism was based on romantic notions of a \"new man\" and the pursuit of establishing God's kingdom of Earth, combined with cult of self-sacrifice and moral heroism. \nIn its statements, Montoneros maintained a conservative tone and combined their calls for a \"socialist fatherland\" (\"patria socialista\") with Catholic moralism and pledges of loyalty to Per\u00f3n. Richard Gillespie also points to the conservative origins of the group, pointing out that the Montoneros \"gained their political baptism in branches of the traditionally-conservative Catholic Action\" and \"the Falange-inspired Tacuara\". David Rock argued that despite stating their commitment to socialism, Montoneros were first and foremost Catholics who used terms such as \"godless\" and \"antinational\", and noted that Montoneros were referred by themselves or their allies as \"Catholic militants\" and \"Catholic nationalists\". Rock adds that \"the old Catholic nationalism, particularly in the assumption of right-wing nationalist tropes and metaphors such as the notion of the national being (ser nacional)\", was still present in the Montoneros' ideology.\nRight-wing influences.\nMontoneros described themselves as \"Peronist, ultra-Catholic nationalists\". Cambridge\nHistory of Latin America noted that Montoneros drew on \"Third World nationalism, liberation theology, and right-wing nationalist ideas that had inspired the neofascist movements of previous decades\", and pointed to the political past of Montoneros' leaders and key activists - two of Montoneros' founders, Fernando Abal Medina and Gustavo Ramus, were former members of Tacuara, while Rodolfo Walsh, a prominent Montonero journalist, was a member of the Nationalist Liberation Alliance in the past. Historians Sandra McGee Deutsch and Ronald H. Dotkart wrote that there were notable \"rightist influences on the Montoneros\", arguing that the \"right's nationalism, historical revisionism, and other features have had a powerful influence\" on the organization. \nMontoneros were described as of \"violent nationalistic tradition\" and combined both right-wing and left-wing nationalism, with Marxism, Peronism, liberation theology and the dependency theory defining their ideology. According to David Rock, beyond their self-identification as Catholic nationalists and Catholic integralists, the Montoneros also retained elements that seemingly collided with their far-left orientation, such as anti-atheism and opposition to \"godless, antinational and foreign communism(s)\". Carlos Mugica, who shaped the political thought of future Montoneros, wrote: \"Jesus was the most ambitious revolutionary throughout history, who wanted not only new structures ... but a new form of living unthinkable to mankind.\" Nevertheless, his rhetoric retained traces of anticommunism and clericalism, as he wrote: \"Complete equality will only be achieved on the coming of the Lord. Marxism overemphasizes material man.\" Rock argues that while the Montoneros represented the \"New Left\", far-left liberation theology Catholicism and anti-imperialist nationalism, they nevertheless maintained \"numerous vestiges of the Nationalist movement and the clerical Right.\" However, he also cautions against claims of the Montoneros being inspired fascism or being reduced to a \"strange fusion or marriage between the Left and Right\", arguing that the Montoneros \"evoked the indigenous Nationalists more than the foreign fascists.\" He concludes that the organization was neo-Peronist as well as \"neo-Nationalist\", which meant continuing the ideological elements of historical Argentinian movements; Montoneros combined these two influences together with \"renegade communism\". \nLuis Miguel Donatello argues that the Montoneros' worldview was Catholic integralism that had continuities with the Tacuaras as well as Falangism. In the 1960s, Catholic integralism had undergone an ideological shift, embracing concepts from liberation theology such as structural sin as well as endorsing Marxist-Catholic dialogue. This included Falangist circles who reconsidered their relationship with socialism, arguing that the anti-imperialism, anti-liberalism and anti-capitalism of socialism already aligns with Falangist ideals. Similarly to Peronists, Falangists were also enthusiastic about the Cuban Revolution, with many Latin American and Spanish Falangists embracing the label of \"Falangist-Castroist\" and praising Che Guevara and Fidel Castro as \"copies of Jesus Christ and of Jos\u00e9 Antonio Primo de Rivera and the embodiment of Hispanic values\". Donatello states that Montoneros mixed \"white-integralism\" with \"red integralism\", and should be placed together with Falangists and other Catholic integralists in the anti-liberal \"national-Catholic matrix\".\nMontoneros originated from and maintained the ideology of Falangism. Rock wrote that the ideological currents in Montoneros ranged \"from Catholic radicals to quasi-falangist\" members. According to Celina Albornoz, rather that abandoning its Tacuara origins, Montoneros developed and maintained ties with the Spanish far-right. Sociologist Patricia Marchak argues that not only did Montoneros have \"right-wing Catholic nationalist roots\", they also maintained the \"ideology of the Spanish Falange but combined with Peronism, with the objective of creating a national syndicalist state.\" Similarly, Hodges observes that although the ideology of Montoneros was \"akin to Marxism\", they \"still upheld the ideology of the Spanish Falange represented by Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera\" but \"looked to Peronism to implement the Falangist objective of a national syndicalist state.\" He also noted that Montoneros formulated their own Christian version of [Peronist] national socialism, which was nevertheless \"strongly influenced by the Spanish Falange and by the writings of Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera\"; despite this, the strong influences of Che Guevara and Frantz Fanon on the Montoneros gave the organization a revolutionary character.\nHistorians Carlos Atlamirano and Beatriz Sarlo classify Montoneros as Catholic nationalists, arguing that there were notable continuities between Catholic integralism and liberation theology of the Montoneros. Sarlo states that liberationist Catholics were \"revolutionary integrists\", and that the liberation Catholicism of the Montoneros \"was motivated by the goal of constructing a single kingdom of God on earth, animated by a mystification of poverty and a collapse of all public-private divides.\" Sarlo characterized Montoneros as \"reactionary components of the revolutionary forces\", describing them as radicalized Catholics who became \"revolutionary Catholic integralists\" and saw liberation theology and socialism as ways of constructing a 'kingdom of God on earth', promoted through mystification of poverty and abolition of private property. Montoneros spoke of political issues in religious terms and affirmed \"the integrity of the Christian doctrine in all spheres of life\" while opposing the secularization of modern society. As such, the Montoneros were considered to represent a far-left form of National Catholicism and Catholic integralism. Likewise, Atlamirano noted that an \"integrist\" attitude resonated in the ideology of the Montoneros, namely \"the affirmation of the integrity of the Christian doctrine in all spheres of life, in opposition to that which accompanies the secularisation of modern society\".\nThe Montoneros also faced accusations of fascist or right-wing ideological elements. Jacobo Timerman alleged that the Montoneros combined Marxism and nationalism, which he described as \"fascism of the left\". Similar accusation was made by philosopher Pablo Giussani, who compared the Montoneros to Fasci Italiani di Combattimento. Both Timerman and Giussani, however, also argued that Guevarism was a distortion of Marxism and represented a form of \"red fascism\". In response to their analyses, historian Donald C. Hodges wrote: \"I have already argued that it is a mistake to classify Peronism as a fascist movement. If my analysis stands up, then it is also erroneous to classify the different versions of revolutionary Peronism as fascist-inspired.\" He noted that the ideology of the Montoneros included elements such as cult of death and violence, but came not from fascist idealization of war and militarism, but rather Che Guavara's cult of heroism and Eva Per\u00f3n's praise for revolutionary violence. When Per\u00f3n was imprisoned in 1945, he was released after a general strike declared by the CGT; Eva however wanted to force the release of Per\u00f3n through workers' militias, which she began organizing and arming. Eva argued that violence is a legitimate vehicle for change, writing: \"With or without bloodshed, the race of oligarchs, exploiters of mankind, will inevitably perish in this century!\" Her slogan \"Peronism will be revolutionary, or it will be nothing!\" also made her an important figure and inspiration for the Peronist left.\nRelations with Per\u00f3n.\nMontoneros had a complicated relationship with Juan Per\u00f3n himself. In February 1971, Per\u00f3n sent a letter to Montoneros, agreeing with their declaration that \"the only possible road for the people to seize power and install national socialism is total, national, and prolonged revolutionary war\" and praised the organization for adapting Peronist doctrine to the difficult conditions created by the military dictatorship. Interpreted as Per\u00f3n endorsement of Montoneros, the organization was soon joined by several other Peronist organizations \u2013 shortly after Per\u00f3n's response, the Descamisado Political-Military Organization under the leadership of Horacio Mendizabal and Norberto Habegger merged with Montoneros, in October 1973 Montoneros welcomed the into its ranks, and in 1974 Peronist Armed Forces also joined Montoneros. As Per\u00f3n returned to Argentina in July 1973 and was welcomed by large groups and overjoyed demonstrations, Montoneros were reported to be 'winning the street', with chants such as 'long live the Montoneros who killed Aramburu' being popular Peronist slogans. However, Per\u00f3n's return marked increasing conflict between various Peronist wings, determined to gain the upper hand. According to Per\u00f3n biographer Jill Hedges, Per\u00f3n was alarmed by the fact that his return did not reduce political violence in Argentina, but rather invited further clashes between the left and right wings of his movement. Per\u00f3n also believed that some guerrilla and right-wing groups did not genuinely support him, but rather planned his assassination.\nIn September 1973, Per\u00f3n attempted to maintain unity in his movement, and met with leaders of the Montoneros and FAR. However, Per\u00f3n was heartbroken by the assassination of trade union leader Jos\u00e9 Ignacio Rucci, for which the Montoneros claimed responsibility. Rucci's assassination marked the first time Per\u00f3n cried in public. Per\u00f3n went into state of depression, and declared at his death: \"They killed my son. They cut off my legs\". The death of Rucci made Per\u00f3n cold towards Montoneros, culminating in Per\u00f3n demanding their expulsion from the Justicalist Movement on May Day 1974, which insulted the Peronist Left. Despite this, Montoneros never abandoned Per\u00f3n and glorified him after his death. His last major speech from 12 June 1974, in which Per\u00f3n denounced an \"imperialist plot\", was interpreted as proof that Per\u00f3n was \"to a great extent taking up the orientations and many of the criticisms which we were formulating\" by the Montoneros. Ronaldo Munck argues that Per\u00f3n did not desire to abandon Montoneros and his June speech was intended to restore their trust after the May Day confrontation. Montoneros praised Per\u00f3n for realizing his \"May Day mistake\" shortly before his death, and continued to identify him as their mentor. However, after Per\u00f3n's death the Montoneros went underground on 6 September 1974 and organized resistance against the regime of Isabel Per\u00f3n, as Isabel's government was dominated by right-wing figures who sought to centralize their control of the movement and initiated crackdowns on other Peronist factions.\nFollowing the death of Per\u00f3n, Montoneros declared war on the government of Isabel Per\u00f3n, denouncing it as 'neither popular nor Peronist' and comparing it to the military dictatorship that ruled Argentina prior to March 1973. Montoneros presented themselves as the successors of the Per\u00f3n's original program, considering it an essential part of their far-left outlook and arguing that its reconstruction is necessary for national liberation of Argentina. They continued to proclaim national liberation and construction of socialism as their main goals, which they defined as liberation from imperialist domination and suppression of private ownership of the means of production, and a planned economy \"in accordance with the particularities of the national productive structure\". Montoneros praised Peronism as \"the main, richest and most generalised experience of the Argentine working class and national sectors to achieve the objective of national and social liberation\", and called their ideology \"Authentic Peronism\" from September 1974. The organization also stressed that it is not abandoning the justicalist movement, but proposes its reconstruction, as it finds it necessary to depose \"reactionary elements\" that have infiltrated Peronism. The new government of Isabel Per\u00f3n was decried as not only not Peronist, but also \"anti-Peronist, anti-popular, repressive and pro-monopoly\". Montoneros doubled down on their glorification of Eva Per\u00f3n, adding the organization of \"the Peronist militias that Evita imagined, so that all the people can actively participate in all the forms of confrontation\" to its goals.\nFrom 1970 to Videla's military dictatorship.\nThe Montoneros formed around 1970 out of a confluence of Roman Catholic groups, university students in social sciences, and leftist supporters of Juan Per\u00f3n. \"The Montoneros took their name from the pejorative term used by the 19th-century elite to discredit the mounted followers of the popular caudillos.\" Montonera referred to the raiding parties composed by Native Americans in Argentina, and the spear in the Montoneros seal refers to this inspiration.\nThe Montoneros initiated a campaign to destabilise by force the regime supported by the U.S., which had trained Argentinian and other Latin American dictators via the School of the Americas.\nIn 1970, as retribution for the June 1956 Le\u00f3n Su\u00e1rez massacre and Juan Jos\u00e9 Valle's execution, the Montoneros kidnapped and executed former dictator Pedro Eugenio Aramburu (1955\u20131958) and other collaborators. In November 1971, in solidarity with militant car workers, Montoneros took over the FIAT car manufacturing plant in Caseros, sprayed 38 new-brand cars with petrol, and set them afire.\nOn 14 October 1970, the Montoneros urban guerrillas operating in the Villa Urquiza suburb of Buenos Aires gun down and kill sub-commissioner Osvaldo Sandoval that at the time was handling the Argentine Federal Police investigation of the murder of Pedro Aramburu.\nOn 26 July 1972, they set off explosives in the Plaza de San Isidro in Buenos Aires, which injured three policemen and killed one fireman (Carlos Adri\u00e1n Ayala), who died of wounds two days later.\nThat same day, a policeman (Agent Ram\u00f3n Gonz\u00e1lez) is shot dead after intercepting a vehicle when the two male and two female MPM guerrillas inside draw their guns and open fire on the police vehicle.\nIn April 1973, Colonel H\u00e9ctor Irabarren, head of the 3rd Army Corps' Intelligence Service, was killed when resisting a kidnap attempt by the Mariano Pojadas and Susana Lesgart platoons of the Montoneros.\nOn 17 October 1972, a powerful bomb detonated inside the Sheraton Hotel in Buenos Aires, with nearly 700 guests at the time, killing a Canadian woman (Lois Crozier, travel agent from West Vancouver) and gravely wounding her husband Gerry as he slept. The Montoneros and the Revolutionary Armed Forces later claimed responsibility for the attack.\nOn 11 March 1973, Argentina held general elections for the first time in ten years. Per\u00f3n loyalist H\u00e9ctor C\u00e1mpora became president and Per\u00f3n returned from Spain. In a controversial move, he released all left-wing guerrillas held in prison at the time in Argentina.\n1974.\nOn 21 February 1974, MPM hitmen armed with 9mm sub-machine-guns from the 'Evita Montonero' Platoon killed 49-year-old Teodoro Ponce, a right-wing Peronist labour leader outside his residence that was 800 Gorriti Street in Rosario. He had sought refuge in a local business after being shot in the leg and then in the back by the guerrillas that arrived in two cars. One of the gunmen finished him off with a shot in the dead while he lay on the floor and two other civilians were also shot in the legs in the hail of fire.\nOn 1 May 1974, Per\u00f3n expelled the Montoneros from the Justicialist May Day rally after Montonero-organized youth chanted slogans against Per\u00f3n's wife, Isabel. Despite the May Day confrontation with Per\u00f3n, when Per\u00f3n threatened to resign on 12 June, Montoneros responded by calling for the defence of Per\u00f3n and his government. \nPer\u00f3n himself did not desire to abandon the Montoneros and sought to restore his trust in his last speech from June 1974, where he denounced \"the oligarchy and the pressures exerted by imperialism upon his government\", which was considered an implication that he was being manipulated by the Peronist right. In response, Montoneros praised Per\u00f3n for \"realizing his May Day mistake\", and continued to identify him as their mentor. However, Per\u00f3n died shortly after, and the Montoneros went underground on 6 September 1974 and organized resistance against the regime of Isabel Per\u00f3n, as Isabel's government was dominated by right-wing figures who sought to centralize their control of the movement and initiated crackdowns on other Peronist factions.\nAfter the death of Juan Per\u00f3n in July 1974 and Isabel's rise to power, Montoneros claimed to have the \"social revolutionary vision of authentic Peronism\" and started guerrilla operations against the government. The more radically orthodoxy peronist and right-wing factions quickly took control of the government; Isabel Per\u00f3n, president since Juan Per\u00f3n's death, was essentially a figurehead under the influence of L\u00f3pez Rega.\nOn 15 July 1974, Montoneros assassinated Arturo Mor Roig, a former foreign minister. On 17 July, they murdered David Kraiselburd, journalist and editor-in-chief of \"El D\u00eda\" newspaper, in the Manuel B. Gonnet suburb of Buenos Aires after an exchange of fire with police.\nIn September, in order to finance their operations, they kidnapped the two brothers of the Bunge and Born family business. Some 20 urban guerrillas dressed as policemen shot dead a bodyguard and chauffeur and diverted traffic in this well-orchestrated ambush. Some 30 militants and sympathisers among the civilian population provided safe houses to the guerrillas and a means to escape. They demanded and received a ransom of $60\u00a0million in cash, as well as $1.2\u00a0million worth of food and clothing to be given to the poor.\nUnder L\u00f3pez Rega's orders, the Triple A began kidnapping, and killing members of Montoneros and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), as well as other leftist militant groups. They expanded their attacks to anyone considered a leftist subversive or sympathiser, such as these groups' deputies or lawyers.\nThe Montoneros and the ERP in turn attacked business and political figures throughout Argentina, and raided military bases for weapons and explosives. The Montoneros killed executives from General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler. General Motors, Chrysler, Citr\u00f6en, Fiat, Ford and Peugeot, eventually withdrew from the Argentine market or shut down their car manufacturing plants in throughout the country.\nOn 16 September 1974, about 40 Montoneros bombs exploded throughout Argentina. They targeted both foreign companies and commemorative ceremonies of the \"Revoluci\u00f3n Libertadora\", the military revolt that had ended Juan Per\u00f3n's first term as president on 16 September 1955. Targets included three Ford showrooms; Peugeot and IKA-Renault showrooms; Goodyear and Firestone tyre distributors, the pharmaceutical manufacturers Riker and Eli Lilly, the Union Carbide Battery Company, the Bank of Boston, Chase Manhattan Bank, the Xerox Corporation, and the soft drink companies, Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola. The Peronist guerrillas also held up at gunpoint two trains in a Buenos Aires suburb on 16 September. The Montoneros discouraged foreign investment more directly by blowing up the homes of company executives. For example, in 1975 the homes of five executives of Lazar Laboratories were bombed in the suburb of La Plata in Buenos Aires. The violence was widespread.\n1975.\nOn 7 February, four carloads of Montoneros intercepted the car driven by Antonio Muscat, a manager of the Bunge y Born firm, and shot him dead in the presence of his daughter. On 14 February 1975, Montoneros killed Hip\u00f3lito Acu\u00f1a, a politician, as he parked his car outside his home in the city of Santa Fe.\nOn 18 February, Montoneros gunmen killed F\u00e9lix Villafa\u00f1e of the FITAM S.A. workers union, in the presence of his wife in the suburb of San Isidro in Buenos Aires. On 22 February 1975, in an ambush in the Lomas de Zamora suburb of Buenos Aires, three policemen (First Sergeant Nicol\u00e1s Cardozo, Corporal Roberto Roque Fredes and Constables Eugenio Rodriguez and Abel Pascuzzi) were killed after their patrol car came under fire from Montoneros guerrillas. On 26 February 1975, the Montoneros kidnapped 62-year-old John Patrick Egan, a U.S. consular agent in the city of C\u00f3rdoba, executing him two days later. That same day, they killed three policemen in another ambush by urban guerrillas in Buenos Aires, and an army conscript in Tucum\u00e1n province was reported to have been killed in action. On 5 March 1975, a Montoneros bomb detonated in the underground parking at Plaza Col\u00f3n of the Argentine Army High Command; a garbage truck driver (Alberto Blas Garc\u00eda) was killed and 28 others were wounded, including four colonels and 18 other ranks. In early June 1975, Montoneros guerrillas murdered executives David Bargut and Ra\u00fal Amelong of the Acindar steel firm in Rosario, in reprisal for alleged repression against striking employees. On 10 June 1975, guerrillas in Santa Fe shot and killed Juan Enrique Pelayes, a trade union leader. On 12 June 1975, in an ambush in the capital of the C\u00f3rdoba province, three policemen (Pedro Ram\u00f3n Enrico, Carlos Alberto Gal\u00edndez and corporal Luis Francisco Rodr\u00edguez) were killed by guerrillas. On 25 July 1975 four policemen were wounded in guerrilla attacks using bazookas and firebombs. On 26 August 1975, 26-year-old Fernando Haymal was killed by fellow Montoneros for allegedly cooperating with government forces.\nThe Montoneros' leadership was keen to learn from the ERP's \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Monte Ram\u00f3n Rosa Jim\u00e9nez\" operating in the province of Tucum\u00e1n. In 1975 they sent \"observers\" to spend a few months with the ERP platoons operating against the 5th Infantry Brigade, then consisting of the 19th, 20th and 29th Mountain Infantry Regiments. On 28 August 1975 the Montoneros planted a bomb in a culvert at the Tucum\u00e1n air base airstrip. The blast destroyed an air force C-130 transport carrying 116 anti-guerrilla commandos of the Gendarmerie, killing five and wounding 40, one of whom later died of his injuries.\nThe network of Montoneros militants had been largely uprooted by the government in the capital of Tucum\u00e1n province. In August 1975, several hundred Montoneros militants took to the streets in C\u00f3rdoba, to divert attention from the military operations being waged in the mountains of Tucum\u00e1n. They shot and killed five policemen (Sergeant Juan Carlos Rom\u00e1n, Corporal Rosario del Carmen Moyano and Agents Luis Rodolfo L\u00f3pez, Jorge Natividad Luna and Juan Antonio Diaz) after attacking their headquarters and bombed the police radio communications centre. As a result, the elite 4th Airborne Infantry Brigade, which had been ordered to assist operations in Tucum\u00e1n province, was kept in C\u00f3rdoba for the rest of the year.\nOn 5 October 1975, the Montoneros carried out a complex operation against a regiment of the 5th Brigade. During this attack named \"Operation Primicia\" (\"Operation Scoop\") a Montoneros force numbering an estimated several hundred guerrillas and underground supporters, set in motion an assault on an army barracks in Formosa province. On 5 October 1975, Montoneros members hijacked a civilian airliner bound for Corrientes from Buenos Aires. The guerrillas redirected the plane to Formosa, and took over the provincial airport, killing policeman Neri Argentino Alegre in the process. With tactical support from a local militant group, the invaders attacked the barracks of the 29th Infantry Regiment with gunfire and hand grenades. They shot several soldiers who had been resting in their quarters.\nAfter the soldiers and NCOs got over their initial surprise, they mounted stiff resistance to the attacking Montoneros. In total, a second lieutenant (Ricardo Massaferro), sergeant (V\u00edctor Sanabria) and ten conscripts (Antonio Arrieta, Heriberto Avalos, Jos\u00e9 Coronel, Dante Salvatierra, Ismael S\u00e1nchez, Tom\u00e1s S\u00e1nchez, Edmundo Roberto Sosa, Marcelino Torales, Alberto Villalba and Hermindo Luna) were killed and several wounded. The Montoneros lost 16 killed in total. Two policemen later died of their wounds. The Montoneros escaped by air into a remote area in adjoining Santa Fe Province. The aircraft, a Boeing 737, landed in a crop field not far from the city of Rafaela. The Peronist guerrillas fled to waiting cars on a highway nearby.\nThe sophistication of the operation, and the getaway cars and hideouts they used to escape the military crackdown, suggest the involvement of several hundred guerrillas and civilian sympathisers in Montoneros' organization. Under the presidency of Nestor Kirchner, the families of all the Montoneros killed in the attack were each later compensated with the payment of around US$200,000.\nWhile the ERP fought the army in Tucum\u00e1n, the Montoneros were active in Buenos Aires. Montoneros' leadership dismissed the tactics of the ERP in Tucum\u00e1n as \"old fashioned\" and \"inappropriate\" but still sent reinforcements. On 26 October 1975, five policemen (Pedro Dettle, Juan Ram\u00f3n Costa, Carlos Livio Cejas, Cleof\u00e1s Galeano, and Juan Fern\u00e1ndez) were killed in Buenos Aires when Montoneros guerrillas ambushed their patrol cars near the San Isidro Cathedral. Two of the captured policemen were reported to have been executed in this operation under the orders of the Montoneros commander Eduardo Pereyra Rossi (nom de guerre Carlon).\nIn December 1975, Montoneros raided an armaments factory in the capital's Munro neighbourhood, fleeing with 250 assault rifles and sub-machine guns. That same month, a Montoneros bomb exploded at the headquarters of the Argentine army in Buenos Aires, injuring at least six soldiers. By the end of 1975, a total of 137 army officers, NCOs and conscripts and policemen had been killed that year and approximately 3,000 wounded by left wing terrorism. U.S. journalist Paul Hoeffel in an article written for the Boston Globe concluded that, \"Although there is widespread reluctance to use the term, it is now impossible to ignore the fact that civil war has broken out in Argentina.\"\nSeaborne attacks.\nMontoneros were inspired by the Italian and British wartime commando raids on warships, and on 1 November 1974, Montoneros successfully blew up General Commissioner Alberto Villar, the chief of the Argentine federal police in his yacht. His wife was also killed on the spot. On 22 August 1975, their frogmen planted a mine on the river's bed below the hull of a navy destroyer, the ARA \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\", as she remained docked at Rio Santiago before her commissioning. The explosion caused considerable damage to the ship's computer and electronic equipment. On 14 December 1975, using the same techniques, Montoneros frogmen placed explosives on the yacht \"Itati\" in an attempt to kill the Commander-in-Chief of the Argentine navy, Admiral Emilio Massera. While Massera was not injured, the yacht was badly damaged by the explosives.\n1976.\nDuring February 1976, the Montoneros sent assistance to the hard-pressed \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Monte Ram\u00f3n Rosa Jim\u00e9nez\" fighting in Tucum\u00e1n province, in the form of a company of their own elite \"Jungle Troops\", while the ERP backed them up with another company of volunteers from C\u00f3rdoba. The Baltimore Sun reported at the time, \"\"In the jungle-covered mountains of Tucum\u00e1n, long known as \"Argentina's garden,\" Argentines are fighting Argentines in a Vietnam-style civil war. So far, the outcome is in doubt. But there is no doubt about the seriousness of the combat, which involves 2,000 or so leftist guerrillas and perhaps as many as 10,000 soldiers.\"\"\nIn January 1976, the son of retired Lieutenant-General Julio Alsogoray, Juan Alsogaray (El Hippie), copied from his father's safe a draft of \"Battle Order 24 March\" and passed it to the head of the Montoneros intelligence, Rodolfo Walsh, who informed the guerrilla leadership of the planned military coup. Private Sergio Tarnopolsky, serving in the Argentine Marine Corps in 1976, also passed on valuable information to Walsh regarding the tortures and killings of left-wing guerrillas taking place in ESMA. He was later that year made to disappear along with his wife Laura, father Hugo and mother Blanca and sister Betina in revenge for a bomb that he planted in the detention centre which failed to explode. The only survivor of the sequestration was his brother Daniel, who was not at home the day of the raid. \nOn 16 January 1976, a police officer was killed while trying to remove a bomb planted in a train in the suburb of Hurlingham in Buenos Aires.\nOn 26 January, urban guerrillas operating in the suburb of Barracas in Buenos Aires, shot a female police traffic officer (21-year-old Silvia Ester Rosboch de Campana) twice in her stomach around 7 AM as she left her place of residence that was Tom\u00e1s Liberti 1145 for work. The three individuals involved in her murder fled in a Peugeot 504 car. She died that day in the emergency ward at the Agudos Dr. Argerich General Hospital.\nOn 29 January, during a raid on the Bendix factory in the suburb of Munro in Buenos Aires, Montoneros shot and killed Alberto Olabarrieta and Jorge Sarlenga of the factory's management, and an off-duty policeman, 27 year-old Juan Carlos Garavaglio, who had tried to intervene.\nOn 2 February 1976, about fifty Montoneros attacked the Juan Vucetich Police Academy in the suburb of La Plata, in an attempt to destroy the patrol helicopters stationed there, but were repelled when the police cadets fought back and reinforcements arrived. On 13 February, the Argentine army scored a major success when the 14th Airborne Infantry Regiment of the 4th Airborne Infantry Brigade ambushed the 65-strong \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda Montoneros de Monte\" (Montoneros Jungle Company), in an action near the town of Cadillal in Tucum\u00e1n province. The 2nd Airborne Infantry Regiment of the same brigade, was also released from garrison duties in the city of C\u00f3rdoba after the ERP armed uprising that killed 5 policemen there in August 1975 and would achieve similar success against the ERP's \"Decididos de C\u00f3rdoba\" (Die-Hards of C\u00f3rdoba) company sent to rekindle the insurgency in Tucum\u00e1n province. In the week preceding the military coup, the Montoneros killed 13 policemen as part of their \"Third National Military Campaign\" that vowed to kill at least 3,000 policemen by the decade's end.\nThe ERP guerrillas and their supporting network of militants came under heavy attack in April 1976, and the Montoneros were forced to come to their assistance with money, weapons and safe houses. On 21 June, the labour relations manager of Swift (an American food processing company), Osvaldo Ra\u00fal Trinidad was shot and killed outside his home in the La Plata suburb of Buenos Aires after coming under fire from a carload of masked Peronist gunmen. On 1 July, a carload of Montoneros shot and killed Army Sergeant Ra\u00fal Godofredo Favale in the Ramos Mej\u00eda suburb of Buenos Aires. On the following day the Montoneros detonated a powerful bomb in the Argentine Federal Police building in Buenos Aires, killing 24 and injuring 66-100people. On 10 July 1976, policemen surrounded and entered a printing house in the San Andr\u00e9s suburb of Buenos Aires in an attempt to free Vicecomodore Roberto Mois\u00e9s Echegoyen from the Argentine air force, but the alerted urban guerrillas shot their hostage in the head, killing him. On 19 July, Montoneros killed Brigadier-General Carlos Omar Actis (tasked with overseeing the World Cup soccer championships in Argentina in 1978) in the suburb of Wilde in Buenos Aires. On 26 July, Montoneros guerrillas operating in the San Justo suburb of Buenos Aires shot and killed an off-duty policeman, Ram\u00f3n Emilio Reno in the presence of his 13-year-old brother while they stood looking at a magazine stand. The terrorists first asked Reno to confirm his name, then shot him in the back before finishing him off with a shot in the head. An Argentine army 1976 report entitled \"Informe Especial: Actividades OPM \"Montoneros\" a\u00f1o 1976\", gave the following surviving Montoneros totals for September 1976: 9,191 members with 991 guerrillas (391 officers and 600 other ranks), 2,700 armed militants and 5,500 sympathisers and active collaborators.\nOn 19 August 1976, Carlos Bergometti of the senior management of Fiat in C\u00f3rdoba, was intercepted on his way to work and killed by Montoneros armed with shotguns in a car. On 2 September, the urban guerrillas killed Lieutenant-Colonel Carlos Heriberto Astudillo in the suburb of Escobar in Buenos Aires. On 7 September, Daniel Andr\u00e9s Cash of the \"Banco de la Naci\u00f3n Argentina\" was killed on his way to work by a Montoneros guerrilla armed with a shotgun. On 12 September 1976, a Montoneros car bomb destroyed a bus carrying police officers in Rosario, killing nine policemen and a married couple, 56-year-old Oscar Walter Ledesma and 42-year-old Irene \u00c1ngela Dib. There were at least 50 wounded. Among the wounded, were 23 policemen travelling on board the bus. On 8 October 1976, First Lieutenant Fernando Cativa-Tolosa from the 601st Air Defence Regiment, after noticing a light-blue Fiat vehicle (believed to be in use by the urban guerrillas) parked in the suburb of Don Bosco in Buenos Aires, he got off his patrol vehicle while the remainder of his squad remained inside. The Army officer entered the Real Madrid Restaurant in order to visually identify possible suspects. But Ra\u00fal Del Monte and Igancio Su\u00e1rez, both Montoneros sitting at a table, drew their handguns first and although Cativa-Tolosa fired back he was shot six times and killed. His 2-man back-up team soon joined the gunfight but were also shot and wounded. On 17 October a Montoneros bomb blast in an Army Club cinema in downtown Buenos Aires killed 14 and wounded about 30 military officers and their relatives. On 9 November, 3 police officers were killed and 11 were wounded when a Montoneros bomb exploded at the police headquarters at La Plata during a meeting of the Buenos Aires police chiefs.\nOn 16 November 1976, about 40 Montoneros guerrillas stormed the police station at Arana, 30 miles south of Buenos Aires. Five policemen and one army captain were wounded in the battle with seventeen guerrillas reported killed in the initial assault and follow-up counterinsurgency operations that took place that day. On 15 December, another Montoneros bomb planted in a Defence Ministry movie hall killed at least 14 and injured 30 officers and their accompanying family members. On 29 December, urban guerrillas shot and killed Colonel Francisco Castellanos and wounded his driver, Private Alberto Guti\u00e9rrez, just a few blocks from the army officer's home in the suburb of Florida in Buenos Aires. The worst year of the insurgency, 1976, saw 156 army officers, NCOs, and conscripts, and police killed.\nBy the time Videla's military junta took power in March 1976, approximately five thousand prisoners were being held in various prisons around Argentina, some with connections and some just guilty by association. In all, 12,000 Argentines were detained during the military dictatorship and became known as the \"detenidos-desaparecidos\", but survived after international pressure forced the military authorities to release them. These prisoners were held throughout the years of the dictatorship, many of them never receiving trials, in prisons such as La Plata, Devoto, Rawson, and Caseros. Justice Minister Ricardo Gil Lavedra, who formed part of the 1985 tribunal judging the military crimes committed during the Dirty War would later go on record saying that \"I sincerely believe that the majority of the victims of the illegal repression were guerrilla militants\".\nTerence Roehrig, in \"The prosecution of former military leaders in newly democratic nations: the cases of Argentina, Greece, and South Korea \" (Pg 42, McFarland &amp; Company, 2001), estimates that of the disappeared in Argentina \"at least 10,000 were involved in various ways with the guerrillas\". The Montoneros later admitted losing 5,000 guerrillas killed, and the People's Revolutionary Army (Ej\u00e9rcito Revolucionario del Pueblo or ERP) admitted the loss of another 5,000 of their own combatants killed. Some 11,000 Argentines have applied for and received up to US$200,000 each as monetary compensation for the loss of loved ones during the military dictatorship. In late November 2012, it was reported that the government of Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner would approve monetary compensation for the families that lost loved ones in the Montoneros attack on the 29th Regiment barracks on 5 October 1975, the first of its kind for military families in Argentina.\nSpeaking of the Montoneros' numbers in 1975, stated: \"The political force the Montoneros represented, that is to say, those who were mobilized around the organized members of the group, can be measured by the participation in public actions. Given the fact that actions took place across the country, the total number of participants can be estimated at around one hundred and twenty thousand, counting sympathizers as well as organized and non-organized members.\" He estimated the number of active militants at ten thousands, including three thousand women.\nUnder Jorge Videla's junta.\nOn 24 March 1976, Isabel Per\u00f3n was ousted and a military junta installed, led by General Jorge Rafael Videla. On 4 April 1976, Montoneros assassinated a naval commander (Jos\u00e9 Guillermo Burgos) and a Chrysler executive (Jorge Ricardo Kenny) and ambushed and killed three policemen in a patrol car. On 26 April 1976, Montoneros guerrillas killed Colonel Abel H\u00e9ctor El\u00edas Cavagnaro outside his home in Tucum\u00e1n province. On 27 June 1976, Montoneros guerrillas operating in the city of Rosario ambushed and destroyed two police cars, killing three police officers During the first three months of the military government, more than 70 policemen were killed in leftist guerrilla attacks.On 11 August 1976, urban guerrillas dressed like police officers intercepted and killed army corporal Jorge Antonio Bulacio, with two shots to the head and set fire to his military lorry belonging to the 141st Headquarters Communications Battalion with a Molotov cocktail bomb. On 3 November 1976, a Chrysler executive, Carlos Roberto Souto, was killed in Buenos Aires by Montoneros.\nOn 4 January 1977, a female guerrilla (Ana Mar\u00eda Gonz\u00e1lez) from the Montoneros movement shot and killed Private Guillermo F\u00e9lix Dimitri of the 10th Mechanized Infantry Brigade while he was on roadblock duty outside the Chrysler factory in the San Justo suburb of Buenos Aires.\n On 27 January, a Montoneros bomb explodes outside a police station in the city of Rosario in Santa Fe Province, killing a policeman (Miguel Angel Bracamonte) and a 15-year-old girl (Mar\u00eda Leonor Berardi), an innocent bystander. On 28 January, a female Montoneros guerrilla (22-year-old Juana Silvia Charura) placed a bomb inside the 2nd Police Station in the suburb of Cuidadela, destroying the building and killing three policemen: Commissioner Carlos A. Ben\u00edtez, Sub-Commissioner Lorenzo Bonnani and Agent C\u00e9sar Landeria.\nOn 10 February, two police officers (Roque Alipio Far\u00edas and Ernesto Olivera) from an anti-explosives unit were fatally wounded trying to deactivate a bomb rigged to a motorbike in Rosario. On 15 February 1977, army corporal Osvaldo Ram\u00f3n R\u00edos was killed after his patrol came under fire from three Montoneros gun-men that had barricaded themselves inside a house in the Ezpeleta suburb of Buenos Aires.\nOn 17 February 1977 around 06.30 local time, Ireneo Garnica and Alejandro D\u00edaz, both railway workers who had refused to participate in a strike, were killed when Montoneros threw a bomb at them from a car in the suburb of Quilmes in Buenos Aires. On 19 March 1977, 45-year-old Sergeant Mart\u00edn A. Novau from the Federal Police was shot and killed while he was repairing a police car in a work shop in Buenos Aires.\nOn 23 May 1977, the urban guerrillas in Buenos Aires killed two police officers and a retired inspector as he entered his home.\nThe junta redoubled the Dirty War anti-guerrilla campaign. During 1977, in just Buenos Aires alone, 36 police were reported killed in actions involving the remaining urban guerrillas.\nOn 1 August 1978, a powerful bomb meant to kill Rear Admiral Armando Lambruschini (chairman of the Joint Chiefs) ripped through a nine-story apartment building, killing three civilians and trapping scores beneath the debris.\nOn 14 August 1977, Susana Leonor Siver and her partner Marcelo Carlos Reinhold, both Montoneros fighters, were kidnapped from Reinold's mother's home along with a friend by a fifteen-strong naval intelligence team and taken to the ESMA naval detention camp. After a brutal torture session in front of his wife, Marcelo was supposedly \"transferred\" to another camp but nothing was heard of him since. In February 1978, Susana was disappeared by the military authorities soon after giving birth to a blonde girl.\nAdriana and Gaspar Tasca, both identified as Montoneros, were taken into custody between 7 and 10 December 1977 and remain unaccounted for. On 16 December 1977, a Montoneros hit-squad operating in Buenos Aires, killed Andre Gasparoux, a top executive of the Peugeot Motor Company and seriously wounded his bodyguard. The seven MPM guerrillas involved, including two women, ambushed the 55-year-old French national in the suburb of Ranelagh after using a truck to block his route before spraying his car with a hail of submachinegun fire before making good their escape.\nOn 6 October 1978, Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rez Rojo and Patricia Roisinblit, both Montoneros members, were made to disappear. According to different sources, 8,000 to 30,000 people are estimated to have disappeared and died during the military dictatorship that ruled Argentina from 1976 to 1983. Some 12,000 of the missing known as the \"detenidos-desaparecidos\", survived detention and were later compensated for their ordeal. On the other hand, according to an NGO dedicated to defending \"victims of terrorism\", 1,355 people, including members of the police and military, were killed by Montoneros and other left-wing armed movements.\nThe commander of the Montoneros, Mario Firmenich, in a radio interview in late 2000 from Spain later stated that \"In a country that has experienced a civil war, everybody has blood on their hands.\"The junta relied on mass illegal arrests, torture, and executions without trial to stifle any political opposition. Some victims were thrown from transport planes into the Atlantic Ocean on what have become infamously known as death flights. Others had their corpses left on streets as intimidation of others. The Montoneros admit 5,000 of their guerrillas were killed.\nThe Montoneros were effectively finished off by 1977, although their \"Special Forces\" did fight on until 1981. The Montoneros tried to disrupt the World Cup Football Tournament being hosted in Argentina in 1978 by launching a number of bomb attacks. In late 1979, the Montoneros launched a \"strategic counteroffensive\" in Argentina, and the security forces killed more than one hundred of the exiled Montoneros, who had been sent back to Argentina after receiving special forces training in camps in the Middle East. On 14 June 1980, eight Argentine army officers (in cooperation with Peruvian military authorities), kidnapped Noem\u00ed Esther Giannetti de Molfino (an active Montoneros collaborator) along with eight Argentine nationals in the Peruvian capital and had them forcefully disappear. In October 2014, the presidency of Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner would rename a street in the city of Resistencia, Chaco Province in her memory. Her daughter Marcela along with her partner, Guillermo Amarilla, had both disappeared in 1979 while re-entering Argentina as part of the Montoneros \"strategic counteroffensive\".\nAmong the Montoneros killed in this operation were Luis Francisco Goya and Mar\u00eda Lourdes Mart\u00ednez Aranda who after crossing the Chilean border into Argentina were abducted in the city of Mendoza in 1980 and never seen again, with their son Jorge Guillermo being adopted and raised by an army NCO, Luis Alberto Tejada and his wife Raquel Quinteros. During the 1980s a captured Sandinista commando revealed that Montoneros \"Special Forces\" were training Sandinista frogmen and conducting gun runs across the Gulf of Fonseca to the Sandinista allies in El Salvador, FMLN guerrillas.\nIn 1977, the Montoneros regrouped in Cuba, where the bulk of the remaining group's money had been transferred as well. Exiled Montoneros expanded their networks to gradually diminish the influence of far-right Orthodox Peronism on the Peronist movement. According to Montoneros, Peronism can be reformed by simply \"correcting the reason\" of Isabel Per\u00f3n and Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Rega and committing to a platform centred around labour corporatism, Catholic socialism and anti-imperialism. Near the end of the 1970s, exiled Montoneros participated in the Nicaraguan Revolution and were allied with the Sandinista National Liberation Front, a fellow Christian socialist movement. Montoneros fought directly for the Sandinista revolution, and a special Montonero medical unit was founded by Sandinistas.\nDuring the Falklands War against Great Britain, the Argentine military conceived the aborted Operation Algeciras, a covert plan to support and convince some commando-trained Montoneros, by appealing to their patriotism, to sabotage British military facilities in Gibraltar. Argentina's defeat led to the fall of the junta, and Ra\u00fal Alfons\u00edn became president in December 1983, thus initiating the democratic transition.\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20611", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20611", "title": "Monophyly", "text": "Taxonomic concept\nIn biological cladistics for the classification of organisms, monophyly is the condition of a taxonomic grouping being a clade \u2013 that is, a grouping of organisms which meets these criteria:\nMonophyly is contrasted with paraphyly and polyphyly as shown in the second diagram. A \"paraphyletic\" grouping meets 1. but not 2., thus consisting of the descendants of a common ancestor, excepting one or more monophyletic subgroups. A \"polyphyletic\" grouping meets neither criterion, and instead serves to characterize convergent relationships of biological features rather than genetic relationships \u2013 for example, night-active primates, fruit trees, or aquatic insects. As such, these characteristic features of a polyphyletic grouping are not inherited from a common ancestor, but evolved independently.\nMonophyletic groups are typically characterised by shared derived characteristics (synapomorphies), which distinguish organisms in the clade from other organisms. An equivalent term is holophyly.\nThe word \"mono-phyly\" means \"one-tribe\" in Greek.\nThese definitions have taken some time to be accepted. When the cladistics school of thought became mainstream in the 1960s, several alternative definitions were in use. Indeed, taxonomists sometimes used terms without defining them, leading to confusion in the early literature, a confusion which persists.\nThe first diagram shows a phylogenetic tree with two monophyletic groups. The several groups and subgroups are particularly situated as branches of the tree to indicate ordered lineal relationships between all the organisms shown. Further, any group may (or may not) be considered a taxon by modern systematics, depending upon the selection of its members in relation to their common ancestor(s); see second and third diagrams.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"monophyly\", or \"monophyletic\", derives from the two Ancient Greek words (), meaning \"alone, only, unique\", and (), meaning \"genus, species\", and refers to the fact that a monophyletic group includes organisms (e.g., genera, species) consisting of all the descendants of a \"unique\" common ancestor.\nConversely, the term \"polyphyly\", or \"polyphyletic\", builds on the ancient Greek prefix (), meaning \"many, a lot of\", and refers to the fact that a polyphyletic group includes organisms arising from \"multiple\" ancestral sources. \nBy comparison, the term \"paraphyly\", or \"paraphyletic\", uses the ancient Greek prefix (), meaning \"beside, near\", and refers to the situation in which one or several monophyletic subgroups are \"left apart\" from all other descendants of a unique common ancestor. That is, a paraphyletic group is \"nearly\" monophyletic, hence the prefix \"\". \nDefinitions.\nOn the broadest scale, definitions fall into two groups.\nThe concepts of monophyly, paraphyly, and polyphyly have been used in deducing key genes for barcoding of diverse group of species.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20613", "revid": "50331862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20613", "title": "Morphine", "text": "Pain medication of the opiate family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMorphine, formerly known as morphium, is an opiate found naturally in opium, a dark brown resin produced by drying the latex of opium poppies (\"Papaver somniferum\"). It is mainly used as an analgesic (pain medication). There are multiple methods used to administer morphine: oral; sublingual; via inhalation; injection into a muscle, injection under the skin, or injection into the spinal cord area; transdermal; or via rectal suppository. It acts directly on the central nervous system (CNS) to induce analgesia and alter perception and emotional response to pain. Physical and psychological dependence and tolerance may develop with repeated administration. It can be taken for both acute pain and chronic pain and is frequently used for pain from myocardial infarction, kidney stones, and during labor. Its maximum effect is reached after about 20\u00a0minutes when administered intravenously and 60\u00a0minutes when administered by mouth, while the duration of its effect is 3\u20137\u00a0hours. Long-acting formulations of morphine are sold under the brand names MS Contin and Kadian, among others. Generic long-acting formulations are also available.\nCommon side effects of morphine include drowsiness, euphoria, nausea, dizziness, sweating, and constipation. Potentially serious side effects of morphine include decreased respiratory effort, vomiting, and low blood pressure. Morphine is highly addictive and prone to abuse. If one's dose is reduced after long-term use, opioid withdrawal symptoms may occur. Caution is advised for the use of morphine during pregnancy or breastfeeding, as it may affect the health of the baby.\nMorphine was first isolated in 1804 by German pharmacist Friedrich Sert\u00fcrner. This is believed to be the first isolation of a medicinal alkaloid from a plant. Merck began marketing it commercially in 1827. Morphine was more widely used after the invention of the hypodermic syringe in 1853\u20131855. Sert\u00fcrner originally named the substance \"morphium\", after the Greek god of dreams, Morpheus, as it has a tendency to cause sleep.\nThe primary source of morphine is isolation from poppy straw of the opium poppy. In 2013, approximately 523 tons of morphine were produced. Approximately 45 tons were used directly for pain, an increase of 400% over the last twenty years. Most use for this purpose was in the developed world. About 70% of morphine is used to make other opioids such as hydromorphone, oxymorphone, and heroin. It is a Schedule II drug in the United States, Class A in the United Kingdom, and Schedule I in Canada. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. In 2023, it was the 156th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 3million prescriptions. It is available as a generic medication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nPain.\nMorphine is used primarily to treat both acute and chronic severe pain. Its duration of analgesia is about three to seven hours. Side effects of nausea and constipation are rarely severe enough to warrant stopping treatment.\nIt is used for pain due to myocardial infarction and for labor pains. However, concerns exist that morphine may increase mortality in the event of non ST elevation myocardial infarction.\nMorphine has also traditionally been used in the treatment of acute pulmonary edema. However, a 2006 review found little evidence to support this practice.\nA 2016 Cochrane review concluded that morphine is effective in relieving cancer pain.\nShortness of breath.\nMorphine is beneficial in reducing the symptom of shortness of breath due to both cancer and non-cancer causes. In the setting of breathlessness at rest or on minimal exertion from conditions such as advanced cancer or end-stage cardiorespiratory diseases, regular, low-dose sustained-release morphine significantly reduces breathlessness safely, with its benefits maintained over time.\nOpioid use disorder.\nMorphine is used in a slow-release formulation for opiate substitution therapy (OST) in Austria, Germany, Bulgaria, Slovenia, and Canada for persons with opioid addiction who cannot tolerate either methadone or buprenorphine.\nContraindications.\nRelative contraindications to morphine include:\nAdverse effects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdverse effects of opioids\nConstipation.\nLike loperamide and other opioids, morphine acts on the myenteric plexus in the intestinal tract, reducing gut motility, and causing constipation. The gastrointestinal effects of morphine are mediated primarily by \u03bc-opioid receptors in the bowel. By inhibiting gastric emptying and reducing propulsive peristalsis of the intestine, morphine decreases the rate of intestinal transit. Reduction in gut secretion and increased intestinal fluid absorption also contribute to the constipating effect. Opioids also may act on the gut indirectly through tonic gut spasms after inhibition of nitric oxide generation. This effect was shown in animals when a nitric oxide precursor, L-arginine, reversed morphine-induced changes in gut motility.\nHormone imbalance.\nClinical studies consistently conclude that morphine, like other opioids, often causes hypogonadism and hormone imbalances in chronic users of both sexes. This side effect is dose-dependent and occurs in both therapeutic and recreational users. Morphine can interfere with menstruation by suppressing levels of luteinizing hormone. Multiple studies suggest the majority (perhaps as many as 90%) of chronic opioid users have opioid-induced hypogonadism. This effect may cause the increased likelihood of osteoporosis and bone fracture observed in chronic morphine users. Studies suggest the effect is temporary. As of 2013[ [update]], the effect of low-dose or acute use of morphine on the endocrine system is unclear.\nEffects on human performance.\nMost reviews conclude that opioids produce minimal impairment of human performance on tests of sensory, motor, or attentional abilities. However, recent studies have been able to show some impairments caused by morphine, which is not surprising, given that morphine is a central nervous system depressant. Morphine has resulted in impaired functioning on critical flicker frequency (a measure of overall CNS arousal) and impaired performance on the Maddox wing test (a measure of the deviation of the visual axes of the eyes). Few studies have investigated the effects of morphine on motor abilities; a high dose of morphine can impair finger tapping and the ability to maintain a low constant level of isometric force (i.e. fine motor control is impaired), though no studies have shown a correlation between morphine and gross motor abilities.\nIn terms of cognitive abilities, one study has shown that morphine may negatively impact anterograde and retrograde memory, but these effects are minimal and transient. Overall, it seems that acute doses of opioids in non-tolerant subjects produce minor effects in some sensory and motor abilities, and perhaps also in attention and cognition. The effects of morphine will likely be more pronounced in opioid-naive subjects than in chronic opioid users.\nIn chronic opioid users, such as those on Chronic Opioid Analgesic Therapy (COAT) for managing severe, chronic pain, behavioural testing has shown normal functioning on perception, cognition, coordination, and behaviour in most cases. One 2000 study analysed COAT patients to determine whether they were able to safely operate a motor vehicle. The findings from this study suggest that stable opioid use does not significantly impair abilities inherent in driving (this includes physical, cognitive, and perceptual skills). COAT patients showed rapid completion of tasks that require the speed of responding for successful performance (e.g., Rey Complex Figure Test) but made more errors than controls. COAT patients showed no deficits in visual-spatial perception and organization (as shown in the WAIS-R Block Design Test) but did show impaired immediate and short-term visual memory (as shown on the Rey Complex Figure Test\u00a0\u2013 Recall). These patients showed no impairments in higher-order cognitive abilities (i.e., planning). COAT patients appeared to have difficulty following instructions and showed a propensity toward impulsive behaviour, yet this did not reach statistical significance. It is important to note that this study reveals that COAT patients have no domain-specific deficits, which supports the notion that chronic opioid use has minor effects on psychomotor, cognitive, or neuropsychological functioning.\nReinforcement disorders.\nAddiction.\nMorphine is a highly addictive substance. Multiple studies, including one by \"The Lancet\", ranked morphine/heroin as the #1 most addictive substance, followed by cocaine at #2, nicotine #3, barbiturates at #4, and ethanol at #5. In controlled studies comparing the physiological and subjective effects of heroin and morphine in individuals formerly addicted to opiates, subjects showed no preference for one drug over the other. Equipotent, injected doses had comparable action courses, with heroin crossing the blood\u2013brain barrier slightly quicker. No difference in subjects' self-rated feelings of euphoria, ambition, nervousness, relaxation, or drowsiness. Short-term addiction studies by the same researchers demonstrated that tolerance developed at a similar rate to both heroin and morphine. When compared to the opioids hydromorphone, fentanyl, oxycodone, and pethidine, former addicts showed a strong preference for heroin and morphine, suggesting that heroin and morphine are particularly susceptible to abuse and addiction. Morphine and heroin also produced higher rates of euphoria and other positive subjective effects when compared to these other opioids. The choice of heroin and morphine over other opioids by former drug addicts may also be because heroin is an ester of morphine and morphine prodrug, essentially meaning they are identical drugs \"in vivo\". Heroin is converted to morphine before binding to the opioid receptors in the brain and spinal cord, where morphine causes subjective effects, which is what the addicted individuals are seeking.\nTolerance.\nSeveral hypotheses are given about how tolerance develops, including opioid receptor phosphorylation (which would change the receptor conformation), functional decoupling of receptors from G-proteins (leading to receptor desensitization), \u03bc-opioid receptor internalization or receptor down-regulation (reducing the number of available receptors for morphine to act on), and upregulation of the cAMP pathway (a counterregulatory mechanism to opioid effects) (For a review of these processes, see Koch and Hollt).\nDependence and withdrawal.\nCessation of dosing with morphine creates the prototypical opioid withdrawal syndrome, which, unlike that of barbiturates, benzodiazepines, alcohol, or sedative-hypnotics, is not fatal by itself in otherwise healthy people.\nAcute morphine withdrawal, along with that of any other opioid, proceeds through a number of stages. Other opioids differ in the intensity and length of each, and weak opioids and mixed agonist-antagonists may have acute withdrawal syndromes that do not reach the highest level. As commonly cited, they are:\nIn advanced stages of withdrawal, ultrasonographic evidence of pancreatitis has been demonstrated in some patients and is presumably attributed to spasm of the pancreatic sphincter of Oddi.\nThe withdrawal symptoms associated with morphine addiction are usually experienced shortly before the time of the next scheduled dose, sometimes within as early as a few hours (usually 6\u00a0h to 12\u00a0h) after the last administration. Early symptoms include watery eyes, insomnia, diarrhea, runny nose, yawning, dysphoria, sweating, and, in some cases, a strong drug craving. Severe headache, restlessness, irritability, loss of appetite, body aches, severe abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, tremors, and even stronger and more intense drug craving appear as the syndrome progresses. Severe depression and vomiting are common. During the acute withdrawal period, systolic and diastolic blood pressures increase, usually beyond premorphine levels, and heart rate increases, which have potential to cause a heart attack, blood clot, or stroke.\nChills or cold flashes with goose bumps alternating with flushing (hot flashes), kicking movements of the legs, and excessive sweating are also characteristic symptoms. Severe pains in the bones and muscles of the back and extremities occur, as do muscle spasms. At any point during this process, a suitable narcotic can be administered that will dramatically reverse the withdrawal symptoms. Major withdrawal symptoms peak between 48\u00a0h and 96\u00a0h after the last dose and subside after about 8 to 12 days. Sudden discontinuation of morphine by heavily dependent users who are in poor health is rarely fatal. Morphine withdrawal is considered less dangerous than alcohol, barbiturate, or benzodiazepine withdrawal.\nThe psychological dependence associated with morphine addiction is complex and protracted. Long after the physical need for morphine has passed, addicts will usually continue to think and talk about the use of morphine (or other drugs) and feel strange or overwhelmed coping with daily activities without being under the influence of morphine. Psychological withdrawal from morphine is usually a long and painful process. Addicts often experience severe depression, anxiety, insomnia, mood swings, forgetfulness, low self-esteem, confusion, paranoia, and other psychological problems. Without intervention, the syndrome will run its course, and most of the overt physical symptoms will disappear within 7 to 10 days including psychological dependence. A high probability of relapse exists after morphine withdrawal when neither the physical environment nor the behavioral motivators that contributed to the abuse have been altered. Testimony of morphine's addictive and reinforcing nature is its relapse rate. Users of morphine have one of the highest relapse rates among all drug users, ranging up to 98% in the estimation of some medical experts.\nToxicity.\nA large overdose can cause asphyxia and death by respiratory depression if the person does not receive medical attention immediately. Overdose treatment includes the administration of naloxone. The latter completely reverses morphine's effects but may result in the immediate onset of withdrawal in opiate-addicted subjects. Multiple doses may be needed as the duration of action of morphine is longer than that of naloxone.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nDue to its long history and established use as a pain medication, this compound has become the benchmark to which all other opioids are compared. It interacts predominantly with the \u03bc\u2013\u03b4-opioid (Mu-Delta) receptor heteromer. The \u03bc-binding sites are discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus caudatus, putamen, and certain cortical areas. They are also found on the terminal axons of primary afferents within laminae I and II (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.\nMorphine is a phenanthrene opioid receptor agonist\u00a0\u2013 its main effect is binding to and activating the \u03bc-opioid receptor (MOR) in the central nervous system. Its intrinsic activity at the MOR is heavily dependent on the assay and tissue being tested; in some situations it is a full agonist while in others it can be a partial agonist or even antagonist. In clinical settings, morphine exerts its principal pharmacological effect on the central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. Its primary actions of therapeutic value are analgesia and sedation. Activation of the MOR is associated with analgesia, sedation, euphoria, physical dependence, and respiratory depression. Morphine is also a \u03ba-opioid receptor (KOR) and \u03b4-opioid receptor (DOR) agonist. Activation of the KOR is associated with spinal analgesia, miosis (pinpoint pupils), and psychotomimetic effects. The DOR is thought to play a role in analgesia. Although morphine does not bind to the \u03c3 receptor, it has been shown that \u03c3 receptor agonists, such as (+)-pentazocine, inhibit morphine analgesia, and \u03c3 receptor antagonists enhance morphine analgesia, suggesting downstream involvement of the \u03c3 receptor in the actions of morphine.\nThe effects of morphine can be countered with opioid receptor antagonists such as naloxone and naltrexone; the development of tolerance to morphine may be inhibited by NMDA receptor antagonists such as ketamine, dextromethorphan, and memantine. The rotation of morphine with chemically dissimilar opioids in the long-term treatment of pain will slow down the growth of tolerance in the longer run, particularly agents known to have significantly incomplete cross-tolerance with morphine such as levorphanol, ketobemidone, piritramide, and methadone and its derivatives; all of these drugs also have NMDA antagonist properties. It is believed that the strong opioid with the most incomplete cross-tolerance with morphine is either methadone or dextromoramide.\nAnalgesia creation.\nMorphine creates analgesia through the activation of a specific group of neurons in the rostral ventromedial medulla, called the \"morphine ensemble.\" This ensemble includes glutamatergic neurons that project to the spinal cord, known as RVMBDNF neurons. These neurons connect to inhibitory neurons in the spinal cord, called SCGal neurons, which release the neurotransmitter GABA and the neuropeptide galanin. The inhibition of SCGal neurons is crucial for morphine's pain-relieving effects. Additionally, the neurotrophic factor BDNF, produced within the RVMBDNF neurons, is required for morphine's action. Increasing BDNF levels enhances morphine's analgesic effects, even at lower doses.\nGene expression.\nStudies have shown that morphine can alter the expression of several genes. A single injection of morphine has been shown to alter the expression of two major groups of genes, for proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration and for cytoskeleton-related proteins.\nEffects on the immune system.\nMorphine has long been known to act on receptors expressed in cells of the central nervous system resulting in pain relief and analgesia. In the 1970s and '80s, evidence suggesting that people addicted to opioids show an increased risk of infection (such as increased pneumonia, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS) led scientists to believe that morphine may also affect the immune system. This possibility increased interest in the effect of chronic morphine use on the immune system.\nThe first step in determining that morphine may affect the immune system was to establish that the opiate receptors known to be expressed on cells of the central nervous system are also expressed on cells of the immune system. One study successfully showed that dendritic cells, part of the innate immune system, display opiate receptors. Dendritic cells are responsible for producing cytokines, which are the tools for communication in the immune system. This same study showed that dendritic cells chronically treated with morphine during their differentiation produce more interleukin-12 (IL-12), a cytokine responsible for promoting the proliferation, growth, and differentiation of T-cells (another cell of the adaptive immune system) and less interleukin-10 (IL-10), a cytokine responsible for promoting a B-cell immune response (B cells produce antibodies to fight off infection).\nThis regulation of cytokines appears to occur via the p38 MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinase)-dependent pathway. Usually, the p38 within the dendritic cell expresses TLR 4 (toll-like receptor 4), which is activated through the ligand LPS (lipopolysaccharide). This causes the p38 MAPK to be phosphorylated. This phosphorylation activates the p38 MAPK to begin producing IL-10 and IL-12. When the dendritic cells are chronically exposed to morphine during their differentiation process and then treated with LPS, the production of cytokines is different. Once treated with morphine, the p38 MAPK does not produce IL-10, instead favoring the production of IL-12. The exact mechanism through which the production of one cytokine is increased in favor over another is not known. Most likely, the morphine causes increased phosphorylation of the p38 MAPK. Transcriptional level interactions between IL-10 and IL-12 may further increase the production of IL-12 once IL-10 is not being produced. This increased production of IL-12 causes increased T-cell immune response.\nFurther studies on the effects of morphine on the immune system have shown that morphine influences the production of neutrophils and other cytokines. Since cytokines are produced as part of the immediate immunological response (inflammation), it has been suggested that they may also influence pain. In this way, cytokines may be a logical target for analgesic development. Recently, one study has used an animal model (hind-paw incision) to observe the effects of morphine administration on the acute immunological response. Following the hind-paw incision, pain thresholds and cytokine production were measured. Normally, cytokine production in and around the wounded area increases to fight infection and control healing (and, possibly, to control pain), but pre-incisional morphine administration (0.1\u00a0mg/kg to 10.0\u00a0mg/kg) reduced the number of cytokines found around the wound in a dose-dependent manner. The authors suggest that morphine administration in the acute post-injury period may reduce resistance to infection and may impair the healing of the wound.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption and metabolism.\nMorphine can be taken orally, sublingually, bucally, rectally, subcutaneously, intranasally, intravenously, intrathecally or epidurally and inhaled via a nebulizer. As a recreational drug, it is becoming more common to inhale (\"Chasing the Dragon\"), but, for medical purposes, intravenous (IV) injection is the most common method of administration. Morphine is subject to extensive first-pass metabolism (a large proportion is broken down in the liver), so, if taken orally, only 40% to 50% of the dose reaches the central nervous system. Resultant plasma levels after subcutaneous (SC), intramuscular (IM), and IV injection are all comparable. After IM or SC injections, morphine plasma levels peak in approximately 20\u00a0min, and, after oral administration, levels peak in approximately 30\u00a0min. Morphine is metabolised primarily in the liver and approximately 87% of a dose of morphine is excreted in the urine within 72\u00a0h of administration. Morphine is metabolized primarily into morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G) and morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G) via glucuronidation by phase II metabolism enzyme UDP-glucuronosyl transferase-2B7 (UGT2B7). About 60% of morphine is converted to M3G, and 6% to 10% is converted to M6G. Not only does the metabolism occur in the liver but it may also take place in the brain and the kidneys. M3G does not undergo opioid receptor binding and has no analgesic effect. M6G binds to \u03bc-receptors and is half as potent an analgesic as morphine in humans. Morphine may also be metabolized into small amounts of normorphine, codeine, and hydromorphone. Metabolism rate is determined by gender, age, diet, genetic makeup, disease state (if any), and use of other medications. The elimination half-life of morphine is approximately 120\u00a0min, though there may be slight differences between men and women. Morphine can be stored in fat, and, thus, can be detectable even after death. Morphine can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier, but, because of poor lipid solubility, protein binding, rapid conjugation with glucuronic acid, and ionization, it does not cross easily. Heroin, which is derived from morphine, crosses the blood-brain barrier more easily, making it more potent.\nExtended-release.\nThere are extended-release formulations of orally administered morphine whose effect lasts longer, which can be given once per day. Brand names for this formulation of morphine include Avinza, Kadian, MS Contin, Dolcontin, and DepoDur. For constant pain, the relieving effect of extended-release morphine given once (for Kadian) or twice (for MS Contin) every 24 hours is roughly the same as multiple administrations of \"immediate release\" (or \"regular\") morphine. Extended-release morphine can be administered together with \"rescue doses\" of immediate-release morphine as needed in case of breakthrough pain, each generally consisting of 5% to 15% of the 24-hour extended-release dosage.\nDetection in body fluids.\nMorphine and its major metabolites, morphine-3-glucuronide, and morphine-6-glucuronide, can be detected in blood, plasma, hair, and urine using an immunoassay. Chromatography can be used to test for each of these substances individually. Some testing procedures hydrolyze metabolic products into morphine before the immunoassay, which must be considered when comparing morphine levels in separately published results. Morphine can also be isolated from whole blood samples by solid phase extraction (SPE) and detected using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS).\nIngestion of codeine or food containing poppy seeds can cause false positives.\nA 1999 review estimated that relatively low doses of heroin (which metabolizes immediately into morphine) are detectable by standard urine tests for 1\u20131.5 days after use. A 2009 review determined that, when the analyte is morphine and the limit of detection is 1ng/ml, a 20mg intravenous (IV) dose of morphine is detectable for 12\u201324 hours. A limit of detection of 0.6ng/ml had similar results.\nChirality and biological activity.\nMorphine is a pentacyclic 3\u00b0amine (alkaloid) with 5 stereogenic centers and exists in 32 stereoisomeric forms. But the desired analgesic activity resides exclusively in the natural product, the (-)-enantiomer with the configuration (5R,6S,9R,13S,14R).\nNatural occurrence.\nMorphine is the most abundant opiate found in opium, the dried latex extracted by shallowly scoring the unripe seedpods of the \"Papaver somniferum\" poppy. Morphine is generally 8\u201314% of the dry weight of opium. Przemko and Norman cultivars of the opium poppy, are used to produce two other alkaloids, thebaine and oripavine, which are used in the manufacture of semi-synthetic and synthetic opioids like oxycodone and etorphine. \"P. bracteatum\" does not contain morphine or codeine, or other narcotic phenanthrene-type, alkaloids. This species is rather a source of thebaine. Occurrence of morphine in other Papaverales and Papaveraceae, as well as in some species of hops and mulberry trees has not been confirmed. Morphine is produced most predominantly early in the life cycle of the plant. Past the optimum point for extraction various processes in the plant produce codeine, thebaine, and in some cases negligible amounts of hydromorphone, dihydromorphine, dihydrocodeine, tetrahydro-thebaine, and hydrocodone (these compounds are rather synthesized from thebaine and oripavine).\nIn the brains of mammals, morphine is detectable in trace steady-state concentrations. The human body also produces endorphins, which are chemically related endogenous opioid peptides that function as neuropeptides and have similar effects to morphine.\nHuman biosynthesis.\nMorphine is an endogenous opioid in humans. Various human cells are capable of synthesizing and releasing it, including white blood cells. The primary biosynthetic pathway for morphine in humans consists of\nL-tyrosine \u2192 \"para\"-tyramine or L-DOPA \u2192 Dopamine\nL-tyrosine \u2192 L-DOPA \u2192 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL)\nDopamine + DOPAL \u2192 (\"S\")-norlaudanosoline \u2192\u2192\u2192 (\"S\")-reticuline \u2192 1,2-dehydroreticulinium \u2192 (\"R\")-reticuline \u2192 salutaridine \u2192 salutaridinol \u2192 thebaine \u2192 neopinone \u2192 codeinone \u2192 codeine \u2192 morphine\nThe intermediate (\"S\")-norlaudanosoline (also known as tetrahydropapaveroline) is synthesized through the addition of DOPAL and dopamine. CYP2D6, a cytochrome P450 isoenzyme is involved in two steps along the biosynthetic pathway, catalyzing both the biosynthesis of dopamine from tyramine and of morphine from codeine.\nUrinary concentrations of endogenous codeine and morphine have been found to significantly increase in individuals taking L-DOPA for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.\nBiosynthesis in the opium poppy.\nBiosynthesis of morphine in the opium poppy begins with two tyrosine derivatives, dopamine and 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde. Condensation of these precursors yields the primary intermediate higenamine (norcoclaurine). Subsequent action of four enzymes yields the tetrahydroisoquinoline reticuline, which is converted into salutaridine, thebaine, and oripavine. The enzymes involved in this process are the salutaridine synthase, salutaridine:NADPH 7-oxidoreductase and the codeinone reductase. Researchers are attempting to reproduce the biosynthetic pathway that produces morphine in genetically engineered yeast. In June 2015 the \"S\"-reticuline could be produced from sugar and \"R\"-reticuline could be converted to morphine, but the intermediate reaction could not be performed. In August 2015 the first complete synthesis of thebaine and hydrocodone in yeast was reported, but the process would need to be 100,000 times more productive to be suitable for commercial use.\nChemistry.\nElements of the morphine structure have been used to create completely synthetic drugs such as the morphinan family (levorphanol, dextromethorphan and others) and other groups that have multiple members with morphine-like qualities. The modification of morphine and the aforementioned synthetics has also given rise to non-narcotic drugs with other uses such as emetics, stimulants, antitussives, anticholinergics, muscle relaxants, local anaesthetics, general anaesthetics, and others. Morphine-derived agonist\u2013antagonist drugs have also been developed.\nStructure description.\nMorphine is a benzylisoquinoline alkaloid with two additional ring closures. As Jack DeRuiter of the Department of Drug Discovery and Development (formerly, Pharmacal Sciences), Harrison School of Pharmacy, Auburn University stated in his Fall 2000 course notes for that earlier department's \"Principles of Drug Action 2\" course, \"Examination of the morphine molecule reveals the following structural features important to its pharmacological profile...&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMorphine and most of its derivatives do not exhibit optical isomerism, although some more distant relatives like the morphinan series (levorphanol, dextrorphan, and the racemic parent chemical racemorphan) do, and as noted above stereoselectivity in vivo is an important issue.\nUses and derivatives.\nMost of the licit morphine produced is used to make codeine by methylation. It is also a precursor for a number of drugs including heroin (3,6-diacetylmorphine), hydromorphone (dihydromorphinone), and oxymorphone (14-hydroxydihydromorphinone). Most semi-synthetic opioids, both of the morphine and codeine subgroups, are created by modifying one or more of the following:\nMany morphine derivatives can also be manufactured using thebaine or codeine as a starting material. Replacement of the \"N\"-methyl group of morphine with an \"N\"-phenylethyl group results in a product that is 18 times more powerful than morphine in its opiate agonist potency. Combining this modification with the replacement of the 6-hydroxyl with a 6-methylene group produces a compound some 1,443 times more potent than morphine, stronger than the Bentley compounds such as etorphine (M99, the Immobilon tranquilliser dart) by some measures. Closely related to morphine are the opioids morphine-\"N\"-oxide (genomorphine), which is a pharmaceutical that is no longer in common use; and pseudomorphine, an alkaloid that exists in opium, form as degradation products of morphine.\nAs a result of the extensive study and use of this molecule, more than 250 morphine derivatives (also counting codeine and related drugs) have been developed since the last quarter of the 19th century. These drugs range from 25% the analgesic strength of codeine (or slightly more than 2% of the strength of morphine) to several thousand times the strength of morphine, to powerful opioid antagonists, including naloxone (Narcan), naltrexone (Trexan), diprenorphine (M5050, the reversing agent for the Immobilon dart) and nalorphine (Nalline). Some opioid agonist-antagonists, partial agonists, and inverse agonists are also derived from morphine. The receptor-activation profile of the semi-synthetic morphine derivatives varies widely and some, like apomorphine are devoid of narcotic effects.\nChemical salts of Morphine.\nBoth morphine and its hydrated form are sparingly soluble in water. For this reason, pharmaceutical companies produce sulfate and hydrochloride salts of the drug, both of which are over 300 times more water-soluble than their parent molecule. Whereas the pH of a saturated morphine hydrate solution is 8.5, the salts are acidic. Since they derive from a strong acid but weak base, they are both at about pH = 5; as a consequence, the morphine salts are mixed with small amounts of NaOH to make them suitable for injection.\nMany salts of morphine are used, with the most common in current clinical use being the hydrochloride, sulfate, tartrate, and citrate; less commonly methobromide, hydrobromide, hydroiodide, lactate, chloride, and bitartrate and the others listed below. Morphine diacetate (heroin) is not a salt, but rather a further derivative, see above.\nMorphine meconate is a major form of the alkaloid in the poppy, as is morphine pectinate, nitrate, sulfate, and some others. Like codeine, dihydrocodeine and other (especially older) opiates, morphine has been used as the salicylate salt by some suppliers and can be easily compounded, imparting the therapeutic advantage of both the opioid and the NSAID; multiple barbiturate salts of morphine were also used in the past, as was/is morphine valerate, the salt of the acid being the active principle of valerian. Calcium morphenate is the intermediate in various latex and poppy-straw methods of morphine production, more rarely sodium morphenate takes its place. Morphine ascorbate and other salts such as the tannate, citrate, and acetate, phosphate, valerate and others may be present in poppy tea depending on the method of preparation.\nThe salts listed by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration for reporting purposes, in addition to a few others, are as follows:\nProduction.\nIn the opium poppy, the alkaloids are bound to meconic acid. The method is to extract from the crushed plant with diluted sulfuric acid, which is a stronger acid than meconic acid, but not so strong to react with alkaloid molecules. The extraction is performed in multiple steps (one amount of crushed plant is extracted at least six to ten times, so practically every alkaloid goes into the solution). From the solution obtained at the last extraction step, the alkaloids are precipitated by either ammonium hydroxide or sodium carbonate. The last step is purifying and separating morphine from other opium alkaloids. The somewhat similar Gregory process was developed in the United Kingdom during the Second World War, which begins with stewing the entire plant, in most cases save the roots and leaves, in plain or mildly acidified water, then proceeding through steps of concentration, extraction, and purification of alkaloids. Other methods of processing \"poppy straw\" (i.e., dried pods and stalks) use steam, one or more of several types of alcohol, or other organic solvents.\nThe poppy straw methods predominate in Continental Europe and the British Commonwealth, with the latex method in most common use in India. The latex method can involve either vertical or horizontal slicing of the unripe pods with a two-to five-bladed knife with a guard developed specifically for this purpose to the depth of a fraction of a millimetre and scoring of the pods can be done up to five times. An alternative latex method sometimes used in China in the past is to cut off the poppy heads, run a large needle through them, and collect the dried latex 24 to 48 hours later.\nIn India, opium harvested by licensed poppy farmers is dehydrated to uniform levels of hydration at government processing centers and then sold to pharmaceutical companies that extract morphine from the opium. However, in Turkey and Tasmania, morphine is obtained by harvesting and processing the fully mature dry seed pods with attached stalks, called \"poppy straw\". In Turkey, a water extraction process is used, while in Tasmania, a solvent extraction process is used.\nOpium poppy contains at least 50 different alkaloids, but most of them are of low concentration. Morphine is the principal alkaloid in raw opium and constitutes roughly 8\u201319% of opium by dry weight (depending on growing conditions). Some purpose-developed strains of poppy now produce opium that is up to 26% morphine by weight. A rough rule of thumb to determine the morphine content of pulverised dried poppy straw is to divide the percentage expected for the strain or crop via the latex method by eight or an empirically determined factor, which is often in the range of 5 to 15. The Norman strain of \"P. somniferum\", also developed in Tasmania, produces down to 0.04% morphine but with much higher amounts of thebaine and oripavine, which can be used to synthesise semi-synthetic opioids as well as other drugs like stimulants, emetics, opioid antagonists, anticholinergics, and smooth-muscle agents.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, Hungary supplied nearly 60% of Europe's total medication-purpose morphine production. To this day, poppy farming is legal in Hungary, but poppy farms are limited by law to . It is also legal to sell dried poppies in flower shops for use in floral arrangements.\nIt was announced in 1973 that a team at the National Institutes of Health in the United States had developed a method for total synthesis of morphine, codeine, and thebaine using coal tar as a starting material. A shortage in codeine-hydrocodone class cough suppressants (all of which can be made from morphine in one or more steps, as well as from codeine or thebaine) was the initial reason for the research.\nMost morphine produced for pharmaceutical use around the world is converted into codeine as the concentration of the latter in both raw opium and poppy straw is much lower than that of morphine; in most countries, the usage of codeine (both as end-product and precursor) is at least equal or greater than that of morphine on a weight basis.\nChemical synthesis.\nThe first morphine total synthesis, devised by Marshall D. Gates, Jr. in 1952, remains a widely used example of total synthesis. Several other syntheses were reported, notably by the research groups of Rice, Evans, Fuchs, Parker, Overman, Mulzer-Trauner, White, Taber, Trost, Fukuyama, Guillou, and Stork. Because of the stereochemical complexity and consequent synthetic challenge presented by this polycyclic structure, Michael Freemantle has expressed the view that it is \"highly unlikely\" that a chemical synthesis will ever be cost-effective such that it could compete with the cost of producing morphine from the opium poppy.\nGMO synthesis.\nResearch.\nThebaine has been produced by GMO \"E. coli\".\nPrecursor to other opioids.\nPharmaceutical.\nMorphine is a precursor in the manufacture of several opioids such as dihydromorphine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone as well as codeine, which itself has a large family of semi-synthetic derivatives.\nIllicit.\nIllicit morphine is produced, though rarely, from codeine found in over-the-counter cough and pain medicines. Another illicit source is morphine extracted from extended-release morphine products. Chemical reactions can then be used to convert morphine, dihydromorphine, and hydrocodone into heroin or other opioids [e.g., diacetyldihydromorphine (Paralaudin), and thebacon]. Other clandestine conversions\u2014of morphine, into ketones of the hydromorphone class, or other derivatives like dihydromorphine (Paramorfan), desomorphine (Permonid), metopon, etc., and of codeine into hydrocodone (Dicodid), dihydrocodeine (Paracodin), etc. \u2014require greater expertise, and types and quantities of chemicals and equipment that are more difficult to source, and so are more rarely used, illicitly (but cases have been recorded).\nHistory.\nThe earliest known reference to morphine can be traced back to Theophrastus in the 3rd century BC, however, possible references to morphine may go as far back as 2100 BC as Sumerian clay tablets which records lists of medical prescriptions including opium-based cures.\nAn opium-based elixir has been ascribed to alchemists of Byzantine times, but the specific formula was lost during the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople (Istanbul). Around 1522, Paracelsus made reference to an opium-based elixir that he called \"laudanum\" from the Latin word \"laud\u0101re\", meaning \"to praise\". He described it as a potent painkiller but recommended that it be used sparingly. The recipe given differs substantially from that of modern-day laudanum.\nMorphine was discovered as the first active alkaloid extracted from the opium poppy plant in December 1804 in Paderborn by German pharmacist Friedrich Sert\u00fcrner. In 1817, Sert\u00fcrner reported experiments in which he administered morphine to himself, three young boys, three dogs, and a mouse; all four people almost died. Sert\u00fcrner originally named the substance \"morphium\" after the Greek god of dreams, Morpheus, as it has a tendency to cause sleep. Sert\u00fcrner's morphium was six times stronger than opium. He hypothesized that, because lower doses of the drug were needed, it would be less addictive. However, Sert\u00fcrner became addicted to the drug, warning that \"I consider it my duty to attract attention to the terrible effects of this new substance I called morphium in order that calamity may be averted.\"\nThe drug was first marketed to the general public by Sert\u00fcrner and Company in 1817 as a pain medication, and also as a treatment for opium and alcohol addiction. It was first used as a poison in 1822 when Edme Castaing of France was convicted of murdering a patient. Commercial production began in Darmstadt, Germany, in 1827 by the pharmacy that became the pharmaceutical company Merck, with morphine sales being a large part of their early growth. In the 1850s, Alexander Wood reported that he had injected morphine into his wife Rebecca as an experiment; the myth goes that this killed her because of respiratory depression, but she outlived her husband by ten years.\nLater it was found that morphine was more addictive than either alcohol or opium, and its extensive use during the American Civil War allegedly resulted in over 400,000 people with the \"soldier's disease\" of morphine addiction. This idea has been a subject of controversy, as there have been suggestions that such a disease was in fact a fabrication; the first documented use of the phrase \"soldier's disease\" was in 1915.\nDiacetylmorphine (better known as heroin) was synthesized from morphine in 1874 and brought to market by Bayer in 1898. Heroin is approximately 1.5 to 2 times more potent than morphine weight for weight. Due to the lipid solubility of diacetylmorphine, it can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier faster than morphine, subsequently increasing the reinforcing component of addiction. Using a variety of subjective and objective measures, one study estimated the relative potency of heroin to morphine administered intravenously to post-addicts to be 1.80\u20132.66\u00a0mg of morphine sulfate to 1\u00a0mg of diamorphine hydrochloride (heroin).\nMorphine became a controlled substance in the US under the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914, and possession without a prescription in the US is a criminal offense.\nMorphine was the most commonly abused narcotic analgesic in the world until heroin was synthesized and came into use. In general, until the synthesis of dihydromorphine (c.\u20091900), the dihydromorphinone class of opioids (1920s), and oxycodone (1916) and similar drugs, there were no other drugs in the same efficacy range as opium, morphine, and heroin, with synthetics still several years away (pethidine was invented in Germany in 1937) and opioid agonists among the semi-synthetics were analogues and derivatives of codeine such as dihydrocodeine (Paracodin), ethylmorphine (Dionine), and benzylmorphine (Peronine). Even today, morphine is the most sought-after prescription narcotic by heroin addicts when heroin is scarce, all other things being equal; local conditions and user preference may cause hydromorphone, oxymorphone, high-dose oxycodone, or methadone as well as dextromoramide in specific instances such as 1970s Australia, to top that particular list. The stop-gap drugs used by the largest absolute number of heroin addicts is probably codeine, with significant use also of dihydrocodeine, poppy straw derivatives like poppy pod and poppy seed tea, propoxyphene, and tramadol.\nThe structural formula of morphine was determined by 1925 by Robert Robinson. At least three methods of total synthesis of morphine from starting materials such as coal tar and petroleum distillates have been patented, the first of which was announced in 1952, by Marshall D. Gates, Jr. at the University of Rochester. Still, the vast majority of morphine is derived from the opium poppy by either the traditional method of gathering latex from the scored, unripe pods of the poppy, or processes using poppy straw, the dried pods and stems of the plant, the most widespread of which was invented in Hungary in 1925 and announced in 1930 by Hungarian pharmacologist J\u00e1nos Kabay.\nIn 2003, there was a discovery of endogenous morphine occurring naturally in the human body. Thirty years of speculation were made on this subject because there was a receptor that, it appeared, reacted only to morphine: the \u03bc3-opioid receptor in human tissue. Human cells that form in reaction to cancerous neuroblastoma cells have been found to contain trace amounts of endogenous morphine.\nSociety and culture.\nNon-medical use.\nThe euphoria, comprehensive alleviation of distress and therefore all aspects of suffering, promotion of sociability and empathy, \"body high\", and anxiolysis provided by narcotic drugs including opioids can cause the use of high doses in the absence of pain for a protracted period, which can impart a craving for the drug in the user. As the prototype of the entire opioid class of drugs, morphine has properties that may lead to its misuse. Morphine addiction is the model upon which the current perception of addiction is based.\nAnimal and human studies and clinical experience back up the contention that morphine is one of the most euphoric drugs known, and via all but the IV route heroin and morphine cannot be distinguished according to studies because heroin is a prodrug for the delivery of systemic morphine. Chemical changes to the morphine molecule yield other euphorigenics such as dihydromorphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid, Hydal), and oxymorphone (Numorphan, Opana), as well as the latter three's methylated equivalents dihydrocodeine, hydrocodone, and oxycodone, respectively; in addition to heroin, there are dipropanoylmorphine, diacetyldihydromorphine, and other members of the 3,6 morphine diester category like nicomorphine and other similar semi-synthetic opiates like desomorphine, hydromorphinol, etc. used clinically in a number of countries of the world but also produced illicitly in rare instances.\nIn general, non-medical use of morphine entails taking more than prescribed or outside of medical supervision, injecting oral formulations, mixing it with unapproved potentiators such as alcohol, cocaine, and the like, or defeating the extended-release mechanism by chewing the tablets or turning into a powder for snorting or preparing injectables. The latter method can be as time-consuming and involved as traditional methods of smoking opium. This and the fact that the liver destroys a large percentage of the drug on the first pass impacts the demand side of the equation for clandestine re-sellers, as some customers are not needle users and may have been disappointed with ingesting the drug orally. As morphine is generally as hard or harder to divert than oxycodone in a lot of cases, morphine in any form is uncommon on the street, although ampoules and phials of morphine injection, pure pharmaceutical morphine powder, and soluble multi-purpose tablets are popular where available.\nMorphine is also available in a paste that is used in the production of heroin, which can be smoked by itself or turned into a soluble salt and injected; the same goes for the penultimate products of the Kompot (Polish Heroin) and black tar processes. Poppy straw as well as opium can yield morphine of purity levels ranging from poppy tea to near-pharmaceutical-grade morphine by itself or with all of the more than 50 other alkaloids. It also is the active narcotic ingredient in opium and all of its forms, derivatives, and analogues as well as forming from the breakdown of heroin and otherwise present in multiple batches of illicit heroin as the result of incomplete acetylation.\nNames.\nMorphine is marketed under multiple different brand names in various parts of the world. It was formerly called Morphia in British English.\nInformal names for morphine include: Cube Juice, Dope, Dreamer, Emsel, First Line, God's Drug, Hard Stuff, Hocus, Hows, Lydia, Lydic, M, Miss Emma, Mister Blue, Monkey, Morf, Morph, Morphide, Morphie, Morpho, Mother, MS, Ms. Emma, Mud, New Jack Swing (if mixed with heroin), Sister, Tab, Unkie, Unkie White, and Stuff.\nMS Contin tablets are known as misties, and the 100\u00a0mg extended-release tablets as greys and blockbusters. The \"speedball\" can use morphine as the opioid component, which is combined with cocaine, amphetamines, methylphenidate, or similar drugs. \"Blue Velvet\" is a combination of morphine with the antihistamine tripelennamine (Pyrabenzamine, PBZ, Pelamine) taken by injection.\nAccess in developing countries.\nAlthough morphine is cheap, people in poorer countries often do not have access to it. According to a 2005 estimate by the International Narcotics Control Board, six countries (Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States) consume 79% of the world's morphine. The less affluent countries, accounting for 80% of the world's population, consumed only about 6% of the global morphine supply. Some countries import virtually no morphine, and in others the drug is rarely available even for relieving severe pain while dying.\nExperts in pain management attribute the under-distribution of morphine to an unwarranted fear of the drug's potential for addiction and abuse. While morphine is clearly addictive, Western doctors believe it is worthwhile to use the drug and then wean the patient off when the treatment is over.\nVeterinary use.\nMorphine is a common perioperative analgesic in small animal veterinary medicine due to morphine's low cost and multiple routes of administration. Morphine has been used in cats and dogs since the late 19th century. Morphine can be used in dogs, cats, and horses. In horses usage is less common due to concerns over gastrointestinal ileus and neurological effects. Lower doses such as 0.1\u20130.2mg/kg given epidurally do not result in these adverse effects. Opioids in general are uncommon for livestock due to regulations around their usage. Morphine can be used for surgery in pigs, cattle, goats, and llamas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20616", "revid": "21226809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20616", "title": "Mechanical advantage", "text": "Measure of the force amplification achieved by using a tool\nMechanical advantage is a measure of the force amplification achieved by using a tool, mechanical device or machine system. The device trades off input forces against movement to obtain a desired amplification in the output force. The model for this is the \"law of the lever.\" Machine components designed to manage forces and movement in this way are called mechanisms. \nAn ideal mechanism transmits power without adding to or subtracting from it. This means the ideal machine does not include a power source, is frictionless, and is constructed from rigid bodies that do not deflect or wear. The performance of a real system relative to this ideal is expressed in terms of efficiency factors that take into account departures from the ideal.\nLevers.\nThe lever is a movable bar that pivots on a fulcrum attached to or positioned on or across a fixed point. The lever operates by applying forces at different distances from the fulcrum, or pivot. The location of the fulcrum determines a lever's class. Where a lever rotates continuously, it functions as a rotary second-class lever. The motion of the lever's end-point describes a fixed orbit, where mechanical energy can be exchanged. (see a hand-crank as an example.)\nIn modern times, this kind of rotary leverage is widely used; see a (rotary) 2nd-class lever; see gears, pulleys or friction drive, used in a mechanical power transmission scheme. It is common for mechanical advantage to be manipulated in a 'collapsed' form, via the use of more than one gear (a gearset). In such a gearset, gears having smaller radii and less inherent mechanical advantage are used. In order to make use of non-collapsed mechanical advantage, it is necessary to use a 'true length' rotary lever. See, also, the incorporation of mechanical advantage into the design of certain types of electric motors; one design is an 'outrunner'. \nAs the lever pivots on the fulcrum, points farther from this pivot move faster than points closer to the pivot. The power into and out of the lever is the same, so must come out the same when calculations are being done. Power is the product of force and velocity, so forces applied to points farther from the pivot must be less than when applied to points closer in.\nIf \"a\" and \"b\" are distances from the fulcrum to points \"A\" and \"B\" and if force \"FA\" applied to \"A\" is the input force and \"FB\" exerted at \"B\" is the output, the ratio of the velocities of points \"A\" and \"B\" is given by so the ratio of the output force to the input force, or mechanical advantage, is given by\nformula_1\nThis is the \"law of the lever\", which Archimedes formulated using geometric reasoning. It shows that if the distance \"a\" from the fulcrum to where the input force is applied (point \"A\") is greater than the distance \"b\" from fulcrum to where the output force is applied (point \"B\"), then the lever amplifies the input force. If the distance from the fulcrum to the input force is less than from the fulcrum to the output force, then the lever reduces the input force. To Archimedes, who recognized the profound implications and practicalities of the law of the lever, has been attributed the famous claim, \"Give me a place to stand and with a lever I will move the whole world.\"\nThe use of velocity in the static analysis of a lever is an application of the principle of virtual work.\nSpeed ratio.\nThe requirement for power input to an ideal mechanism to equal power output provides a simple way to compute mechanical advantage from the input-output speed ratio of the system.\nThe power input to a gear train with a torque \"TA\" applied to the drive pulley which rotates at an angular velocity of \"\u03c9A\" is \"P=TA\u03c9A\".\nBecause the power flow is constant, the torque \"TB\" and angular velocity \"\u03c9B\" of the output gear must satisfy the relation\nformula_2\nwhich yields\nformula_3\nThis shows that for an ideal mechanism the input-output speed ratio equals the mechanical advantage of the system. This applies to all mechanical systems ranging from robots to linkages.\nGear trains.\nGear teeth are designed so that the number of teeth on a gear is proportional to the radius of its pitch circle, and so that the pitch circles of meshing gears roll on each other without slipping. The speed ratio for a pair of meshing gears can be computed from ratio of the radii of the pitch circles and the ratio of the number of teeth on each gear, its gear ratio.\nThe velocity \"v\" of the point of contact on the pitch circles is the same on both gears, and is given by \nformula_4\nwhere input gear \"A\" has radius \"rA\" and meshes with output gear \"B\" of radius \"rB,\ntherefore,\nformula_5\nwhere \"NA\" is the number of teeth on the input gear and \"NB\" is the number of teeth on the output gear.\nThe mechanical advantage of a pair of meshing gears for which the input gear has \"NA\" teeth and the output gear has \"NB\" teeth is given by\nformula_6\nThis shows that if the output gear \"G\"B has more teeth than the input gear \"G\"A, then the gear train \"amplifies\" the input torque. And, if the output gear has fewer teeth than the input gear, then the gear train \"reduces\" the input torque.\nIf the output gear of a gear train rotates more slowly than the input gear, then the gear train is called a \"speed reducer\" (Force multiplier). In this case, because the output gear must have more teeth than the input gear, the speed reducer will amplify the input torque.\nChain and belt drives.\nMechanisms consisting of two sprockets connected by a chain, or two pulleys connected by a belt are designed to provide a specific mechanical advantage in power transmission systems.\nThe velocity \"v\" of the chain or belt is the same when in contact with the two sprockets or pulleys:\nformula_4\nwhere the input sprocket or pulley \"A\" meshes with the chain or belt along the pitch radius \"rA\" and the output sprocket or pulley \"B\" meshes with this chain or belt along the pitch radius \"rB\",\ntherefore\nformula_5\nwhere \"NA\" is the number of teeth on the input sprocket and \"NB\" is the number of teeth on the output sprocket. For a toothed belt drive, the number of teeth on the sprocket can be used. For friction belt drives the pitch radius of the input and output pulleys must be used.\nThe mechanical advantage of a pair of a chain drive or toothed belt drive with an input sprocket with \"NA\" teeth and the output sprocket has \"NB\" teeth is given by\nformula_9\nThe mechanical advantage for friction belt drives is given by\nformula_10\nChains and belts dissipate power through friction, stretch and wear, which means the power output is actually less than the power input, which means the mechanical advantage of the real system will be less than that calculated for an ideal mechanism. A chain or belt drive can lose as much as 5% of the power through the system in friction heat, deformation and wear, in which case the efficiency of the drive is 95%.\nExample: bicycle chain drive.\nConsider the 18-speed bicycle with 7\u00a0in (radius) cranks and 26\u00a0in (diameter) wheels. If the sprockets at the crank and at the rear drive wheel are the same size, then the ratio of the output force on the tire to the input force on the pedal can be calculated from the law of the lever to be\nformula_11\nNow, assume that the front sprockets have a choice of 28 and 52 teeth, and that the rear sprockets have a choice of 16 and 32 teeth. Using different combinations, we can compute the following speed ratios between the front and rear sprockets\nThe ratio of the force driving the bicycle to the force on the pedal, which is the total mechanical advantage of the bicycle, is the product of the speed ratio (or teeth ratio of output sprocket/input sprocket) and the crank-wheel lever ratio.\nNotice that in every case the force on the pedals is greater than the force driving the bicycle forward (in the illustration above, the corresponding backward-directed reaction force on the ground is indicated).\nBlock and tackle.\nA block and tackle is an assembly of a rope and pulleys that is used to lift loads. A number of pulleys are assembled together to form the blocks, one that is fixed and one that moves with the load. The rope is threaded through the pulleys to provide mechanical advantage that amplifies that force applied to the rope.\nIn order to determine the mechanical advantage of a block and tackle system consider the simple case of a gun tackle, which has a single mounted, or fixed, pulley and a single movable pulley. The rope is threaded around the fixed block and falls down to the moving block where it is threaded around the pulley and brought back up to be knotted to the fixed block.\nLet \"S\" be the distance from the axle of the fixed block to the end of the rope, which is \"A\" where the input force is applied. Let \"R\" be the distance from the axle of the fixed block to the axle of the moving block, which is \"B\" where the load is applied.\nThe total length of the rope \"L\" can be written as\nformula_12\nwhere \"K\" is the constant length of rope that passes over the pulleys and does not change as the block and tackle moves.\nThe velocities \"V\"A and \"V\"B of the points \"A\" and \"B\" are related by the constant length of the rope, that is\nformula_13\nor\nformula_14\nThe negative sign shows that the velocity of the load is opposite to the velocity of the applied force, which means as we pull down on the rope the load moves up.\nLet \"V\"A be positive downwards and \"V\"B be positive upwards, so this relationship can be written as the speed ratio\nformula_15\nwhere 2 is the number of rope sections supporting the moving block.\nLet \"F\"A be the input force applied at \"A\" the end of the rope, and let \"F\"B be the force at \"B\" on the moving block. Like the velocities \"F\"A is directed downwards and \"F\"B is directed upwards.\nFor an ideal block and tackle system there is no friction in the pulleys and no deflection or wear in the rope, which means the power input by the applied force \"F\"A\"V\"A must equal the power out acting on the load \"F\"B\"V\"B, that is\nformula_16\nThe ratio of the output force to the input force is the mechanical advantage of an ideal gun tackle system,\nformula_17\nThis analysis generalizes to an ideal block and tackle with a moving block supported by \"n\" rope sections,\nformula_18\nThis shows that the force exerted by an ideal block and tackle is \"n\" times the input force, where \"n\" is the number of sections of rope that support the moving block.\nEfficiency.\nMechanical advantage that is computed using the assumption that no power is lost through deflection, friction and wear of a machine is the maximum performance that can be achieved. For this reason, it is often called the \"ideal mechanical advantage\" (IMA). In operation, deflection, friction and wear will reduce the mechanical advantage. The amount of this reduction from the ideal to the \"actual mechanical advantage\" (AMA) is defined by a factor called \"efficiency\", a quantity which is determined by experimentation.\nAs an example, using a block and tackle with six rope sections and a load, the operator of an ideal system would be required to pull the rope six feet and exert of force to lift the load one foot. Both the ratios \"F\"out / \"F\"in and \"V\"in / \"V\"out show that the IMA is six. For the first ratio, of force input results in of force out. In an actual system, the force out would be less than 600 pounds due to friction in the pulleys. The second ratio also yields a MA of 6 in the ideal case but a smaller value in the practical scenario; it does not properly account for energy losses such as rope stretch. Subtracting those losses from the IMA or using the first ratio yields the AMA. \nIdeal mechanical advantage.\nThe \"ideal mechanical advantage\" (IMA), or \"theoretical mechanical advantage\", is the mechanical advantage of a device with the assumption that its components do not flex, there is no friction, and there is no wear. It is calculated using the physical dimensions of the device and defines the maximum performance the device can achieve.\nThe assumptions of an ideal machine are equivalent to the requirement that the machine does not store or dissipate energy; the power into the machine thus equals the power out. Therefore, the power \"P\" is constant through the machine and force times velocity into the machine equals the force times velocity out\u2014that is,\nformula_19\nThe ideal mechanical advantage is the ratio of the force out of the machine (load) to the force into the machine (effort), or\nformula_20\nApplying the constant power relationship yields a formula for this ideal mechanical advantage in terms of the speed ratio:\nformula_21\nThe speed ratio of a machine can be calculated from its physical dimensions. The assumption of constant power thus allows use of the speed ratio to determine the maximum value for the mechanical advantage.\nActual mechanical advantage.\nThe \"actual mechanical advantage\" (AMA) is the mechanical advantage determined by physical measurement of the input and output forces. Actual mechanical advantage takes into account energy loss due to deflection, friction, and wear.\nThe AMA of a machine is calculated as the ratio of the measured force output to the measured force input,\nformula_22\nwhere the input and output forces are determined experimentally.\nThe ratio of the experimentally determined mechanical advantage to the ideal mechanical advantage is the mechanical efficiency \u03b7 of the machine,\nformula_23\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20617", "revid": "40402157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20617", "title": "Marathi language", "text": "Indo-Aryan language of India\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMarathi ( ; , , , ) is a classical Indo-Aryan language predominantly spoken by the Marathi people in the Indian state of Maharashtra and is also spoken in Goa, and parts of Gujarat, Karnataka and the territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.\nIt is the official language of Maharashtra, and an additional official language in the state of Goa, where it is used for replies when requests are received in Marathi.\nIt is one of the 22 scheduled languages of India, with 83 million speakers as of 2011. Marathi ranks 15th in the list of languages with the most native speakers in the world. Marathi has the third largest number of native speakers in India, after Hindustani and Bengali. Marathi has some of the oldest literature of all modern Indian languages. The major dialects of Marathi are Standard Marathi and the Varhadi Marathi. Marathi was designated as a classical language by the Government of India in October 2024.\nMarathi distinguishes inclusive and exclusive forms of 'we' and possesses three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter. Its phonology contrasts apico-alveolar with alveopalatal affricates and alveolar with retroflex laterals ( and (Marathi letters and respectively).\nHistory.\nModern Indo-Aryan languages, including Marathi, that belong to the Indo-Aryan language family are derived from Prakrits via Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba. Marathi is one of several languages that further descend from Maharashtri Prakrit. Further changes led to the formation of Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba, followed by Old Marathi.\nHowever, this is challenged by Bloch (1970), who states that Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba was formed after Marathi had already separated from the Middle Indo-Aryan dialect. Marathi, a derivative of \nMaharashtri, is probably first attested in a 739\u00a0CE copper-plate inscription found in Satara. Several inscriptions dated to the second half of the 11th century feature Marathi, which is usually appended to Sanskrit or Kannada in these inscriptions. The earliest Marathi-only inscriptions are the ones issued during the Shilahara rule, including a c.\u20091012 CE stone inscription from Akshi taluka of Raigad district and a 1060 or 1086\u00a0CE copper-plate inscription from Dive that records a land grant (\"agrahara\") to a Brahmin. A 2-line 1118\u00a0CE Prakrit inscription at Shravanabelagola records a grant by the Hoysalas. These inscriptions suggest that Prakrit was a standard written language by the 12th century. However, after the Gaha Sattasai, there is no record of any literature produced in Marathi until the late 13th century.\nYadava period.\nAfter 1187\u00a0CE, the use of Marathi grew substantially in the inscriptions of the Yadava kings, who earlier used Kannada and Sanskrit in their inscriptions. Marathi became the dominant language of epigraphy during the last half century of the dynasty's rule (14th century), and may have been a result of the Yadavas' attempts to connect with their Marathi-speaking subjects and to distinguish themselves from the Kannada-speaking Hoysalas.\nFurther growth and usage of the language occurred due to two religious sects \u2013 the Mahanubhava and Varkari \"panthan\"s \u2013 who adopted Marathi as the medium for preaching their doctrines of devotion. Marathi was used in court life by the time of the Yadava kings. During the reign of the last three Yadava kings, a great deal of literature in verse and prose, on astrology, medicine, Puranas, Vedanta, kings and courtiers was created. \"Nalopakhyana\", \"Rukminiswayamvara\" and Shripati's \"Jyotisharatnamala\" (1039) are a few examples.\nThe oldest book in prose form in Marathi, \"Viv\u0113kasindhu\" (), was written by Mukundaraja, a Nath yogi and arch-poet of Marathi. Mukundaraja bases his exposition of the basic tenets of the Hindu philosophy and the yoga marga on the utterances or teachings of Shankaracharya. Mukundaraja's other work, \"Paramamrta,\" is considered the first systematic attempt to explain the Vedanta in the Marathi language.\nNotable examples of Marathi prose are \"\" (), events and anecdotes from the miracle-filled life of Chakradhar Swami of the Mahanubhava sect compiled by his close disciple, Mahimbhatta, in 1238. The \"L\u012b\u1e37\u0101car\u012btra\" is considered to be the first biography written in the Marathi language. Mahimbhatta's second important literary work is the \"Shri Govindaprabhucharitra\" or \"Ruddhipurcharitra\", a biography of Shri Chakradhar Swami's guru, Shri Govind Prabhu. This was probably written in 1288. The Mahanubhava sect made Marathi a vehicle for the propagation of religion and culture. Mahanubhava literature generally comprises works that describe the incarnations of gods, the history of the sect, commentaries on the \"Bhagavad Gita\", poetical works narrating the stories of the life of Krishna and grammatical and etymological works that are deemed useful to explain the philosophy of the sect.\nMedieval and Deccan Sultanate period.\nThe 13th century Varkari saint Dnyaneshwar (1275\u20131296) wrote a treatise in Marathi on Bhagawat Gita popularly called \"Dnyaneshwari\" and \"Amrutanubhava\".\nMukund Raj was a poet who lived in the 13th century and is said to be the first poet who composed in Marathi. He is known for the \"Viveka-Siddhi\" and \"Parammruta\" which are metaphysical, pantheistic works connected with orthodox Vedantism.\nThe 16th century saint-poet Eknath (1528\u20131599) is well known for composing the Ekn\u0101th\u012b Bh\u0101gavat, a commentary on Bhagavat Purana and the devotional songs called Bharud. Mukteshwar translated the \"Mahabharata\" into Marathi; Tukaram (1608\u20131649) transformed Marathi into a rich literary language. His poetry contained his inspirations. Tukaram wrote over 3000 abhangs or devotional songs. Manmathswamy(1561\u20131631) wrote a large volume of poetry and literature in Marathi. The Shivparv Ambhag composed by him is still read with interest by Veerashaiva people of Marathwada. Apart from this, the Pararamrhasya, a spiritual book composed by him on Shatsthalsiddhanta, is also recited.\nMarathi was widely used during the Sultanate period. Although the rulers were Muslims, the local feudal landlords and the revenue collectors were Hindus and so was the majority of the population. To simplify administration and revenue collection, the sultans promoted use of Marathi in official documents. However, the Marathi language from the era is heavily Persianised in its vocabulary. The Persian influence continues to this day with many Persian derived words used in everyday speech such as b\u0101g (Garden), k\u0101rkh\u0101n\u0101 (factory), shahar (city), b\u0101z\u0101r (market), duk\u0101n (shop), hush\u0101r (clever), k\u0101\u1e21a\u1e0f (paper), khurchi (chair), jamin (land), j\u0101hir\u0101t (advertisement), and haz\u0101r (thousand) Marathi also became language of administration during the Ahmadnagar Sultanate. Adilshahi of Bijapur also used Marathi for administration and record keeping.\nMaratha Empire.\nMarathi gained prominence with the rise of the Maratha Kingdom beginning with the reign of Shivaji. In his court, Shivaji replaced Persian, the common courtly language in the region, with Marathi. The Marathi language used in administrative documents also became less Persianised. Whereas in 1630, 80% of the vocabulary was Persian, it dropped to 37% by 1677. His reign stimulated the deployment of Marathi as a tool of systematic description and understanding. Shivaji Maharaj commissioned one of his officials, Balaji Avaji Chitnis, to make a comprehensive lexicon to replace Persian and Arabic terms with their Sanskrit equivalents. This led to production of 'R\u0101javyavah\u0101rako\u015ba', the thesaurus of state usage in 1677.\nSubsequent Maratha rulers extended the confederacy. These excursions by the Marathas helped to spread Marathi over broader geographical regions. This period also saw the use of Marathi in transactions involving land and other business. Documents from this period, therefore, give a better picture of the life of common people. There are a number of Bakhars (journals or narratives of historical events) written in Marathi and Modi script from this period. \nIn the 18th century during Peshwa rule, some well-known works such as Yatharthadeepika by Vaman Pandit, Naladamayanti Swayamvara by Raghunath Pandit, Pandava Pratap, Harivijay, Ramvijay by Shridhar Pandit and Mahabharata by Moropant were produced. Krishnadayarnava and Sridhar were poets during the Peshwa period. New literary forms were successfully experimented with during the period and classical styles were revived, especially the Mahakavya and Prabandha forms. The most important hagiographies of Varkari Bhakti saints were written by Mahipati in the 18th century.\nOther well known literary scholars of the 17th century were Mukteshwar and Shridhar. Mukteshwar was the grandson of Eknath and is the most distinguished poet in the \"Ovi\" meter. He is most known for translating the Mahabharata and the Ramayana in Marathi but only a part of the Mahabharata translation is available and the entire Ramayana translation is lost. Shridhar Kulkarni came from the Pandharpur area and his works are said to have superseded the Sanskrit epics to a certain extent. This period also saw the development of Powada (ballads sung in honour of warriors), and Lavani (romantic songs presented with dance and instruments like tabla). Major poet composers of Powada and Lavani songs of the 17th and the 18th century were Anant Phandi, Ram Joshi and Honaji Bala.\nBritish colonial period.\nThe British colonial period starting in early 1800s saw standardisation of Marathi grammar through the efforts of the Christian missionary William Carey. Carey's dictionary had fewer entries and Marathi words were in Devanagari. Translations of the Bible were the first books to be printed in Marathi. These translations by William Carey, the American Marathi mission and the Scottish missionaries led to the development of a peculiar pidginised Marathi called \"Missionary Marathi\" in the early 1800s. The most comprehensive Marathi-English dictionary was compiled by Captain James Thomas Molesworth and Major Thomas Candy in 1831. The book is still in print nearly two centuries after its publication.\nThe colonial authorities also worked on standardising Marathi under the leadership of Molesworth and Candy. They consulted Brahmins of Pune for this task and adopted the Sanskrit dominated dialect spoken by the elite in the city as the standard dialect for Marathi.\nThe first Marathi translation of the New Testament was published in 1811 by the Serampore press of William Carey. The first Marathi newspaper called Durpan was started by Balshastri Jambhekar in 1832. Newspapers provided a platform for sharing literary views, and many books on social reforms were written. The First Marathi periodical \"Dirghadarshan\" was started in 1840. \nThe Marathi language flourished, as Marathi drama gained popularity. Musicals known as \"Sangeet Natak\" also evolved. Keshavasut, the father of modern Marathi poetry published his first poem in 1885. \nThe late-19th century in Maharashtra saw the rise of essayist Vishnushastri Chiplunkar with his periodical, Nibandhmala that had essays that criticised social reformers like Phule and Gopal Hari Deshmukh. He also founded the popular Marathi periodical of that era called Kesari in 1881. Later under the editorship of Lokmanya Tilak, the newspaper was instrumental in spreading Tilak's nationalist and social views. Phule and Deshmukh also started their periodicals, \"Deenbandhu\" and \"Prabhakar\", that criticised the prevailing Hindu culture of the day. The 19th century and early 20th century saw several books published on Marathi grammar. Notable grammarians of this period were Tarkhadkar, A.K.Kher, Moro Keshav Damle, and R.Joshi\nThe first half of the 20th century was marked by new enthusiasm in literary pursuits, and socio-political activism helped achieve major milestones in Marathi literature, drama, music and film. Modern Marathi prose flourished: for example, N.C. Kelkar's biographical writings, novels of Hari Narayan Apte, Narayan Sitaram Phadke and V. S. Khandekar, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar's nationalist literature and plays of Mama Varerkar and Kirloskar. In folk arts, Patthe Bapurao wrote many lavani songs during the late colonial period.\nMarathi since Indian independence in 1947.\nAfter Indian independence, Marathi was accorded the status of a scheduled language on the national level. In 1956, the then Bombay state was reorganised, which brought most Marathi and Gujarati speaking areas under one state. Further re-organization of the Bombay state on 1 May 1960, created the Marathi speaking Maharashtra and Gujarati speaking Gujarat state respectively. With state and cultural protection, Marathi made great strides by the 1990s. A literary event called \"Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan\" (All-India Marathi Literature Meet) is held every year. In addition, the \"Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Natya Sammelan\" (All-India Marathi Theatre Convention) is also held annually. Both events are very popular among Marathi speakers.\nNotable works in Marathi in the latter half of the 20th century include Khandekar's Yayati, which won him the Jnanpith Award. Also Vijay Tendulkar's plays in Marathi have earned him a reputation beyond Maharashtra. P.L. Deshpande (popularly known as \"PuLa\"), Vishnu Vaman Shirwadkar, P.K. Atre, Prabodhankar Thackeray and Vishwas Patil are known for their writings in Marathi in the fields of drama, comedy and social commentary. Bashir Momin Kavathekar wrote Lavani's and folk songs for Tamasha artists.\nIn 1958 the term \"Dalit literature\" was used for the first time, when the first conference of \"Maharashtra Dalit Sahitya Sangha\" (Maharashtra Dalit Literature Society) was held at Mumbai, a movement inspired by 19th century social reformer, Jyotiba Phule and eminent dalit leader, Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar. Baburao Bagul (1930\u20132008) was a pioneer of Dalit writings in Marathi. His first collection of stories, \"Jevha Mi Jat Chorali\" (, \"When I Stole My Caste\"), published in 1963, created a stir in Marathi literature with its passionate depiction of a cruel society and thus brought in new momentum to Dalit literature in Marathi. Gradually with other writers like Namdeo Dhasal (who founded Dalit Panther), these Dalit writings paved way for the strengthening of Dalit movement. Notable Dalit authors writing in Marathi include Arun Kamble, Shantabai Kamble, Raja Dhale, Namdev Dhasal, Daya Pawar, Annabhau Sathe, Laxman Mane, Laxman Gaikwad, Sharankumar Limbale, Bhau Panchbhai, Kishor Shantabai Kale, Narendra Jadhav, Keshav Meshram, Urmila Pawar, Vinay Dharwadkar, Gangadhar Pantawane, Kumud Pawde and Jyoti Lanjewar.\nIn recent decades there has been a trend among Marathi speaking parents of all social classes in major urban areas of sending their children to English medium schools. There is some concern that this may lead to the marginalisation of the language.\nGeographic distribution.\nMarathi is primarily spoken in Maharashtra and parts of neighbouring states of Gujarat (majorly in Vadodara, and among a small number of population in Surat), Madhya Pradesh (in the districts of Burhanpur, Betul, Chhindwara and Balaghat), Goa, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu (in Thanjavur) and Karnataka (in the districts of Belagavi, Karwar, Bagalkote, Vijayapura, Kalaburagi and Bidar), Telangana, union-territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The former Maratha ruled cities of Baroda, Indore, Gwalior, Jabalpur, and Tanjore have had sizeable Marathi-speaking populations for centuries. Marathi is also spoken by Maharashtrian migrants to other parts of India and overseas. For instance, the people from western India who emigrated to Mauritius in the early 19th century also speak Marathi.\nThere were 83 million native Marathi speakers in India, according to the 2011 census, making it the third most spoken native language after Hindi and Bengali. Native Marathi speakers form 6.86% of India's population. Native speakers of Marathi formed 70.34% of the population in Maharashtra, 10.89% in Goa, 7.01% in Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 4.53% in Daman and Diu, 3.38% in Karnataka, 1.7% in Madhya Pradesh, and 1.52% in Gujarat.\nInternational.\nThe following table is a list of the geographic distribution of Marathi speakers as it appears in the 2019 edition of \"Ethnologue\", a language reference published by SIL International, which is based in the United States.\nStatus.\nMarathi is the official language of Maharashtra and additional official language in the state of Goa. In Goa, Konkani is the sole official language; however, Marathi may also be used for any or all official purposes in case any request is received in Marathi. Marathi is included among the languages that are part of the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India, thus granting it the status of a \"scheduled language\". The Government of Maharashtra has applied to the Ministry of Culture to grant classical language status to Marathi language, which was approved by the Government of India on 3 October 2024.\nThe contemporary grammatical rules described by Maharashtra Sahitya Parishad and endorsed by the Government of Maharashtra are supposed to take precedence in standard written Marathi. Traditions of Marathi Linguistics and the above-mentioned rules give special status to tatsamas, words adapted from Sanskrit. This special status expects the rules for tatsamas to be followed as in Sanskrit. This practice provides Marathi with a large corpus of Sanskrit words to cope with the demands of new technical words whenever needed. Currently there are many different dialects spoken across India for example, Konkani,Mumbaikar etc.\nIn addition to all universities in Maharashtra, Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda in Vadodara, Osmania University in Hyderabad, Karnataka University in Dharwad, Gulbarga University in Kalaburagi, Devi Ahilya University in Indore and Goa University in Goa have special departments for higher studies in Marathi linguistics. Jawaharlal Nehru University (New Delhi) has announced plans to establish a special department for Marathi.\nMarathi Day is celebrated on 27 February, the birthday of the poet Kusumagraj (Vishnu Vaman Shirwadkar).\nDialects.\nStandard Marathi is based on dialects used by academics and the print media.\nIndic scholars distinguish 42 dialects of spoken Marathi. Dialects bordering other major language areas have many properties in common with those languages, further differentiating them from standard spoken Marathi. The bulk of the variation within these dialects is primarily lexical and phonological (e.g. accent placement and pronunciation). Although the number of dialects is considerable, the degree of intelligibility within these dialects is relatively high.\nVarhadi.\n\"Varhadi\" (Varh\u0101di) (\u0935\u0931\u094d\u0939\u093e\u0921\u093f) or \"Vaidarbhi\" (\u0935\u0948\u0926\u0930\u094d\u092d\u093f) is spoken in the Western Vidarbha region of Maharashtra.\nIn Marathi, the retroflex lateral approximant \"\u1e37\" is common, while sometimes in the Varhadii dialect, it corresponds to the palatal approximant \"y\" (IPA: [j]), making this dialect quite distinct. Such phonetic shifts are common in spoken Marathi and, as such, the spoken dialects vary from one region of Maharashtra to another.\nZadi Boli.\nZaadi Boli or Zhaadiboli () is spoken in Zaadipranta (a forest rich region) of far eastern Maharashtra or eastern Vidarbha or western-central Gondwana comprising Gondia, Bhandara, Chandrapur, Gadchiroli and some parts of Nagpur of Maharashtra.\nZaadi Boli Sahitya Mandal and many literary figures are working for the conservation of this dialect of Marathi.\nSouthern Indian Marathi.\nThanjavur Marathi \u0924\u091e\u094d\u091c\u093e\u0935\u0942\u0930\u094d \u092e\u0930\u093e\u0920\u093f, Namadeva Shimpi Marathi, Arey Marathi (Telangana), Kasaragod (north Kerala) and Bhavsar Marathi are some of the dialects of Marathi spoken by many descendants of Maharashtrians who migrated to Southern India. These dialects retain the 17th-century basic form of Marathi and have been considerably influenced by the Dravidian languages after the migration. These dialects have speakers in various parts of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.\nOther.\nOther Marathi\u2013Konkani languages and dialects spoken in Maharashtra include Maharashtrian Konkani, Malvani, Sangameshwari, Agri, Andh, Warli, Vadvali and Samavedi.\nWriting.\nThe Kadamba script and its variants have been historically used to write Marathi in the form of inscriptions on stones and copper plates. The Marathi version of Devanagari, called \"Balbodh\", is similar to the Hindi Devanagari alphabet except for its use for certain words. Some words in Marathi preserve the schwa, which has been omitted in other languages which use Devanagari. For example, the word '\u0930\u0902\u0917' (colour) is pronounced as 'ranga' in Marathi &amp; 'rang' in other languages using Devanagari, and '\u0916\u0930\u0902' (true), despite the anuswara, is pronounced as 'khara'. The anuswara in this case is used to avoid schwa deletion in pronunciation; most other languages using Devanagari show schwa deletion in pronunciation despite the presence of schwa in the written spelling. From the 13th century until the beginning of British rule in the 19th century, Marathi was written in the Modi script for administrative purposes but in Devanagari for literature. Since 1950 it has been written in the Balbodh style of Devanagari. Except for Father Thomas Stephens' Krista Purana in the Latin script in the 1600s, Marathi has mainly been printed in Devanagari because William Carey, the pioneer of printing in Indian languages, was only able to print in Devanagari. He later tried printing in Modi but by that time, Balbodh Devanagari had been accepted for printing.\nDevanagari.\nMarathi is usually written in the \"Balbodh\" version of Devanagari script, an abugida consisting of 36 consonant letters and 16 initial-vowel letters. It is written from left to right. The Devanagari alphabet used to write Marathi is slightly different from the Devanagari alphabets of Hindi and other languages: there are additional letters in the Marathi alphabet and Western punctuation is used.\nWilliam Carey in 1807 Observed that as with other parts of India, a traditional duality existed in script usage between Devanagari for religious texts, and Modi for commerce and administration. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although in the \"Mahratta\" country the \"Devanagari\" character is well known to men of education, yet a character is current among the men of business which is much smaller, and varies considerably in form from the \"Nagari\", though the number and power of the letters nearly correspond.\nConsonants.\nIt is written from left to right. Devanagari used to write Marathi is slightly different from that of Hindi or other languages. It uses additional vowels and consonants that are not found in other languages that also use Devanagari.\nExample of consonant\u2013vowel combination.\nCombination of the vowels with K:\nThe Modi alphabet.\nFrom the thirteenth century until 1950, Marathi, especially for business use, was written in the Modi alphabet, a cursive script designed for minimising the lifting of pen from paper while writing.\nConsonant clusters in Devanagari.\nIn Devanagari, consonant letters by default come with an inherent schwa. Therefore, will be 't\u0259y\u0101che', not 'ty\u0101che'. To form 'ty\u0101che', you will have to write it as + , giving .\nWhen two or more consecutive consonants are followed by a vowel then a \"\" (consonant cluster) is formed. Some examples of consonant clusters are shown below:\nIn writing, Marathi has a few digraphs that are rarely seen in the world's languages, including those denoting the so-called \"nasal aspirates\" (\u1e47h (\u0923\u094d\u0939), nh (\u0928\u094d\u0939) and mh (\u092e\u094d\u0939)) and liquid aspirates (rh, \u1e5fh, lh (), and vh \u0935\u094d\u0939). Some examples are given above.\nEyelash reph/raphar.\nThe eyelash reph/raphar (\u0930\u0947\u092b/ \u0930\u092b\u093e\u0930) (\u0930\u094d\u200d) exists in Marathi as well as Nepali. The eyelash reph/raphar (\u0930\u094d\u200d) is produced in Unicode by the sequence [ra \u0930 ] + [vir\u0101ma \u094d] + [ZWJ] and [rra \u0931 ]+ [vir\u0101ma \u094d] + [ZWJ]. In Marathi, when '\u0930' is the first consonant of a consonant cluster and occurs at the beginning of a syllable, it is written as an eyelash reph/raphar. \nMinimal pairs.\nSource:\nBraille.\nIn February 2008, Swagat Thorat published India's first Braille newspaper, the Marathi \"Sparshdnyan\", a news, politics and current affairs fort nightly magazine.\nGrammar.\nMarathi grammar shares similarities with other modern Indo-Aryan languages. Jain Acharya Hemachandra is the grammarian of Maharashtri Prakrit. The first modern book exclusively concerning Marathi grammar was printed in 1805 by William Carey.\nMarathi employs agglutinative, inflectional and analytical forms. Unlike most other Indo-Aryan languages, Marathi has kept three grammatical genders: masculine, feminine and neuter. The primary word order of Marathi is subject\u2013object\u2013verb Marathi follows a split-ergative pattern of verb agreement and case marking: it is ergative in constructions with either perfective transitive verbs or with the obligative (\"should\", \"have to\") and it is nominative elsewhere. An unusual feature of Marathi, as compared to other Indo-European languages, is that it displays inclusive and exclusive we, common to the Austroasiatic and Dravidian languages. Other similarities to Dravidian include the extensive use of participial constructions and also to a certain extent the use of the two anaphoric pronouns and . Numerous scholars have noted the existence of Dravidian linguistic patterns in the Marathi language.\nSharing of linguistic resources with other languages.\nMarathi is primarily influenced by Prakrit, Maharashtri, and Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba. Formal Marathi draws literary and technical vocabulary from Sanskrit.\nMarathi has also shared directions, vocabulary, and grammar with languages such as Indian Dravidian languages. Over a period of many centuries, the Marathi language and people have also come into contact with foreign languages such as Persian, Arabic, English, and European romance languages such as French, Spanish, Portuguese and other European languages.\nDravidian Influence.\nSpoken in the historically active region of the Deccan Plateau, the language has been subject to contact and mostly one-way influence with the surrounding Dravidian languages. Up to 5% of Marathi's basic vocabulary is of a Dravidian origin. According to various scholars like Bloch (1970) and Southworth (1971), Marathi's very origins can be traced to a \"pidgin\" or a substratum origin with surrounding Dravidian language.\nMorphology and etymology.\nSpoken Marathi contains a high number of Sanskrit-derived (\"tatsama\") words. Such words are for example \"nantar\" (from \"nantara\" or after), ' (' or complete, full, or full measure of something), \"ola\" (\"ola\" or damp), ' (' or cause), \"pu\u1e63ka\u1e37\" (\"pu\u1e63kala\" or much, many), \"satat\" (\"satata\" or always), \"vichitra\" (\"vichitra\" or strange), \"svatah\" (\"svatah\" or himself/herself), \"prayatna\" (\"prayatna\" or effort, attempt), \"bh\u012bt\u012b\" (from \"bh\u012bti\", or fear) and \"bh\u0101\u1e47\u1e0de\" (\"bh\u0101\u1e47\u1e0da\" or vessel for cooking or storing food). Other words (\"tadbhavas\") have undergone phonological changes from their Sanskrit roots, for example \"d\u0101r\" (\"dw\u0101ra\" or door), \"ghar\" (\"g\u1e5bha\" or house), \"v\u0101gh\" (\"vy\u0101ghra\" or tiger), \"pa\u1e37a\u1e47e\" (\"pal\u0101yate\" or to run away), \"kiti\" (\"kati\" or how many) have undergone more modification.\nExamples of words borrowed from other Indian and foreign languages include:\nA lot of English words are commonly used in conversation and are considered to be assimilated into the Marathi vocabulary. These include words like \"pen\" (\u092a\u0947\u0928, \"pen\") and \"shirt\" (\u0936\u0930\u094d\u091f, \"shar\u1e6da\") whose native Marathi counterparts are \"lekha\u1e47\u012b\" (\u0932\u0947\u0916\u0923\u0940) and \"sadar\u0101\" (\u0938\u0926\u0930\u093e) respectively.\nCompounds.\nMarathi uses many morphological processes to join words together, forming compounds. For example, \"ati\" + \"uttam\" gives the word \"atyuttam\", Ganesh + Utsav = Ganeshotsav, \"miith-bhaakar\" (\"salt-bread\"), \"udyog-patii\" (\"businessman\"), \"ash\u1e6da-bhujaa\" (\"eight-hands\", name of a Hindu goddess).\nCounting.\nLike many other languages, Marathi uses distinct names for the numbers 1 to 20 and each multiple of 10, and composite ones for those greater than 20.\nAs with other Indic languages, there are distinct names for the fractions &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444. They are \"p\u0101va\", \"ardh\u0101\", and \"p\u0101u\u1e47a\", respectively. For most fractions greater than 1, the prefixes \"savv\u0101-\", \"s\u0101\u1e0d\u0113-\", \"p\u0101va\u1e47e-\" are used. There are special names for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20442 (\"d\u012b\u1e0d\"), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20442 (\"a\u1e0d\u012bch\"), and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20442 (\"aut\").\nPowers of ten are denoted by separate specific words as depicted in the table below.\nA positive integer is read by breaking it up from the tens digit leftwards, into parts each containing two digits, the only exception being the hundreds place containing only one digit instead of two. For example, 1,234,567 is written as 12,34,567 and read as \"12 lakh 34 Hazara 5 she 67\" (\u0967\u0968 \u0932\u093e\u0916 \u0969\u096a \u0939\u091c\u093e\u0930 \u096b \u0936\u0947 \u096c\u096d).\nEvery two-digit number after 18 (11 to 18 are predefined) is read backward. For example, 21 is read \u090f\u0915-\u0935\u0940\u0938 (1-twenty). Also, a two digit number that ends with a 9 is considered to be the next tens place minus one. For example, 29 is \u090f\u0915\u094b\u0923\u0924\u0940\u0938 (\u090f\u0915-\u0909\u0923\u0947-\u0924\u0940\u0938) (thirty minus one). Two digit numbers used before \"Hazara\" are written in the same way.\nMarathi on computers and the Internet.\nShrilipee, Shivaji, kothare 2,4,6, Kiran fonts KF-Kiran and many more (about 48) are clip fonts that were used prior to the introduction of Unicode standard for Devanagari script. Clip fonts are in vogue on PCs even today since most computers use English keyboards. Even today a large number of printed publications such as books, newspapers and magazines are prepared using these ASCII based fonts. However, clip fonts cannot be used on internet since those did not have Unicode compatibility.\nEarlier Marathi suffered from weak support by computer operating systems and Internet services, as have other Indian languages. But recently, with the introduction of language localisation projects and new technologies, various software and Internet applications have been introduced. Marathi typing software is widely used and display interface packages are now available on Windows, Linux and macOS. Many Marathi websites, including Marathi newspapers, have become popular especially with Maharashtrians outside India. Online projects such as the Marathi language Wikipedia, with 76,000+ articles, the Marathi blogroll, and Marathi blogs have gained immense popularity.\nNatural language processing for Marathi.\nMore recent attention has focused on developing natural language processing tools for Marathi. Some studies proposed a couple of text corpora for Marathi. L3CubeMahaSent is the first major publicly available Marathi dataset for sentiment analysis. It contains about 16,000 distinct tweets classified into three broad classes, such as positive, negative, and neutral. L3Cube-MahaNER\n is a dataset for named-entity recognition consisting of 25,000 manually tagged sentences categorised according to the eight entity classes. There are at least two public available datasets for hate speech detection in Marathi: L3Cube-MahaHate \n and HASOC2021.\nThe HASOC2021 dataset was proposed for conducting a machine learning competition on hate, offensive, and profane content identification in Marathi collocated with Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (FIRE 2021). The participants of the competition presented 25 solutions based on supervised learning. The winning teams used pre-trained language models (XLM-RoBERTa, Language Agnostic BERT Sentence Embeddings (LaBSE)) fine-tuned on the HASOC2021 dataset proposed by the organisers. The participants also experimented with the joint use of multilingual data for fine-tuning.\nCorpus Development in Marathi.\nText Corpus and Corpus Linguistics show how texts, sentences, or words from written or spoken language have changed over time or how they have been used in an organised way. The https:// of the 'Linguistic Survey of India' by George Abraham Grierson describes first systematic and structured attempt to create documentation of Marathi language data.\nCorpora in Marathi\nAttempts have been made to create Corpus of Marathi. One of the first efforts to make a corpus with Indian text was the Kolhapur Corpus of Indian English (Shastri, 1986). The corpus was developed at the university in Maharastra, but Indian English was studied. The IIT Bombay WordNet (IndoWordNet; Bhattacharya, 2010) project in Indian languages includes Marathi. WordNet do not give word counts for further useful data analysis. The raw text based corpus in Marathi (Ramamoorthy et al., 2019a) is based on sampled pages from different select books. This work is carried out at Central Institute of Indian Languages, Mysore. A corpus-based linguistic study at the University of Mumbai explores the language contact between English and Marathi by compiling and analysing an overarching corpus of English loan-words in Marathi existing between the years 2001 and 2020. The study also investigates the attitudes of Marathi speakers towards English loan-words in contemporary Marathi, attempting to understand their motivations for borrowing English words (Doibale, 2022).\nThe work at University of Mumbai by Belhekar and Bhargava (2023) provided the first Marathi word count collection (Marathi WordCorp). The bag-of-words (BoW) model was used to make 1-gram (single-word) Marathi WordCorp. They used more than 700 complete works of literature.\nThe https:// (Michel et al., 2011) is a relatively new and advanced method that shows how the frequency of n-grams has changed over a specific period. There is no database of Indian languages in the Google Books Ngram viewer. The Indian Languages Word Corpus (https://) WebApp, which was made by Belhekar and Bhargava, shows how often words are used by decade from before 1920 to 2020. The limitation with the method is that it only gives researchers the raw OCR data to \"combine and collapse frequencies of correctly and incorrectly recognised words\" (p.\u00a02).\nStatistical Models for Marathi Corpora\nAttempts to evaluate statistical models for Marathi language Corpuses and text-collections have been carried out. For the Marathi corpus (Marathi WordCorp), the y-intercept of Zipf's law is reported as 12.49, and the coefficient is 0.89 and these numbers show that Zipf's law is applicable for Marathi language. The coefficients show that the number of words and texts used in the corpus metadata is enough. Heaps' law intercept for the Marathi word corpora is 2.48, and the coefficient is 0.73. The coefficient values show that there are more unique words in Marathi writings than would be expected. The higher number of unique words could be due to the number of alphabets (36 consonant letters and 16 initial-vowel letters, with each consonant taking 14 forms with vowel pairs), the orthographic features of the Devanagari script (for example, the same word can be written in different ways), the use of consonant clusters (jodakshar), the number of suffixes a word can have, etc.\nMarathi Language Day.\nMarathi Language Day (\u092e\u0930\u093e\u0920\u0940 \u0926\u093f\u0928/\u092e\u0930\u093e\u0920\u0940 \u0926\u093f\u0935\u0938 transl.\u2009Marathi Dina/Marathi Diwasa) is celebrated on 27 February every year across the Indian states of Maharashtra and Goa. This day is regulated by the Ministry of Marathi Language. It is celebrated on the Birthday of eminent Marathi Poet V.V. Shirwadkar, popularly known as Kusumagraj.\nEssay competitions and seminars are arranged in schools and colleges, and government officials are asked to conduct various events.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20618", "revid": "39165258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20618", "title": "Martin Bormann", "text": "German Nazi politician (1900\u20131945)\n \nMartin Ludwig Bormann (17 June 1900 \u2013 2 May 1945) was a German Nazi Party official and head of the Nazi Party Chancellery, private secretary to Adolf Hitler, and a war criminal. Bormann gained immense power by using his position as Hitler's private secretary to control the flow of information and access to Hitler. He used his position to create an extensive bureaucracy and involve himself as much as possible in the decision-making.\nBormann joined a paramilitary \"Freikorps\" organisation in 1922 while working as manager of a large estate. He served nearly a year in prison as an accomplice to his friend Rudolf H\u00f6ss (later commandant of Auschwitz concentration camp) in the murder of Walther Kadow. Bormann joined the Nazi Party in 1927 and the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) in 1937. He initially worked in the party's insurance service, and transferred in July 1933 to the office of Deputy F\u00fchrer Rudolf Hess, where he served as chief of staff.\nBormann gained acceptance into Hitler's inner circle and accompanied him everywhere, providing briefings and summaries of events and requests. He was appointed as Hitler's personal secretary on 12 April 1943. After Hess's solo flight to Britain on 10 May 1941 to seek peace negotiations with the British government, Bormann assumed Hess's former duties, with the title of Head of the \"Parteikanzlei\" (Party Chancellery). He had final approval over civil service appointments, helped review and approve legislation. He was a leading proponent of reducing the influence of Christian churches and favoured harsh treatment of Jews and Slavs in the areas conquered by Germany during World War II.\nBormann returned with Hitler to the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" in Berlin on 16 January 1945 as the Red Army approached the city. After Hitler committed suicide, Bormann and others attempted to flee Berlin on 2 May to avoid capture by the Soviets. Bormann probably committed suicide on a bridge near Lehrter station. His body was buried nearby on 8 May 1945, but was not found and confirmed as Bormann's until 1973; the identification was reaffirmed in 1998 by DNA tests. The missing Bormann was tried \"in absentia\" by the International Military Tribunal in the Nuremberg trials of 1945 and 1946. He was convicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity and sentenced to death by hanging.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Wegeleben (now in Saxony-Anhalt) in the Kingdom of Prussia in the German Empire, Bormann was the son of Theodor Bormann (1862\u20131903), a post office employee, and his second wife, Antonie Bernhardine Mennong. The family was Lutheran. He had two half-siblings (Else and Walter Bormann) from his father's earlier marriage to Louise Grobler, who died in 1898. Antonie Bormann gave birth to three sons, one of whom died in infancy. Martin and Albert (1902\u201389) survived to adulthood. Theodor died when Bormann was three, and his mother soon remarried.\nBormann's studies at an agricultural trade high school were interrupted when he joined the 55th Field Artillery Regiment as a gunner in June 1918, in the final months of World War I. He never saw action, but served garrison duty until February 1919. After working a short time in a cattle feed mill, Bormann became estate manager of a large farm in Mecklenburg. Shortly after starting work at the estate, Bormann joined an antisemitic landowners association. While hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic meant that money was worthless, foodstuffs stored on farms and estates became ever more valuable. Many estates, including Bormann's, had \"Freikorps\" units stationed on site to guard the crops from pillaging. Bormann joined the \"Freikorps\" organisation headed by Gerhard Ro\u00dfbach in 1922, acting as section leader and treasurer.\nOn 17 March 1924 Bormann was sentenced to a year in Elisabethstrasse Prison as an accomplice to his friend Rudolf H\u00f6ss in the murder of Walther Kadow. The perpetrators believed Kadow had tipped off the French occupation authorities in the Ruhr District that fellow \"Freikorps\" member Albert Leo Schlageter was carrying out sabotage operations against French industries. Schlageter was arrested and was executed on 26 May 1923. On the night of 31 May, H\u00f6ss, Bormann and several others took Kadow into a meadow out of town, where he was beaten and had his throat cut. After one of the perpetrators confessed, police dug up the body and laid charges in July. Bormann was released from prison in February 1925. He joined the \"Frontbann\", a short-lived Nazi Party paramilitary organisation created to replace the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA; storm detachment or assault division), which had been banned in the aftermath of the failed Munich Putsch. Bormann returned to his job at Mecklenburg and remained there until May 1926, when he moved in with his mother in Oberweimar.\nCareer in the Nazi Party.\nIn 1927, Bormann joined the Nazi Party. His membership number was 60,508. He joined the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) on 1 January 1937 with number 278,267. By special order of Heinrich Himmler in 1938, Bormann was granted SS number 555 to reflect his \"Alter K\u00e4mpfer\" (Old Fighter) status.\nEarly career.\nBormann took a job with \"Der Nationalsozialist\", a weekly paper edited by Nazi Party member Hans Severus Ziegler, who was deputy \"Gauleiter\" (party leader) for Thuringia. After joining the Nazi Party in 1927, Bormann began duties as regional press officer, but his lack of public-speaking skills made him ill-suited to this position. He soon put his organisational skills to use as business manager for the \"Gau\" (region). \nIn October 1928, Bormann moved to Munich where he worked in the SA insurance office. Initially the Nazi Party provided coverage through insurance companies for members who were hurt or killed in the frequent violent skirmishes with members of other political parties. As insurance companies were unwilling to pay out claims for such activities, in 1930 Bormann set up the \"Hilfskasse der NSDAP\" (Nazi Party Auxiliary Fund), a benefits and relief fund directly administered by the party. Each party member was required to pay premiums and might receive compensation for injuries sustained while conducting party business. Payments out of the fund were made solely at Bormann's discretion. He began to gain a reputation as a financial expert, and many party members felt personally indebted to him after receiving benefits from the fund. In addition to its stated purpose, the fund was used as a last-resort source of funding for the Nazi Party, which was chronically short of money at that time. After the Nazi Party's success in the 1930 general election, where they won 107 seats, party membership grew dramatically. By 1932 the fund was collecting 3 million\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 per year.\nBormann also worked on the staff of the SA from 1928 to 1930, and while there he founded the National Socialist Automobile Corps, precursor to the National Socialist Motor Corps. The organisation was responsible for co-ordinating the donated use of motor vehicles belonging to party members, and later expanded to training members in automotive skills.\n\"Reichsleiter\" and head of the party chancellery.\nAfter the \"Machtergreifung\" (Nazi Party seizure of power) in January 1933, the relief fund was repurposed to provide general accident and property insurance, so Bormann resigned from its administration. He applied for a transfer and was accepted as chief of staff in the office of Rudolf Hess, the Deputy F\u00fchrer, on 1 July 1933. Bormann also served as personal secretary to Hess from July 1933 until 12 May 1941. Hess's department was responsible for settling disputes within the party and acted as an intermediary between the party and the state regarding policy decisions and legislation. Bormann used his position to create an extensive bureaucracy and involve himself in as much of the decision-making as possible. On 10 October 1933 Hitler named Bormann \"Reichsleiter\" (national leader \u2013 the second highest political rank) of the Nazi Party. At the November 1933 parliamentary election, Bormann was elected as a \"Reichstag\" deputy from electoral constituency 5 (Frankfurt an der Oder); he was reelected in 1936 and 1938. By June 1934, Bormann was gaining acceptance into Hitler's inner circle and accompanied him everywhere, providing briefings and summaries of events and requests.\nIn 1935, Bormann was appointed as overseer of renovations at the Berghof, Hitler's property at Obersalzberg. In the early 1930s, Hitler bought the property, which he had been renting since 1925 as a vacation retreat. After he became chancellor, Hitler drew up plans for expansion and remodelling of the main house and put Bormann in charge of construction. Bormann commissioned the construction of barracks for the SS guards, roads and footpaths, garages for motor vehicles, a guesthouse, accommodation for staff, and other amenities. Retaining title in his own name, Bormann bought up adjacent farms until the entire complex covered . Members of the inner circle built houses within the perimeter, beginning with Hermann G\u00f6ring, Albert Speer, and Bormann himself. Bormann commissioned the building of the \"Kehlsteinhaus\" (Eagle's Nest), a tea house high above the Berghof, as a gift to Hitler on his fiftieth birthday (20 April 1939). Hitler seldom used the building, but Bormann liked to impress guests by taking them there.\nWhile Hitler was in residence at the Berghof, Bormann was constantly in attendance and acted as Hitler's personal secretary. In this capacity, he began to control the flow of information and access to Hitler. During this period, Hitler gave Bormann control of his personal finances. In addition to salaries as chancellor and president, Hitler's income included money raised through royalties collected on his book \"Mein Kampf\" and the use of his image on postage stamps. Bormann set up the Adolf Hitler Fund of German Trade and Industry, which collected money from German industrialists on Hitler's behalf. Some of the funds received through this programme were disbursed to various party leaders, but Bormann retained most of it for Hitler's personal use. Bormann and others took notes of Hitler's thoughts expressed over dinner and in monologues late into the night and preserved them. The material was published after the war as \"Hitler's Table Talk\". Historian Mikael Nilsson contends that Bormann (along with Henry Picker and Heinrich Heim, who transcribed the material) distorted the table talks so that the content would be useful to help him win disagreements within the Nazi leadership. Picker noted Bormann would make him insert fictitious statements, and that Bormann wanted their notes to fit in with his own fight against the churches. Nilsson notes that Bormann seemed willing to pursue his anti-Christian stance behind Hitler's back. \nThe office of the Deputy F\u00fchrer had final approval over civil service appointments, and Bormann reviewed the personnel files and made the decisions regarding appointments. This power impinged on the purview of Minister of the Interior Wilhelm Frick, and was an example of the overlapping responsibilities typical of the Nazi regime. Bormann travelled everywhere with Hitler, including trips to Austria in 1938 after the \"Anschluss\" (the annexation of Austria into Nazi Germany), and to the Sudetenland after the signing of the Munich Agreement later that year. Bormann was placed in charge of organising the 1938 Nuremberg Rally, a major annual party event.\nHitler intentionally played top party members against one another and the Nazi Party against the civil service. In this way, he fostered distrust, competition, and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power. He typically did not give written orders; instead he communicated with them verbally or had them conveyed through Bormann. Falling out of favour with Bormann meant that access to Hitler was cut off. Bormann proved to be a master of intricate political infighting. Along with his ability to control access to Hitler, this enabled him to curtail the power of Joseph Goebbels, G\u00f6ring, Himmler, Alfred Rosenberg, Robert Ley, Hans Frank, Speer, and other high-ranking officials, many of whom became his enemies. This ruthless and continuous infighting for power, influence, and Hitler's favour came to characterise the inner workings of the Third Reich.\nAs World War II progressed, Hitler's attention became focused on foreign affairs and the conduct of the war to the exclusion of all else. Hess, not directly engaged in either of these endeavours, became increasingly sidelined from the affairs of the nation and from Hitler's attention; Bormann had successfully supplanted Hess in many of his duties and usurped his position at Hitler's side. Hess was concerned that Germany would face a war on two fronts as plans progressed for Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union scheduled to take place later that year. He flew solo to Britain on 10 May 1941 to seek peace negotiations with the British government. He was arrested on arrival and spent the rest of the war as a British prisoner, eventually receiving a life sentence \u2013 for crimes against peace (planning and preparing a war of aggression), and conspiracy with other German leaders to commit crimes \u2013 at the Nuremberg trials in 1946. Speer later said Hitler described Hess's departure as one of the worst blows of his life, as he considered it a personal betrayal. Hitler ordered Hess to be shot should he return to Germany and abolished the post of Deputy F\u00fchrer on 12 May 1941, assigning Hess's former duties to Bormann, with the title of Head of the \"Parteikanzlei\" (Party Chancellery). In this position he was responsible for all Nazi Party appointments, and was answerable only to Hitler. By a F\u00fchrer decree (\"F\u00fchrererlass\") on 29 May, Bormann also succeeded Hess on the six-member Council of Ministers for Defense of the Reich, which operated as a war cabinet. He simultaneously was awarded cabinet rank equivalent to a \"Reichsminister\" without portfolio. Associates began to refer to him as the \"Brown Eminence\", although never to his face.\nBormann's power and effective reach broadened considerably during the war. By early 1943, the war produced a labour crisis for the regime. Hitler created a three-man committee with representatives of the State, the army, and the Party in an attempt to centralise control of the war economy. The committee members were Hans Lammers (head of the Reich Chancellery), Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, chief of the \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" (Armed Forces High Command; OKW), and Bormann, who controlled the Party. The committee was intended to independently propose measures regardless of the wishes of various ministries, with Hitler reserving most final decisions to himself. The committee, soon known as the \"Dreierausschu\u00df\" (Committee of Three), met eleven times between January and August 1943. However, they ran up against resistance from Hitler's cabinet ministers, who headed deeply entrenched spheres of influence and were excluded from the committee. Seeing it as a threat to their power, Goebbels, G\u00f6ring, and Speer worked together to bring it down. The result was that nothing changed, and the Committee of Three declined into irrelevance.\nRole in \"Kirchenkampf\".\nArticle 24 of the National Socialist Program, issued in 1920, advocated for positive Christianity, and a \"Reichskonkordat\" (Reich Concordat) treaty with the Vatican was signed in 1933, purporting to guarantee religious freedom for Catholics. But many Nazis believed that Christianity was fundamentally incompatible with Nazism. Bormann, who was strongly anti-Christian, agreed. Historian Alan Bullock comments that out of political expediency, Hitler intended to postpone the elimination of the Christian churches until after the war, but his repeated hostile statements against the church indicated to his subordinates that a continuation of the \"Kirchenkampf\" (church struggle) would be tolerated and even encouraged. Richard Steigmann-Gall disagrees with this view.\nBormann was one of the leading proponents of the ongoing campaign against the Christian churches. Speer notes in his memoirs that while drafting plans for \"Welthauptstadt Germania\", the planned rebuilding of Berlin, he was told by Bormann that churches were not to be allocated any building sites. However, on the subject of religion, Bormann's decisions were often countermanded, frequently by Hitler himself. As part of the campaign against the Catholic Church, hundreds of monasteries in Germany and Austria were confiscated by the Gestapo and their occupants were expelled. In 1941, the Catholic Bishop of M\u00fcnster, Clemens August Graf von Galen, publicly protested against this persecution and against Action T4, the Nazi involuntary euthanasia programme under which the mentally ill, physically deformed, and incurably sick were to be killed. In a series of sermons that received international attention, he criticised the programme as illegal and immoral. His sermons led to a widespread protest movement among church leaders, the strongest protest against a Nazi policy up until that point. Bormann and others called for Galen to be hanged, but Hitler and Goebbels concluded that Galen's death would only be viewed as a martyrdom and lead to further unrest. Hitler decided to deal with the issue when the war was over. Steigmann-Gall comments that \"absent is firm evidence\" that Nazism sought to eliminate Christianity.\nGeorge Mosse wrote of Bormann's beliefs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[He believed that] God is present, but as a world-force which presides over the laws of life which the Nazis alone have understood. This non-Christian theism, tied to Nordic blood, was current in Germany long before Bormann wrote down his own thoughts on the matter. It must now be restored, and the catastrophic mistakes of the past centuries, which had put the power of the state into the hands of the Church, must be avoided. The Gauleiters are advised to conquer the influence of the Christian Churches by keeping them divided, encouraging particularism among them...\nRichard Overy describes Bormann as an atheist.\nPersonal Secretary to the \"F\u00fchrer\".\nPreoccupied with military matters and spending most of his time at his military headquarters on the eastern front, Hitler came to rely more and more on Bormann to handle the domestic policies of the country. On 12 April 1943, Hitler officially appointed Bormann as Personal Secretary to the \"F\u00fchrer\". Speer described Bormann as having \"de facto\" control over all domestic matters, and this new appointment gave him the power to act in an official capacity in any matter. Historian Jonathan Petropoulos notes that all \"F\u00fchrer\" decrees were routed through Hans Lammers at the Reich Chancellery, where state affairs were handled.\nBormann was invariably the advocate of extremely harsh, radical measures when it came to the treatment of Jews, the conquered eastern peoples, and prisoners of war. He signed the decree of 31 May 1941 extending the 1935 Nuremberg Laws to the annexed territories of the East. Thereafter, he signed the decree of 9 October 1942 prescribing that the permanent Final Solution in Greater Germany could no longer be solved by emigration, but only by the use of \"ruthless force in the special camps of the East\", that is, extermination in Nazi death camps. A further decree, signed by Bormann on 1 July 1943, gave Adolf Eichmann absolute powers over Jews, who now came under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Gestapo. Historian Richard J. Evans estimates that 5.5 to 6 million Jews, representing two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe, were exterminated by the Nazi regime in the course of The Holocaust.\nKnowing Hitler viewed the Slavs as inferior, Bormann opposed the introduction of German criminal law into the conquered eastern territories. He lobbied for and eventually achieved a strict separate penal code that implemented martial law for the Polish and Jewish inhabitants of these areas. The \"Edict on Criminal Law Practices against Poles and Jews in the Incorporated Eastern Territories\", promulgated 4 December 1941, permitted corporal punishment and death sentences for even the most trivial of offences.\nBormann supported the hard-line approach of Erich Koch, \"Reichskommissar\" in Reichskommissariat Ukraine, in his brutal treatment of Slavic people. Alfred Rosenberg, serving as head of the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories, favoured a more moderate policy. After touring collective farms around Vinnytsia, Ukraine, Bormann was concerned about the health and good physical constitution of the population, as he was concerned that they could constitute a danger to the regime. After discussion with Hitler, he issued a policy directive to Rosenberg that read in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Slavs are to work for us. In so far as we don't need them, they may die. The fertility of the Slavs is undesirable. As to food, they are to not get more than necessary. We are the masters; we come first.\nBormann and Himmler shared responsibility for the \"Volkssturm\" (people's militia), which drafted all remaining able-bodied men aged 16 to 60 into a last-ditch militia founded on 18 October 1944. Poorly equipped and trained, the men were sent to fight on the eastern front, where nearly 175,000 of them were killed without having any discernible impact on the Soviet advance.\nIn early 1945, Bormann edited the Bormann dictations of supposed remarks made by Hitler to Bormann; the authenticity as well as the degree of editing applied by Bormann to Hitler's original remarks are disputed among historians.\nLast days in Berlin.\nOn 16 January 1945, Hitler transferred his headquarters to the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" (\"Leader's bunker\") in Berlin, where he (along with Bormann, Bormann's secretary Else Kr\u00fcger, and others) remained until the end of April. The \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" was located under the Reich Chancellery garden in the government district of the city centre. The Battle of Berlin, the final major Soviet offensive of the war, began on 16 April 1945. By 19 April, the Red Army started to encircle the city. On 20 April, his 56th birthday, Hitler made his last trip above ground. In the ruined garden of the Reich Chancellery, he awarded Iron Crosses to boy soldiers of the Hitler Youth. That afternoon, Berlin was bombarded by Soviet artillery for the first time. On 23 April, Albert Bormann left the bunker complex and flew to the Obersalzberg. He and several others had been ordered by Hitler to leave Berlin.\nIn the early morning hours of 29 April 1945, Wilhelm Burgdorf, Goebbels, Hans Krebs and Bormann witnessed and signed Hitler's last will and testament. In the will, Hitler described Bormann as \"my most faithful Party comrade\" and named him executor of the estate. That same night Hitler married Eva Braun in a civil ceremony.\nAs Soviet forces continued to fight their way into the centre of Berlin, Hitler and Braun committed suicide on the afternoon of 30 April. Braun took cyanide and Hitler shot himself. Pursuant to Hitler's instructions, their bodies were carried up to the Reich Chancellery garden and burned. In accordance with Hitler's last wishes, Bormann was named as Party Minister, thus officially confirming that he held the top position in the Party. Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz was appointed as the new \"Reichspr\u00e4sident\" (President of Germany) and Goebbels became head of government and Chancellor of Germany. Hitler did not name any successor to the title F\u00fchrer. Goebbels and his wife Magda committed suicide the next day.\nThe Battle in Berlin ended when General der Artillerie Helmuth Weidling, commander of the Berlin Defence Area, unconditionally surrendered the city to General Vasily Chuikov, commander of the Soviet 8th Guards Army on 2 May.\nDeath, rumours of survival and discovery of remains.\nAxmann's account of Bormann's death.\nAt around 11:00 pm on 1 May, Bormann left the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" with SS doctor Ludwig Stumpfegger, Hitler Youth leader Artur Axmann, and Hitler's pilot Hans Baur, part of one of the groups attempting to break out of the Soviet encirclement. Bormann carried with him a copy of Hitler's last will and testament. The group left the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" and travelled on foot via an U-Bahn subway tunnel to the Friedrichstra\u00dfe station, where they surfaced. Several members of the party attempted to cross the Spree River at the Weidendammer Bridge while crouching behind a Tiger tank. The tank was hit by an anti-tank round and Bormann and Stumpfegger were knocked to the ground. Bormann, Stumpfegger, and several others eventually crossed the river on their third attempt. Bormann, Stumpfegger, and Axmann walked along the railway tracks to Lehrter station, where Axmann decided to leave the others and go in the opposite direction. When he encountered a Red Army patrol, Axmann doubled back. He saw two bodies, which he later identified as Bormann and Stumpfegger, on a bridge near the railway shunting yard. He did not have time to check thoroughly, so he did not know how they died. Since the Soviets never admitted to finding Bormann's body, his fate remained in doubt for many years.\nTried at Nuremberg \"in absentia\".\nDuring the chaotic days after the war, contradictory reports arose as to Bormann's whereabouts. Sightings were reported in Argentina, Spain, and elsewhere. Bormann's wife was placed under surveillance in case he tried to contact her. Jakob Glas, Bormann's long-time chauffeur, insisted that he saw Bormann in Munich in July 1946. In case Bormann was still alive, multiple public notices about the upcoming Nuremberg trials were placed in newspapers and on the radio in October and November 1945 to notify him of the proceedings against him.\nThe trial got under way on 20 November 1945. Lacking evidence confirming Bormann's death, the International Military Tribunal tried him \"in absentia\", as permitted under article 12 of their charter. He was charged with three counts: conspiracy to wage a war of aggression, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. His prosecution was assigned to Lieutenant Thomas F. Lambert Jr. and his defence to Friedrich Bergold. The prosecution stated that Bormann participated in planning and co-signed virtually all of the antisemitic legislation put forward by the regime. Bergold unsuccessfully proposed that the court could not convict Bormann because he was already dead. Due to the shadowy nature of Bormann's activities, Bergold was unable to refute the prosecution's assertions as to the extent of his involvement in decision making. Bormann was convicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity and acquitted of conspiracy to wage a war of aggression. On 1 October 1946, he was sentenced to death by hanging, with the provision that if he were later found alive, any new facts brought to light by that time could be taken into consideration to reduce or overturn the sentence.\nDiscovery of remains.\nOver the following decades, several organisations, including the CIA and West German government, attempted to locate Bormann without success. In 1964, the West German government offered a reward of 100,000 Deutsche Marks (~\u20ac248,000 or ~US$270,000 in 2023 terms) for information leading to Bormann's capture. Sightings were reported all over the world, including Australia, Denmark, Italy, and South America. In his autobiography, army intelligence officer Reinhard Gehlen claimed that Bormann had been a Soviet spy and had escaped to Moscow. Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal believed that Bormann was living in South America. The West German government declared that its hunt for Bormann was over in 1971.\nIn 1963, a retired postal worker named Albert Krumnow told police that around 8 May 1945, the Soviets had ordered him and his colleagues to bury two bodies found near a railway bridge near Lehrter station (now Berlin Hauptbahnhof). One was dressed in a \"Wehrmacht\" uniform and the other was clad only in his underwear. On the second body, Krumnow's colleague, a man named Wagenpfohl, found an SS doctor's paybook identifying him as Ludwig Stumpfegger. Wagenpfohl gave the paybook to his boss, postal chief Berndt, who turned it over to the Soviets. They in turn destroyed it. Wagenpfohl wrote to Stumpfegger's wife on 14 August 1945, informing her that her husband's body was \"interred with the bodies of several other dead soldiers in the grounds of the Alpendorf in Berlin NW 40, Invalidenstrasse 63.\"\nExcavations on 20\u201321 July 1965 at the site specified by Axmann and Krumnow failed to locate the bodies. However, on 7 December 1972, construction workers uncovered human remains near Lehrter station in West Berlin, only from the spot where Krumnow claimed to have buried them. At the subsequent autopsies, fragments of glass were found in the jaws of both skeletons, suggesting that the men had committed suicide by biting cyanide capsules to avoid capture. Dental records reconstructed from memory in 1945 by Hugo Blaschke identified one skeleton as Bormann's, and damage to the collarbone was consistent with injuries that Bormann's sons reported he had sustained in a riding accident in 1939. Forensic examiners determined that the size of the skeleton and shape of the skull were identical to Bormann's. Likewise, the second skeleton was deemed to be Stumpfegger's, since it was of similar height to his last known proportions. Composite photographs, in which images of the skulls were overlaid on photographs of the men's faces, were completely congruent. Facial reconstruction was undertaken in early 1973 on both skulls to confirm the identities of the bodies. Soon afterward, the West German government declared Bormann dead. Bormann's family was not permitted to cremate the body, in case further forensic examination later proved necessary. The family refused burial and refused to take possession of the remains. The bones were placed in a vault at the Public Prosecutor's Office in Karlsruhe, which was at the time being shared with the Federal Court of Justice.\nOn 4 May 1998, the remains were conclusively identified as Bormann's after German authorities ordered genetic testing on fragments of the skull. The testing was led by Wolfgang Eisenmenger, Professor of Forensic Science at Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich. Tests using DNA from one of his relatives identified the skull as that of Bormann.\nAfter being released to his family, Bormann's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered over the Baltic Sea on 16 August 1999. This was done in part to prevent Neo Nazis from using any potential tomb containing Bormann's remains to create a Neo-Nazi monument.\nPersonal life.\nOn 2 September 1929, Bormann married 19-year-old Gerda Buch (23 October 1909 \u2013 23 March 1946), whose father, Major Walter Buch, served as a chairman of the \"Untersuchung und Schlichtungs-Ausschuss\" (USCHLA; Investigation and Settlement Committee), which was responsible for settling disputes within the party. Hitler was a frequent visitor to the Buch house, and it was here that Bormann met him. Hess and Hitler served as witnesses at his wedding. Bormann also had a series of mistresses, including Manja Behrens, an actress.\nMartin and Gerda Bormann had ten children:\nGerda Bormann and the children fled Obersalzberg for Italy on 25 April 1945 after an Allied air attack. She died of cancer on 23 March 1946 in Merano, Italy. Bormann's nine remaining children survived the war and were cared for in foster homes. The eldest son, Martin, was ordained a Roman Catholic priest and worked in Africa as a missionary. He later left the priesthood and married.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20619", "revid": "2663537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20619", "title": "Madeline Amy Sweeney", "text": "American flight attendant (1965\u20132001)\nMadeline Amy Sweeney (n\u00e9e Todd; December 14, 1965\u00a0\u2013 September 11, 2001) was an American flight attendant who was killed when American Airlines Flight 11 was deliberately crashed into the World Trade Center by hijackers during the September 11 attacks.\nAmerican Airlines Flight 11.\nOn September 11, 2001, Sweeney, who had been a flight attendant for 12\u00a0years, was asked by American Airlines to take an extra shift because the other crew member, who was assigned to the position, was ill. Normally, she would only work part-time on weekends.\nAt approximately 7:15\u00a0a.m., before the plane had taken off, Sweeney made a cellular telephone call to her husband Mike, from the plane\u00a0\u2013 which he deemed to be \"highly unusual\". She was feeling low about being at work and missing out on a chance to see their five-year old daughter Anna, a kindergartener, off to school. Mike comforted her by saying she would have plenty of days ahead to see their kids off to school. After the plane was hijacked, she relayed a report on the phone with manager Michael Woodward of the seat numbers of the hijackers which later helped investigators to determine their identities: 9D (Mohamed Atta), 9G (Abdulaziz al-Omari), and 10B (Satam al-Suqami). Sweeney said that one of the hijackers had shown her a device with red and yellow wires that appeared to be a bomb, and another of whom \u201cspoke English very well\u201d (Atta).\nAt 8:46\u00a0a.m., Sweeney was on the phone with Woodward when the plane crashed into the North Tower: \"I see water. I see buildings. I see buildings! We are flying low. We are flying very, very low. We are flying way too low. Oh my God we are flying way too low. Oh my God!\" Sweeney, along with everyone else on the plane and hundreds of others in the building, was killed instantly.\nLegacy.\nOn February 11, 2002, Sweeney was commemorated in a series of new annual bravery awards initiated by the Government of Massachusetts. The annual Madeline Amy Sweeney Award for Civilian Bravery is awarded every September\u00a011 to at least one Massachusetts resident who displayed extraordinary courage in defending or saving the lives of others. The first recipients were Sweeney, Flight 11 Captain John Ogonowski, and Sweeney's fellow flight attendant, Betty Ong, who had also relayed information about the hijacking to personnel on the ground. They were all residents of Massachusetts. Relatives of all three accepted the awards on their behalf.\nActress Irene Carl portrayed Sweeney in BBC docudrama \"Zero Hour\" Season 1: Episode 2 (2004) called \"The Last Hour of Flight 11\".\nIn August 2002, some of Sweeney's remains had been identified, allowing the family to arrange for a funeral. She was buried at Mount Hope Cemetery\nin Acton, Massachusetts. In subsequent years, more of her remains would be identified and reunited in her burial plot. At the National September 11 Memorial, Sweeney is memorialized at the North Pool, on Panel N-74, along with other passengers from Flight 11.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20621", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20621", "title": "Microtubule", "text": "Polymer of tubulin that forms part of the cytoskeleton\nMicrotubules are biopolymers of tubulin that form part of the cytoskeleton to provide structure and shape to a eukaryotic cell. Microtubules can be as long as 50\u00a0micrometres, as wide as 23 to 27\u00a0nm and have an inner diameter between 11 and 15\u00a0nm. They are formed by the polymerization of a dimer of two globular proteins, alpha and beta tubulin into protofilaments that can then associate laterally to form a hollow tube, the microtubule. The most common form of a microtubule consists of 13 protofilaments in the tubular arrangement.\nMicrotubules play an important role in a number of cellular processes. They are involved in maintaining the structure of the cell and, together with microfilaments and intermediate filaments, they form the cytoskeleton. They also make up the internal structure of cilia and flagella. They provide platforms for intracellular transport and are involved in a variety of cellular processes, including the movement of secretory vesicles, organelles, and intracellular macromolecular assemblies. They are also involved in cell division (by mitosis and meiosis) and are the main constituents of mitotic spindles, which are used to pull eukaryotic chromosomes apart.\nMicrotubules are nucleated and organized by microtubule-organizing centres, such as the centrosome found in the center of many animal cells or the basal bodies of cilia and flagella, or the spindle pole bodies found in most fungi.\nThere are many proteins that bind to microtubules, including the motor proteins dynein and kinesin, microtubule-severing proteins like katanin, and other proteins important for regulating microtubule dynamics. Recently an actin-like protein has been found in the gram-positive bacterium \"Bacillus thuringiensis\", which forms a microtubule-like structure called a nanotubule, involved in plasmid segregation. Other bacterial microtubules have a ring of five protofilaments.\nHistory.\nTubulin and microtubule-mediated processes, like cell locomotion, were seen by early microscopists, like Van Leeuwenhoek (1677). However, the fibrous nature of flagella and other structures were discovered two centuries later, with improved light microscopes, and confirmed in the 20th century with the electron microscope and biochemical studies.\n\"In vitro\" assays for microtubule motor proteins such as dynein and kinesin are researched by fluorescently tagging a microtubule and fixing either the microtubule or motor proteins to a microscope slide, then visualizing the slide with video-enhanced microscopy to record the travel of the motor proteins. This allows the movement of the motor proteins along the microtubule or the microtubule moving across the motor proteins. Consequently, some microtubule processes can be determined by kymograph.\nStructure.\nIn eukaryotes, microtubules are long, hollow cylinders made up of polymerized \u03b1- and \u03b2-tubulin dimers. The inner space of the hollow microtubule cylinders is referred to as the lumen. The \u03b1 and \u03b2-tubulin subunits are ~50% identical at the amino acid level, and both have a molecular weight of approximately 50 kDa.\nThese \u03b1/\u03b2-tubulin dimers polymerize end-to-end into linear protofilaments that associate laterally to form a single microtubule, which can then be extended by the addition of more \u03b1/\u03b2-tubulin dimers. Typically, microtubules are formed by the parallel association of thirteen protofilaments, although microtubules composed of fewer or more protofilaments have been observed in various species\u00a0 as well as \"in vitro\".\nMicrotubules have a distinct polarity that is critical for their biological function. Tubulin polymerizes end to end, with the \u03b2-subunits of one tubulin dimer contacting the \u03b1-subunits of the next dimer. Therefore, in a protofilament, one end will have the \u03b1-subunits exposed while the other end will have the \u03b2-subunits exposed. These ends are designated the (\u2212) and (+) ends, respectively. The protofilaments bundle parallel to one another with the same polarity, so, in a microtubule, there is one end, the (+) end, with only \u03b2-subunits exposed, while the other end, the (\u2212) end, has only \u03b1-subunits exposed. While microtubule elongation can occur at both the (+) and (\u2212) ends, it is significantly more rapid at the (+) end.\nThe lateral association of the protofilaments generates a pseudo-helical structure, with one turn of the helix containing 13 tubulin dimers, each from a different protofilament. In the most common \"13-3\" architecture, the 13th tubulin dimer interacts with the next tubulin dimer with a vertical offset of 3 tubulin monomers due to the helicity of the turn. There are other alternative architectures, such as 11-3, 12-3, 14-3, 15-4, or 16-4, that have been detected at a much lower occurrence. Microtubules can also morph into other forms such as helical filaments, which are observed in protist organisms like foraminifera. There are two distinct types of interactions that can occur between the subunits of lateral protofilaments within the microtubule called the A-type and B-type lattices. In the A-type lattice, the lateral associations of protofilaments occur between adjacent \u03b1 and \u03b2-tubulin subunits (i.e. an \u03b1-tubulin subunit from one protofilament interacts with a \u03b2-tubulin subunit from an adjacent protofilament). In the B-type lattice, the \u03b1 and \u03b2-tubulin subunits from one protofilament interact with the \u03b1 and \u03b2-tubulin subunits from an adjacent protofilament, respectively. Experimental studies have shown that the B-type lattice is the primary arrangement within microtubules. However, in most microtubules there is a seam in which tubulin subunits interact \u03b1-\u03b2.\nThe sequence and exact composition of molecules during microtubule formation can thus be summarised as follows: A \u03b2-tubulin connects in the context of a non-existent covalent bond with an \u03b1-tubulin, which in connected form are a heterodimer, since they consist of two different polypeptides (\u03b2-tubulin and \u03b1-tubulin). So after the heterodimers are formed, they join together to form long chains that rise figuratively in one direction (e.g. upwards). These heterodimers, which are connected in a certain direction, form protofilaments. These long chains (protofilaments) now gradually accumulate next to each other so that a tube-like structure is formed, which has a lumen typical of a tube. Accordingly, mostly 13 protofilaments form the outer wall of the microtubules. The heterodimers consist of a positive and negative end, with alpha-tubulin forming the negative end and beta-tubulin the positive end. Due to the fact that the heterodimers are stacked on top of each other, there is always a negative and positive end. Microtubules grow by an addition of heterodimers at the plus end.\nSome species of \"Prosthecobacter\" also contain microtubules. The structure of these bacterial microtubules is similar to that of eukaryotic microtubules, consisting of a hollow tube of protofilaments assembled from heterodimers of bacterial tubulin A (BtubA) and bacterial tubulin B (BtubB). Both BtubA and BtubB share features of both \u03b1- and \u03b2-tubulin. Unlike eukaryotic microtubules, bacterial microtubules do not require chaperones to fold. In contrast to the 13 protofilaments of eukaryotic microtubules, bacterial microtubules comprise only five.\nIntracellular organization.\nMicrotubules are part of the cytoskeleton, a structural network within the cell's cytoplasm. The roles of the microtubule cytoskeleton include mechanical support, organization of the cytoplasm, transport, motility and chromosome segregation. In developing neurons microtubules are known as neurotubules, and they can modulate the dynamics of actin, another component of the cytoskeleton. A microtubule is capable of growing and shrinking in order to generate force, and there are motor proteins such as kinesins and dynein that allow organelles and other cellular components (such as mRNA) to be carried along a microtubule, using specific adaptor proteins. This combination of roles makes microtubules important for organizing and moving intracellular constituents/cargo.\nThe organization of microtubules in the cell is cell-type specific. In epithelia, the minus-ends of the microtubule polymer are anchored near the site of cell-cell contact and organized along the apical-basal axis. After nucleation, the minus-ends are released and then re-anchored in the periphery by factors such as ninein and PLEKHA7. In this manner, they can facilitate the transport of proteins, vesicles and organelles along the apical-basal axis of the cell. In fibroblasts and other mesenchymal cell-types, microtubules are anchored at the centrosome and radiate with their plus-ends outwards towards the cell periphery (as shown in the first figure). In these cells, the microtubules play important roles in cell migration. Moreover, the polarity of microtubules is acted upon by motor proteins, which organize many components of the cell, including the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus.\nMicrotubule polymerization.\nNucleation.\nNucleation is the event that initiates the formation of microtubules from the tubulin dimer. Microtubules are typically nucleated and organized by organelles called microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs). Contained within the MTOC is another type of tubulin, \u03b3-tubulin, which is distinct from the \u03b1- and \u03b2-subunits of the microtubules themselves. The \u03b3-tubulin combines with several other associated proteins to form a lock washer-like structure known as the \"\u03b3-tubulin ring complex\" (\u03b3-TuRC). This complex acts as a template for \u03b1/\u03b2-tubulin dimers to begin polymerization; it acts as a cap of the (\u2212) end while microtubule growth continues away from the MTOC in the (+) direction.\nThe centrosome is the primary MTOC of most cell types. However, microtubules can be nucleated from other sites as well. For example, cilia and flagella have MTOCs at their base termed basal bodies. In addition, work from the Kaverina group at Vanderbilt, as well as others, suggests that the Golgi apparatus can serve as an important platform for the nucleation of microtubules. Because nucleation from the centrosome is inherently symmetrical, Golgi-associated microtubule nucleation may allow the cell to establish asymmetry in the microtubule network. In recent studies, the Vale group at UCSF identified the protein complex augmin as a critical factor for centrosome-dependent, spindle-based microtubule generation. It that has been shown to interact with \u03b3-TuRC and increase microtubule density around the mitotic spindle origin.\nSome cell types, such as plant cells, do not contain well defined MTOCs. In these cells, microtubules are nucleated from discrete sites in the cytoplasm. Other cell types, such as trypanosomatid parasites, have a MTOC but it is permanently found at the base of a flagellum. Here, nucleation of microtubules for structural roles and for generation of the mitotic spindle is not from a canonical centriole-like MTOC.\nPolymerization.\nFollowing the initial nucleation event, tubulin monomers must be added to the growing polymer. The process of adding or removing monomers depends on the concentration of \u03b1\u03b2-tubulin dimers in solution in relation to the critical concentration, which is the steady state concentration of dimers at which there is no longer any net assembly or disassembly at the end of the microtubule. If the dimer concentration is greater than the critical concentration, the microtubule will polymerize and grow. If the concentration is less than the critical concentration, the length of the microtubule will decrease.\nMicrotubule dynamics.\nDynamic instability.\nDynamic instability refers to the coexistence of assembly and disassembly at the ends of a microtubule. The microtubule can dynamically switch between growing and shrinking phases in this region. Tubulin dimers can bind two molecules of GTP, one of which can be hydrolyzed subsequent to assembly. During polymerization, the tubulin dimers are in the GTP-bound state. The GTP bound to \u03b1-tubulin is stable and it plays a structural function in this bound state. However, the GTP bound to \u03b2-tubulin may be hydrolyzed to GDP shortly after assembly. The assembly properties of GDP-tubulin are different from those of GTP-tubulin, as GDP-tubulin is more prone to depolymerization. A GDP-bound tubulin subunit at the tip of a microtubule will tend to fall off, although a GDP-bound tubulin in the middle of a microtubule cannot spontaneously pop out of the polymer. Since tubulin adds onto the end of the microtubule in the GTP-bound state, a cap of GTP-bound tubulin is proposed to exist at the tip of the microtubule, protecting it from disassembly. When hydrolysis catches up to the tip of the microtubule, it begins a rapid depolymerization and shrinkage. This switch from growth to shrinking is called a catastrophe. GTP-bound tubulin can begin adding to the tip of the microtubule again, providing a new cap and protecting the microtubule from shrinking. This is referred to as \"rescue\".\n\"Search and capture\" model.\nIn 1986, Marc Kirschner and Tim Mitchison proposed that microtubules use their dynamic properties of growth and shrinkage at their plus ends to probe the three dimensional space of the cell. Plus ends that encounter kinetochores or sites of polarity become captured and no longer display growth or shrinkage. In contrast to normal dynamic microtubules, which have a half-life of 5\u201310 minutes, the captured microtubules can last for hours. This idea is commonly known as the \"search and capture\" model. Indeed, work since then has largely validated this idea. At the kinetochore, a variety of complexes have been shown to capture microtubule (+)-ends. Moreover, a (+)-end capping activity for interphase microtubules has also been described. This later activity is mediated by formins, the adenomatous polyposis coli protein, and EB1, a protein that tracks along the growing plus ends of microtubules.\nRegulation of microtubule dynamics.\nPost-translational modifications.\nAlthough most microtubules have a half-life of 5\u201310 minutes, certain microtubules can remain stable for hours. These stabilized microtubules accumulate post-translational modifications on their tubulin subunits by the action of microtubule-bound enzymes. However, once the microtubule depolymerizes, most of these modifications are rapidly reversed by soluble enzymes. Since most modification reactions are slow while their reverse reactions are rapid, modified tubulin is only detected on long-lived stable microtubules. Most of these modifications occur on the C-terminal region of alpha-tubulin. This region, which is rich in negatively charged glutamate, forms relatively unstructured tails that project out from the microtubule and form contacts with motors. Thus, it is believed that tubulin modifications regulate the interaction of motors with the microtubule. Since these stable modified microtubules are typically oriented towards the site of cell polarity in interphase cells, this subset of modified microtubules provide a specialized route that helps deliver vesicles to these polarized zones. These modifications include:\nTubulin is also known to be phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, sumoylated, and palmitoylated.\nTubulin-binding drugs and chemical effects.\nA wide variety of drugs are able to bind to tubulin and modify its assembly properties. These drugs can have an effect at intracellular concentrations much lower than that of tubulin. This interference with microtubule dynamics can have the effect of stopping a cell's cell cycle and can lead to programmed cell death or apoptosis. However, there are data to suggest that interference of microtubule dynamics is insufficient to block the cells undergoing mitosis. These studies have demonstrated that suppression of dynamics occurs at concentrations lower than those needed to block mitosis. Suppression of microtubule dynamics by tubulin mutations or by drug treatment have been shown to inhibit cell migration. Both microtubule stabilizers and destabilizers can suppress microtubule dynamics.\nThe drugs that can alter microtubule dynamics include:\nTaxanes (alone or in combination with platinum derivatives (carboplatine) or gemcitabine) are used against breast and gynecological malignancies, squamous-cell carcinomas (head-and-neck cancers, some lung cancers), etc.\nExpression of \u03b23-tubulin has been reported to alter cellular responses to drug-induced suppression of microtubule dynamics. In general the dynamics are normally suppressed by low, subtoxic concentrations of microtubule drugs that also inhibit cell migration. However, incorporating \u03b23-tubulin into microtubules increases the concentration of drug that is needed to suppress dynamics and inhibit cell migration. Thus, tumors that express \u03b23-tubulin are not only resistant to the cytotoxic effects of microtubule targeted drugs, but also to their ability to suppress tumor metastasis. Moreover, expression of \u03b23-tubulin also counteracts the ability of these drugs to inhibit angiogenesis which is normally another important facet of their action.\nMicrotubule polymers are extremely sensitive to various environmental effects. Very low levels of free calcium can destabilize microtubules and this prevented early researchers from studying the polymer in vitro. Cold temperatures also cause rapid depolymerization of microtubules. In contrast, heavy water promotes microtubule polymer stability.\nProteins that interact with microtubules.\nMicrotubule-associated proteins (MAPs).\nMAPs have been shown to play a crucial role in the regulation of microtubule dynamics \"in-vivo\". The rates of microtubule polymerization, depolymerization, and catastrophe vary depending on which microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) are present. The originally identified MAPs from brain tissue can be classified into two groups based on their molecular weight. This first class comprises MAPs with a molecular weight below 55-62 kDa, and are called \u03c4 (tau) proteins. \"In-vitro\", tau proteins have been shown to directly bind microtubules, promote nucleation and prevent disassembly, and to induce the formation of parallel arrays. Additionally, tau proteins have also been shown to stabilize microtubules in axons and have been implicated in Alzheimer's disease. The second class is composed of MAPs with a molecular weight of 200-1000 kDa, of which there are four known types: MAP-1, MAP-2, MAP-3 and MAP-4. MAP-1 proteins consists of a set of three different proteins: A, B and C. The C protein plays an important role in the retrograde transport of vesicles and is also known as cytoplasmic dynein. MAP-2 proteins are located in the dendrites and in the body of neurons, where they bind with other cytoskeletal filaments. The MAP-4 proteins are found in the majority of cells and stabilize microtubules. In addition to MAPs that have a stabilizing effect on microtubule structure, other MAPs can have a destabilizing effect either by cleaving or by inducing depolymerization of microtubules. Three proteins called katanin, spastin, and fidgetin have been observed to regulate the number and length of microtubules via their destabilizing activities. Furthermore, CRACD-like protein is predicted to be localized to the microtubules.\nMAPs are determinants of different cytoskeletal forms of axons and dendrites, with microtubules being farther apart in the dendrites \nPlus-end tracking proteins (+TIPs).\nPlus end tracking proteins are MAP proteins which bind to the tips of growing microtubules and play an important role in regulating microtubule dynamics. For example, +TIPs have been observed to participate in the interactions of microtubules with chromosomes during mitosis. The first MAP to be identified as a +TIP was CLIP170 (cytoplasmic linker protein), which has been shown to play a role in microtubule depolymerization rescue events. Additional examples of +TIPs include EB1, EB2, EB3, p150Glued, Dynamitin, Lis1, CLIP115, CLASP1, and CLASP2.\nMotor proteins.\nMicrotubules can act as substrates for motor proteins that are involved in important cellular functions such as vesicle trafficking and cell division. Unlike other microtubule-associated proteins, motor proteins utilize the energy from ATP hydrolysis to generate mechanical work that moves the protein along the substrate. The major motor proteins that interact with microtubules are kinesin, which usually moves toward the (+) end of the microtubule, and dynein, which moves toward the (\u2212) end.\nSome viruses (including retroviruses, herpesviruses, parvoviruses, and adenoviruses) that require access to the nucleus to replicate their genomes attach to motor proteins.\nMitosis.\nCentrosomes.\nThe centrosome is the main MTOC (microtubule organizing center) of the cell during mitosis. Each centrosome is made up of two cylinders called centrioles, oriented at right angles to each other. The centriole is formed from 9 main microtubules, each having two partial microtubules attached to it. Each centriole is approximately 400\u00a0nm long and around 200\u00a0nm in circumference.\nThe centrosome is critical to mitosis as most microtubules involved in the process originate from the centrosome. The minus ends of each microtubule begin at the centrosome, while the plus ends radiate out in all directions. Thus the centrosome is also important in maintaining the polarity of microtubules during mitosis.\nMost cells only have one centrosome for most of their cell cycle, however, right before mitosis, the centrosome duplicates, and the cell contains two centrosomes. Some of the microtubules that radiate from the centrosome grow directly away from the sister centrosome. These microtubules are called astral microtubules. With the help of these astral microtubules the centrosomes move away from each other towards opposite sides of the cell. Once there, other types of microtubules necessary for mitosis, including interpolar microtubules and K-fibers can begin to form.\nA final important note about the centrosomes and microtubules during mitosis is that while the centrosome is the MTOC for the microtubules necessary for mitosis, research has shown that once the microtubules themselves are formed and in the correct place the centrosomes themselves are not needed for mitosis to occur.\nMicrotubule subclasses.\nAstral microtubules are a subclass of microtubules which only exist during and around mitosis. They originate from the centrosome, but do not interact with the chromosomes, kinetochores, or with the microtubules originating from the other centrosome. Instead their microtubules radiate towards the cell membrane. Once there they interact with specific motor proteins which create force that pull the microtubules, and thus the entire centrosome towards the cell membrane. As stated above, this helps the centrosomes orient themselves away from each other in the cell. However these astral microtubules do not interact with the mitotic spindle itself. Experiments have shown that without these astral microtubules, the mitotic spindle can form, however its orientation in the cell is not always correct and thus mitosis does not occur as effectively. Another key function of the astral microtubules is to aid in cytokinesis. Astral microtubules interact with motor proteins at the cell membrane to pull the spindle and the entire cell apart once the chromosomes have been replicated.\nInterpolar/Polar microtubules are a class of microtubules which also radiate out from the centrosome during mitosis. These microtubules radiate towards the mitotic spindle, unlike astral microtubules. Interpolar microtubules are both the most abundant and dynamic subclass of microtubules during mitosis. Around 95 percent of microtubules in the mitotic spindle can be characterized as interpolar. Furthermore, the half life of these microtubules is extremely short as it is less than one minute. Interpolar microtubules that do not attach to the kinetochores can aid in chromosome congregation through lateral interaction with the kinetochores.\nK fibers/Kinetochore microtubules are the third important subclass of mitotic microtubules. These microtubules form direct connections with the kinetochores in the mitotic spindle. Each K fiber is composed of 20\u201340 parallel microtubules, forming a strong tube which is attached at one end to the centrosome and on the other to the kinetochore, located in the center of each chromosome. Since each centrosome has a K fiber connecting to each pair of chromosomes, the chromosomes become tethered in the middle of the mitotic spindle by the K fibers. K fibers have a much longer half life than interpolar microtubules, at between 4 and 8 minutes. During the end of mitoses, the microtubules forming each K fiber begin to disassociate, thus shorting the K fibers. As the K fibers shorten the pair chromosomes are pulled apart right before cytokinesis. Previously, some researchers believed that K fibers form at their minus end originating from the centrosome just like other microtubules, however, new research has pointed to a different mechanism. In this new mechanism, the K fibers are initially stabilized at their plus end by the kinetochores and grow out from there. The minus end of these K fibers eventually connect to an existing Interpolar microtubule and are eventually connected to the centrosome in this way.\nMicrotubule nuclear in the mitotic spindle.\nMost of the microtubules that form the mitotic spindle originate from the centrosome. Originally it was thought that all of these microtubules originated from the centrosome via a method called search and capture, described in more detail in a section above, however new research has shown that there are addition means of microtubule nucleation during mitosis. One of the most important of these additional means of microtubule nucleation is the RAN-GTP pathway. RAN-GTP associates with chromatin during mitosis to create a gradient that allows for local nucleation of microtubules near the chromosomes. Furthermore, a second pathway known as the augmin/HAUS complex (some organisms use the more studied augmin complex, while others such as humans use an analogous complex called HAUS) acts an additional means of microtubule nucleation in the mitotic spindle.\nFunctions.\nCell migration.\nMicrotubule plus ends are often localized to particular structures. In polarized interphase cells, microtubules are disproportionately oriented from the MTOC toward the site of polarity, such as the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts. This configuration is thought to help deliver microtubule-bound vesicles from the Golgi to the site of polarity.\nDynamic instability of microtubules is also required for the migration of most mammalian cells that crawl. Dynamic microtubules regulate the levels of key G-proteins such as RhoA and Rac1, which regulate cell contractility and cell spreading. Dynamic microtubules are also required to trigger focal adhesion disassembly, which is necessary for migration. It has been found that microtubules act as \"struts\" that counteract the contractile forces that are needed for trailing edge retraction during cell movement. When microtubules in the trailing edge of cell are dynamic, they are able to remodel to allow retraction. When dynamics are suppressed, microtubules cannot remodel and, therefore, oppose the contractile forces. The morphology of cells with suppressed microtubule dynamics indicate that cells can extend the front edge (polarized in the direction of movement), but have difficulty retracting their trailing edge. On the other hand, high drug concentrations, or microtubule mutations that depolymerize the microtubules, can restore cell migration but there is a loss of directionality. It can be concluded that microtubules act both to restrain cell movement and to establish directionality.\nCilia and flagella.\nMicrotubules have a major structural role in eukaryotic cilia and flagella. Cilia and flagella always extend directly from a MTOC, in this case termed the basal body. The action of the dynein motor proteins on the various microtubule strands that run along a cilium or flagellum allows the organelle to bend and generate force for swimming, moving extracellular material, and other roles. Prokaryotes possess tubulin-like proteins including FtsZ. However, prokaryotic flagella are entirely different in structure from eukaryotic flagella and do not contain microtubule-based structures.\nDevelopment.\nThe cytoskeleton formed by microtubules is essential to the morphogenetic process of an organism's development. For example, a network of polarized microtubules is required within the oocyte of \"Drosophila melanogaster\" during its embryogenesis in order to establish the axis of the egg. Signals sent between the follicular cells and the oocyte (such as factors similar to epidermal growth factor) cause the reorganization of the microtubules so that their (-) ends are located in the lower part of the oocyte, polarizing the structure and leading to the appearance of an anterior-posterior axis. This involvement in the body's architecture is also seen in mammals.\nAnother area where microtubules are essential is the development of the nervous system in higher vertebrates, where tubulin's dynamics and those of the associated proteins (such as the microtubule-associated proteins) are finely controlled during the development of the nervous system.\nGene regulation.\nThe cellular cytoskeleton is a dynamic system that functions on many different levels: In addition to giving the cell a particular form and supporting the transport of vesicles and organelles, it can also influence gene expression. The signal transduction mechanisms involved in this communication are little understood. However, the relationship between the drug-mediated depolymerization of microtubules, and the specific expression of transcription factors has been described, which has provided information on the differential expression of the genes depending on the presence of these factors. This communication between the cytoskeleton and the regulation of the cellular response is also related to the action of growth factors: for example, this relation exists for connective tissue growth factor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20622", "revid": "50961685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20622", "title": "Militia", "text": "Force of non-professional soldiers\nA militia ( ) is a military or paramilitary force that comprises civilian members, as opposed to a professional standing army of regular, full-time military personnel. Militias may be raised in times of need to support regular troops or serve as a pool of available manpower for regular forces to draw from.\nWhen acting independently, militias are generally unable to hold ground against regular forces. Militias commonly support regular troops by skirmishing, holding fortifications, or conducting irregular warfare, instead of undertaking offensive campaigns by themselves. However, militias may also engage in defense activities to protect a community, its territory, property, and laws. For example, naval militias may comprise fishermen and other civilians which are organized and sanctioned by a state to enforce its maritime boundaries.\nBeginning in the late 20th century, some militias (in particular officially recognized and sanctioned militias of a government) act as professional forces, while still being part-time or on-call organizations. For instance, members of the part-time United States National Guard militia are considered professional soldiers, as they are trained to the same standards that their full-time, active duty counterparts are. Militias may nonetheless operate outside of a state's legal jurisdiction, taking the form of a private military force, irregular military, or guerilla forces.\nIn countries with conscription, the term \"militia\" may refer to the entire able-bodied population available, legally obliged, or who actually respond to be called to arms. In Russia and some countries of the former Soviet Union, an official reserve army composed of citizen soldiers is known as the \"militsiya\". \nEtymology.\n\"Militia\" derives from Latin roots:\nThe word \"militia\" dates back to ancient Rome, and more recently to at least 1590 when it was recorded in a book by Sir John Smythe, \"Certain Discourses Military\" with the meanings: a military force; a body of soldiers and military affairs; a body of military discipline\nThe word Militia comes from ancient Latin, in which it meant defense service, as distinguished from a body of (armed) defenders which would be \"volgus militum\". The term is used by several countries with the meaning of \"defense activity\" indicating it is taken directly from Latin.\nHistory.\nFrance.\nThe first notable militia in French history was the resistance of the Gauls to invasion by the Romans until they were defeated by Julius Caesar. Centuries later, Joan of Arc organized and led a militia until her capture and execution in 1431. This settled the succession to the French crown and laid the basis for the formation of the modern nation of France.\nDuring the French Revolution the National Guard was a political home defense militia. The lev\u00e9e en masse was a conscription army used during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars.\nAt the time of the Franco-Prussian War, the Parisian National Guard engaged the Prussian Army and later rebelled against the Versailles Army under Marshal McMahon.\nUnder German occupation during World War II, a militia usually called the French Resistance emerged to conduct a guerrilla war of attrition against German forces and prepare the way for the D-Day Allied Invasion of France. The Resistance militia were opposed by the collaborationist French Militia\u2014the paramilitary police force of the German puppet state of Vichy.\nAlthough defunct from 1871 until 2016, the French National Guard has now been reestablished for homeland security purposes.\nGermany.\nThe earliest reports of Germanic militias was the system of hundreds described in AD 98 by the Roman historian Tacitus as the \"centeni.\" They were similar in nature to the Anglo-Saxon \"fyrd\".\nFreikorps (German for \"Free Corps\") was originally applied to voluntary armies. The first \"Freikorps\" were recruited by Frederick II of Prussia during the Seven Years' War. These troops were regarded as unreliable by regular armies, so they were mainly used as sentries and for minor duties. During the Napoleonic occupation, organizations such as the Lutzow Free Corps fought against the occupiers and later joined the allied forces as regular soldiers.\nHowever, after 1918, the term was used for nationalist paramilitary organizations that sprang up around Germany as soldiers returned in defeat from World War I. They were one of the many Weimar paramilitary groups active during that time. They received considerable support from Gustav Noske, the German Defence Minister who used them to crush the Spartakist League with enormous violence, including the murders of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg on January15, 1919. Militia were also used to put down the Bavarian Soviet Republic in 1919. They were officially \"disbanded\" in 1920, resulting in the ill-fated Kapp Putsch in March 1920. The \"Einwohnerwehr\", active in Germany from 1919 to 1921 was a paramilitary citizens' militia consisting of hundreds of thousands of mostly former servicemen. Formed by the Prussian Ministry of the Interior on April15, 1919, to allow citizens to protect themselves from looters, armed gangs, and revolutionaries, the \"Einwohnerwehr\" was under the command of the local \"Reichswehr\" regiments, which supplied its guns. In 1921, the Berlin government dissolved the \"Einwohnerwehr\". Many of its members went on to join the Nazi Party.\nIn 1921 the Nazi Party created the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA; Storm Detachment; Brownshirts), which was the first paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party and served as a Nazi militia whose initial assignment was to protect Nazi leaders at rallies and assemblies. The SA also took part in street battles against the forces of rival political parties and violent actions against Jews. From the SA sprung the Schutzstaffel (SS; Protective Squadron) which grew to become one of the largest and most powerful groups in Nazi Germany, which Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS Heinrich Himmler (the leader of the SS from 1929) envisioned as an elite group of guards. The Waffen-SS, the military branch of the SS, became a de facto fourth branch of the Wehrmacht.\nIn 1944\u20131945, as World War II came to a close in Europe, the German high command deployed increasing numbers of Volkssturm units to combat duties. These regiments were composed of men, women and children too old, young or otherwise unfit for service in the Wehrmacht (German Regular Army). Their primary role was assisting the army with fortification duties and digging anti-tank ditches. As the shortage of manpower became severe, they were used as front line infantry, most often in urban settings. Due to the physical state of members, almost non-existent training and shortage of weapons, there was not much the \"Volkssturm\" could do except act like shields for regular army units.\nGreat Britain and Ireland.\nOrigins.\nThe obligation to serve in the militia (also known as the \"Constitutional Force\") in England derives from a common law tradition, and dates back to Anglo-Saxon times. The tradition was that all able-bodied males were liable to be called out to serve in one of two organisations. These were the posse comitatus, an \"ad hoc\" assembly called together by a law officer to apprehend lawbreakers, and the fyrd, a military body intended to preserve internal order or defend the locality against an invader. The latter developed into the militia, and was usually embodied by a royal warrant. Service in each organisation involved different levels of preparedness.\n16th and 17th centuries.\nWith the decay of the feudal system and the military revolution of the 16th century, the militia began to become an important institution in English life. It was organised on the basis of the shire county, and was one of the responsibilities of the Lord Lieutenant, a royal official (usually a trusted nobleman). Each of the county hundreds was likewise the responsibility of a Deputy Lieutenant, who relayed orders to the justices of the peace or magistrates. Every parish furnished a quota of eligible men, whose names were recorded on muster rolls. Likewise, each household was assessed for the purpose of finding weapons, armour, horses, or their financial equivalent, according to their status. The militia was supposed to be mustered for training purposes from time to time, but this was rarely done. The militia regiments were consequently ill-prepared for an emergency, and could not be relied upon to serve outside their own counties. This state of affairs concerned many people. Consequently, an elite force was created, composed of members of the militia who were prepared to meet regularly for military training and exercise. These were formed into trained band regiments, particularly in the City of London, where the Artillery Ground was used for training. The trained bands performed an important role in the English Civil War on the side of parliament, in marching to raise the siege of Gloucester (5 September 1643). Except for the London trained bands, both sides in the Civil War made little use of the militia, preferring to recruit their armies by other means.\nMilitia in the English Empire and the British Empire.\nAs successful English settlement of North America began to take place in 1607 in the face of the hostile intentions of the powerful Spanish, and of the native populations, it became immediately necessary to raise militia amongst the settlers. The militia in Jamestown saw constant action against the Powhatan Federation and other native polities. In the Virginia Company's other outpost, Bermuda, fortification began immediately in 1612. A Spanish attack in 1614 was repulsed by two shots fired from the incomplete Castle Islands Fortifications manned by Bermudian Militiamen. In the Nineteenth century, \"Fortress Bermuda\" would become Britain's \"Gibraltar of the West\", heavily fortified by a Regular Army garrison to protect the Royal Navy's headquarters and dockyard in the Western Atlantic.\nIn the 17th Century, however, Bermuda's defence was left entirely in the hands of the Militia. In addition to requiring all male civilians to train and serve in the militia of their Parish, the Bermudian Militia included a standing body of trained artillerymen to garrison the numerous fortifications which ringed \"New London\" (St. George's). This standing body was created by recruiting volunteers, and by sentencing criminals to serve as punishment. The Bermudian militiamen were called out on numerous occasions of war, and, on one notable occasion, to quell rioting privateers. The 1707 Acts of Union made Bermudian and other English militiamen \"British\". The Militia in Bermuda came to include a Troop of Horse (mounted infantry) and served alongside volunteers and (from 1701) a small body of regulars. The Militia faded away after the American War of 1812 when the Parliament of Bermuda declined to renew the Militia Act. This resulted from the build-up of the regular army Bermuda Garrison along with Bermuda's development as the headquarters and dockyard of the North America and West Indies Station of the Royal Navy, which made the militia seem excess to need. Vast sums of the Imperial defence expenditure were lavished on fortifying Bermuda during the Nineteenth Century and the British Government cajoled, implored, begged, and threatened the colonial legislature for 80 years before it raised a militia and volunteer units (in 1894 and 1894 respectively). Although the militia had historically been an infantry force, many units in Britain had been re-tasked as militia artillery from the 1850s onward due to the increased importance of the coastal artillery defences and the new militia unit in Bermuda followed suit. Titled the \"Bermuda Militia Artillery\", it was badged and uniformed as part of the Royal Artillery, and tasked with the garrison artillery role, manning coastal batteries. As in Britain, recruitment was of volunteers who engaged for terms of service, whereas the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps was organised on the same lines as volunteer rifle corps in Britain. Recruitment to the BVRC was restricted to whites, but the BMA recruited primarily coloured (those who were not entirely of European heritage) other ranks, though its officers were all white until 1953. Neither unit was reorganised in 1908 when the Militia, Volunteer Force and Yeomanry in Britain merged into the Territorial Force, but the BVRC was re-organised as a territorial in 1921 and the BMA in 1926. The BVRC name was not modified to Bermuda Rifles until 1951, however, and the Bermuda Militia Artillery (and from 1939 the Bermuda Militia Infantry) continued to be titled as militia until amalgamated with the Bermuda Rifles in 1965 to form the Bermuda Regiment.\nIn British India, a special class of militia was established in 1907. This took the form of the Frontier Corps, which consisted of locally recruited full-time auxiliaries under British officers. Their role combined the functions of tribal police and border guards deployed along the North-West Frontier. Regional units included the Zhob Militia, the Kurram Militia, and the Chagai Militia. After 1946 the Frontier Corps became part of the modern Pakistan Army.\nPolitical issues.\nUntil the Glorious Revolution in 1688 the Crown and Parliament were in strong disagreement. The English Civil War left a rather unusual military legacy. Both Whigs and Tories distrusted the creation of a large standing army not under civilian control. The former feared that it would be used as an instrument of royal tyranny. The latter had memories of the New Model Army and the anti-monarchical social and political revolution that it brought about. Both preferred a small standing army under civilian control for defensive deterrence and to prosecute foreign wars, a large navy as the first line of national defence, and a militia composed of their neighbours as additional defence and to preserve domestic order.\nConsequently, the English Bill of Rights (1689) declared, amongst other things: \"that the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in time of peace, unless it be with consent of Parliament, is against law...\" and \"that the subjects which are Protestants may have arms for their defence suitable to their conditions and as allowed by law.\" This implies that they are fitted to serve in the militia, which was intended to serve as a counterweight to the standing army and preserve civil liberties against the use of the army by a tyrannical monarch or government. The Standing Army Controversy from 1697 to 1699 reflected the suspicion of both Tories and Radical Whigs of standing armies, a suspicion that would continue in opposition circles.\nThe Crown still (in the British constitution) controls the use of the army. This ensures that officers and enlisted men swear an oath to a politically neutral head of state, and not to a politician. While the funding of the standing army subsists on annual financial votes by parliament, the Mutiny Act, superseded by the Army Act, and now the Armed Forces Act is also renewed on an annual basis by Parliament. If it lapses, the legal basis for enforcing discipline disappears, and soldiers lose their legal indemnity for acts committed under orders.\nWith the creation of the British Empire, militias were also raised in the colonies, where little support could be provided by regular forces. Overseas militias were first raised in Jamestown, Virginia, and in Bermuda, where the Bermuda Militia followed over the next two centuries a similar trajectory to that in Britain.\n18th century and the Acts of Union.\nIn 1707 the Acts of Union united the Kingdom of England with the Kingdom of Scotland. The Scottish navy was incorporated into the Royal Navy. The Scottish military (as opposed to naval) forces merged with the English, with pre-existing regular Scottish regiments maintaining their identities, though command of the new British Army was from England. How this affected militias either side of the border is unclear.\nBritish Militia.\nThe Militia Act 1757 created a more professional force. Better records were kept, and the men were selected by ballot to serve for longer periods; specific provision was made for members of the Religious Society of Friends, Quakers, to be exempted, as conscientious objectors, from compulsory enlistment in the militia. Proper uniforms and better weapons were provided, and the force was 'embodied' from time to time for training sessions.\nThe militia was widely embodied at various times during the French and Napoleonic Wars. It served at several vulnerable locations, and was particularly stationed on the South Coast and in Ireland. A number of camps were held at Brighton, where the militia regiments were reviewed by the Prince Regent. (This is the origin of the song \"Brighton Camp\".) The militia could not be compelled to serve overseas, but it was seen as a training reserve for the army, as bounties were offered to men who opted to 'exchange' from the militia to the regular army.\nIrish militia.\nThe Parliament of Ireland passed an act in 1715 raising regiments of militia in each county and county corporate. Membership was restricted to Protestants between the ages of 16 and 60. In 1793, during the Napoleonic Wars, the Irish militia were reorganised to form thirty-seven county and city regiments. While officers of the reorganised force were Protestant, membership of the other ranks was now made available to members of all denominations.\nScottish militia.\nIn the late 17th century, numerous individuals in the Kingdom of Scotland (then in a personal union with the Kingdom of England) called for the resurrection of a Scottish militia, with the understated aim of protecting the rights of Scots in Great Britain. After Scotland became part of the Kingdom of Great Britain, the Militia Act 1757 did not apply there. The traditional Scottish militia system continued, with only certain settlements in Scotland playing host to a militia regiment. This was viewed with resentment among some in Scotland, and the Militia Club was formed to promote the raising of a Scottish militia. The Militia Club, along with several other Scottish gentlemen's clubs became the crucible of the Scottish Enlightenment. The Militia Act 1797 empowered Scottish Lord Lieutenants to raise and command militia regiments in each of the \"Counties, Stewartries, Cities, and Places\" under their jurisdiction.\n19th century.\nAlthough muster rolls were prepared as late as 1820, the element of compulsion was abandoned, and the militia transformed into a volunteer force, revived by the Militia Act 1852. It was intended to be seen as an alternative to the regular army. Men would volunteer and undertake basic training for several months at an army depot. Thereafter, they would return to civilian life, but report for regular periods of military training (usually on the weapons ranges) and an annual two-week training camp. In return, they would receive military pay and a financial retainer, a useful addition to their civilian wage. Of course, many saw the annual camp as the equivalent of a paid holiday. The militia thus appealed to agricultural labourers, colliers and the like, men in casual occupations, who could leave their civilian job and pick it up again. Until 1852 the militia were an entirely infantry force, but from that year a number of county infantry regiments were converted to artillery and new ones raised. In 1877 the militia of Anglesey and Monmouthshire were converted to engineers. Under the reforms, introduced by Secretary of State for War Hugh Childers in 1881, the remaining militia infantry regiments were re-designated as numbered battalions of regiments of the line, ranking after the two regular battalions. Typically, an English, Welsh or Scottish regiment would have two militia battalions (the 3rd and 4th) and Irish regiments three (numbered 3rd\u20135th).\nThe militia must not be confused with the volunteer units created in a wave of enthusiasm in the second half of the nineteenth century. In contrast with the Volunteer Force, and the similar Yeomanry Cavalry, they were considered rather plebeian.\nThe Special Reserve.\nThe militia was transformed into the Special Reserve by the military reforms of Haldane in the reforming post 1906 Liberal government. In 1908 the militia infantry battalions were redesignated as \"reserve\" and a number were amalgamated or disbanded. Numbered Territorial Force battalions, ranking after the Special Reserve, were formed from the volunteer units at the same time. Altogether, 101 infantry battalions, 33 artillery regiments and two engineer regiments of special reservists were formed. Upon mobilisation, the special reserve units would be formed at the depot and continue training while guarding vulnerable points in Britain. The special reserve units remained in Britain throughout the First World War, but their rank and file did not, since the object of the special reserve was to supply drafts of replacements for the overseas units of the regiment. The original militiamen soon disappeared, and the battalions simply became training units. The Special Reserve reverted to its militia designation in 1921, then to Supplementary Reserve in 1924, though the units were effectively placed in \"suspended animation\" until disbanded in 1953.\nThe militiamen.\nThe name was briefly revived in the Military Training Act 1939, in the aftermath of the Munich Crisis. Leslie Hore-Belisha, Secretary of State for War, wished to introduce a limited form of conscription, not known in peacetime Britain since the militia of the early 19th century and previously. It was thought that calling the conscripts 'militiamen' would make this more acceptable, as it would render them distinct from the rest of the army. Only single men aged 20 up to the day before their 22nd birthday were to be conscripted, for six months full-time training before discharge into the reserve (with a free suit of civilian clothing). Although the first intake was called up in late July 1939, the declaration of war on 3 September entailed implementation of full-time conscription for all men aged 18\u201341, superseding the militia, never to be revived.\nModern survivals.\nThree units still maintain their militia designation in the British Army. These are the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (formed in 1539), the Jersey Field Squadron (The Royal Militia Island of Jersey) (formed in 1337), and the Royal Alderney Militia (created in the 13th century and reformed in 1984). Additionally, the Atholl Highlanders are a ceremonial infantry militia maintained by the Duke of Atholl\u2014they are the only legal private army in Europe.\nOther British militias.\nVarious other part-time, home defence organisations have been raised during times of crisis or perceived threat, although without the word \"militia\" in their title. These have included:\nThe Troubles and Irish War of Independence.\nThe various non-state paramilitary groups involved in the 20th-century conflicts in Northern Ireland and the island of Ireland, such as the various Irish Republican Army groups and loyalist paramilitaries, could also be described as militias and are occasionally referred to as such.\nThe Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) was a locally raised professional militia instituted by an Act of Parliament in December 1969, becoming operational on 1 April 1970. Created as a non-partisan force to defend Northern Ireland \"against armed attack or sabotage\", it eventually peaked at 11 battalions with 7,559 men and women. 197 soldiers of the UDR were killed as active servicemen, with a further 61 killed after leaving the regiment, mostly by the Provisional Irish Republican Army. As a result of defence cuts it was eventually reduced to 7 battalions before being amalgamated with the Royal Irish Rangers in 1992 to form the \"Home Service Battalions\" of the Royal Irish Regiment.\nUnited States.\nThe history of militia in the United States dates from the colonial era, such as in the American Revolutionary War. Based on the English system, colonial militias were drawn from the body of adult male citizens of a community, town, or local region. Because there was no standing English Army before the English Civil War, and subsequently the English Army and later the British Army had few regulars garrisoning North America, colonial militia served a vital role in local conflicts, particularly in the French and Indian Wars. Before shooting began in the American War of Independence, American revolutionaries took control of the militia system, reinvigorating training and excluding men with Loyalist inclinations. Regulation of the militia was codified by the Second Continental Congress with the Articles of Confederation. The revolutionaries also created a full-time regular army\u2014the Continental Army\u2014but, because of manpower shortages, the militia provided short-term support to the regulars in the field throughout the war.\nIn colonial era Anglo-American usage, militia service was distinguished from military service in that the latter was normally a commitment for a fixed period of time of at least a year, for a salary, whereas militia was only to meet a threat, or prepare to meet a threat, for periods of time expected to be short. Militia persons were normally expected to provide their own weapons, equipment, or supplies, although they may later be compensated for losses or expenditures. A related concept is the jury, which can be regarded as a specialized form of militia convened to render a verdict in a court proceeding (known as a petit jury or trial jury) or to investigate a public matter and render a presentment or indictment (grand jury).\nWith the Constitutional Convention of 1787 and Article 1 Section 8 of the United States Constitution, control of the army and the power to direct the militia of the states was concurrently delegated to the federal Congress. The Militia Clauses gave Congress authority for \"organizing, arming, and disciplining\" the militia, and \"governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States\", and the States retained authority to appoint officers and to impose the training specified by Congress. Proponents describe a key element in the concept of \"militia\" was that to be \"genuine\" it not be a \"select militia\", composed of an unrepresentative subset of the population. This was an argument presented in the ratification debates.\nThe first legislation on the subject was the Militia Act of 1792 which provided, in part:\nThat each and every free able-bodied white male citizen of the respective States, resident therein, who is or shall be of age of eighteen years, and under the age of forty-five years (except as is herein after excepted) shall severally and respectively be enrolled in the militia... every citizen, so enrolled and notified, shall, within six months thereafter, provide himself with a good musket or firelock.\nPrior to the War of Independence, the officers of militia units were commissioned by the royal governors. During the war, they were commissioned either by the legislature or the chief executive of the state. After the war, commissions were typically granted by the state's chief executive. Militias did not operate independently of the state governments but were under the command of the civil government just like the regular military forces. Twenty-four of the current US states maintain state defense forces in the form of a constitutional militia in addition to the National Guard which is shared with the US government. These states include Alabama, Alaska, California, Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, Vermont, and Virginia. In addition, the Territory of Puerto Rico has a defense force.\n19th century.\nDuring the nineteenth century, each of the states maintained its militia differently, some more than others. American militia saw action in the various Indian Wars, the War of 1812, the American Civil War, and the Spanish\u2013American War. Sometimes militia units were found to be unprepared, ill-supplied, and unwilling. Prior to the Civil War, militia units were sometimes used by southern states for slave control. Formed in 1860, Republican Party-affiliated Wide Awakes clubs were quick to take action to defend persons against southern slave-hunters. In California, the militia carried out campaigns against bandits and against the Indians at the direction of its Governor between 1850 and 1866. During Reconstruction after the Civil War, Republican state governments had militias composed almost entirely of freed slaves and populist whites. Their deployment to maintain order in the former Confederate states caused increased resentment among many Southern whites.\nAfter the American Civil War, secret groups like the Ku Klux Klan and Knights of the White Camellia arose quickly across the South, reaching a peak in the late 1860s. Even more significant in terms of effect were private militias: paramilitary organizations that formed starting in 1874, including the White League in Louisiana, which quickly formed chapters in other states; the Red Shirts in Mississippi in 1875, and with South Carolina and North Carolina; and other \"white line\" militias and rifle clubs.\nIn contrast to the KKK, these paramilitary organizations were open; members were often well known in their communities. Nevertheless, they used force, intimidation, and violence, including murder, to push out Republican officeholders, break up organizing, and suppress freedmen's voting and civil rights. The paramilitary groups were described as \"the military arm of the Democratic Party\" and were instrumental in helping secure Democratic victories in the South in the elections of 1876.\n20th century.\nThe Militia Act of 1903 divided what had been the militia into what it termed the \"organized\" militia, created from portions of the former state guards to become state National Guard units, and the \"unorganized\" militia consisting of all males from ages 17 to 45, with the exception of certain officials and others, which is codified in \u00a0https://. Some states, such as Texas, California, and Ohio, created separate state defense forces for assistance in local emergencies. Congress later established a system of \"dual enlistment\" for the National Guard, so that anyone who enlisted in the National Guard also enlisted in the U.S. Army. When the U.S. Air Force was established as an independent service in 1947, the National Guard was further divided into the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. Under this construct, the 1933 defense act's \"dual enlistment\" facet was further amended so that enlisted soldiers and commissioned officers in the Army National Guard were also enlisted or commissioned in the Reserve Component of the U.S. Army. Enlisted airmen and commissioned officers in the Air National Guard were also enlisted or commissioned in the Air Reserve Component (ARC) of the U.S. Air Force.\nThe 20th century saw the rise of militia organizations in the United States, these private militias often have an anti-government outlook and are not under the civil authority of the states. Privately organized citizen militia-related groups blossomed in the mid-1990s. Many militia groups are based on religious or political extremism and some are regarded as hate groups.\n21st century.\nIn the 2008 decision of the Supreme Court, in District of Columbia v. Heller, the \"de jure\" definition of \"militia\" as used in United States jurisprudence was discussed. The Court's opinion made explicit, in its \"obiter dicta\", that the term \"militia\", as used in colonial times in this originalist decision, included both the federally organized militia and the citizen-organized militias of the several States: \"... the 'militia' in colonial America consisted of a subset of 'the people'\u2014those who were male, able-bodied, and within a certain age range\" (7)... Although the militia consists of all able-bodied men, the federally-organized militia may consist of a subset of them\"(23).\nTexas.\nThe most important previous activity of the Texas Militia was the Texas Revolution in 1836. Texans declared independence from Mexico while they were defeated during the Battle of the Alamo, in March 1836. On April 21, 1836, led by Sam Houston, the Militia attacked the Mexican Army at their camp, in the Battle of San Jacinto near the present city of Houston. Following the war, some militia units reorganized into what was later to be known as the Texas Rangers, which was a private, volunteer effort for several years before becoming an official organization. After Texas joined the Union of the United States in 1845, Texas militia units participated in the Mexican\u2013American War.\nIn 1861 Texas joined the other Confederate States in seceding from the Union, and Texas militias played a role in the American Civil War until it ended in 1865. Texas militiamen joined Theodore Roosevelt's Rough Riders, a volunteer militia, and fought with him during the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898. Some of the training of the Rough Riders took place in San Pedro Park, in the north-central part of San Antonio near the present site of San Antonio College. When a muster of the Militia proposed to train there on April 19, 1994, they were threatened with arrest, even though the charter of San Pedro Park forbids exclusion of activities of that kind. This threat led to a change in the meeting site. Like many other American states, Texas maintains a recognized State Militia, the Texas State Guard.\nModern paramilitary forces.\nBahrain.\nIn Bahrain, emergence of a small militia group Katibat al Haydariyah was first seen in 2015. During the year, total four attacks were claimed by the group, including on August 22 and 24, 2015, in Muharraq, on September 10, 2015, in Al Khamis, and on October 9, 2015, on Bahraini forces in the Al Juffair region. Katibat al Haydariyah is its own distinct organization that decries the Bahraini government, but Canada and the United Kingdom listed it as an alias for the larger Al-Ashtar Brigades (or the Saraya al Ashtar). After four years, the militia group reemerged on social media in October 2019, to threaten new attacks on the island. It stated that they \"will not retreat from our goals of the downfall of the Al Khalifa entity,\" and that \"soon, guns will open their mouths and they will hear the whiz of bullets\".\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, the word \"mil\u00edcia\" is heavily associated with paramilitary and drug-related criminal groups.\nMexico.\nMexico has a history of various activities and insurrection by militia and paramilitary groups dating back several hundred years that include the exploits of historical figures such as Captain Manuel Pineda Munoz and Francisco \"Pancho\" Villa. This also includes groups such as the Free-Colored Militia (the interracial militias of New Spain, Colonial Mexico), the Camisas Doradas, and the contemporary Self Defense Council of Michoacan.\nFree-colored militias were an important and at times critical organization in Colonial Mexico. Prior to the eighteenth century, Spain's territories in the Americas were mainly defended through a series of Spanish military units being based in strategic coastal port cities and important economic centers. But as European rivals began to challenge the Spanish crown and their dominance in the new world, the Bourbon dynasty initiated a series of reforms, allowing people from their colonies to serve in the regular armies, as well as permitting local militias in their territories.\nWhile these groups began to integrate themselves into the official Spanish colonial militaries, free-colored militias have been reluctantly used since the-mid sixteenth century. \"Palenques,\" or run away slave communities, would often initiate slavery uprising in various cities and towns in New Spain, which made the colonial Spanish authorities uneasy about arming any free colored individuals. Free colored rebellions and violence in Mexico City impacted regional policy of New Spain towards blacks. Given this social context, the racial climate in which these free-colored militias first appeared was a hostile one, and the first militias often had conflicts within them between their free-colored and white commanders. The first large scale recruitment of fee-colored militias was in response to the attack on Veracruz port in 1683 by Dutch pirateer Lorenzo de Graff, with free-colored soldiers being called in from Mexico City, Puebla, Orizaba and other large colonial cities. Militias increasingly began to take shape and develop over the course of the 17th and 18th centuries, but it's critical to understand that their development was not a linear progressive one. The experiences of militias in urban areas was vastly different from those in rural communities, and the role, influence, and duties of militias in the early 17th century were not the same as those of a century later. The critical stage for militia growth was during 1670\u20131762, where there was an increase of the militias responsibilities and they gained a considerable amount of autonomy over their own affairs. The social impact of these free-colored militias added complexity to the race-based caste system that dominated the social landscape.\nFree-colored militias were structured to follow the \"tercio\" organizational model that was used by Spanish Habsburg and Bourbon dynasties. \"Tercios\" compromised 2,500 soldiers distributed among ten companies, each under the leadership of a captain. Free-colored militias under the tercio system were headed by a \"sargento mayor\" (major) who became the senior operating officer in militias. Under the \"sargento mayor\" were the junior officers, which included one captain and alferez (lieutenant) per company, who were also aided by an \"ayudante\" (adjutant) and \"subteniente\" (second lieutenant) after they were incorporated into the system after 1767. The captain had supreme authority within their company, only reporting to the \"sargento\" mayor when he could not control matters of the company. The \"alferez\" coordinated affairs with his captain and was next in line in command in his absence. Below the junior officers were ranking NCO's and up to four sergeants served per company. A \"cabo\" (corporal) was assigned to lead each squad of 25 soldiers. These NCO's were responsible for discipline of the soldiers and maintaining a limited record of individuals. Officers and first sergeants were the only soldiers in the free-colored militias to receive a monthly salary with lower ranked soldiers only receiving pay when on campaigns. Their salaries came from the royal treasuries, alongside occasional supplementation by private contributions of prominent individuals.\nWho exactly constitutes as a \"free-colored person\" is subject to much debate and discussion. While the terms \"pardos, mulatos, negros\" and \"morenos\" were commonly used under the caste system that was in place during this era, their use in this context is much more complex and who exactly qualified as who was a very fluid process, dependent on the social context of the time and place. Despite the lack of universal understanding of racial identification across New Spain, when they were faced with external threats to their organizations, free-colored militias showed great racial unity in these times, such as in the case of Huajolotitlan, a small town of Oaxaca in southern Mexico. After a decree was passed in 1784 calling for the retirement of every free-colored officer and the disbandment of their militia, the tows free-coloreds fiercely resisted. Free-colored soldiers refused to leave their posts and they dispatched to the capital in protests to defend their racially integrated organizations. This later inspired the communities other free-colored people to protests what they saw as other aggressions by the government, such as increasing tribute burdens.\nWhile some of the previous examples are historical, the current official view on the existence of such militias in Mexico, when they are not backed by the government, has been to always label them as illegal and to combat them in a military and a political way.\nModern examples on the Mexican view on militias are the Chiapas conflict against the EZLN and against the EPR in Guerrero, where the government forces combated the upraised militias. And in a more recent case when civilian self-defence militias appeared during the Mexican war on drugs, the government regulated them and transformed the militias in to Rural federal forces, and those who resisted were combated and imprisoned.\nBy country.\nAfghanistan.\nMilitias have been used throughout the history of Afghanistan. Afghan Militias and irregular forces have contributed significantly to the military history of the country and affected the process of state formation.\nAndorra.\nAndorra has a small army, which has historically been raised or reconstituted at various dates, but has never in modern times amounted to a standing army. The basic principle of Andorran defence is that all able-bodied men are available to fight if called upon by the sounding of the Sometent. Being a landlocked country, Andorra has no navy.\nBefore World War I, Andorra maintained an armed militia force of about 600 part-time militiamen under the supervision of a Captain (Capit\u00e0 or Cap de Sometent) and a Lieutenant (Desener or Lloctinent del Capit\u00e0). This body was not liable for service outside the principality and was commanded by two officials (veguers) appointed by France and the Bishop of Urgell.\nIn the modern era, the army has consisted of a very small body of volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties. Uniforms and weaponry were handed down from generation to generation within families and communities.\nThe army's role in internal security was largely taken over by the formation of the Police Corps of Andorra in 1931. Brief civil disorder associated with the elections of 1933 led to assistance being sought from the French National Gendarmerie, with a detachment resident in Andorra for two months under the command of Ren\u00e9-Jules Baulard. The Andorran Police was reformed in the following year, with eleven soldiers appointed to supervisory roles. The force consisted of six Corporals, one for each parish (although there are currently seven parishes, there were only six until 1978), plus four junior staff officers to co-ordinate action, and a commander with the rank of major. It was the responsibility of the six corporals, each in his own parish, to be able to raise a fighting force from among the able-bodied men of the parish.\nToday a small, twelve-man ceremonial unit remains the only permanent section of the Sometent, but all able-bodied men remain technically available for military service, with a requirement for each family to have access to a firearm. An area weapon such as a Shotgun per household is unregulated, however ranged weapons such as Pistols and Rifles require a license. The army has not fought for more than 700 years, and its main responsibility is to present the flag of Andorra at official ceremonial functions. According to Marc Forn\u00e9 Moln\u00e9, Andorra's military budget is strictly from voluntary donations, and the availability of full-time volunteers.\nIn more recent times there has only been a general emergency call to the popular army of Sometent during the floods of 1982 in the Catalan Pyrenees, where 12 citizens perished in Andorra, to help the population and establish a public order along with the Local Police units.\nArgentina.\nIn the early 1800s Buenos Aires, which was by then the capital of the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata, was attacked during the British invasions of the R\u00edo de la Plata. As regular military forces were insufficient to counter the British attackers, Santiago de Liniers drafted all males in the city capable of bearing arms into the military. These recruits included the criollo peoples, who ranked low down in the social hierarchy, as well as some slaves. With these reinforcements, the British armies were twice defeated. The militias became a strong factor in the politics of the city afterwards, as a springboard from which the \"criollos\" could manifest their political ambitions. They were a key element in the success of the May Revolution, which deposed the Spanish viceroy and began the Argentine War of Independence. A decree by Mariano Moreno derogated the system of promotions involving \"criollos\", allowing instead their promotion on military merit.\nThe Argentine Civil War was waged by militias again, as both federalists and unitarians drafted common people into their ranks as part of ongoing conflicts. These irregular armies were organized at a provincial level, and assembled as leagues depending on political pacts. This system had declined by the 1870s, mainly due to the establishment of the modern Argentine Army, drafted for the Paraguayan War by President Bartolom\u00e9 Mitre. Provincial militias were outlawed and decimated by the new army throughout the presidential terms of Mitre, Sarmiento, Avellaneda and Roca.\nArmenia.\nArmenian militia, or \"fedayi\" played a major role in the independence of various Armenian states, including Western Armenia, the First Republic of Armenia, and the Republic of Artsakh. Armenian militia also played a role in the Georgia-Abkhazia War of 1992\u20131993.\nAustralia.\nIn the Colony of New South Wales, Governor Lachlan Macquarie proposed a colonial militia but the idea was rejected. Governor Ralph Darling felt a mounted police force was more efficient than a militia. A military volunteer movement attracted wide interest during the Crimean War. Following Federation, the various military reserve forces of the Commonwealth of Australia became the Citizen Military Force (CMF).\nA citizens' militia modeled on the British Home Guard called the Volunteer Defence Corps (VDC) was founded by the Returned and Services League of Australia (RSL) in 1940 in response to the possibility of a Japanese invasion of Australia. In the beginning, members didn't have uniforms and often paraded in business attire. They were given instruction on guerrilla warfare, and later the private organization was taken over by the Australian Government and became part of the Australian Military Forces (AMF). The government supported the organization and equipped them with anti-aircraft artillery; however, they were disbanded by the end of World War II due to the fact that there was no longer a significant threat to national security.\nAustria.\nDuring the Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire, a National Guard was established in Vienna. A separate but related Academic Legion was composed mainly of students in the capital city.\nAfter World War I, multiple militias formed as soldiers returned home to their villages, only to find many of them occupied by Slovene and Yugoslav forces. Especially in the southern province of Carinthia the Volkswehr (Peoples Defense Force) was formed, to fight the occupant forces.\nDuring the First Republic, similar to the development in Germany, increasing radicalization of politics led to certain paramilitary militias associating with certain political parties. The Heimwehr (German: \"Home Defense\") became affiliated with the Christian Social Party and the Republikanischer Schutzbund (German: \"Republican Defense League\") became affiliated with the Social Democratic Workers' Party of Austria. Violence increasingly escalated, breaking out during the July Revolt of 1927 and finally the Austrian Civil War, when the Schutzbund was defeated by the Heimwehr, police, Gendarmerie and Austrian Armed Forces.\nAfter World War II the Austrian Armed Forces (Bundesheer) were reestablished as a conscript military force. A basic part of it is the militia, which is a regular reservists force of the Bundesheer, comparable to the national guard units of the United States. The conscript soldiers of the militia have to store their military equipment at home, to be mobilized quite fast within a few days in case of emergency. The system was established during the Cold War and still exists, but the members of the militia now are volunteers only.\nBelgium.\nThe Garde Civique or Burgerwacht (French and Dutch; \"Civic Guard\") was a Belgian paramilitary militia which existed between 1830 and 1920. Created in October 1830 shortly after the Belgian Revolution, the Guard amalgamated the various militia groups which had been created by the middle classes to protect property during the political uncertainty. Its role was as a quasi-military \"gendarmerie\", with the primary role of maintaining social order within Belgium. Increasingly anachronistic, it was demobilised in 1914 and officially disbanded in 1920, following a disappointing performance during the German invasion of Belgium in World War I.\nCanada.\nIn Canada the title \"Militia\" historically referred to the land component of the armed forces, both regular (full-time) and reserve. The earliest Canadian militias date from the beginning of the French colonial period. In New France, King Louis XIV created a compulsory militia of settlers in every parish that supported French authorities in the defence and expansion of the colony.\nFollowing the British conquest of New France in 1760, local militia units supported British Army regiments stationed in British America, and, after the secession of thirteen continental colonies in the American War of Independence, British North America. In addition to the Canadian militia, British regiments were also supported by locally raised regulars (including the 40th Regiment of Foot, and the 100th (Prince of Wales's Royal Canadian) Regiment of Foot) and Fencibles regiments. These regiments were raised through ordinary modes of recruiting, as opposed to being raised by ballot like the militia. Most militia units were only activated in time of war, but remained inactive in between. The battle honours awarded to these colonial militia regiments are perpetuated by modern regiments within the Canadian Army.\nDefence of the Canadas long relied on a contingent of British soldiers, as well as support from the Royal Navy. However, the Crimean War saw the diversion of a significant number of British soldiers from British North America. Fearing possible incursions from the United States, the Parliament of the Province of Canada passed the \"Militia Act of 1855\", creating the Active Militia. The Active Militia, later splitting into the Permanent Active Militia (PAM), a full-time professional army component (although it continued to use the label militia), and Non-Permanent Active Militia (NPAM), a military reserve force for the Canadian militia. Following 1855, the traditional sedentary militia was reorganized into the Reserve Militia, with its last enrolment taking place in 1873, and was formally abolished in 1950.\nPrior to Canadian Confederation, the colonies that made up the Maritimes, and Newfoundland maintained their own militias independent of the Canadian Militia. Bermuda, part of British North America and militarily subordinate to the Commander-in-Chief of the Maritimes, allowed its militia to lapse following the American War of 1812. United States Independence, however, elevated Bermuda to the status of an Imperial fortress and it would be strongly defended by the regular army, and left out of the confederation of Canada. From 1853 to 1871, the Colony of Vancouver Island (and the succeeding Colony of British Columbia) periodically raised and disbanded militia units. These units were raised for specific purposes, or in response to a specific threat, real or perceived.\nAfter the Treaty of Washington was signed between the Americans and British, nearly all remaining British soldiers were withdrawn from Canada in November 1871. The departure of the majority of British forces in Canada made the Canadian militia the only major land forces available in Canada. In 1940, both components of the militia, PAM and NPAM were reorganized, the former into Canadian Army (Active), the latter into the Canadian Army (Reserve)\nIn addition to the various colonial militia units, and the regiments of the Canadian militia, in 1942, the Army's Pacific Command created the Pacific Coast Militia Rangers. Intended to function similarly to the United Kingdom's Home Guard, the Rangers were a secondary defence force, defending the coast of British Columbia and Yukon from potential Japanese attack. The Rangers were disbanded in September 1945, shortly after the conclusion of World War II. The legacy of the Pacific Coast Militia Rangers is perpetuated by the Canadian Rangers, a component of the Primary Reserve that provides a military presence in areas where it would not be economically or practically viable to have conventional Army units \u2013 most notably northern Canada.\nThe Canadian Army Reserve continued to use the term \"militia\" in reference to itself until the unification of the Canadian Armed Forces in 1968. Since unification, no Canadian military force has formally used \"militia\" in its name. However, the Canadian Army Reserve is still colloquially referred to as the \"militia\". Members of the Canadian Army Reserve troops typically train one night a week and every other weekend of the month, except in the summer. Summertime training may consist of courses, individual call-outs, or concentrations (unit and formation training of one to two weeks' duration). Most Canadian cities and counties have one or more militia units. Primary Reserve members may volunteer for overseas service, to augment their regular force counterparts\u2014usually during NATO or United Nations missions.\nChina.\nChina's current militia falls under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), and forms part of the Chinese armed forces. Under the command of the military organs, it undertakes such jobs as war preparation services, security and defense operational tasks and assistance in maintaining social order and public security.\nHistorically, militias of varying levels of ability have existed in China, organized on a village and clan level, especially during periods of instability and in areas subject to pirate and bandit attack. When the British attempted to take control of the New Territories in 1898, they were resisted by the local militias which had been formed for mutual defence against pirate raids. Although ultimately defeated, the militias' dogged resistance convinced the British to make concessions to the indigenous inhabitants allowing them to preserve inheritance, property and marriage rights and customs throughout most of the period of the British rule.\nCuba.\nCuba has three militia organizations: The Territorial Troops Militia (\"Milicias de Tropas Territoriales\") of about one million people (half women), the Youth Labor Army (\"Ej\u00e9rcito Juvenil del Trabajo\") devoted to agricultural production, and a naval militia. Formerly, there existed the National Revolutionary Militias (\"Milicias Nacionales Revolucionarias\"), which was formed after the Cuban Revolution and initially consisted of 200,000 men who helped the 25,000 strong standing army defeat counter-revolutionary guerillas.\nCzech Republic.\nIn 2021, the Czech Parliament passed an Act No. 14/2021 Coll., on the handling of weapons in certain cases affecting the internal order or security of the Czech Republic. The Act's number 14/21 symbolically refers to the 600th anniversary of civilian firearms possession in the country. The legislation establishes \"a system of firearms training, the purpose of which is to improve the knowledge, abilities and skills of persons authorised to handle firearms for the purpose of ensuring internal order or the security of the Czech Republic\". Gun owners can join government endorsed advanced shooting training courses with their privately owned firearms and become members of the militia-style Designated Reserves.\nDenmark.\nThe Danish Home Guard () (HJV) is the fourth service of the Danish military. It was formerly concerned only with the defence of Danish territory but, since 2008, it has also supported Danish international military efforts in Afghanistan, Iraq and Kosovo. There are five branches: Army Home Guard, Naval Home Guard, Air Force Home Guard, Police Home Guard, and Infrastructure Home Guard.\nEstonia.\nThe Omakaitse (Home Guard) was an organisation formed by the local population of Estonia on the basis of the Estonian Defence League and the forest brothers resistance movement active on the Eastern Front between 3July 1941 and 17September 1944. This arrangement was unique in the context of the war as in Latvia, which otherwise shared a common fate with Estonia, there was no organisation of this kind.\nEthiopia.\nThe People's Militia was established in 1975 under the Derg regime's Proclamation No 71, used to assist police forces and protect farms and property. The militia did operations in Eritrea during the Ogaden War, while Mengistu Haile Mariam reconstituted as the \"Red Army\". The Derg government conscripted about 30,000 to 40,000 civilians into the militia from Shewa, Wollo, and Gojam provinces in May 1976. \nThe Fano militia is an ethno-nationalist Amhara militia and former protest movement that emerged during the premiership of Abiy Ahmed. Fano intervened armed conflicts in the post-2018 regime, including Benishangul-Gumuz's Metekel conflict, Tigray War and recently War in Amhara. They have been accused of ethnic massacres against other ethnic groups, such as the Qemant and other minorities.\nFinland.\nWhile Finland employs conscription, they do not have separate militia units: all units are organized by and under the command of the Finnish Defence Forces. All men belong to the reserve until age 50 or 60 depending on rank, and may be called up in case of mobilization. Each reservist is assigned a position in a unit to be activated. However, since 2004, the FDF does have territorial forces, organized along the lines of regular infantry formations, which are composed of volunteers. Furthermore, long-range patrol units (sissi troops, a type of special forces) are assigned to local troops.\nIn history, before Finland became independent, two types of local militias existed: the White Guards and Red Guards, which were non-socialists and socialists, respectively. In the Finnish Civil War (1918) the White Guards founded the White Army, which was victorious over the Red Guards. White Guards continued their existence as a volunteer militia until the Second World War. In some cases their activity found overt political expression as in the M\u00e4nts\u00e4l\u00e4 rebellion. However, in 1934 separate wartime White Guard units were dissolved and in the Second World War they served at the front, dispersed in regular units. They were dissolved as a condition of peace after the Continuation War.\nIndia.\nSalwa Judum (meaning \"Peace March\" or \"Purification Hunt\" in Gondi language) was a militia active in the Chhattisgarh state of India.\nVillage Defence Guards, formerly known as Village Defence Committees, were first set up in 1995. The idea of the VDCs was to arm ex-service personnel to check Pakistani infiltration and espionage. The VDCs were formed in Jammu region of J&amp;K to offer self-defence capabilities to villagers in the face of looming terrorist threats. Under the scheme, each VDC used to have a Special Police Officer (SPO) as its in-charge and there were 10-15 other volunteer members, mostly ex-service personnel. They were given .303 rifles and ammunition. The SPO in charge of the VDC was paid whereas the rest were volunteers. In 2020, the policy of Village Defence Committees was revamped and Village Defence Groups were introduced, members of whom are called Village Defence Guards. It was not just a change of name as the very structure of committees was changed. Unlike VDCs where only SPOs were paid, all VDGs are paid.\nA total of 4,153 Village Defence Groups (VDG) and 32,355 Special Police Officers were engaged in Jammu and Kashmir in different responsibilities for the protection of civilians and anti-terrorists operations.\nIran.\nThe Basij militia founded by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in November 1979, is composed of 90,000 men, with an active and reserve strength up to 300,000 men. It ultimately draws from about 1\u00a0million members, and is subordinate to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in Iran.\nIraq.\nSince the rise of ISIL in 2014 and their conquest of many predominantly-Sunni areas in Iraq, the Shiite militias became even more prominent in the country by joining the Iraqi Army in many major battles against ISIL.\nIsrael.\nIn 1908 a Jewish underground organisation, Bar Giora, re-invented itself as an armed militia \u2013 Hashomer. It was established to provide Jewish guards for the Zionist colonies being established in Ottoman Palestine. The group existed for 10 years. At its height it had around 100 members, including 23 women.\nIn modern times, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) is often described as a heavily armed militia, not a full-fledged army, since it is legally and publicly viewed as a defensive force only, and since it relies heavily on the reserve duty of Israeli citizens who are annually called to service for set periods of time, rather than on professional, full-time soldiers. Israeli settlements in the Israeli-occupied territories rely on armed militia teams for their security. National service conscripts can also serve in the Israel Border Police (commonly known by its Hebrew abbreviation Magav which means border guard in Hebrew), which is a paramilitary branch of the Israel Police rather than the IDF.\nLibya.\nSince the fall of Gaddafi's rule of Libya in the aftermath of the Libyan Civil War, rebel groups that have contributed to the revolution splintered into self-organized militia movements and have been involved in a feud for control of each city. Since the revolution, reports of clashes and violence by militia groups have been increasing.\nMontenegro.\nIn 1910 King Nicholas I of Montenegro proclaimed that all male citizens were members of a national militia and had both a right and a duty to own at least one Gasser Pattern revolver under penalty of law.\nThe official reason for the King's decree was to create an armed populace that would deter neighbouring countries from attacking Montenegro, which was unable to field a large army. However, it was widely believed in Montenegro that this decision was actually taken because the King owned shares in Leopold Gasser Waffenfabrik in Vienna - the patent holder and sole manufacturer of the pistol at that time. Despite this, the decree actually obliged Montenegrin adult males to own a Gasser \"Pattern\" revolver, not necessarily one made by Gasser itself. In fact Leopold Gasser was faced with such heavy demand for the pistol internationally, that it could not fulfil all of the orders placed for it. This led the revolver's manufacturer to license out production to other companies and many Gasser Pattern pistols were then manufactured and sold by other European firms, most notably based out of Belgium and Spain. Even these licensed models did not satiate demand for the pistol and this, alongside a lax enforcement of intellectual property rights in Montenegro, led to many unlicensed local models of the pistol also being produced, with quality ranging from very good to outright dangerous to its user.\nSubsequently, the weapon quickly became a status symbol for Montenegrin men and was commonly worn alongside traditional attire. Many Montenegrin immigrants that travelled to North America brought their Gasser pattern revolvers with them and at least two batches of several thousand pistols were smuggled into Mexico during the Mexican Revolution, leading to the Gasser revolver becoming widespread in the Americas. However, as the original reason for their mass production and the generation that grew around it faded, the pistol eventually lost its place as a status symbol and many were either given away or sold in the secondhand market.\nNetherlands.\nSchutterij refers to a voluntary city guard or citizen militia in the medieval and early modern Netherlands, intended to protect the town or city from attack and act in case of revolt or fire. Their training grounds were often on open spaces within the city, near the city walls, but, when the weather did not allow, inside a church. They are mostly grouped according to their district and to the weapon that they used: bow, crossbow or gun. Together, its members are called a \"Schuttersgilde\", which could be roughly translated as a \"shooter's guild\". It is now a title applied to ceremonial shooting clubs and to the country's Olympic rifle team.\nNew Zealand.\nFrom the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840 until 1844 small detachments of British Imperial troops based in New Zealand were the only military. This changed as a result of the Flagstaff War, with the colonial government passing a Militia Act on 25 March 1845. Militia units were formed in Auckland, Wellington, New Plymouth, and Nelson. Service in the militia was compulsory.\nMany localized militia saw service, together with British Imperial troops, during the New Zealand Wars. In the late nineteenth century a system of local Volunteer militias evolved throughout the country. These were semi-trained but uniformed and administered by a small number of regular \"Imperial\" officers.\nThe militia units were disbanded and reformed as the Territorial Army in 1911.\nNorth Korea.\nThe Worker-Peasant Red Guards is a North Korean paramilitary organization organized on a provincial/town/city/village level.\nPakistan.\nMilitias have played an important role supporting Pakistan's Military since the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 when Pakistan, with the support of militias, was able to gain control of parts of the region of Kashmir. Pakistan found the militias volunteering to participate in the Indo-Pakistani war of 1965 and the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 quite useful as well.\nCurrently Pakistani citizens forming militias from the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province are participating in the 'war on terror'.\nPhilippines.\nIn the eighteenth century, the Philippines was a Spanish colony and the Spanish authorities sought to augment the strength of the regular military force of their colony by forming a number of militias. The most notable of these was the Luzon Grenadiers, which was of such exceptional quality that it was converted into a regular unit. Another noteworthy militia was the Royal University Militias, which was the forerunner of the University of Santo Tomas ROTC unit. The University of Santo Tomas along with the University of the Philippines Diliman and the University of the East have the best Reserve Officers' Training Corps programs in the country. \nAfter the outbreak of the Revolution, Spain's governor-general in the Philippines authorized the formation of the Manila Loyal Volunteers Battalion.\nDuring the Philippine-American War, the \"Sandatahan\" was the militia of the First Republic, and it distinguished itself in the Battle of Manila and the Second Battle of Caloocan. \nWhen the Philippines Islands was an American colony, the Philippine National Guard was formed to fight in France during World War I as a unit of the American Expeditionary Force, but it never served overseas. The most famous Philippine guardsman was the first Filipino military pilot Leoncio R. Malinao, a 1920 U.P. graduate, who held the ranks of aviation cadet and lieutenant. \nAt the time when the Philippines was under Japanese military administration during the Pacific War, the \"Palaak\" was formed by the Japanese army. Also known as the Bamboo Army, because it was armed with bamboo spears, this militia existed even before the inauguration of the Second Republic. It was composed of all able-bodied men of District and Neighborhood Associations (Danas), from teenagers to sexagenarians. They were organized into platoons, companies, and battalions, and drilled along Japanese army lines. They served as spies and informers of the Japanese, they helped arrest guerrillas and performed guard duties. The Danas was created in August 1942 and when fully established, the government claimed that there were 124,000 Danas encompassing more than 1,500,000 Filipinos. \nThe Cold War caused the formation of various militias such as the Integrated Civilian Home Defense Forces, \"Bant\u00e1y Bayan\" (Civilian Volunteer Organization), and Citizen Armed Force Geographical Unit. There was also the Manila Crusaders for Peace and Democracy, and in Mindanao there were the Alamara, \"Alsa Masa\", Davao Death Squad, \"Kuratong Baleleng\", Lost Command, \"Magahat Bagani\", \"Nakasaka\", and Tagum Death Squad.\nPortugal.\nPortugal has a long tradition in the use of militias for national defense. Between the 12th and 16th centuries, the municipal militias \u2013 composed of spearmen, pikemen, horsemen, slingers, javelineers, archers, crossbowmen and later arquebusiers \u2013 constituted the main component of the Portuguese Royal Army, together with smaller military forces from the King, the military orders and the feudal lords.\nAfter some failed previous attempts, in 1570 King Sebastian of Portugal created the \"Ordenan\u00e7as\", a centrally managed military territorial organization that would replace the municipal militias and became the basis of a national army. After 60 years of foreign domination (1580\u20131640), the \"Ordenan\u00e7as\" were reorganized for the Portuguese Restoration War. The Portuguese Army was then organized in three lines, with the 2nd and 3rd being militia forces. The \"Ordenan\u00e7as\" became the 3rd line and acted both as a territorial draft organization for the 1st and 2nd line troops and as a kind of home guard for local defense. The 2nd line was made of the auxiliary troops, also militia units with the role of regional defense. In the end of the 18th century, the auxiliary troops were renamed \"Militias\".\nIn the Peninsular War, the Militia regiments and the Ordenan\u00e7as units had an important role in the defense of the country against the Napoleonic invader army. Still in the 19th century, the Militia units also had an important role in the Liberal Wars, with the majority of those troops fighting on the side of King Miguel. Besides the regular militias, a number of volunteer militia units were formed to fight on both sides of the war.\nWith the establishment of the constitutional regime, the old Militias and \"Ordenan\u00e7as\" were replaced by a single national militia force, the National Guard. However, the National Guard revealed itself an ineffective and undisciplined force. Their units became highly politicized, being involved in a number of conspiracies and coups. The National Guard having less and less confidence from the authorities, became extinct in 1847, terminating a long tradition of national militias in Portugal.\nDuring the 20th century, some experiments with militia type forces were made. From 1911 to 1926, the Portuguese Army was organized as a militia army. Also, in 1936, the \"Estado Novo\" regime created the Portuguese Legion as a political volunteer militia, dedicated to the fight against the enemies of country and of the social order. From World War II, the Portuguese Legion assumed the responsibility for civil defense, this becoming its main role during the Cold War, until its extinction in 1974.\nRussia and the Soviet Union.\nNeither the Russian Empire, nor the Soviet Union ever had an organised force that could be equated to a militia. Instead a form of organisation that predated the Russian state was used during national emergencies called Narodnoe Opolcheniye (People's Regimentation). More comparable to the English Fyrd, it was a popular voluntary joining of the local \u043f\u043e\u043b\u043a polk, or a regiment, though it had no regular established strength or officers, these usually elected from prominent local citizens. The Tsarist regime was particularly reluctant to arm and organise militia forces because of concern over a repetition of the Pugachev Serf Revolt of the late 18th century. Only in the face of the national emergency of 1812 was the raising of \"opolcheniye\" \"cohorts\" permitted. Numbering over 223,000, loosely trained and barely equipped, these enthusiastic volunteers nevertheless provided a useful reserve for the regular army.\nAlthough these spontaneously created popular forces had participated in several major wars of the Russian Empire, including in combat, they were not obligated to serve for more than one year, and notably departed for home during the 1813 campaign in Germany. On only one occasion, during the military history of the Soviet Union, the Narodnoe Opolcheniye was incorporated into the regular forces of the Red Army, notably in Leningrad and Moscow.\nThe term Militsiya in Russia and former Communist Bloc nations was specifically used to refer to the civilian police force, and should not be confused with the conventional western definition of militia. The term, as used in this context, dated from post-revolutionary Russia in late 1917 and was intended to draw a distinction between the new Soviet law enforcement agencies and the disbanded Tsarist police. In some of these states, such as Ukraine, the \"militia\" were renamed as \"police\" while in other states (e.g. Belarus) the title remains unchanged. In Russia itself the \"militia' became \"police\" (in , \"Politsiya\") in March 2011.\nSri Lanka.\nThe first militias formed in Sri Lanka were by Lankan Kings, who raised militia armies for their military campaigns both within and outside the island. This was due to the reason that the Kings never maintained a standing army instead had a Royal Guard during peacetime and formed a militia in wartime.\nWhen the Portuguese who were the first colonial power to dominate the island raised local militias under the command of local leaders known as Mudaliyars. These militias took part in the many Portuguese campaigns against the Lankan Kings. The Dutch continued to employ these militias but due to their unreliability tended to favor employing Swiss and Malay mercenaries in their campaigns in the island.\nThe British Empire then ousted the Dutch from the coastal areas of the country, and sought to conquer the independent Kandyan Kingdom. In 1802, the British became the first foreign power to raise a regular unit of Sinhalese with British officers, which was named the 2nd Ceylon Regiment, also known as the Sepoy Corps. It fought alongside British troops in the Kandyan wars. After the Matale Rebellion led by Puran Appu in 1848, in which a number of Sinhalese recruits defected to the side of the rebels, the recruitment of Sinhalese to the British forces was temporarily halted and the Ceylon Regiments disbanded.\nIn 1861, the Ceylon Light Infantry Volunteers were raised as a militia, but soon became a military reserve force. This became the Ceylon Defence Force in 1910 and consisted of militia units. These were the Colombo Town Guard and the Town Guard Artillery formed during the two world wars.\nWith the escalation of the Sri Lankan Civil War, local villagers under threat of attack were formed into localized militia to protect their families and homes. According to the Sri Lankan Military these militias were formed after \"massacres done by the LTTE\" and in the early 1990s they were reformed as the Sri Lankan Home Guard. In 2007 the Home Guard became the Sri Lanka Civil Security Force. In 2008, the government called for the formation of nearly 15,000 civil defence committees at the village level for additional protection.\nIn 2004, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam claimed have establish a voluntary \"Tamil Eelam auxiliary force\". According to the LTTE's then head of police, the force was to be assigned to tasks such as rehabilitation, construction, forest conservation and agriculture, but would also be used to battle the Sri Lankan military if the need arose. In early 2009 it ceased to exist with the military defeat of the LTTE at the hands of the Sri Lanka Armed Forces.\nSudan.\nThe Janjaweed militia consists of armed Arab Muslims fighting for the government in Khartoum against non-Arab Muslim \"rebels\". They are active in the Darfur region of western Sudan and also in eastern Chad. According to Human Rights Watch these partisans are responsible for abuses including war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.\nSweden.\nAs of 2012, the Swedish Home Guard consists of 22,000 organized into 40 light infantry battalions of 300\u2013700 Guardsmen. These battalions are then organised into companies, usually one for every municipality. The main task of the battalions is to guard vital military and civilian installations throughout the country.\nIn 2001, the Rapid Response units numbered around 5,000 soldiers of the total of 42,000. As of 2014, the majority of the force, 17,000 out of 22,000 soldiers will be in Rapid Response units. The decrease in number of troops comes with an equal increase in quality and modern equipment. These units are motorized and are ready to be mobilized more often, than other Home Guard units. Rapid response units have more combat tasks compared to the rest of the Home Guard, including escort duties. Some battalions located near the coast also have marine companies equipped with Combat Boat 90. A few battalions have recently set up 'specialized' companies to evaluate the possibility to add new abilities to the Home Guard. These are at the time of writing eight reconnaissance/intelligence companies, four CBRN-platoons, a movcon platoon, an engineer platoon, and a military police unit.\nSwitzerland.\nOne of the best known and ancient militias is the Swiss Armed Forces. Switzerland has long maintained, proportionally, the second largest military force in the world, with about half the proportional amount of reserve forces of the Israeli Defense Forces, a militia of some 33% of the total population. The \"militia principle\" of public duties is central to Swiss political culture and not limited to military issues. For example, in most municipalities it is common to serve as a conscript fire fighter in the Compulsory Fire Department.\nArticle 58.1 of the April18, 1999, Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation (official, French version) provides that \"Switzerland has an army. It is primarily organised according to the principle of a militia.\" However, under the country's militia system, professional soldiers constitute about 5 percent of military personnel. In 1995, the number of soldiers was reduced to 400,000 (including reservists, amounting to some 5.6% of the population) in 2004, to 200,000 (including 80,000 reservists, or 2.5% of the population) and again in 2022, to 150,000 (including 50,000 reservists). However, the Swiss Militia continues to consist of most of the adult male population (with voluntary participation by women) who are usually issued an assault rifle which they can keep at home or store in a central arsenal and most of them have to periodically engage in combat and marksmanship training. The militia clauses of the Swiss Federal Constitution are contained in Art. 59, where it is referred to as \"military service\" (; ; ; ).\nSyria.\nThe Syrian National Defense Force was formed out of pro-government militias. They receive their salaries and their military equipment from the government and as of 2013 numbers around 100,000. The force acts in an infantry role, directly fighting against rebels on the ground and running counter-insurgency operations in coordination with the army which provides them with logistical and artillery support. Unlike the Syrian Army, NDF soldiers are allowed to take loot from battlefields, which can then be sold on for extra money.\nVietnam.\nThe Militia and Self-Defence Force is a part of Vietnam People's Armed Forces. The militia organized in communes, wards and townships and is put under commune-level military commands.\nThe Self-Defence Militia has two branches: \"D\u00e2n qu\u00e2n t\u1ef1 v\u1ec7 n\u00f2ng c\u1ed1t\" (Core Self-Defence Militia) and \"D\u00e2n qu\u00e2n t\u1ef1 v\u1ec7 r\u1ed9ng r\u00e3i\" (General Self-Defence Militia). The term of service in the Core Militia is 4 years.\nSFR Yugoslavia.\nBeside the federal Yugoslav People's Army, each constituent republic of the former SFR Yugoslavia had its own \"Territorial Defense Forces\". The Non-Aligned Yugoslavia was concerned about eventual aggression from any of the superpowers, especially by the Warsaw Pact after the Prague Spring, so the \"Territorial Defense Forces\" were formed as an integral part of the total war military doctrine called \"Total National Defense\". Those forces corresponded to military reserve forces, paramilitary or militia, the latter, in the military meaning of the term (like military formation). It should not be confused with the Yugoslav Militia- \"Milicija\" which was a term for a police.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20623", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20623", "title": "Multiprotocol Label Switching", "text": "Network routing scheme based on labels identifying paths\nMultiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is a routing technique in telecommunications networks that directs data from one node to the next based on labels rather than network addresses. Whereas network addresses identify endpoints, MPLS labels identify established paths between endpoints. MPLS can encapsulate packets of various network protocols and supports a range of access technologies, including T1/E1, ATM, Frame Relay, and DSL.\nMPLS was originally developed to improve packet forwarding by reducing the reliance on complex routing table lookups. With the introduction of hardware-based forwarding engines, forwarding speed is no longer the main reason for deployment, and MPLS today is more often used for traffic engineering, Differentiated Services quality of service, and BGP/MPLS IP virtual private networks (VPNs).\nIn an MPLS network, packet-forwarding decisions are made solely on the contents of labels, without the need to examine the packet itself. This allows for the creation of end-to-end connections across any type of transport medium, using any protocol. The primary benefit is to eliminate dependence on a particular OSI data link layer technology, and eliminate the need for multiple layer-2 networks to satisfy different types of traffic. Multiprotocol label switching belongs to the family of packet-switched networks.\nMPLS operates at a layer between traditional definitions of OSI Layer 2 (data link layer) and Layer 3 (network layer), and is often referred to as a \"layer 2.5\" protocol. It was designed to provide a unified data-carrying service for both circuit-based clients and packet-switching clients which provide a datagram service model. It can be used to carry many different kinds of traffic, including IP packets, as well as native Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), Frame Relay, Synchronous Optical Networking (SONET) or Ethernet.\nMPLS can exist in both an IPv4 and an IPv6 environment, using appropriate routing protocols. The major goal of MPLS development was the increase of routing speed. This goal is no longer relevant because of the usage of newer switching methods such as ASIC, TCAM and CAM-based switching able to forward plain IPv4 as fast as MPLS labeled packets. Now, therefore, the main benefit of MPLS is to implement limited traffic engineering and layer 3 or layer 2 service provider type VPNs over IPv4 networks.\nMPLS is standardized by the IETF in . It is deployed to connect as few as two facilities to very large deployments. In practice, MPLS is mainly used to forward IP protocol data units and Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) Ethernet traffic. Major applications of MPLS are telecommunications traffic engineering and MPLS VPN. MPLS works in conjunction with the Internet Protocol (IP) and its routing protocols, usually interior gateway protocols (IGPs) and supports the creation of dynamic, transparent virtual networks with support for traffic engineering, the ability to transport layer VPNs with overlapping address spaces, and for layer-2 pseudowires that are capable of transporting a variety of transport payloads (IPv4, IPv6, ATM, Frame Relay, etc.).\nHistory.\nIn 1996 a group from Ipsilon Networks proposed a \"flow management protocol\". Their \"IP Switching\" technology, which was defined only to work over ATM, did not achieve market dominance. Cisco Systems introduced a related proposal, not restricted to ATM transmission, called \"Tag Switching\" with its Tag Distribution Protocol (TDP). It was a Cisco proprietary proposal, and was renamed \"Label Switching\". It was handed over to the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) for open standardization. The IETF formed the MPLS Working Group in 1997. Work involved proposals from other vendors, and development of a consensus protocol that combined features from several vendors' work.\nSome time later it was recognized that the work on threaded indices by Girish Chandranmenon and George Varghese had invented the idea of using labels to represent destination prefixes that was central to tag switching.\nOne original motivation was to allow the creation of simple high-speed switches since for a significant length of time it was considered impractical to forward IP packets entirely in hardware. Advances in VLSI and in forwarding algorithms have made hardware forwarding of IP packets possible and common. The current advantages of MPLS primarily revolve around the ability to support multiple service models and perform traffic management. MPLS also offers a robust recovery framework that goes beyond the simple protection rings of synchronous optical networking (SONET/SDH).\nA number of different technologies were previously deployed with essentially identical goals, such as Frame Relay and ATM. Frame Relay and ATM use \"labels\" to move frames or cells through a network. The header of the Frame Relay frame and the ATM cell refers to the virtual circuit that the frame or cell resides on. The similarity between Frame Relay, ATM, and MPLS is that at each hop throughout the network, the \"label\" value in the header is changed. This is different from the forwarding of IP packets. \nMPLS technologies have evolved with the strengths and weaknesses of ATM in mind. MPLS is designed to have lower overhead than ATM while providing connection-oriented services for variable-length frames, and has replaced much use of ATM in the market. MPLS dispenses with the cell-switching and signaling-protocol baggage of ATM. MPLS recognizes that small ATM cells are not needed in the core of modern networks, since modern optical networks are fast enough that even full-length 1500-byte packets do not incur significant real-time queuing delays. At the same time, MPLS attempts to preserve the traffic engineering (TE) and out-of-band control that made Frame Relay and ATM attractive for deploying large-scale networks.\nOperation.\nMPLS works by prefixing packets with an MPLS header, containing one or more labels. This is called a label stack.\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|4\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|32\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|&amp;vellip;\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|\nEach entry in the label stack contains four fields:\n!style=\"min-width:42px; border-bottom:none; border-right:none;\"|\"Offset\"\n!style=\"border-left:none;\"|Octet\n!colspan=\"8\"|0\n!colspan=\"8\"|1\n!colspan=\"8\"|2\n!colspan=\"8\"|3\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;border-top: none;\"|Octet\n!style=\"min-width: 42px;\"|Bit\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|0\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|1\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|2\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|3\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|4\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|5\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|6\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|7\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|8\n!style=\"min-width:11px;\"|9\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|10\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|11\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|12\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|13\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|14\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|15\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|16\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|17\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|18\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|19\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|20\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|21\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|22\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|23\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|24\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|25\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|26\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|27\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|28\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|29\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|30\n!style=\"min-width:16px;\"|31\n!style=\"width:35px;\"|0\n!style=\"width:30px;\"|0\nThese MPLS-labeled packets are switched based on the label instead of a lookup in the IP routing table. When MPLS was conceived, label switching was faster than a routing table lookup because switching could take place directly within the switched fabric and avoided CPU and software involvement.\nThe presence of such a label has to be indicated to the switch. In the case of Ethernet frames this is done through the use of EtherType values 0x8847 and 0x8848, for unicast and multicast connections respectively.\nEquipment.\nCE\nP/LSR\nPE/ELSR\nMPLS VPN network diagram with wikilinks\nLabel switch router.\nAn MPLS router that performs routing based only on the label is called a label switch router (LSR) or transit router. This is a type of router located in the middle of an MPLS network. It is responsible for switching the labels used to route packets.\nWhen an LSR receives a packet, it uses the label included in the packet header as an index to determine the next hop on the label-switched path (LSP) and a corresponding label for the packet from a Label Information Base. The old label is then removed from the header and replaced with the new label before the packet is routed forward.\nLabel edge router.\nA label edge router (LER, also edge LSR (which is \"technically more correct\") or simply \"edge router\") is a router that operates at the edge of an MPLS network and acts as the entry and exit points for the network. LERs \"push\" an MPLS label onto an incoming packet and \"pop\" it off an outgoing packet. Alternatively, under penultimate hop popping this function may instead be performed by the LSR directly connected to the LER.\nWhen forwarding an IP datagram into the MPLS domain, a LER uses routing information to determine the appropriate label to be affixed, labels the packet accordingly, and then forwards the labeled packet into the MPLS domain. Likewise, upon receiving a labeled packet that is destined to exit the MPLS domain, the LER strips off the label and forwards the resulting IP packet using normal IP forwarding rules.\nProvider router.\nIn the specific context of an MPLS-based virtual private network (VPN), LERs that function as ingress or egress routers to the VPN are often called provider edge (PE) routers. Devices that function only as transit routers are similarly called provider (P) routers. The job of a P router is significantly easier than that of a PE router.\nLabel Distribution Protocol.\nLabels may be distributed between LERs and LSRs using the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) or Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP). LSRs in an MPLS network regularly exchange label and reachability information with each other using standardized procedures in order to build a complete picture of the network so that they can then use that information to forward the packets.\nLabel-switched paths.\nLabel-switched paths (LSPs) are established by the network operator for a variety of purposes, such as to create network-based IP virtual private networks or to route traffic along specified paths through the network. In many respects, LSPs are not different from permanent virtual circuits (PVCs) in ATM or Frame Relay networks, except that they are not dependent on a particular layer-2 technology.\nRouting.\nWhen an unlabeled packet enters the ingress router and needs to be passed on to an MPLS tunnel, the router first determines the forwarding equivalence class (FEC) for the packet and then inserts one or more labels in the packet's newly created MPLS header. The packet is then passed on to the next hop router for this tunnel.\nFrom an OSI model perspective, the MPLS Header is added between the network layer header and link layer header.\nWhen a labeled packet is received by an MPLS router, the topmost label is examined. Based on the contents of the label a \"swap\", \"push\" or \"pop\" operation is performed on the packet's label stack. Routers can have prebuilt lookup tables that tell them which kind of operation to do based on the topmost label of the incoming packet so they can process the packet very quickly.\nDuring these operations, the contents of the packet below the MPLS Label stack are not examined. Indeed, transit routers typically need only to examine the topmost label on the stack. The forwarding of the packet is done based on the contents of the labels, which allows protocol-independent packet forwarding that does not need to look at a protocol-dependent routing table and avoids the expensive IP longest prefix match at each hop.\nAt the egress router, when the last label has been popped, only the payload remains. This can be an IP packet or any type of packet. The egress router must, therefore, have routing information for the packet's payload since it must forward it without the help of label lookup tables. An MPLS transit router has no such requirement.\nUsually, the last label is popped off at the penultimate hop (the hop before the egress router). This is called penultimate hop popping (PHP). This is useful in cases where the egress router has many packets leaving MPLS tunnels and thus spends significant CPU resources on these transitions. By using PHP, transit routers connected directly to this egress router effectively offload it, by popping the last label themselves. In the label distribution protocols, this PHP label pop action is advertised as label value 3 (implicit null) and is never found in a label, since it means that the label is to be popped.\nSeveral MPLS services including end-to-end QoS management, and 6PE, require keeping a label even between the penultimate and the last MPLS router, with a label disposition always done on the last MPLS router, ultimate hop popping (UHP). Some specific label values have been notably reserved for this use. In this scenario the remaining label stack entry conveys information to the last hop (such as its Traffic Class field for QoS information), while also instructing the last hop to pop the label stack using one of the following reserved label values:\nAn MPLS header does not identify the type of data carried inside the MPLS path. To carry two different types of traffic between the same two routers, with different treatment by the core routers for each type, a separate MPLS path for each type of traffic is required.\nLabel-switched path.\nA label-switched path (LSP) is a path through an MPLS network set up by the NMS or by a signaling protocol such as LDP, RSVP-TE, BGP (or the now deprecated CR-LDP). The path is set up based on criteria in the FEC.\nThe path begins at an LER, which makes a decision on which label to prefix to a packet based on the appropriate FEC. It then forwards the packet along to the next router in the path, which swaps the packet's outer label for another label, and forwards it to the next router. The last router in the path removes the label from the packet and forwards the packet based on the header of its next layer, for example IPv4. Due to the forwarding of packets through an LSP being opaque to higher network layers, an LSP is also sometimes referred to as an MPLS tunnel.\nThe router which first prefixes the MPLS header to a packet is an ingress router. The last router in an LSP, which pops the label from the packet, is called an egress router. Routers in between, which need only swap labels, are called transit routers or label switch routers (LSRs).\nNote that LSPs are unidirectional; they enable a packet to be label switched through the MPLS network from one endpoint to another. Since bidirectional communication is typically desired, the aforementioned dynamic signaling protocols can automatically set up a separate LSP in the opposite direction.\nWhen link protection is considered, LSPs can be categorized as primary (working), secondary (backup) and tertiary (LSP of last resort).\nInstalling and removing paths.\nThere are two standardized protocols for managing MPLS paths: the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) and RSVP-TE, an extension of the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) for traffic engineering. Furthermore, there exist extensions of the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) that can be used to manage an MPLS path.\nMulticast addressing.\nMulticast was, for the most part, an afterthought in MPLS design. It was introduced by point-to-multipoint RSVP-TE. It was driven by service provider requirements to transport broadband video over MPLS.\nThe hub and spoke multipoint LSP (HSMP LSP) was also introduced by IETF. HSMP LSP is mainly used for multicast, time synchronization, and other purposes.\nRelationship to Internet Protocol.\nMPLS works in conjunction with the Internet Protocol (IP) and its routing protocols, usually interior gateway protocols (IGPs). MPLS LSPs provide dynamic, transparent virtual networks with support for traffic engineering, the ability to transport layer-3 (IP) VPNs with overlapping address spaces, and support for layer-2 pseudowires using Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) that are capable of transporting a variety of transport payloads (IPv4, IPv6, ATM, Frame Relay, etc.). MPLS-capable devices are referred to as LSRs. The paths an LSR knows can be defined using explicit hop-by-hop configuration, or are dynamically routed by the Constrained Shortest Path First (CSPF) algorithm, or are configured as a loose route that avoids a particular IP address or that is partly explicit and partly dynamic.\nIn a pure IP network, the shortest path to a destination is chosen even when the path becomes congested. Meanwhile, in an IP network with MPLS Traffic Engineering CSPF routing, constraints such as the RSVP bandwidth of the traversed links can also be considered, such that the shortest path with available bandwidth will be chosen. MPLS Traffic Engineering relies upon the use of TE extensions to Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) or Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) and RSVP. In addition to the constraint of RSVP bandwidth, users can also define their own constraints by specifying link attributes and special requirements for tunnels to route (or not to route) over links with certain attributes.\nFor end-users the use of MPLS is not visible directly, but can be assumed when doing a traceroute: only nodes that do \"full\" IP routing are shown as hops in the path, thus not the MPLS nodes used in between, therefore when you see that a packet \"hops\" between two very distant nodes and hardly any other \"hop\" is seen in that provider's network (or AS) it is very likely that network uses MPLS.\nMPLS local protection.\nIn the event of a network element failure when recovery mechanisms are employed at the IP layer, restoration may take several seconds which may be unacceptable for real-time applications such as VoIP. In contrast, MPLS local protection meets the requirements of real-time applications with recovery times comparable to those of shortest path bridging networks or SONET rings of less than 50\u00a0ms.\nComparisons.\nMPLS can make use of existing ATM network or Frame Relay infrastructure, as its labeled flows can be mapped to ATM or Frame Relay virtual-circuit identifiers, and vice versa.\nFrame Relay.\nFrame Relay aimed to make more efficient use of existing physical resources, which allow for the underprovisioning of data services by telecommunications companies (telcos) to their customers, as clients were unlikely to be utilizing a data service 100 percent of the time. Consequently, oversubscription of capacity by the telcos, while financially advantageous to the provider, can directly affect overall performance.\nTelcos often sold Frame Relay to businesses looking for a cheaper alternative to dedicated lines; its use in different geographic areas depended greatly on governmental and telecommunication companies' policies.\nMany customers migrated from Frame Relay to MPLS over IP or Ethernet, which in many cases reduced costs and improved manageability and performance of their wide area networks.\nAsynchronous Transfer Mode.\nWhile the underlying protocols and technologies are different, both MPLS and ATM provide a connection-oriented service for transporting data across computer networks. In both technologies, connections are signaled between endpoints, the connection state is maintained at each node in the path, and encapsulation techniques are used to carry data across the connection. Excluding differences in the signaling protocols (RSVP/LDP for MPLS and PNNI for ATM) there still remain significant differences in the behavior of the technologies.\nThe most significant difference is in the transport and encapsulation methods. MPLS is able to work with variable-length packets while ATM uses fixed-length (53 bytes) cells. Packets must be segmented, transported and re-assembled over an ATM network using an adaptation layer, which adds significant complexity and overhead to the data stream. MPLS, on the other hand, simply adds a label to the head of each packet and transmits it on the network.\nDifferences exist, as well, in the nature of the connections. An MPLS connection (LSP) is unidirectional, allowing data to flow in only one direction between two endpoints. Establishing two-way communications between endpoints requires a pair of LSPs be established. Because two LSPs are used, data flowing in the forward direction may use a different path from data flowing in the reverse direction. ATM point-to-point connections (virtual circuits), on the other hand, are bidirectional, allowing data to flow in both directions over the same path.\nBoth ATM and MPLS support tunneling of connections inside connections. MPLS uses label stacking to accomplish this while ATM uses \"virtual paths\". MPLS can stack multiple labels to form tunnels within tunnels. The ATM virtual path indicator (VPI) and virtual circuit indicator (VCI) are both carried together in the cell header, limiting ATM to a single level of tunneling.\nThe biggest advantage that MPLS has over ATM is that it was designed from the start to be complementary to IP. Modern routers can support both MPLS and IP natively across a common interface allowing network operators great flexibility in network design and operation. ATM's incompatibilities with IP require complex adaptation, making it comparatively less suitable for today's predominantly IP networks.\nDeployment.\nMPLS is standardized by the IETF in . It is deployed to connect as few as two facilities to very large deployments. In practice, MPLS is mainly used to forward IP protocol data units (PDUs) and Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) Ethernet traffic. Major applications of MPLS are telecommunications traffic engineering and MPLS VPN.\nEvolution.\nMPLS was originally proposed to allow high-performance traffic forwarding and traffic engineering in IP networks. However, it evolved in Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) to also allow the creation of LSPs in non-native IP networks, such as SONET/SDH networks and wavelength switched optical networks.\nCompeting protocols.\nMPLS can exist in both an IPv4 and an IPv6 environment, using appropriate routing protocols. The major goal of MPLS development was the increase of routing speed. This goal is no longer relevant because of the usage of newer switching methods such as ASIC, TCAM and CAM-based switching able to forward plain IPv4 as fast as MPLS labeled packets. Now, therefore, the main benefit of MPLS is to implement limited traffic engineering and layer 3 or layer 2 service provider type VPNs over IPv4 networks.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20624", "revid": "50565355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20624", "title": "Message transfer agent", "text": "Software to transfer electronic mail\nWithin the Internet email system, a message transfer agent (MTA), mail transfer agent, or mail relay is software that transfers electronic mail messages from one computer to another using the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. In some contexts, the alternative names mail server, mail exchanger, or MX host are used to describe an MTA.\nMessages exchanged across networks are passed between mail servers, including any attached data files (such as images, multimedia, or documents). These servers often keep mailboxes for email. Access to this email by end users is typically either by webmail or an email client.\nOperation.\nA message transfer agent receives mail from either another MTA, a mail submission agent (MSA), or a mail user agent (MUA). The transmission details are specified by the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). When a recipient mailbox of a message is not hosted locally, the message is relayed, that is, forwarded to another MTA. Every time an MTA receives an email message, it adds a Received trace header field to the top of the header of the message, thereby building a sequential record of MTAs handling the message. The process of choosing a target MTA for the next hop is also described in SMTP, but can usually be overridden by configuring the MTA software with specific routes.\nAn MTA works in the background, while the user usually interacts directly with a mail user agent. One may distinguish initial submission as first passing through an MSA\u2014port 465 (or, for legacy reasons, optionally port 587) is used for communication between an MUA and an MSA, while port 25 is used for communication between MTAs, or from an MSA to an MTA. this distinction is clarified in .\nFor recipients hosted locally, the final delivery of email to a recipient mailbox is the task of a message delivery agent (MDA). For this purpose the MTA transfers the message to the message handling service component of the message delivery agent (MDA). Upon final delivery, the Return-Path field is added to the envelope to record the return path.\nTransfer versus access.\nA relay or filtering server will typically store email only briefly, but other systems keep full mailboxes for email - in which case they usually support some means for end users to access their email via a Mail User Agent (MUA), or email client.\nCommon protocols for this are:\nSubmission of new email from a mail client is via SMTP, typically on port 587 or 465, and is now generally restricted to servers the user has an account with-such as their ISP. This is for policy, not technical, reasons so that providers have some means of holding their users accountable for the generation of spam and other forms of email abuse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20625", "revid": "62026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20625", "title": "Makran", "text": "Semi-desert coastal region in Iran and Pakistan\nMakran (, Balochi: \u0645\u06aa\u0631\u0627\u0646), also mentioned in some sources as \"Mecran\" and \"Mokr\u0101n\", is the southern coastal region of Balochistan. It is a semi-desert coastal strip in the Balochistan province in Pakistan and in Iran, along the coast of the Gulf of Oman. It extends westwards, from the Sonmiani Bay to the northwest of Karachi in the east, to the fringes of the region of Bashkardia/B\u0101\u0161gerd in the southern part of the Sistan and Baluchestan province of modern Iran. Makr\u0101n is thus bisected by the modern political boundary between Pakistan and Iran. In January 2025, a government spokesperson informed that Iran is investigating the possibility of moving its capital to the Makran region.\nEtymology.\nThe southern part of Balochistan is called \"Kech Makran\" on the Pakistani side and Makran on the Iranian side which is also the name of a former Iranian province. The location corresponds to that of the Maka satrapy in Achaemenid times. The Sumerian trading partners of Magan are identified with Makran. In Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita, there is a mention of a tribe called \"Makara\" inhabiting the lands west of India. Arrian used the term \"Ichthyophagi\" (Ancient Greek for \"fish eaters\") for inhabitants of coastal areas, which has led to a suggestion to derive \"Makran\" from the modern Persian term \"m\u0101h\u012b khor\u0101n\", meaning \"fish eaters\".\nHistory.\nEarliest settlements.\nThe Kech-Makran region in southwestern Pakistan, along Kech River, was inhabited as early as the 5th millennium BCE. The site of Miri Qalat was investigated by French and Pakistani archaeologists from 1987 to 2007. Later, the site of Shahi-Tump, near Turbat, was also studied.\nLarge and massive quadrangular stone building were constructed already before 4000 BCE. Flints, worked\nstones, and bone tools used by the inhabitants were found by archaeologists, but no ceramics were yet used.\nIn this Period I the inhabitants of the Kech River Valley already cultivated wheat and barley, as well as lentils. They had domesticated cattle, goats, and sheep. They also caught fish from the Oman Sea.\nDuring Period II, the building of massive architectural structures continued, and a quadrangular stone complex was built. Later, mud brick constructions also appear on top of some of these stone buildings.\nAt Miri Qalat, some links with Uruk culture ceramics were also found.\nThe related site of Balakot, Makran, going back to 4000 BCE, was also studied by archaeologists.\nAncient times.\nAfter the victory of the Mauryan Empire against the Greeks in the Seleucid\u2013Mauryan war, Baluchistan came under the rule of Chandragupta Maurya of ancient India. Chandragupta and Seleucus made a peace settlement in 304 BCE. Seleucus I Nicator ceded the satrapies, including those in Baluchistan to the expanding Mauryan Empire. The alliance was solidified with a marriage between Chandragupta Maurya and a princess of the Seleucid Empire. An outcome of the arrangement proved to be mutually beneficial. The border between the Seleucid and Mauryan Empires remained stable in subsequent generations, and friendly diplomatic relations are reflected by the ambassador Megasthenes, and by the envoys sent westward by Chandragupta's grandson Ashoka.\nSasanian Empire.\nShapur I's trilingual inscription at the Ka'ba-ye Zartosht in Naqsh-i-Rustam, dated to 262 CE, had noted \"Makuran\"/\"Makran\" to be one of the many provinces of the Sasanian Empire:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd I (Shapur I) possess the lands: Fars [Persis], Pahlav [Parthia]\u00a0... and all of Abarshahr (all the upper (eastern, Parthian) provinces), Kerman, Sakastan, Turgistan, Makuran, Pardan [Paradene], Hind [Sind] and Kushanshahr all the way to Pashkibur [Peshawar?] and to the borders of Kashgaria, Sogdia and Chach [Tashkent] and of that sea-coast Mazonshahr [Oman].\nBuddhist and Hindu past.\nAb\u016b Ray\u1e25\u0101n Mu\u1e25ammad ibn A\u1e25mad Al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b states in his book \"Alberuni's India\" that the coast of India begins with Tiz, the capital of Makran.\nAccording to historian Andre Wink:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Further evidence in the Chachnama makes perfectly clear that many areas of Makran had a largely Buddhist population. When Chach marched to Armabil, this town is described as having been in the hands of a Buddhist Samani (Samani Budda), a descendant of the agents of Rai Sahiras who had been elevated for their loyalty and devotion, but who later made themselves independent. The Buddhist chief offered his allegiance to Chach when the latter was on his way to Kirman in 631. The same chiefdom of Armadil is referred to by Hiuen Tsang O-tien-p-o-chi-lo, located at the high road running through Makran, and he also describes it as predominantly Buddhist, thinly populated though it was, it had no less than 80 Buddhist convents with about 5000 monks. In effect at eighteen km northwest of Las Bela at Gandakahar, near the ruins of an ancient town are the caves of Gondrani, and as their constructions show these caves were undoubtedly Buddhist. Traveling through the Kij valley further west (then under the government of Persia) Hiuen Tsang saw some 100 Buddhist monasteries and 6000 priests. He also saw several hundred Deva temples in this part of Makran, and in the town of Su-nu li-chi-shi-fa-lo \u2013 which is probably Qasrqand \u2013 he saw a temple of Maheshvara Deva, richly adorned and sculptured. There is thus very wide extension of Indian cultural forms in Makran in the seventh century, even in the period when it fell under Persian sovereignty. By comparison in more recent times the last place of Hindu pilgrimage in Makran was Hinglaj, 256 km west of present-day Karachi in Las Bela.\nWink has recorded Hiuen Tsang's notes on the language and script in use in easternmost Makran (eastern parts of Pakistani Balochistan\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hiuen Tsang considered the script which was in use in Makran to be \"much the same as India\", but the spoken language \"differed a little from that of India\".\nEarly medieval times.\nThe Hindu Sewa dynasty ruled much of Baluchistan up until the 7th century CE. The Sibi division carved out of Quetta division still derives its name from Rani Sewi, the queen of the Hindu Sewa dynasty.\nIn 635 or 636 CE, the Hindu Brahman dynasty controlled parts of Balochistan.\nIslamic conquest.\nThe first Islamic conquest of Makran took place during the Rashidun Caliphate in the year 643 CE . Caliph Umar's governor of Bahrain, Usman ibn Abu al-Aas, who was on a campaign to conquer the southern coastal areas beyond Sassanid, sent his brother Hakam ibn Abu al-Aas to raid and reconnoitre the Makran region.\nIn late 644 CE Caliph Umar dispatched an army under the command of Hakam ibn Amr for the wholesale invasion of Makkuran. He was joined by reinforcements from Kufa under the command of Shahab ibn Makharaq, and by Abdullah ibn Utban, the commander of a campaign in Kerman. They encountered no strong resistance in Makran until the army of the King of Rai, along with contingents from Makran and Sind, stopped them near the Indus River. In mid-644 the Battle of Rasil was fought between the forces of the Rashidun Caliphate and the Rai Kingdom; the Raja's forces were defeated and forced to retreat to the eastern bank of the Indus. The Raja's army had included war elephants, but these had posed little problem for the Muslim invaders, who had dealt with them during the conquest of Persia. In accordance with the orders of Caliph Umar, the captured war elephants were sold in Islamic Persia, with the proceeds distributed among the soldiers as share in booty. In response to Caliph Umar's questions about the Makran region, the messenger from Makkuran who brought the news of the victory told him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUmar looked at the messenger and said:\n\"Are you a messenger or a poet?\" He replied, \"Messenger\". Thereupon Caliph Umar instructed Hakim bin Amr al Taghlabi that for the time being Makkuran should be the easternmost frontier of the Islamic empire, and that no further attempt should be made to extend the conquests.\nIt was reconquered by the usurper Chach of Alor in 631. Ten years later, it was described to be \"under the government of Persia\" by Xuanzang who visited the region. Three years later however, when the Arabs invaded, it was regarded as the \"frontier of \"Al-Hind\"\". The Brahmin, Maharaja Chacha met the invaders outside Broach and defeated them with heavy slaughter also killing their very Commander-in-Chief Abdul Aziz in the process.\nBaloch attack on Mahmud Ghazni.\nBaloch raiders plundered Mahmud of Ghazni's ambassador between Tabbas and Khabis. In revenge, his son Masud defeated them at the latter place, which lies at the foot of the Karman Mountains on the edge of the desert.\nModern era.\nFrom the 15th century onward, the area was ruled by the Rind, Buledai, Hammal Jiand, and Gichki tribes.\nHammal Baloch lived during the 15th century and his father, Jiand was the ruler of Makran. He is best known for his resistance against Portuguese incursions, particularly during the attacks on coastal towns like Pasni and Gawadar.\nThe sultanate held onto the Makran coast throughout the period of British colonial rule, but eventually, only Gwadar was left in the hands of the sultan.\nPrincely State of Makaran.\nOn the independence of Pakistan, Makran became a district within the province of Balochistan, with the exception of an area of around Gwadar.\nMakran () was an autonomous princely state in a subsidiary alliance with British India until 1947, before acceding to Pakistan as an autonomous princely state of Pakistan. It ceased to exist in 1955. It was located in the extreme southwest of present-day Pakistan, an area now parts of the districts of Gwadar, Kech and Panjgur. The state did not include the enclave of Omani Gwadar, which was under Omani rule until 1958.\nMakran state was ruled by Gichki Nawabs, who were of Rajputs origin. Their ancestor, Jagat Singh had migrated from Rajputana in the 17th century and converted to Islam. In 1958 the Gwadar enclave was transferred to Pakistani control as part of the district of Makran. The entire region has been subdivided into new smaller districts over the years.\nAncient Corridor of Makran.\nBetween 2500 B.C. and 1700 B.C., a maritime trade route existed in the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf(which continued into later periods), connecting three primary regions as described in ancient Akkadian inscriptions found in Iraq:\nAccording to these inscriptions, ships carrying up to 20 tons of goods (20,000 kilograms each) traversed this trade route regularly.\nGeography.\nThe narrow coastal plain rises rapidly into several mountain ranges. Of the coastline, around are in Pakistan. The climate is dry with little rainfall. Makran is very sparsely inhabited, with much of the population concentrated in a string of small ports including Chabahar, Gwatar, Jiwani, Jask, Sirik, Gwadar (not to be confused with Gwatar), Pasni, Ormara and many smaller fishing villages.\nThere is only one island off the coast of Makran, Astola Island, near Pasni although there are several small islets. The coastline has a number of lagoons and bays. The main lagoons are Miani Hor, Khor Kalmat, and the Jiwani Coastal Wetland. The main bays are from east to west: Ormara East Bay, Ormara West Bay, Pasni Bay, Surbandar Bay, Gwadar East Bay, Gwadar West Bay and Gwatar Bay (which includes Jiwani Bay). This latter bay shelters a large mangrove forest and the nesting grounds of endangered turtle species. The Mirani Dam provides irrigation, flood prevention and water supply to Gwadar city.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20627", "revid": "27073799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20627", "title": "Micrometre", "text": "Unit of length; one millionth of a metre\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe micrometre (Commonwealth English) or micrometer (American English) (SI symbol: \u03bcm) is a unit of length in the International System of Units (SI) equalling (SI standard prefix \"micro-\" = ); that is, one millionth of a metre (or one thousandth of a millimetre, , or about ).\nThe nearest smaller common SI unit is the nanometre, equivalent to one thousandth of a micrometre, one millionth of a millimetre or one billionth of a metre ( or ).\nThe micrometre is a common unit of measurement for wavelengths of infrared radiation as well as sizes of biological cells and bacteria, and for grading wool by the diameter of the fibres. The width of a single human hair ranges from approximately 20 to .\nExamples.\nBetween 1\u00a0\u03bcm and 10\u00a0\u03bcm:\nBetween 10\u00a0\u03bcm and 100\u00a0\u03bcm:\nSI standardization.\nThe term \"micron\" and the symbol \u03bc were officially accepted for use in isolation to denote the micrometre in 1879, but officially revoked by the International System of Units (SI) in 1967. This became necessary because the older usage was incompatible with the official adoption of the unit prefix \"micro-\", denoted \u03bc, during the creation of the SI in 1960.\nIn the SI, the systematic name \"micrometre\" became the official name of the unit, and \u03bcm became the official unit symbol.\n In American English, the use of \"micron\" may help to differentiate the unit from the micrometer, a measuring device, because the unit's name in American spelling is a homograph of the device's name. In spoken English, they are distinguished by pronunciation, as the name of the measuring device is stressed on the second syllable ( ), whereas the unit name places the stress on the first syllable ( ).\nThe plural of \"micron\" is normally \"microns\", though \"micra\" was occasionally used before 1950.\nSymbol.\nThe official symbol for the SI prefix \"micro-\" is a Greek lowercase mu. Unicode has inherited from ISO/IEC 8859-1, distinct from the code point . According to the Unicode Consortium, the Greek letter character is preferred, but implementations must recognize the micro sign as well for compatibility with legacy character sets. Most fonts use the same glyph for the two characters.\nBefore desktop publishing became commonplace, it was customary to render the symbol \u03bc in texts produced with mechanical typewriters by combining a slightly lowered slash with the letter u. For example, \"15\u00a0\u03bcm\" would appear as \"15um\". This gave rise in early word processing to substituting just the letter u for the symbol if the Greek letter \u03bc was not available, as in \"15\u00a0um\".\nThe Unicode CJK Compatibility block contains square forms of some Japanese katakana measure and currency units.\n corresponds to .\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20629", "revid": "39102135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20629", "title": "Maharashtra", "text": "State in western India\nMaharashtra is a state in the western peninsular region of India occupying a substantial portion of the Deccan Plateau. It is bordered by the Arabian Sea to the west, the Indian states of Karnataka and Goa to the south, Telangana to the southeast and Chhattisgarh to the east, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh to the north, and the Indian union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu to the northwest. Maharashtra is the second-most populous state in India, the third most populous country subdivision in South Asia and the fourth-most populous in the world.\nThe region that encompasses the modern state has a history going back many millennia. Notable dynasties that ruled the region include the Asmakas, the Mauryas, the Satavahanas, the Western Satraps, the Abhiras, the Vakatakas, the Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas, the Western Chalukyas, the Seuna Yadavas, the Khaljis, the Tughlaqs, the Bahamanis and the Mughals. In the early nineteenth century, the region was divided between the Dominions of the Peshwa in the Maratha Confederacy and the Nizamate of Hyderabad.\nEarly in the 19th century, the British East India company by defeating the Marathas, brought most of the present day Maharashtra region directly under its control or indirectly through many princely states. After 1858, the British crown assumed control for the areas from the company. The region during the company or British rule was divided between the Bombay presidency, Central provinces and Berar and many princely states including the Hyderabad state. After Indian independence in 1947, Bombay presidency became the Bombay State in the Indian Union. Between 1950 and 1956 and Berar, the Deccan states and the Gujarat states were merged into the Bombay State. Aspirations of a separate state for Marathi-speaking peoples were pursued by the United Maharashtra Movement; their advocacy eventually borne fruit on 1 May 1960, when the State of Bombay was bifurcated into the modern states of Maharasthra and Gujarat.\nThe state is divided into 6 divisions and 36 districts. Mumbai is the capital of Maharashtra due to its historical significance as a major trading port and its status as India's financial hub, housing key institutions and a diverse economy. Mumbai's well-developed infrastructure and cultural diversity make it a suitable administrative center for the state, and the most populous urban area in India, with Nagpur serving as the winter capital. The Godavari and Krishna are the state's two major rivers, and forests cover 16.47% of the state's geographical area. \nThe economy of Maharashtra is the largest in India, with a gross state domestic product (GSDP) of \u20b9 () and GSDP per capita of (); it is the single-largest contributor to India's economy, being accountable for 14% of all-India nominal GDP. The service sector dominates the state's economy, accounting for 69.3% of the value of the output of the country. Although agriculture accounts for 12% of the state GDP, it employs nearly half the population of the state.\nMaharashtra is one of the most industrialised states in India. The state's capital, Mumbai, is India's financial and commercial capital. The Bombay Stock Exchange, India's largest stock exchange and the oldest in Asia, is located in the city, as is the National Stock Exchange, which is the second-largest stock exchange in India and one of world's largest derivatives exchanges. The state has played a significant role in the country's social and political life and is widely considered a leader in terms of agricultural and industrial production, trade and transport, and education. Maharashtra is the ninth-highest ranking among Indian states in the human development index.\nThe state is home to seven UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Ajanta Caves, Ellora Caves, Elephanta Caves, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly Victoria Terminus), the Victorian Gothic and Art Deco Ensembles of Mumbai, the Maratha Military Landscapes of India (shared with Tamil Nadu) and the Western Ghats, a heritage site made up of 39 individual properties of which four are in Maharashtra.\nEtymology.\nPre-independence era writers state that the term \"Maharashtra\" was derived from \"the country of Mahars\". Irawati Karve also noted that Mahars were found in all regions of Maharashtra.\nThe modern Marathi language evolved from Maharashtri Prakrit, and the word \"Marhatta\" (later used for the Marathas) is found in the Jain Maharashtrian literature. The term Maharashtra along with Maharashtrian, Marathi, and Maratha may have derived from the same root. However, their exact etymology is uncertain.\nAnother theory among the linguistic scholars is that the words Maratha and Maharashtra ultimately derived from a combination of \"Mah\u0101\" and \"R\u0101\u1e63\u1e6drik\u0101\", the name of a tribe or dynasty of chiefs ruling in the Deccan region. An alternate theory states that the term is derived from \"mah\u0101\" (\"great\") and \"ratha\"/\"rathi\" (\"chariot\"/\"charioteer\"), which refers to a skilful northern fighting force that migrated southward into the area.\nIn the Harivamsa, the Yadava kingdom called Anaratta is described as mostly inhabited by the Abhiras (Abhira-praya-manusyam). The Anartta country and its inhabitants were called Surastra and the Saurastras, probably after the Rattas (Rastras) akin to the Rastrikas of Asoka's rock Edicts, now known as Maharastra and the Marattas.\nAn alternative theory states that the term derives from the word \"mah\u0101\" (\"great\") and \"r\u0101\u1e63\u1e6dra\" (\"nation/dominion\"). However, this theory is somewhat controversial among modern scholars who believe it to be the Sanskritised interpretation of later writers.\nHistory.\nNumerous Late Harappan or Chalcolithic sites belonging to the Jorwe culture (c.\u20091300\u2013700 BCE) have been discovered throughout the state. The largest settlement discovered of the culture is at Daimabad, which had a mud fortification during this period, as well as an elliptical temple with fire pits. In the Late Harappan period there was a large migration of people from Gujarat to northern Maharashtra.\nMaharashtra was ruled by Maurya Empire in the fourth and third centuries BCE. Around 230 BCE, Maharashtra came under the rule of the Satavahana dynasty which ruled it for the next 400 years. The rule of Satavahanas was followed by that of Western Satraps, Gupta Empire, Gurjara-Pratihara, Vakataka, Kadambas, Chalukya Empire, Rashtrakuta Dynasty, and Western Chalukya and the Yadava Dynasty. The Buddhist Ajanta Caves in present-day Aurangabad display influences from the Satavahana and Vakataka styles. The caves were possibly excavated during this period.\nThe Chalukya dynasty ruled the region from the sixth to the eighth centuries CE, and the two prominent rulers were Pulakeshin II, who defeated the north Indian Emperor Harsha, and Vikramaditya II, who defeated the Arab invaders in the eighth century. The Rashtrakuta dynasty ruled Maharashtra from the eighth to the tenth century. The Arab traveller Sulaiman al Mahri described the ruler of the Rashtrakuta dynasty Amoghavarsha as \"one of the four great kings of the world\". Shilahara dynasty began as vassals of the Rashtrakuta dynasty which ruled the Deccan plateau between the eighth and tenth centuries. From the early 11th century to the 12th century, the Deccan Plateau, which includes a significant part of Maharashtra, was dominated by the Western Chalukya Empire and the Chola dynasty. Several battles were fought between the Western Chalukya Empire and the Chola dynasty in the Deccan Plateau during the reigns of Raja Raja Chola I, Rajendra Chola I, Jayasimha II, Someshvara I, and Vikramaditya VI.\nIn the early 14th century, the Yadava dynasty, which ruled most of present-day Maharashtra, was overthrown by the Delhi Sultanate ruler Alauddin Khalji. Later, Muhammad bin Tughluq conquered parts of the Deccan, and temporarily shifted his capital from Delhi to Daulatabad in Maharashtra. After the collapse of the Tughluqs in 1347, the local Bahmani Sultanate of Gulbarga took over, governing the region for the next 150 years. After the break-up of the Bahamani sultanate in 1518, Maharashtra split into five Deccan Sultanates: Nizamshah of Ahmednagar, Adilshah of Bijapur, Qutubshah of Golkonda, Bidarshah of Bidar and Imadshah of Elichpur. These kingdoms often fought with each other. United, they decisively defeated the Vijayanagara Empire of the south in 1565. The present area of Mumbai was ruled by the Sultanate of Gujarat before its capture by Portugal in 1535 and the Faruqi dynasty ruled the Khandesh region between 1382 and 1601 before finally getting annexed in the Mughal Empire. Malik Ambar, the regent of the Nizamshahi dynasty of Ahmednagar from 1607 to 1626, increased the strength and power of Murtaza Nizam Shah II and raised a large army.Ambar is said to have introduced the concept of guerrilla warfare in the Deccan region. Malik Ambar assisted Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in Delhi against his stepmother, Nur Jahan, who wanted to enthrone her son-in-law. Both Shivaji's grandfather, Maloji and father Shahaji served under Ambar.\nIn the early 17th century, Shahaji Bhosale, an ambitious local general who had served the Ahmadnagar Sultanate, the Mughals and Adil Shah of Bijapur at different periods throughout his career, attempted to establish his independent rule. This attempt was unsuccessful, but his son Shivaji succeeded in establishing the Maratha Empire. Shortly after Shivaji's death in 1680, the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb launched a campaign to conquer Maratha territories as well as the Adilshahi and Govalkonda kingdoms. This campaign, better known as Mughal\u2013Maratha Wars, was a strategic defeat for Mughals. Aurangzeb failed to fully conquer Maratha territories, and this campaign had a ruinous effect on Mughal Treasury and Army. Shortly after Aurangzeb's death in 1707, Marathas under Peshwa Bajirao I and the generals that he had promoted such as Ranoji Shinde and Malharrao Holkar started conquering Mughal Territories in the north and western India, and by 1750s they or their successors had confined the Mughals to city of Delhi.\nAfter their defeat at the hand of Ahmad Shah Abdali's Afghan forces in the Third Battle of Panipat in 1761, the Maratha suffered a setback. However, they soon reclaimed the lost territories and ruled central and north India including Delhi until the end of the eighteenth century. The Marathas also developed a potent \"Navy\" circa in the 1660s, which at its peak under the command of Kanhoji Angre, dominated the territorial waters of the western coast of India from Mumbai to Savantwadi. It resisted the British, Portuguese, Dutch, and Siddi naval ships and kept a check on their naval ambitions. Charles Metcalfe, British Civil servant and later Acting Governor-General, said in 1806:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;India contains no more than two great powers, British and Maratha, and every other state acknowledges the influence of one or the other. Every inch that we recede will be occupied by them.\nThe British East India Company slowly expanded areas under its rule during the 18th century. The Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817\u20131818) led to the end of the Maratha Empire and the East India Company took over the empire. The Maratha Navy dominated till around the 1730s, was in a state of decline by the 1770s and ceased to exist by 1818.\nThe British governed western Maharashtra as part of the Bombay Presidency, which spanned an area from Karachi in Pakistan to northern Deccan. A number of the Maratha states persisted as princely states, retaining autonomy in return for acknowledging British suzerainty. The largest princely states in the territory were Nagpur, Satara and Kolhapur State; Satara was annexed to the Bombay Presidency in 1848, and Nagpur was annexed in 1853 to become Nagpur Province, later part of the Central Provinces. Berar, which had been part of the Nizam of Hyderabad's kingdom, was occupied by the British in 1853 and annexed to the Central Provinces in 1903. However, a large region called Marathwada remained part of the Nizam's Hyderabad State throughout the British period. The British ruled Maharashtra region from 1818 to 1947 and influenced every aspect of life for the people of the region. They brought several changes to the legal system, built modern means of transport including roads and Railways, took various steps to provide mass education, including that for previously marginalised classes and women, established universities based on western system and imparting education in science, technology, and western medicine, standardised the Marathi language, and introduced mass media by utilising modern printing technologies. The 1857 war of independence had many Marathi leaders, though the battles mainly took place in northern India. The modern struggle for independence started taking shape in the late 1800s with leaders such as Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Pherozeshah Mehta and Dadabhai Naoroji evaluating the company rule and its consequences. Jyotirao Phule was the pioneer of social reform in the Maharashtra region in the second half of the 19th century. His social work was continued by Shahu, Raja of Kolhapur and later by B. R. Ambedkar. After the partial autonomy given to the states by the Government of India Act 1935, B. G. Kher became the first chief minister of the Congress party-led government of tri-lingual Bombay Presidency. The ultimatum to the British during the Quit India Movement was given in Mumbai and culminated in the transfer of power and independence in 1947.\nAfter Indian independence, princely states and Jagirs of the Deccan States Agency were merged into Bombay State, which was created from the former Bombay Presidency in 1950. In 1956, the States Reorganisation Act reorganised the Indian states along linguistic lines, and Bombay Presidency State was enlarged by the addition of the predominantly Marathi-speaking regions of Marathwada (Aurangabad Division) from erstwhile Hyderabad state and Vidarbha region from the Central Provinces and Berar. The southernmost part of Bombay State was ceded to Mysore. In the 1950s, Marathi people strongly protested against bilingual Bombay state under the banner of Samyukta Maharashtra Samiti. The notable leaders of the samiti included Keshavrao Jedhe, S.M. Joshi, Shripad Amrit Dange, Pralhad Keshav Atre and Gopalrao Khedkar. The key demand of the samiti called for a Marathi speaking state with Mumbai as its capital. In the Gujarati speaking areas of the state, a similar Mahagujarat Movement demanded a separate Gujarat state comprising majority Gujarati areas. After many years of protests, which saw 106 deaths among the protestors, and electoral success of the samiti in 1957 elections, the central government led by Prime minister Nehru split Bombay State into two new states of Maharashtra and Gujarat on 1 May 1960.\nThe state continues to have a dispute with Karnataka regarding the region of Belgaum and Karwar. The Government of Maharashtra was unhappy with the border demarcation of 1957 and filed a petition to the Ministry of Home affairs of India. Maharashtra claimed 814 villages, and 3 urban settlements of Belagon, Karwar and Nippani, all part of then Bombay Presidency before freedom of the country. A petition by Maharashtra in the Supreme Court of India, staking a claim over Belagon, is currently pending.\nGeography.\nMaharashtra with a total area of , is the third-largest state by area in terms of land area and constitutes 9.36% of India's total geographical area. The State lies between 15\u00b035' N to 22\u00b002' N latitude and 72\u00b036' E to 80\u00b054' E longitude. It occupies the western and central part of the country and has a coastline stretching along the Arabian Sea. The dominant physical feature of the state is its plateau character, which is separated from the Konkan coastline by the mountain range of the Western Ghats, which runs parallel to the coast from north to south. The Western Ghats, also known as the Sahyadri Range, has an average elevation of ; its slopes gently descending towards the east and southeast. The Western Ghats (or the Sahyadri Mountain range) provide a physical barrier to the state on the west, while the Satpura Hills along the north and Bhamragad-Chiroli-Gaikhuri ranges on the east serve as its natural borders. This state's expansion from North to South is and East to West is . To the west of these hills lie the Konkan coastal plains, in width. To the east of the Ghats lies the flat Deccan Plateau. The main rivers of the state are the Krishna, and its tributary, Bhima, the Godavari, and its main tributaries, Manjara, and Wardha-Wainganga and the Tapi, and its tributary Purna. Maharashtra is divided into five geographic regions. Konkan is the western coastal region, between the Western Ghats and the sea. Khandesh is the north region lying in the valley of the Tapti, Purna river. Nashik, Malegaon Jalgaon, Dhule and Bhusawal are the major cities of this region. Desh is in the centre of the state. Marathwada, which was a part of the princely state of Hyderabad until 1956, is located in the southeastern part of the state. Aurangabad and Nanded are the main cities of the region. Vidarbha is the easternmost region of the state, formerly part of the Central Provinces and Berar.\nThe state has limited area under irrigation, low natural fertility of soils, and large areas prone to recurrent drought. Due to this the agricultural productivity of Maharashtra is generally low as compared to the national averages of various crops. Maharashtra has been divided in to nine agro-climatic zones on the basis of annual rainfall soil types, vegetation and cropping pattern.\nClimate.\nMaharashtra experiences a tropical wet and dry climate with hot, rainy, and cold weather seasons. Some areas more inland experience a hot semi arid climate, due to a rain shadow effect caused by the Western Ghats. The month of March marks the beginning of the summer and the temperature rises steadily until June. In the central plains, summer temperatures rise to between and . May is usually the warmest and January the coldest month of the year. The winter season lasts until February with lower temperatures occurring in December and January. On the Deccan plateau that lies on eastern side of the Sahyadri mountains, the climate is drier, however, dew and hail often occur, depending on seasonal weather.\nThe rainfall patterns in the state vary by the topography of different regions. The state can be divided into four meteorological regions, namely coastal Konkan, Western Maharashtra, Marathwada, and Vidarbha. The southwest monsoon usually arrives in the last week of June and lasts till mid-September. Pre-monsoon showers begin towards the middle of June and post-monsoon rains occasionally occur in October. The highest average monthly rainfall is during July and August. In the winter season, there may be a little rainfall associated with western winds over the region. The Konkan coastal area, west of the Sahyadri Mountains receives very heavy monsoon rains with an annual average of more than . However, just to the east, in the rain shadow of the mountain range, only 500\u2013700\u00a0mm/year will fall, and long dry spells leading to drought are a common occurrence. Maharashtra has many of the 99 Indian districts identified by the Indian Central water commission as prone to drought. The average annual rainfall in the state is and 75% of it is received during the southwest monsoon from June\u2013to September. However, under the influence of the Bay of Bengal, eastern Vidarbha receives good rainfall in July, August, and September. Thane, Raigad, Ratnagiri, and Sindhudurg districts receive heavy rains of an average of and the hill stations of Matheran and Mahabaleshwar over . Contrariwise, the rain shadow districts of Nashik, Pune, Ahmednagar, Dhule, Jalgaon, Satara, Sangli, Solapur, and parts of Kolhapur receive less than annually. In winter, a cool dry spell occurs, with clear skies, gentle air breeze, and pleasant weather that prevails from October to February, although the eastern Vidarbha region receives rainfall from the north-east monsoon.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe state has three crucial biogeographic zones, namely Western Ghats, Deccan Plateau, and the West coast. The Ghats nurture endemic species, Deccan Plateau provides for vast mountain ranges and grasslands while the coast is home to littoral and swamp forests. Flora of Maharashtra is heterogeneous in composition. In 2012 the recorded thick forest area in the state was which was about 20.13% of the state's geographical area. \nThere are three main Public Forestry Institutions (PFIs) in the Maharashtra state: the Maharashtra Forest Department (MFD), the Forest Development Corporation of Maharashtra (FDCM) and the Directorate of Social Forestry (SFD). The Maharashtra State Biodiversity Board, constituted by the Government of Maharashtra in January 2012 under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002, is the nodal body for the conservation of biodiversity within and outside forest areas in the State.\nMaharashtra is ranked second among the Indian states in terms of the recorded forest area. Recorded Forest Area (RFA) in the state is , of which is reserved forests, is protected forest and is unclassed forests. Based on the interpretation of IRS Resourcesat-2 LISS III satellite data of the period Oct 2017 to Jan 2018, the State has under Very Dense Forest (VDF), under Moderately Dense Forest (MDF) and under Open Forest (OF). According to the Champion and Seth classification, Maharashtra has five types of forests:\nThe most common animal species present in the state are monkeys, wild pigs, tiger, leopard, gaur, sloth bear, sambar, four-horned antelope, chital, barking deer, mouse deer, small Indian civet, golden jackal, jungle cat, and hare. Other animals found in this state include reptiles such as lizards, scorpions and snake species such as cobras and kraits. The state provides legal protection to its tiger population through six dedicated tiger reserves under the precincts of the National Tiger Conservation Authority.\nThe state's of sea coastline of the Arabian Sea marks the presence of various types of fish and marine animals. The Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) found 1527 marine animal species, including molluscs with 581 species, many crustacean species including crabs, shrimps, and lobsters, 289 fish species, and 141 species types of annelids (sea worms).\nRegions, divisions and districts.\nMaharashtra has following geographical regions:\nIt consists of six administrative divisions:\nThe state's six divisions are divided into 36 districts, 109 sub-divisions, 358 talukas, and 44778 revenue villages. The following map shows the 36 districts of Maharashtra.\nEach district is administered by a district collector &amp; district magistrate, appointed by the government either from the cadre of Indian Administrative Service or the Maharashtra Civil Service. The Collector is assisted by additional collectors and deputy collectors. Districts are subdivided into \"sub-divisions\" (upavibh\u0101ga) administered by sub-divisional magistrates (\"sub divisional officers\"), and again into \"talukas\". Each taluka (tehsil) is headed by a tahsildar. \nEach taluka comprises a group of villages, placed under a Circle Officer, and is divided into individual villages under Talathis, who are responsible for land revenue-related matters. The above district\u2013subdivision\u2013tehsil\u2013circle\u2013village divisions are primarily intended for land revenue administration. The local governance structure is such that a block consists of panchayats (village councils). Panchayat Samitis are intermediate level panchayat between the Zilla Parishad (district councils) at the district level and gram panchayat (village councils) at the lower level.\nOf Maharashtra's population, 45.22% of people live in urban regions. 50.8\u00a0million people live in urban areas. There are 29 Municipal Corporations, 247 Municipal Councils, and 147 Nagar panchayats in Maharashtra for urban governance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the provisional results of the 2011 national census, Maharashtra was at that time the richest state in India and the second-most populous state in India with a population of 112,374,333. Contributing to 9.28% of India's population, males and females are 58,243,056 and 54,131,277, respectively. The total population growth in 2011 was 15.99%, while in the previous decade it was 22.57%. Since independence, the decadal growth rate of population has remained higher (except in the year 1971) than the national average. However, in the year 2011, it was found to be lower than the national average. The 2011 census for the state found 55% of the population to be rural with 45% being urban-based. Although, India hasn't conducted a caste-wise census since Independence, based on the British era census of 1931, it is estimated that the Maratha and the Maratha-kunbi numerically form the largest caste cluster with around 32% of the population. Maharashtra has a large Other Backward Class population constituting 41% of the population. The scheduled tribes include \"Adivasis\" such as Thakar, Warli, Konkana and Halba. The 2011 census found scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to account for 11.8% and 8.9% of the population, respectively. The state also includes a substantial number of migrants from other states of India. Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, and Karnataka account for the largest percentage of migrants to the Mumbai metropolitan area.\nThe 2011 census reported the human sex ratio is 929 females per 1000 males, which were below the national average of 943. The density of Maharashtra was 365 inhabitants per km2 which was lower than the national average of 382 per km2. Since 1921, the populations of Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg shrank by \u22124.96% and \u22122.30%, respectively, while the population of Thane grew by 35.9%, followed by Pune at 30.3%. The literacy rate is 83.2%, higher than the national rate at 74.04%. Of this, male literacy stood at 89.82% and female literacy 75.48%.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census, Hinduism was the principal religion in the state at 79.8% of the total population. Muslims constituted 11.5% of the total population. Maharashtra has the highest number of followers of Buddhism in India, accounting for 5.8% of Maharashtra's total population with 6,531,200 followers. Marathi Buddhists account for 77.36% of all Buddhists in India. Sikhs, Christians, and Jains constituted 0.2%, 1%, and 1.2% of the Maharashtra population respectively.\nMaharashtra, and particularly the city of Mumbai, is home to two tiny religious communities. This includes 5000 Jews, mainly belonging to the Bene Israel, and Baghdadi Jewish communities. Parsi is the other community who follow Zoroastrianism. The 2011 census recorded around 44,000 parsis in Maharashtra.\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMarathi is the official language although different regions have their own dialects. Most people speak regional languages classified as dialects of Marathi in the census. Powari, Lodhi, and Varhadi are spoken in the Vidarbha region, Dangi is spoken near the Maharashtra-Gujarat border, Bhil languages are spoken throughout the northwest part of the state, Khandeshi (locally known as Ahirani) is spoken in Khandesh region. In the Desh and Marathwada regions, Dakhini Urdu is widely spoken, although Dakhini speakers are usually bilingual in Marathi.\nKonkani, and its dialect Malvani, is spoken along the southern Konkan coast. Telugu and Kannada are spoken along the border areas of Telangana and Karnataka, respectively. At the junction of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Chhattisgarh a variety of Hindi dialects are spoken such as Lodhi and Powari. Lambadi is spoken through a wide area of eastern Marathwada and western Vidarbha. Gondi is spoken by diminishing minorities throughout Vidarbha but is most concentrated in the forests of Gadchiroli and the Telangana border.\nMarathi is the first language of a majority or plurality of the people in all districts of Maharashtra except Nandurbar, where Bhili is spoken by 45% of its population. The highest percentage of Khandeshi speakers are Dhule district (29%) and the highest percentage of Gondi speakers are in Gadchiroli district (24%).\nThe highest percentages of first language Hindi speakers are in urban areas, especially Mumbai and its suburbs, where it is the mother tongue to over a quarter of the population. Other urban centers like Pune, Nagpur, and Aurangabad also have a high number of Hindi-speakers. Combined with Urdu, the persianized register of Hindustani, speakers of Hindi-Urdu form nearly 20% of the Maharashtrian population. Urdu and another Hindustani dialect, Dakhni, are spoken primarily by the Muslim population of the state.\nThe Mumbai metropolitan area is home to migrants from all over India. In Mumbai, a wide range of languages are spoken, including Gujarati, Telugu, Tamil, Konkani, Kannada, Sindhi, Punjabi, Bengali, Tulu, and many more.\nGovernance and administration.\nThe state is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy, a feature the state shares with other Indian states. Maharashtra is one of the six states in India where the state legislature is bicameral, comprising the Vidhan Sabha (Legislative Assembly) and the Vidhan Parishad (Legislative Council). The legislature, the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly, consists of elected members and special office bearers such as the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, who are elected by the members. The Legislative Assembly consists of 288 members who are elected for five-year terms unless the Assembly is dissolved before to the completion of the term. The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 78 members with one-third (33 members) retiring every two years. Maharashtra is the second most important state in terms of political representation in the Lok Sabha, or the lower chamber of the Indian Parliament with 48 seats which is next only to Uttar Pradesh which has the highest number of seats than any other Indian state with 80 seats. Maharashtra also has 19 seats in the Rajya Sabha, or the upper chamber of the Indian Parliament.\nThe government of Maharashtra is a democratically elected body in India with the Governor as its constitutional head who is appointed by the President of India for a five-year term. The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the chief minister by the governor, and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the governor on the advice of the chief minister. The governor remains a ceremonial head of the state, while the chief minister and his council are responsible for day-to-day government functions. The council of ministers consists of Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State (MoS). The Secretariat headed by the Chief Secretary assists the council of ministers. The Chief Secretary is also the administrative head of the government. Each government department is headed by a Minister, who is assisted by an Additional Chief Secretary or a Principal Secretary, who is usually an officer of the Indian Administrative Service, the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary serves as the administrative head of the department they are assigned to. Each department also has officers of the rank of Secretary, Special Secretary, Joint Secretary, etc. assisting the Minister and the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary.\nFor purpose of administration, the state is divided into 6 divisions and 36 districts. Divisional Commissioner, an IAS officer is the head of administration at the divisional level. The administration in each district is headed by a Collector &amp; District Magistrate, who is an IAS officer and is assisted by several officers belonging to state services. Urban areas in the state are governed by Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats, and seven Cantonment Boards. Rural areas are governed by Panchayati Raj institutions: Zilla Parishads at the district level, Panchayat Samitis at the block level, and Gram Panchayats at the village level. The Maharashtra Police is headed by an IPS officer of the rank of Director general of police (DGP). A Superintendent of Police (SP), an IPS officer assisted by the officers of the Maharashtra Police Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of police administration, maintaining law and order, crime prevention, crime investigation and related issues in each district. In urban areas, a Commissioner of Police (CP) heads the police force. The Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, manages the forests, environment, and wildlife of the district, assisted by the officers of Maharashtra Forest Service and Maharashtra Forest Subordinate Service. For revenue administration, each district is divided into subdivisions, headed by a Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO). A subdivision comprises several tehsils (taluks), each headed by a Tehsildar. A tehsil is further divided into revenue circles under Circle Officers, and each circle consists of multiple revenue villages under Village Revenue Officers, who are responsible for land revenue\u2013related matters.\nOther development departments of the state government, such as Rural Development, Education, Health, Public Works, Transport are responsible for discharging their respective functions within each district. Each headed by their respective district heads.\nThe judiciary in the state consists of the Maharashtra High Court (The High Court of Bombay), district and session courts in each district and lower courts and judges at the taluka level. The High Court has regional branches at Nagpur and Aurangabad in Maharashtra and Panaji which is the capital of Goa. The state cabinet on 13 May 2015 passed a resolution favouring the setting up of one more bench of the Bombay high court in Kolhapur, covering the region. The President of India appoints the chief justice of the High Court of the Maharashtra judiciary on the advice of the chief justice of the Supreme Court of India as well as the Governor of Maharashtra. Other judges are appointed by the chief justice of the high court of the judiciary on the advice of the Chief Justice. Subordinate Judicial Service is another vital part of the judiciary of Maharashtra. The subordinate judiciary or the district courts are categorised into two divisions: the Maharashtra civil judicial services and higher judicial service. While the Maharashtra civil judicial services comprises the Civil Judges (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrates and civil judges (Senior Division)/Chief Judicial Magistrate, the higher judicial service comprises civil and sessions judges. The Subordinate judicial service of the judiciary is controlled by the District Judge.\nPolitics.\nThe politics of the state in the first decades after its formation in 1960 was dominated by the Indian National Congress party or its offshoots such as the Nationalist Congress Party. At present, it has been dominated by four political parties, the Bharatiya Janata Party, the Nationalist Congress Party, the Indian National Congress and Shinde's Shiv sena.The politics of the state in the last five years has seen long-term alliances breaking up like that of undivided Shivsena and BJP, new ones being formed between Congress, NCP, and the Shivsena, regional parties like the Shivsena and NCP splitting up, and majority of their legislators joining a new alliance government with the BJP.\nJust like in other states in India, dynastic politics is fairly common also among political parties in Maharashtra. The dynastic phenomenon is seen from the national level down to the district level and even village level. The three-tier structure of Panchayati Raj created in the state in the 1960s also helped to create and consolidate this phenomenon in rural areas. Apart from controlling the government, political families also control cooperative institutions, mainly cooperative sugar factories and district cooperative banks in the state. The Bharatiya Janata Party also features several senior leaders who are dynasts. In Maharashtra, the NCP has a particularly high level of dynasticism.\nIn the early years, the politics of Maharashtra was dominated by Congress party figures such as Yashwantrao Chavan, Vasantdada Patil, Vasantrao Naik, and Shankarrao Chavan. Sharad Pawar, who started his political career in the Congress party, has been a towering personality in state and national politics for over forty years. During his career, he has split the Congress twice with significant consequences for the state politics. The Congress party enjoyed a near unchallenged dominance of the political landscape until 1995 when the Shiv Sena and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) secured an overwhelming majority in the state to form a coalition government. After his second parting from the Congress party in 1999, Sharad Pawar founded the NCP but then formed a coalition with the Congress to keep out the BJP-Shiv Sena combine out of the Maharashtra state government for fifteen years until September 2014. Prithviraj Chavan of the Congress party was the last Chief Minister of Maharashtra under the Congress-NCP alliance. For the 2014 assembly polls, the two alliances between NCP and Congress and that between BJP and Shiv Sena respectively broke down over seat allocations. In the election, the largest number of seats went to the Bharatiya Janata Party, with 122 seats. The BJP initially formed a minority government under Devendra Fadnavis. The Shiv Sena entered the Government after two months and provided a comfortable majority for the alliance in the Maharashtra Vidhansabha for the duration of the assembly. In the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance secured 41 seats out of 48 from the state. Later in 2019, the BJP and Shiv Sena alliance fought the assembly elections together but the alliance broke down after the election over the post of the chief minister. Uddhav Thackeray of Shiv Sena then formed an alternative governing coalition under his leadership with his erstwhile opponents from NCP, INC, and several independent members of the legislative assembly. Thackeray served as the 19th Chief minister of Maharashtra of the Maha Vikas Aghadi coalition until June 2022.\nIn late June 2022, Eknath Shinde, a senior Shiv Sena leader, and the majority of MLAs from Shiv Sena joined hands with the BJP. Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari called for a trust vote, an action that would later on be described as a \"sad spectacle\" by Supreme Court of India, and draw criticism from Political Observers. Uddhav Thackeray resigned from the post as chief minister well as a MLC member ahead of no-confidence motion on 29 June 2022. Shinde subsequently formed a new coalition with the BJP, and was sworn in as the Chief Minister on 30 June 2022. BJP leader, Devendra Fadnavis was given the post of Deputy Chief Minister in the new government. Uddhav Thackeray filed a lawsuit in Supreme Court of India claiming that Eknath Shinde and his group's actions meant that they were disqualified under Anti-defection law, with Eknath Shinde claiming that he has not defected, but rather represents the true Shiv Sena party. The Supreme court delivered its verdict in May 2023. In its verdict the five-judge constitution bench of the Supreme court ruled that the Maharashtra governor and assembly speaker did not act as per the law. However, the court said that it cannot order the restoration of the Uddhav Thackeray government as Thackeray resigned without facing a floor test. Supreme Court also asked the Assembly Speaker to decide on the matter of disqualification of 16 MLAs including Chief Minister Eknath Shinde. The case for decision on which faction has rights to use Shiv Sena Name and Symbol is currently being heard by Supreme Court.\nIn July 2023, NCP leader Ajit Pawar, and a number of NCP state assembly members joined the Shivsena- BJP government led by Eknath Shinde. Sharad Pawar, the founder of NCP, condemned the move and expelled the rebels. Ajit Pawar received support from majority of party legislators and office holders of the party.His faction was declared the official NCP and received the right to use the NCP election symbol of clock by the Election Commission of India.\nIn the 2024 Loksabha elections, the INDIA grouping which includes the Mahavikas aghadi won a resounding victory with the majority of the state Loksabha seats, however in the Vidhan sabha elections held November 2024 had the opposite result with the Mahayuti coalition of BJP, Shivsena (Shinde), and NCP (Ajit Pawar) winning 80% of the Vidhan sabha seats. In December 2024, Devendra Phadnavis became the chief minister of the mahayuti government with Eknath Shinde, and Ajit Pawar being appointed as deputy chief ministers. Election analysts have credited the Ladki Bahin Yojana that made cash transfers to women before the election as attracting a larger number of female voters to opt for the Mahayuti. Other factors cited by analysts including greater participation by the RSS in ground level campaigning, continued popularity of Narendra Modi, and dog-whistle call for Hindu Unity using slogans such as \u00abEk Hai To Safe Hai\u00bb (If We're United, We are Strong and Safe against All Threats). Meanwhile this Slogan also appealed to the Muslims and a significant Amount of Muslim Votes also returned to MahaYuti in Vidhan Sabha Elections providing them a Super strong Mandate. \nEconomy.\nThe economy of Maharashtra is driven by manufacturing, international trade, Mass Media (television, motion pictures, video games, recorded music), aerospace, technology, petroleum, fashion, apparel, and tourism. Maharashtra is the most industrialised state and has maintained the leading position in the industrial sector in India. The State is a pioneer in small scale industries. Mumbai, the capital of the state and the financial capital of India, houses the headquarters of most of the major corporate and financial institutions. India's main stock exchanges and capital market and commodity exchanges are located in Mumbai. The state continues to attract industrial investments from domestic as well as foreign institutions. Maharashtra has the largest proportion of taxpayers in India and its share markets transact almost 70% of the country's stocks.\nAccording to most recent data, Maharashtra is considered the richest state in India. As of 2024, Maharashtra is the richest state in India, with a projected GSDP of \u20b942.67 lakh crore for the 2024-25 fiscal year.\nThe service sector dominates the economy of Maharashtra, accounting for 61.4% of the value addition and 69.3% of the value of output in the state. The state's per-capita income in 2014 was 40% higher than the all-India average in the same year. The gross state domestic product (GSDP) at current prices for 2021\u201322 is estimated at $420 billion\u00a0and contributes about 14.2% of the GDP. The agriculture and allied activities sector contributes 13.2% to the state's income. In 2012, Maharashtra reported a revenue surplus of \u20b91524.9\u00a0million (US$24\u00a0million), with total revenue of \u20b91,367,117\u00a0million (US$22\u00a0billion) and spending of \u20b91,365,592.1\u00a0million (US$22\u00a0billion). Maharashtra is the largest FDI destination of India. FDI inflows in the State since April 2000 to September 2021 totalled \u20b99,59,746 crore, which was 28.2% of total FDI inflows at the all-India level. With 11,308 startups, Maharashtra has the highest number of recognised startups in India.\nMaharashtra contributes 25% of India's industrial output and is the most indebted state in the country. Industrial activity in state is concentrated in Seven districts: Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban, Thane, Aurangabad, Pune, Nagpur, and Nashik. Mumbai has the largest share in GSDP (19.5%), both Thane and Pune districts contribute about same in the Industry sector, Pune district contributes more in the agriculture and allied activities sector, whereas Thane district contributes more in the Services sector. Nashik district shares highest in the agricultural and allied activities sector, but is behind in the Industry and Services sectors as compared to Thane and Pune districts. \nIndustries in Maharashtra include chemical and chemical products (17.6%), food and food products (16.1%), refined petroleum products (12.9%), machinery and equipment (8%), textiles (6.9%), basic metals (5.8%), motor vehicles (4.7%) and furniture (4.3%). Maharashtra is the manufacturing hub for some of the largest public sector industries in India, including Hindustan Petroleum Corporation, Tata Petrodyne and Oil India Ltd.\nMaharashtra is the leading Indian state for many Creative industries including advertising, architecture, art, crafts, design, fashion, film, music, performing arts, publishing, R&amp;D, software, toys and games, TV and radio, and video games.\nMaharashtra has an above-average knowledge industry in India, with Pune Metropolitan Region being the leading IT hub in the state. Approximately 25% of the top 500 companies in the IT sector are based in Maharashtra. The state accounts for 28% of the software exports of India.\nMaharashtra and particularly Mumbai is a prominent location for the Indian entertainment industry, with many films, television series, books, and other media being set there. Mumbai is the largest centre for film and television production and a third of all Indian films are produced in the state. Multimillion-dollar Bollywood productions, with the most expensive costing up to (), are filmed there. Marathi films used to be previously made primarily in Kolhapur, but now are produced in Mumbai.\nThe state houses important financial institutions such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India, the SEBI and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations. It is also home to some of India's premier scientific and nuclear institutes like BARC, NPCL, IREL, TIFR, AERB, AECI, and the Department of Atomic Energy.\nWith more than half the population being rural, agriculture and allied industries play an important role in the states's economy and source of income for the rural population. The agriculture and allied activities sector contributes 12.9% to the state's income. Staples such as rice and millet are the main monsoon crops. Important cash crops include sugarcane, cotton, oilseeds, tobacco, fruit, vegetables, and spices such as turmeric. \nAnimal husbandry is an important agriculture-related activity. The State's share in the livestock and poultry population in India is about 7% and 10%, respectively. Maharashtra was a pioneer in the development of Agricultural Cooperative Societies after independence. It was an integral part of the then Governing Congress party's vision of 'rural development with local initiative'. A 'special' status was accorded to the sugar cooperatives and the government assumed the role of a mentor by acting as a stakeholder, guarantor, and regulator, Apart from sugar, cooperatives play a crucial role in dairy, cotton, and fertiliser industries.\nThe banking sector comprises scheduled and non-scheduled banks. Scheduled banks are of two types, commercial and cooperative. Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in India are classified into five types: State Bank of India and its associates, nationalised banks, private sector banks, Regional Rural Banks, and others (foreign banks). In 2012, there were 9,053 banking offices in the state, of which about 26% were in rural and 54% were in urban areas. Maharashtra has a microfinance system, which refers to small-scale financial services extended to the poor in both rural and urban areas. It covers a variety of financial instruments, such as lending, savings, life insurance, and crop insurance. The three largest urban cooperative banks in India are all based in Maharashtra.\nTransport.\nThe state has a large, multi-modal transportation system with the largest road network in India. In 2011, the total length of surface road in Maharashtra was ; national highways accounted for , and state highways . The Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation (MSRTC) provides economical and reliable passenger road transport service in the public sector. These buses, popularly called ST (State Transport), are the preferred mode of transport for much of the populace. Hired forms of transport include metered taxis and auto-rickshaws, which often ply specific routes in cities.\nOther district roads and village roads provide villages, accessibility to meet their social needs as well as the means to transport agricultural produce from villages to nearby markets. Major district roads provide a secondary function of linking between main roads and rural roads. Approximately 98% of villages are connected either via the highways or modern roads in Maharashtra. Average speed on state highways varies between due to the heavy presence of vehicles; in villages and towns, speeds are as low as .\nIn April 1853, the first passenger train in India ran from Mumbai to Thane. Rail transportation is run by the Central Railway, Western Railway, South Central Railway, Konkan Railway and South East Central Railway zones of the Indian Railways with the first two zones being headquartered in Mumbai, at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (CSMT) and Churchgate respectively. The Konkan Railway Corporation is headquartered in Navi Mumbai. The Mumbai Rajdhani Express, the fastest Rajdhani train, connects the Indian capital of New Delhi to Mumbai. Thane and CSMT are among the busiest railway stations in India, the latter serving as a terminal for both long-distance trains and commuter trains of the Mumbai Suburban Railway.\nThe two principal seaports, Mumbai Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port, which is also in the Mumbai region, are under the control and supervision of the government of India. There are around 48 minor ports in Maharashtra. Most of these handle passenger traffic and have a limited capacity. None of the major rivers in Maharashtra are navigable, and thus river transport does not exist in the state.\nChhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (formerly Bombay International Airport), is the state's largest airport. The four other international airports are Pune International Airport, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar International Airport at Nagpur, Nashik Airport and Shirdi Airport. Aurangabad Airport, Kolhapur Airport, Jalgaon Airport, and Nanded Airport are domestic airports in the state. Most of the State's airfields are operated by the Airports Authority of India (AAI).\nReliance Airport Developers (RADPL), operates five non-metro airports at Latur, Nanded, Baramati, Osmanabad and Yavatmal on a 95-year lease. The Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC) was set up in 2002 to take up development of airports in the state that are not under the AAI or the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC). MADC is playing the lead role in the planning and implementation of the Multi-modal International Cargo Hub and Airport at Nagpur (MIHAN) project. \nAdditional smaller airports include Akola, Amravati, Chandrapur, Ratnagiri, and Solapur. Maharashtra Metro Rail Corporation Limited (Maha Metro), which is a joint Venture establishment of Government of India &amp; Government of Maharashtra, is headquartered at Nagpur, India. Maha Metro is responsible for the implementation of all Maharashtra state metro projects, except the Mumbai Metropolitan Region. Mumbai Metro has been operational since 8 June 2014.\nEducation.\nThe 2011 census showed that state literacy rates for males and females were around 88.38% and 75.87% respectively.\nRegions that comprise the present day state of Maharashtra have been known for their pioneering role in the development of the modern education system in India. Scottish missionary John Wilson, American Marathi mission, Indian nationalists such as Vasudev Balwant Phadke and Bal Gangadhar Tilak, social reformers such as Jyotirao Phule, Dhondo Keshav Karve and Bhaurao Patil played a leading role in the setting up of modern schools and colleges during the British colonial era. \nThe forerunner of Deccan College Post-Graduate and Research Institute was established in 1821. The Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey Women's University, the oldest women's liberal arts college in South Asia, started its journey in 1916. College of Engineering Pune, established in 1854, is the third oldest college in Asia. Government Polytechnic Nagpur, established in 1914, is one of the oldest polytechnics in India. Most of the private colleges including religious and special-purpose institutions were set up in the last thirty years after the State Government of Vasantdada Patil liberalised the Education Sector in 1982.\nPrimary and secondary level education.\nSchools in the state are either managed by the government or by private trusts, including religious institutions. The medium of instruction in most of the schools is mainly Marathi, English, or Hindi, though Urdu is also used. The secondary schools are affiliated with the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), the National Institute of Open School (NIOS), and the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education. \nUnder the 10+2+3 plan, after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for two years in a junior college, also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education or any central board. Students choose from one of three streams, namely liberal arts, commerce, or science. Upon completing the required coursework, students may enrol in general or professional degree programs.\nTertiary education.\nMaharashtra has 24 universities with a turnout of 160,000 Graduates every year. Established during the rule of East India company in 1857 as Bombay University, The University of Mumbai, is the largest university in the world in terms of the number of graduates. It has 141 affiliated colleges. According to a report published by The Times Education magazine, 5 to 7 Maharashtra colleges and universities are ranked among the top 20 in India. \nMaharashtra is also home to notable autonomous institutes as Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Indian Institute of Information Technology Pune, College of Engineering Pune (CoEP), Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Institute of Chemical Technology, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Walchand College of Engineering, Sangli, and Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI), Sardar Patel College of Engineering (SPCE). \nMost of these autonomous institutes are ranked the highest in India and have very competitive entry requirements. The University of Pune (now Savitribai Phule Pune University), the National Defence Academy, Film and Television Institute of India, Armed Forces Medical College, and National Chemical Laboratory were established in Pune soon after the Indian independence in 1947. Mumbai has an IIT, an IIM and also National Institute of Industrial Engineering and Nagpur has IIM and AIIMS. Other notable institutes in the state are: Maharashtra National Law University, Nagpur (MNLUN), Maharashtra National Law University, Mumbai (MNLUM), Maharashtra National Law University, Aurangabad (MNLUA), Government Law College, Mumbai (GLC), ILS Law College, and Symbiosis Law School (SLS)\nAgricultural universities include Vasantrao Naik Marathwada Agricultural University, Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, and Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, Regional universities viz. Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, North Maharashtra University, Shivaji University, Solapur University, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, and Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University are established to cover the educational needs at the district levels of the state. deemed universities are established in Maharashtra, including Symbiosis International University, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, and Tilak Maharashtra University.\nVocational training in different trades such as construction, plumbing, welding, automobile mechanics is offered by post-secondary school Industrial Training Institute (ITIs). Local community colleges also exist with generally more open admission policies, shorter academic programs, and lower tuition.\nInfrastructure.\nHealthcare.\nHealth indicators of Maharashtra show that they have attained relatively high growth against a background of high per capita income (PCI). In 2011, the health care system in Maharashtra consisted of 363 rural government hospitals, 23 district hospitals (with 7,561 beds), 4 general hospitals (with 714 beds) mostly under the Maharashtra Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and 380 private medical establishments; these establishments provide the state with more than 30,000 hospital beds. It is the first state in India to have nine women's hospitals serving 1,365 beds. The state also has a significant number of medical practitioners who hold the Bachelor of Ayurveda, Medicine and Surgery qualifications. These practitioners primarily use the traditional Indian therapy of Ayurveda, nevertheless, modern western medicine is used as well.\nIn Maharashtra and the rest of India, Primary Health Centre (PHC) is part of the government-funded public health system and is the most basic unit of the healthcare system. They are essentially single-physician clinics usually with facilities for minor surgeries, too. Maharashtra has a life expectancy at birth of 67.2 years in 2011, ranking it third among 29 Indian states. The total fertility rate of the state is 1.9. The Infant mortality rate is 28 and the maternal mortality ratio is 104 (2012\u20132013), which are lower than the national averages. Public health services are governed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), through various departments. The Ministry is divided into two departments: the Public Health Department, which includes family welfare and medical relief, and the Department of Medical Education and Drugs.\nHealth insurance includes any program that helps pay for medical expenses, through privately purchased insurance, social insurance, or a social welfare program funded by the government. In a more technical sense, the term is used to describe any form of insurance that protects against the costs of medical services. This usage includes private insurance and social insurance programs such as National Health Mission, which pools resources and spreads the financial risk associated with major medical expenses across the entire population to protect everyone, as well as social welfare programs such as National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and the Health Insurance Program, which assist people who cannot afford health coverage.\nMaharashtra was ranked fifth in the Fiscal Health Index (FHI) 2025, with a score of 50.3.\nEnergy.\nIts population makes Maharashtra one of India's largest energy users. Conservation mandates, mild weather in the largest population centres, and strong environmental movements have kept its per capita energy use to one of the smallest of any Indian state. The high electricity demand of the state constitutes 13% of the total installed electricity generation capacity in India, which is derived mainly from fossil fuels such as coal and natural gas. Mahavitaran is responsible for the distribution of electricity throughout the state by buying power from Mahanirmiti, captive power plants, other state electricity boards, and private sector power generation companies.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], Maharashtra was the largest power generating state in India, with an installed electricity generation capacity of 26,838 MW. The state forms a major constituent of the western grid of India, which now comes under the North, East, West and North Eastern (NEWNE) grids of India. Maharashtra Power Generation Company (MAHAGENCO) operates thermal power plants. In addition to the state government-owned power generation plants, there are privately owned power generation plants that transmit power through the Maharashtra State Electricity Transmission Company, which is responsible for the transmission of electricity in the state.\nEnvironmental protection and sustainability.\nMaharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB) is established and responsible for implementing various environmental legislations in the state principally including the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, Water (Cess) Act, 1977 and some of the provisions under Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 and the rules framed there under it including, Biomedical Waste (M&amp;H) Rules, 1998, Hazardous Waste (M&amp;H) Rules, 2000, and Municipal Solid Waste Rules, 2000. MPCB is functioning under the administrative control of the Environment Department of the Government of Maharashtra. The Maharashtra Plastic and Thermocol Products ban became effective as law on 23 June 2018, subjecting plastic users to fines and potential imprisonment for repeat offenders.\nCulture.\nCuisine.\nMaharashtrian cuisine includes a variety of dishes ranging from mild to very spicy ones. Wheat, rice, \"jowar\", \"bajri\", vegetables, lentils and fruit form staple food of the Maharashtrian diet. Some of the popular traditional dishes include \"puran poli\", \"ukdiche modak\", \"Thalipeeth.\" Street food items like \"Batata wada,\" \"Misal Pav\", \"Pav Bhaji\" and\" Vada pav\" are very popular among the locals and are usually sold on stalls and in small hotels. \nMeals (mainly lunch and dinner) are served on a plate called thali. Each food item served on the \"thali\" is arranged in a specific way. All non-vegetarian and vegetarian dishes are eaten with boiled rice, chapatis or with bhakris, made of jowar, bajra or rice flours. A typical vegetarian thali is made of chapati or bhakri (Indian flat bread), dal, rice (varan bhaat), amti, \"bhaji or usal\", chutney, \"koshimbir\" (salad) and buttermilk or \"Sol kadhi\".\nA \"bhaji\" is a vegetable dish made of a particular vegetable or combination of vegetables. \"Aamti\" is variant of the curry, typically consisting of a lentil (\"tur\") stock, flavoured with goda masala and sometimes with tamarind or amshul, and jaggery (\"gul\"). \"Varan\" is nothing but plain dal, a common Indian lentil stew. More or less, most of the dishes use coconut, onion, garlic, ginger, red chili powder, green chilies, and mustard though some section of the population traditionally avoid onion and garlics.\nMaharashtrian cuisine varies with the regions. Traditional Malvani (Konkani), Kolhapuri, and Varhadhi dishes are examples of well known regional cuisines. Kolhapur is famous for Tambda Pandhra rassa, a dish made of either chicken or mutton. Rice and seafood are the staple foods of the coastal Konkani people. Among seafood, the most popular is a fish variety called the Bombay duck (also known as bombil in Marathi).\nAttire.\nTraditionally, Marathi women commonly wore the sari, often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs. Most middle-aged and young women in urban Maharashtra dress in western outfits such as skirts and trousers or shalwar kameez with the traditionally \"nauvari\" or nine-yard lugade, disappearing from the markets due to a lack of demand. Older women wear the five-yard sari. In urban areas, the five-yard sari, especially the Paithani, is worn by younger women for special occasions such as marriages and religious ceremonies. \nAmong men, western dressing has greater acceptance. Men also wear traditional costumes such as the dhoti, and pheta on cultural occasions. The Gandhi cap is the popular headgear among older men in rural Maharashtra. Women wear traditional jewellery derived from Maratha and Peshwa dynasties. Kolhapuri saaj, a special type of necklace, is also worn by Marathi women. In urban areas, western attire is dominant among women and men.\nMusic.\nMaharashtra and Maharashtrian artists have been influential in preserving and developing Hindustani classical music for more than a century. Notable practitioners of Kirana or Gwalior style called Maharashtra their home. The Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival in Pune started by Bhimsen Joshi in the 1950s is considered the most prestigious Hindustani music festival in India, if not one of the largest.\nCities like Kolhapur and Pune have been playing a major role in the preservation of music like Bhavageet and Natya Sangeet, which are inherited from Indian classical music. The biggest form of Indian popular music is songs from films produced in Mumbai. Film music, in 2009 made up 72% of the music sales in India. Many the influential music composers and singers have called Mumbai their home.\nIn recent decades, the music scene in Maharashtra, and particularly in Mumbai has seen a growth of newer music forms such as rap. The city also holds festivals in western music genres such as blues. In 2006, the Symphony Orchestra of India was founded, housed at the NCPA in Mumbai. It is today the only professional symphony orchestra in India and presents two concert seasons per year, with world-renowned conductors and soloists.\nMaharashtra has a long and rich tradition of folk music. Some of the most common forms of folk music in practice are Bhajan, Bharud, Kirtan, Gondhal, and Koli Geet.\nDance.\nMarathi dance forms draw from folk traditions. Lavani is popular form of dance in the state. The Bhajan, Kirtan and Abhangas of the Warkari sect (Vaishanav Devotees) have a long history and are part of their daily rituals. Koli dance (called 'Koligeete') is among the most popular dances of Maharashtra. As the name suggests, it is related to the fisher folk of Maharashtra, who are called Koli. Popular for their unique identity and liveliness, their dances represent their occupation. This type of dance is represented by both men and women. While dancing, they are divided into groups of two. These fishermen display the movements of waves and casting of the nets during their koli dance performances.\nTheatre.\nModern Theatre in Maharashtra can trace its origins to the British colonial era in the middle of the 19th century. It is modelled mainly after the western tradition but also includes forms like Sangeet Natak (musical drama). In recent decades, Marathi Tamasha has also been incorporated in some experimental plays. The repertoire of Marathi theatre ranges from humorous social plays, farces, historical plays, and musical, to experimental plays and serious drama. Marathi Playwrights such as Vijay Tendulkar, Purushottam Laxman Deshpande, Mahesh Elkunchwar, Ratnakar Matkari, and Satish Alekar have influenced theatre throughout India. Besides Marathi theatre, Maharashtra and particularly, Mumbai, has had a long tradition of theatre in other languages such as Gujarati, Hindi, and English.\nThe National Centre for the Performing Arts (NCP) is a multi-venue, multi-purpose cultural centre in Mumbai which hosts events in music, dance, theatre, film, literature, and photography from India as well other places. It also presents new and innovative work in the performing arts field.\nLiterature.\nMaharashtra's regional literature is about the lives and circumstances of Marathi people in specific parts of the state. The Marathi language, which boasts a rich literary heritage, is written in the Devanagari script. The earliest instance of Marathi literature is Dnyaneshwari, a commentary on the Bhagavad Gita by 13th-century Bhakti Saint Dnyaneshwar and devotional poems called abhangs by his contemporaries such as Namdev, and Gora Kumbhar. Devotional literature from the Early modern period includes compositions in praise of the God Pandurang by Bhakti saints such as Tukaram, Eknath, and Rama by Ramdas respectively.\n19th century Marathi literature includes mainly Polemic works of social and political activists such as Balshastri Jambhekar, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Gopal Hari Deshmukh, Mahadev Govind Ranade, Jyotirao Phule, and Vishnushastri Krushnashastri Chiplunkar. Keshavasuta was a pioneer in modern Marathi poetry. The Hindutva proponent, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar was a prolific writer. His work in English and Marathi consists of many essays, two novels, poetry, and plays.\nFour Marathi writers have been honoured with the Jnanpith Award, India's highest literary award. They include novelists, Vishnu Sakharam Khandekar, and Bhalchandra Nemade, Vishnu Vaman Shirwadkar (Kusumagraj) and Vinda Karandikar. The last two were known for their poetry as well. Other notable writers from the early and mid 20th century include playwright Ram Ganesh Gadkari, novelist Hari Narayan Apte, poet, and novelist B. S. Mardhekar, Pandurang Sadashiv Sane, Vyankatesh Madgulkar, Pralhad Keshav Atre, Chintamani Tryambak Khanolkar, and Lakshman Shastri Joshi. Vishwas Patil, Ranjit Desai, and Shivaji Sawant are known for novels based on Maratha history. P. L. Deshpande gained popularity in the period after independence for depicting the urban middle class society. His work includes humour, travelogues, plays, and biographies. Narayan Gangaram Surve, Shanta Shelke, Durga Bhagwat, Suresh Bhat, and Narendra Jadhav are some of the more recent authors.\nDalit literature originally emerged in the Marathi language as a literary response to the everyday oppressions of caste in mid-twentieth-century independent India, critiquing caste practices by experimenting with various literary forms. In 1958, the term \"Dalit literature\" was used for the first conference of \"Maharashtra Dalit Sahitya Sangha\" (Maharashtra Dalit Literature Society) in Mumbai.\nMaharashtra, and particularly the cities in the state such as Mumbai and Pune are diverse with different languages being spoken. Mumbai is called home by writers in English such as Rohinton Mistry, Shobha De, and Salman Rushdie. Their novels are set with Mumbai as the backdrop. Many eminent Urdu poets such as Kaifi Azmi, Jan Nisar Akhtar, Gulzar, and Javed Akhtar have been residents of Mumbai.\nCinema.\nMaharashtra is a prominent location for the Indian entertainment industry, with enormous films, television series, books, and other media production companies being set there. Mumbai has numerous film production studios and facilities to produce films. Mainstream Hindi films are popular in Maharashtra, especially in urban areas. Mumbai is the largest centre for film and television production and a third of all Indian films are produced in the state. Multimillion-dollar Bollywood productions, with the most expensive costing up to (), are filmed there.\nThe first Indian feature-length film, Raja Harishchandra, was made in Maharashtra by Dadasaheb Phalke in 1913. Phalke is widely considered the father of Indian cinema. The Dadasaheb Phalke Award is India's highest award in cinema, given annually by the Government of India for lifetime contribution to Indian cinema.\nThe Marathi film industry, initially located in Kolhapur, has spread throughout Mumbai. Well known for its art films, the early Marathi film industry included acclaimed directors such as Dadasaheb Phalke, V. Shantaram, Raja Thakur, Bhalji Pendharkar, Pralhad Keshav Atre, Baburao Painter, and Dada Kondke. Some of the directors who made acclaimed films in Marathi are Jabbar Patel, Mahesh Manjrekar, Amol Palekar, and Sanjay Surkar.\nDurga Khote was one of the first women from respectable families to enter the film industry, thus breaking a social taboo. Lalita Pawar, Sulabha Deshpande, and Usha Kiran featured in Hindi and Marathi movies. In 70s and 80s, Smita Patil, Ranjana Deshmukh, Reema Lagoo featured in both art and mainstream movies in Hindi and Marathi. Rohini Hattangadi starred in a number of acclaimed movies, and is the only Indian actress to win the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her performance as Kasturba Gandhi in \"Gandhi\" (1982). Bhanu Athaiya was the first Indian to win an Oscar in Best Costume Design category for \"Gandhi\" (1982). In 90s and 2000s, Urmila Matondkar and Madhuri Dixit starred in critically acclaimed and high grossing films in Hindi and Marathi.\nIn earliest days of Marathi cinema, Suryakant Mandhare was a leading star. In later years, Shriram Lagoo, Nilu Phule, Vikram Gokhale, Dilip Prabhavalkar played character roles in theatre, and Hindi and Marathi films. Ramesh Deo and Mohan Joshi played leading men in Mainstream Marathi movies. In 70s and 80s, Sachin Pilgaonkar, Ashok Saraf, Laxmikant Berde and Mahesh Kothare created a \"comedy film wave\" in Marathi Cinema.\nMedia.\nThe state is home to more than 200 newspapers and 350 consumer magazines. The publishing industry employs more than 250,000 people. There are number of Marathi news channels in the state viz \"News18 Lokmat, ABP Majha\". As of \u00a02016[ [update]], Sakal, published in Pune and other major cities, is the largest circulated Marathi Newspaper in Maharashtra. Other major Marathi newspapers include \"Maharashtra Times\", \"Loksatta\", \"Nava Kaal\", \"Pudhari\", \"Lokmat\" and \"Sakal\" \"Saptahik Sakal\", \"Grihashobhika\", \"Lokrajya\", \"Lokprabha\", and \"Chitralekha\" are some of the prominent Marathi magazines. \nEnglish language newspapers are confined to urban areas. Some popular among these are \"Daily News &amp; Analysis\", \"The Times of India\", \"Hindustan Times\", \"The Indian Express\", \"Mumbai Mirror\", \"Asian Age\", \"MiD-DAY\" and \"The Free Press Journal\". Some prominent financial dailies like \"The Economic Times\", \"Mint\", \"Business Standard\", and \"The Financial Express\" are widely circulated. Many newspapers in other Indian languages such as Nava Bharat in Hindi, Udayavani in Kannada, Mumbai Samachar in Gujarati, and The Inquilab in Urdu have Mumbai editions.\nThe television industry in Maharashtra has been contributing significantly in the state's economy. Doordarshan, a state-owned television broadcaster runs a channel named DD Sahyadri. Numerous Indian and international television channels can be watched in Maharashtra through one of the Pay TV companies or the local cable television provider. The four major Indian broadcast networks are all headquartered in Maharashtra: The Times, Disney Star, CNN-News18 and ZEEL. Multi-system operators provide a range of Marathi, Bengali, Nepali, Hindi, English, and international channels via cable. There are number of entertainment channels that exclusively streams content in Marathi including Zee Marathi, Zee Yuva, Colors Marathi, Star Pravah, Sony Marathi, and Fakt Marathi.\nAll India Radio airs its content through multiple channels including \"Air Marathi\", \"FM Gold\", and \"FM Rainbow\". Air India's commercially successful air channel \"Vividh Bharti\" is headquartered in Mumbai. Private radio stations like \"Big 92.7 FM\", \"Radio Mirchi\", \"Red FM,\" \"Vasundhara Vahini\", \"Radio Dhamaal 24\", and \"My FM\" air in all major cities. Airtel, BSNL, Jio, and VI networks provide cellular services and have covered most of the Maharashtra. Broadband internet is available in most of the towns, villages, and cities, provided by the state-run MTNL and BSNL and by other private companies.\nSports.\nCricket is the most popular spectator sport in Maharashtra. It is played as an exercise and recreational activity. Maharashtra is represented by three teams in Domestic Cricket namely Maharashtra, Mumbai and Vidarbha. These teams are governed by Maharashtra cricket association, Mumbai Cricket Association, and Vidarbha Cricket Association, respectively. Governing body of Cricket in India, BCCI, has its headquarters in Churchgate, Mumbai. The state also has Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Mumbai Indians based in Mumbai which plays its home matches at Wankhede Stadium. Brabourne Stadium, Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai and New VCA Stadium, Nagpur are international cricket stadiums, which are the venues for international cricket.\nAt 2023 National games, Maharashtra won highest number of medals among the states and was first in the total medals tally behind Services. Maharashtra won 228 total medals, of which are 80 gold medals.\nKabaddi, Kho kho, Kushti, and Mallakhamba are some of the traditional games that are played in the state. Kusti and bullock cart races are popular in rural areas of South-west Maharashtra, are organised by villagers during the annual fairs. Amateur wrestling tournaments Hind Kesari, Maharashtra Kesari are held annually. Badminton, Volleyball, Tennis are played as a recreational activity in urban areas. The beaches of Konkan coast, mountains of the Western Ghats, and the lakes formed by numerous dams in the state facilitate adventure sports such as paragliding, rock climbing, trekking, mountaineering, water sports, and scuba diving and are popular among visitors.\nIndia's only world class Tennis championship Maharashtra Open tennis championship are annually organised in Pune by governing body of tennis in the state, 'Maharashtra Lawn Tennis Association' (MLTA). The tournament is part of ATP Tour 250. Mumbai and Pune hold derby races at the Mahalaxmi Racecourse and Pune Race Course respectively. The Maharashtra football team represents the state in the Santosh Trophy, football tournament. Pune hosted the Commonwealth Youth Games in 2008.\nMany national-level football club are based in this state, such as Mumbai Tigers FC, Kenkre FC, Bengal Mumbai FC, and Air India FC. Two clubs from the state participate in Elite Football League of India. Mumbai Gladiators and Pune Marathas are teams based in Mumbai and Pune respectively. Puneri Paltan, U Mumba, Pro Kabbadi, league teams are based in Pune and Mumbai respectively.\nTourism.\nMaharashtra has a number of places that attracts national and international tourists. The most popular or well known are Mumbai city, Ajanta, Ellora caves and the Nature reserves in the state. Ajanta\u2013Ellora are the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Mumbai, being the biggest and the most cosmopolitan city in India, attracts tourists from all over the world for its many attractions including colonial architecture, beaches, Bollywood, shopping, and an active nightlife. The city attracts three million foreign and forty million domestic tourists annually. The state wants to increase the numbers by allowing retailers and entertainment venues to be open 24-hours a day, seven days a week.\nPune city, along with MTDC, organises many cultural events during Pune festival which coincides with the Hindu Ganeshotsav festival. Hill stations built during the British rule are popular tourist destinations, especially during the summer months. These include Mahabaleshwar, Lonavala, and Matheran in Western Maharashtra, and Chikhaldara in the Vidarbha region. The mountainous districts of Western Maharashtra are dotted with the ruins of hundreds of mountain forts from the Deccan Sultanate and the Maratha empire eras. These forts and the surrounding hills are popular among people interested in trekking, hiking, and heritage tourism related to Shivaji. Notable forts popular with tourists include Shivaneri, Rajgad, Sinhagad, Raigad, and Pratapgad. A group of 11 such forts in Maharashtra along with one fort in Tamil Nadu, officially called the Maratha Military Landscapes of India, were recognised as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in the year 2025.\nA number of temples such as Trimbakeshwar, Bhavani of Tuljapur, Shani Shingnapur, Jyotiba Temple, Ashtavinayaka Ganapati temples, Lord Pandurang temple at Pandharpur attract a huge number of Hindu devotees every year. Khandoba temple of God Khandoba at Jejuri in the Pune district attract pilgrims from all over the Maharashtra where worshippers shower each other with \"Bhandar\" (turmaric powder). Saibaba temple at Shirdi is visited by an average of 25,000 pilgrims a day and during religious festivals, this number can reach up to 300,000. \nThe places associated with the Warkari sect such as Pandharpur, Dehu, and Alandi remain popular throughout the year, and attract huge number of people from all over the state during religious observations. Situated in Nanded, Sikh Gurudwara of Hazur Sahib, also known as Takht Sachkhand Sri Hazur Abchalnagar Sahib, is one of the five takhts in Sikhism. The area around the city of Aurangabad has many ancient and medieval sites including the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of Ajanta and Ellora caves, the Daulatabad Fort, and the Bibi Ka Maqbara.\nThe Vidarbha region of Maharashtra has numerous nature reserve parks. These include Melghat Tiger Reserve in Amravati district, Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve in Chandrapur district, Umred Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary in Nagpur district, the Nagzira wildlife sanctuary, and Navegaon National Park (bird sanctuary) of Gondia District.\nAccording to a survey by the government of Maharashtra, in 2009\u201310, domestic tourists accounted for 98% of the total number of visitors to Maharashtra and the remaining were foreign. Visitors from the US, UK, Germany, and UAE each form a significant percentage of the foreign tourists. The state government has established the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation (MTDC) for the systematic development and promotion of tourism in the state. MTDC owns and maintains resorts at all key tourist centres.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20632", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20632", "title": "Mozzarella", "text": "Type of semi-soft Italian cheese\nMozzarella is a semi-soft non-aged cheese prepared using the ('stretched-curd') method. It originated in southern Italy.\nVarieties of mozzarella are distinguished by the milk used: when prepared with cow's milk and buffalo mozzarella ( in Italian) when the milk of the Italian buffalo is used. Genetic research suggest buffalo came to Italy by migration of river buffalo from India in the 7th century CE.\nFresh mozzarella is generally white but may be light yellow depending on the animal's diet. Fresh mozzarella makes a distinct squeaky sound when chewed or rubbed. Due to its high moisture content, it is traditionally served the day after it is made but can be kept in brine for up to a week or longer when sold in vacuum-sealed packages. Low-moisture mozzarella can be kept refrigerated for up to a month, although some shredded low-moisture mozzarella is sold with a shelf life of up to six months.\nMozzarella is used for most types of pizza and several pasta dishes or served with sliced tomatoes and basil in Caprese salad.\nEtymology.\n, derived from the southern Italian dialects spoken in Apulia, Calabria, Campania, Abruzzo, Molise, Basilicata, Lazio, and Marche, is the diminutive form of , 'cut', or , 'to cut off', derived from the method of working. The term is first mentioned in 1570, cited in a cookbook by Bartolomeo Scappi, reading \"milk cream, fresh butter, ricotta cheese, fresh mozzarella and milk\". An earlier reference of Monsignor Alicandri is also often cited as describing mozzarella, which states that in the 12th century the Monastery of San Lorenzo, in Capua, Campania, Alicandri offered pilgrims a piece of bread with .\nTypes.\nFresh mozzarella has been recognised as a traditional speciality guaranteed (TSG) since 1996 in the European Union. It is usually sold rolled into a ball that weighs around and measures about in diameter, although they may be as large as and have a diameter around . It is soaked in salt water (brine) or whey.\nIn Italy, the cheese is produced nationwide using Italian buffalo's milk under the government's official name , because Italian buffalo are present in all regions. Only selected PDO is a style made from the milk of Italian buffalo raised in designated areas of Campania, Lazio, Apulia, and Molise. Unlike other mozzarellas\u201450% of whose production derives from non-Italian and often semi-coagulated milk\u2014it holds the status of a protected designation of origin (PDO: 1996) under European Union law and UK law.\nA more dense mozzarella is made by adding citric acid and partly drying (desiccated). This is often used to prepare baked dishes, such as lasagna and pizza.\nSizes and shapes.\nFresh mozzarella balls are made in multiple sizes for various uses; often the name refers to the size.\n are about the size of a hen's egg, and may be served whole as part of a composed salad or sliced for topping a small sandwich such as a slider. ('small cherries') are cherry-sized. are the smallest commercially produced and are often added to salads or hot soups and pasta dishes just before serving. These balls are packaged in whey or water, have a spongy texture, and absorb flavours.\nBocconcini ('small mouthful'), sometimes called ('buffalo eggs'), are approximately bite-sized; a common use is alternating them with cherry tomatoes on a skewer for an appetiser. Bocconcini of water buffalo's milk are still produced in the provinces of Naples, Caserta, and Salerno, as , in a process that involves mixing freshly produced PDO with fresh cream. A PDO is also made, which is simply PDO, produced in the egg-sized format.\nWhen twisted to form a plait, mozzarella is called .\nLow-moisture.\nSeveral variants have been specifically formulated and prepared for use on pizza, such as low-moisture mozzarella cheese. The \"International Dictionary of Food and Cooking\" defines this cheese as \"a soft spun-curd cheese similar to mozzarella made from cow's milk\" that is \"[u]sed particularly for pizzas and [that] contains somewhat less water than real mozzarella\".\nLow-moisture part-skim mozzarella, widely used in the food service industry, has a low galactose content, per some consumers' preference for cheese on pizza to have low or moderate browning. Some pizza cheeses derived from skim mozzarella variants were designed not to require aging or the use of starter. Others can be made through the direct acidification of milk.\nOther.\nMozzarella of sheep milk, sometimes called , is typical of Sardinia, Lazio, and Abruzzo, where it is also called . It is worked with the addition of the rennet of lamb. Goat milk mozzarella was invented recently, and is produced in small quantities. Mozzarella is also sold smoked ().\n\"\u00c7aycuma\" and \"Kand\u0131ra\" mozzarella cheeses are Turkish cheeses made of buffalo's milk.\nProduction.\nAfter the curd heals, it is further cut into pieces. The curds are stirred and heated to separate the curds from the whey. The whey is then drained from the curds and the curds are placed in a hoop to form a solid mass. The curd mass is left until the pH is at around 5.2\u20135.5, which is the point when the cheese can be stretched and kneaded to produce a delicate consistency\u2014this process is generally known as . According to the trade association, \"The cheese-maker kneads it with his hands... until he obtains a smooth, shiny paste, a strand of which he pulls out and lops off, forming individual mozzarella.\"\nLarge quantities of mozzarella are exported internationally.\nStorage.\nDue to its high moisture content, it is traditionally served the day it is made, and food writer Arthur Schwartz describes that a Neapolitan will not eat day-old mozzarella without further processing\u2014frying or baking into a casserole or pasta. Despite this, manufacturers market the cheese as having a week-long shelf life. As mozzarella is kept, it develops a sour flavour and softens, a process which is slower for larger cheeses.\nWithin the city of Naples, there is a belief among part of the populace that the best mozzarella has \"relaxed\"; softened in the hours after being made. Schwartz reports that this does not seem to be believed by Campanians who live in the country, closer to dairy farms where the cheese is produced, where the cheese can be easily purchased while still firm.\nLow-moisture mozzarella can be kept refrigerated for up to a month, although some shredded low-moisture mozzarella is sold with a shelf life of up to six months.\nRecognitions and regulations.\nMozzarella received a traditional specialities guaranteed (TSG) certification from the European Union in 1998, and in 2022 the product specification was updated for the name . This protection scheme requires that sold in the European Union is produced according to a traditional recipe. The TSG certification does not specify the source of the milk, so any type of milk can be used, but it is speculated that it is normally made from whole milk.\nDifferent variants of this dairy product are included in the list of (PAT) of the Ministry of Agricultural, Food and Forestry Policies (MIPAAF), with the following denominations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20633", "revid": "1509778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20633", "title": "Macrinus", "text": "Roman emperor from 217 to 218\nMarcus Opellius Macrinus (; c.\u2009165 \u2013 June 218) was a Roman emperor who reigned from April 217 to June 218, jointly with his young son Diadumenianus. Born in Caesarea (now called Cherchell, in modern Algeria), in the Roman province of Mauretania Caesariensis to an equestrian family of Berber origins, he became the first emperor who did not hail from the senatorial class and also the first emperor who never visited Rome during his reign. Before becoming emperor, Macrinus served under Emperor Caracalla as a praetorian prefect and dealt with Rome's civil affairs. He later conspired against Caracalla and had him murdered in a bid to protect his own life and succeeded Caracalla as emperor.\nMacrinus was proclaimed emperor of Rome by 11 April 217 while in the eastern provinces of the empire and was subsequently confirmed as such by the Senate; however, for the duration of his reign, he never had the opportunity to return to Rome. His predecessor's policies had left Rome's coffers empty and the empire at war with several kingdoms, including Parthia, Armenia, and Dacia. As emperor, Macrinus first attempted to enact reform to restore economic and diplomatic stability in Rome. While Macrinus' diplomatic actions brought about peace with each of the individual kingdoms, the additional monetary costs and subsequent fiscal reforms generated unrest in the Roman military.\nCaracalla's aunt, Julia Maesa, took advantage of the unrest and instigated a rebellion to have her fourteen-year-old grandson, Elagabalus, recognized as emperor. Macrinus was overthrown at the Battle of Antioch on 8 June 218 and Elagabalus proclaimed himself emperor with support from the rebelling Roman legions. Macrinus fled the battlefield and tried to reach Rome, but was captured in Chalcedon and later executed in Cappadocia. He sent his son to the care of Artabanus IV of Parthia, but Diadumenian was also captured before he could reach his destination and executed. After Macrinus' death, the Senate declared him and his son enemies of Rome and had their names struck from the records and their images destroyed, a procedure known as \"damnatio memoriae.\"\nBackground and career.\nMacrinus was born in Caesarea (modern Cherchell, Algeria) in the Roman province of Mauretania Caesariensis to an equestrian family of Berber origins. According to David Potter, his family traced its origins to the Berber tribes of the region and his pierced ear was an indication of his Berber heritage. He received an education which allowed him to ascend to the Roman political class. Over the years, he earned a reputation as a skilled lawyer; and, under Emperor Septimius Severus, he became an important bureaucrat. Severus' successor Caracalla later appointed him a prefect of the Praetorian Guard.\nWhile Macrinus probably enjoyed the trust of Emperor Caracalla, this may have changed when, according to tradition, it was prophesied that he would depose and succeed the emperor. Macrinus, fearing for his safety, resolved to have Caracalla murdered before he was condemned.\nIn the spring of 217, Caracalla was in the eastern provinces preparing a campaign against the Parthian Empire. Macrinus was among his staff, as were other members of the Praetorian Guard. In April, Caracalla left the winter military camp at Edessa to visit a temple of Luna near the site of the battle of Carrhae and was accompanied only by his personal guard, which included Macrinus. The guard returned to the camp with two bodies: that of the dead emperor, and that of one of the accompanying soldiers. The story that was told indicated that on 8 April, while travelling to the temple, Caracalla was stabbed to death by Justin Martialis, a soldier who was later claimed to have been recruited by Macrinus to commit the murder. In the aftermath, Martialis was killed by one of Caracalla's men.\nFor two or three days, Rome remained without an emperor. On 11 April, Macrinus proclaimed himself emperor and assumed all of the imperial titles and powers, without waiting for the Senate. The army backed his claim as emperor and the Senate, so far away, was powerless to intervene. Macrinus never returned to Rome as emperor and remained based in Antioch for the duration of his reign. Macrinus was the first emperor to hail from the equestrian class, rather than the senatorial, and also the first emperor of Mauretanian descent. He adopted the name of Severus, in honour of the Severan dynasty, and conferred the imperial title of Augusta to his wife Nonia Celsa and the title of Caesar and name of Antoninus to his son Diadumenianus in honour of the Antonine dynasty, thus making him second in command. At the time of Diadumenian's accession he was eight years old.\nReign.\nDespite his equestrian background, Macrinus was accepted by the Senate for two reasons: for the removal of Caracalla, and for having received the loyalty of the army. The senators were less concerned by Macrinus' Mauretanian ancestry than by his equestrian social background and scrutinized his actions as emperor. Their opinion of him was reduced by his decisions to appoint to high offices men who were of similarly undistinguished background. Macrinus, not being a senator and having become emperor through force rather than through traditional means, was looked down upon.\nMacrinus had several issues that he needed to deal with at the time of his accession, which had been left behind by his predecessor. As Caracalla had a tendency towards military belligerence, rather than diplomacy, this left several conflicts for Macrinus to resolve. Additionally, Caracalla had been a profligate spender of Rome's income. Most of the money was spent on the army; he had greatly increased their pay from 2,000 sesterces to 3,000 sesterces per year. The increased expenditures forced Caracalla to strip bare whatever sources of income he had to supply the difference. This shortfall left Rome in a dire fiscal situation that Macrinus needed to address.\nMacrinus was at first occupied by the threat of the Parthians, with whom Rome had been at war since the reign of Caracalla. Macrinus settled a peace deal with the Parthians after fighting an indecisive battle at Nisibis in 217. In return for peace, Macrinus was forced to pay a large indemnity to the Parthian ruler Artabanus IV. Rome was at the time also under threat from Dacia and Armenia, so any deal with Parthia would likely have been beneficial to Rome. Next, Macrinus turned his attention to Armenia. In 216, Caracalla had imprisoned Khosrov I of Armenia and his family after Khosrov had agreed to meet with Caracalla at a conference to discuss some issue between himself and his sons. Caracalla instead installed a new Roman governor to rule over Armenia. These actions angered the Armenian people and they soon rebelled against Rome. Macrinus settled a peace treaty with them by returning the crown and loot to Khosrov's son and successor Tiridates II and releasing his mother from prison, and by restoring Armenia to its status as a client kingdom of Rome. Macrinus made peace with the Dacians by releasing hostages, though this was likely not handled by himself but by Marcius Agrippa. In matters of foreign policy, Macrinus showed a tendency towards settling disputes through diplomacy and a reluctance to engage in military conflict, though this may have been due more to the lack of resources and manpower than to his own personal preference.\nMacrinus began to overturn Caracalla's fiscal policies and moved closer towards those that had been set forth by Septimius Severus. One such policy change involved the pay of Roman legionaries. The soldiers that were already enlisted during Caracalla's reign enjoyed exorbitant payments which were impossible for Macrinus to reduce without risking a potential rebellion. Instead, Macrinus allowed the enlisted soldiers to retain their higher payments, but he reduced the pay of new recruits to the level which had been set by Severus. Macrinus revalued the Roman currency, increasing the silver purity and weight of the denarius from 50.78 percent and 1.66 grams at the end of Caracalla's reign to 57.85 percent and 1.82 grams from Autumn 217 to the end of his reign, so that it mirrored Severus' fiscal policy for the period 197 to 209. Macrinus' goal with these policies might have been to return Rome to the relative economic stability that had been enjoyed under Severus' reign, though it came with a cost. The fiscal changes that Macrinus enacted might have been tenable had it not been for the military. By this time, the strength of the military was too great and by enacting his reforms he angered the veteran soldiers, who viewed his actions in reducing the pay of new recruits as a foreshadowing of eventual reductions in their own privileges and pay. This significantly reduced Macrinus' popularity with the legions that had declared him emperor.\nCaracalla's mother Julia Domna was initially left in peace when Macrinus became emperor. This changed when Macrinus discovered that she was conspiring against him and had her placed under house arrest in Antioch. By this time Julia Domna was suffering from a presumed advanced stage of breast cancer and she soon died in Antioch after starving herself. Afterwards, Macrinus sent Domna's sister Julia Maesa and her children back to Emesa in Syria, from where Maesa set in motion her plans to have Macrinus overthrown. Macrinus remained in Antioch instead of going to Rome upon being declared emperor, a step which furthered his unpopularity in Rome and contributed to his eventual downfall.\nDownfall.\nJulia Maesa had retired to her home town of Emesa with an immense fortune, which she had accrued over the course of twenty years. She took her children, Julia Soaemias and Julia Mamaea, and grandchildren, including Elagabalus, with her to Emesa. Elagabalus, aged 14, was the chief priest of the Phoenician sun-deity Elagabalus (or El-Gabal) in Emesa. Soldiers from Legio III \"Gallica\" (Gallic Third Legion), that had been stationed at the nearby camp of Raphanea, often visited Emesa and went to see Elagabalus perform his priestly rituals and duties while there. Julia Maesa took advantage of this, to suggest to the soldiers that Elagabalus was indeed the illegitimate son of Caracalla. On 16 May, Elagabalus was proclaimed emperor by the Legio III \"Gallica\" at its camp at Raphanea. Upon Elagabalus' revolt, Macrinus travelled to Apamea and conferred the title of Augustus onto his son, Diadumenianus, and made him co-emperor.\nExecution.\nMacrinus realised that his life was in danger but struggled to decide upon a course of action and remained at Antioch. He sent a force of cavalry commanded by Ulpius Julianus to regain control of the rebels, but they failed and Ulpius died in the attempt. This failure further strengthened Elagabalus' army. Soon after, a force under Elagabalus' tutor Gannys marched on Antioch and engaged Macrinus' army on 8 June 218 near the village of Immae, located approximately from Antioch. At some point during the ensuing Battle of Antioch, Macrinus deserted the field and returned to Antioch. He was then forced to flee from Antioch as fighting erupted in the city as well. Elagabalus himself subsequently entered Antioch as the new ruler of the Roman Empire. Macrinus fled for Rome; he travelled as far as Chalcedon before being recognized and captured. His son and co-emperor Diadumenianus, sent to the care of Artabanus IV of Parthia, was himself captured in transit at Zeugma and killed in June 218. Diadumenianus' reign as emperor lasted less than one month, and he was about 10 years old when he died. Macrinus, upon learning of his son's death, tried to escape captivity, but he injured himself in the unsuccessful attempt and was afterward executed in Cappadocia; his head was sent to Elagabalus. Much like Macrinus, Diadumenianus' head was also cut off and sent to Elagabalus as a trophy.\n\"Damnatio memoriae\".\nMacrinus and his son Diadumenian were declared \"hostes\", enemies of the state, by the Senate immediately after news had arrived of their deaths and as part of an official declaration of support for the usurper Elagabalus, who was recognized in the Senate as the new Emperor. The declaration of \"hostes\" led to two actions being taken against the images of the former Emperors. First, their portraits were destroyed and their names were stricken from inscriptions and papyri. The second action, taken by the Roman soldiers who had rebelled against Macrinus in favour of Elagabalus, was to destroy all of the works and possessions of Macrinus. The \"damnatio memoriae\" against Macrinus is among the earliest of such sanctions enacted by the Senate. Many of the marble busts of Macrinus that exist were defaced and mutilated as a response to the \"damnatio memoriae\" and many of the coins depicting Macrinus and Diadumenianus were also destroyed. These actions against Macrinus are evidence of his unpopularity in Rome.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the film \"Gladiator II\" (2024), Denzel Washington portrays the character \"Macrinus\", who is loosely inspired by the historical figure. In an interview with \"The Times\" where Washington addressed the historical inaccuracy of Macrinus being adapted as a black man in the film, Washington acknowledged that the real Macrinus was not black. The choice of Washington garnered controversy and sparked criticism in Algeria, where many people denounced a \"blackwashing\" of the historical Berber character and argued that \"Macrinus was not of sub-Saharan African origin. This historical revisionism erases North African identities to impose a simplistic and incorrect vision of history\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20634", "revid": "50926682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20634", "title": "Minotaur", "text": "Creature of Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, the Minotaur (, \"M\u012bn\u1e53tauros\"), also known as Asterion or Asterius, is a mythical creature portrayed during classical antiquity with the head and tail of a bull and the body of a man(p34) or, as described by Roman poet Ovid, a being \"part man and part bull\". He dwelt at the center of the Labyrinth, which was an elaborate maze-like construction designed by the architect Daedalus and his son Icarus, upon command of King Minos of Crete. According to tradition, every nine years the people of Athens were compelled by King Minos to choose fourteen young noble citizens (seven men and seven women) to be offered as sacrificial victims to the Minotaur in retribution for the death of Minos's son Androgeos. The Minotaur was eventually slain by the Athenian hero Theseus, who managed to navigate the labyrinth with the help of a thread offered to him by the King's daughter, Ariadne.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Minotaur\" derives from the Ancient Greek a compound of the name (Minos) and the noun \"tauros\" meaning 'bull', thus it is translated as the 'Bull of Minos'. In Crete, the Minotaur was known by the name Asterion () or Asterios (), a name shared with Minos's foster-father.\n\"Minotaur\" was originally a proper noun in reference to this mythical figure. That is, there was only the one Minotaur. In contrast, the use of \"minotaur\" as a common noun to refer to a whole \"species\" of bull-headed creatures developed much later, in 20th\u00a0century fantasy genre fiction.\nThe Minotaur was called \"\" in Latin and in Etruscan. English pronunciation of the word \"Minotaur\" is varied; the following can be found in dictionaries: , , .\nCreation myth.\nAfter ascending the throne of the island of Crete, Minos competed with his brothers as ruler. Minos prayed to the sea god Poseidon to send him a snow-white bull as a sign of the god's favor. Minos was to sacrifice the bull to honor Poseidon, but owing to the bull's beauty he decided instead to keep him. Minos believed that the god would accept a substitute sacrifice. To punish Minos, Poseidon arranged with Aphrodite for Minos's wife, Pasipha\u00eb, to fall in love with the bull. Pasipha\u00eb had the master craftsman, Daedalus, fashion for her a hollow wooden cow, into which she climbed to let the bull mate with her. She then fell pregnant and bore Asterius, the Minotaur, making him a grandchild of Helios. Pasipha\u00eb nursed the Minotaur but he grew in size and became ferocious. As the unnatural offspring of a woman and a beast, the Minotaur had no natural source of nourishment and thus devoured humans for sustenance. Minos, following advice from the oracle at Delphi, had Daedalus construct a gigantic Labyrinth to hold the Minotaur. Its location was near Minos's palace in Knossos.\nAppearance.\nThe Minotaur is commonly represented in Classical art with the body of a man and the head and tail of a bull. According to Sophocles's , when the river spirit Achelous seduced Deianira, one of the guises he assumed was a man with the head of a bull. From classical antiquity through the Renaissance, the Minotaur appears at the center of many depictions of the Labyrinth. Ovid's Latin account of the Minotaur, which did not describe which half was bull and which half man, was the most widely available during the Middle Ages, and several later versions show a man's head and torso on a bull's body - the reverse of the Classical configuration, reminiscent of a centaur. This alternative tradition survived into the Renaissance, and is reflected in Dryden's elaborated translation of Virgil's description of the Minotaur in Book VI of the \"Aeneid\": \"The lower part a beast, a man above/The monument of their polluted love.\" It still figures in some modern depictions, such as Steele Savage's illustrations for Edith Hamilton's \"Mythology\" (1942). A mythical creature fitting this description was also known as a bucentaur, but it postdates Greek mythology.\nTheseus myth.\nAll the stories agree that prince Androgeus, son of King Minos, died and that the fault lay with the Athenians. The sacrifice of young Athenian men and women was a penalty for his death.\nIn some versions he was killed by the Athenians because of their jealousy of the victories he had won at the Panathenaic Games; in others he was killed at Marathon by the Cretan Bull, his mother's former taurine lover, because Aegeus, king of Athens, had commanded Androgeus to slay it. The common tradition holds that Minos waged a war of revenge for the death of his son, and won. The consequence of Athens losing the war was the regular sacrifice of several of their youths and maidens. Pausanias's account of the myth said that Minos had led a fleet against Athens and simply harassed the Athenians until they had agreed to send children as sacrifices. In his account of the Minotaur's birth, Catullus refers to yet another version in which Athens was \"compelled by the cruel plague to pay penalties for the killing of Androgeon\". To avert a plague caused by divine retribution for the Cretan prince's death, Aegeus had to send into the Labyrinth \"young men at the same time as the best of unwed girls as a feast\" for the Minotaur. Some accounts declare that Minos required seven Athenian youths and seven maidens, chosen by lots, to be sent every seventh year (or ninth); some versions say every year.\nWhen the time for the third sacrifice approached, the Athenian prince Theseus volunteered to slay the Minotaur. Isocrates orates that Theseus thought that he would rather die than rule a city that paid a tribute of children's lives to their enemy. He promised his father Aegeus that he would change the somber black sail of the boat carrying the victims from Athens to Crete, and put up a white sail for his return journey if he was successful; the crew would leave up the black sail if he was killed.\nIn Crete, Minos's daughter Ariadne fell madly in love with Theseus and helped him navigate the Labyrinth. In most accounts she gave him a ball of thread, allowing him to retrace his path. According to various classical sources and representations, Theseus killed the Minotaur with his sword, a club, or his bare hands. He then led the Athenians out of the Labyrinth, and they sailed with Ariadne away from Crete. On the way home, Theseus abandoned Ariadne on the island of Naxos and continued to Athens. The returning group neglected to replace the black sail with the promised white sail, and from his lookout on Cape Sounion, King Aegeus saw the black-sailed ship approach. Presuming his son dead, he killed himself by leaping into the sea that is since named after him. His death secured the throne for Theseus.\nInterpretations.\nThe contest between Theseus and the Minotaur was frequently represented in Greek art. A Knossian didrachm exhibits on one side the Labyrinth, on the other the Minotaur surrounded by a semicircle of small balls, probably intended for stars; one of the monster's names was Asterion or Asterius (\"star\"). Pasipha\u00eb gave birth to Asterius, who was called the Minotaur. He had the face of a bull, but the rest of him was human; and Minos, in compliance with certain oracles, shut him up and guarded him in the Labyrinth.While the ruins of Minos's palace at Knossos were discovered, the Labyrinth never was. The multiplicity of rooms, staircases and corridors in the palace has led some archaeologists to suggest that the palace itself was the source of the Labyrinth myth, with over 1300\u00a0maze-like compartments, an idea that is now generally discredited.\nHomer, describing the shield of Achilles, remarked that Daedalus had constructed a ceremonial dancing ground for Ariadne, but does not associate this with the term \"labyrinth\".\nSome 19th century mythologists proposed that the Minotaur was a personification of the sun and a Minoan adaptation of the Baal-Moloch of the Phoenicians. The slaying of the Minotaur by Theseus in that case could be interpreted as a memory of Athens breaking tributary relations with Minoan Crete.\nAccording to A.B. Cook, \"Minos\" and \"Minotaur\" were different forms of the same personage, representing the sun-god of the Cretans, who depicted the sun as a bull. He and J. G. Frazer both explain Pasipha\u00eb's union with the bull as a sacred ceremony, at which the queen of Knossos was wedded to a bull-formed god, just as the wife of the Tyrant in Athens was wedded to Dionysus. E. Pottier, who does not dispute the historical personality of Minos, in view of the story of Phalaris, considers it probable that in Crete (where a bull cult may have existed by the side of that of the labrys) victims were tortured by being shut up in the belly of a red-hot brazen bull. The story of Talos, the Cretan man of brass, who heated himself red-hot and clasped strangers in his embrace as soon as they landed on the island, is probably of similar origin.\nKer\u00e9nyi K\u00e1roly viewed the Minotaur, or Asterios, as a god associated with stars, comparable to Dionysus. Coins minted at Knossos from the fifth century showed labyrinth patterns encircling a goddess's head crowned with a wreath of grain, a bull's head, or a star. Ker\u00e9nyi argued that the star in the Labyrinth was in fact Asterios, making the Minotaur a \"luminous\" deity in Crete, associated with a goddess known as the Mistress of the Labyrinth.\nA geological interpretation also exists. Citing early descriptions of the minotaur by Callimachus as being entirely focused on the \"cruel bellowing\"\nit made from its underground labyrinth, and the extensive tectonic activity in the region, science journalist Matt Kaplan has theorised that the myth may well stem from geology.\nReferences in media.\nDante's \"Inferno\".\nThe Minotaur (, Italian for 'infamy of Crete'), appears briefly in Dante's \"Inferno\", in Canto 12 (l. 12\u201313, 16\u201321), where Dante and his guide Virgil find themselves picking their way among boulders dislodged on the slope and preparing to enter into the seventh circle of hell. Dante and Virgil encounter the beast first among the \"men of blood\": those damned for their violent natures. Some commentators believe that Dante, in a reversal of classical tradition, bestowed the beast with a man's head upon a bull's body, though this representation had already appeared in the Middle Ages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014\"Inferno\", Canto XII, lines 16\u201320\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nIn these lines, Virgil taunts the Minotaur to distract him, and reminds the Minotaur that he was killed by Theseus the Duke of Athens with the help of the monster's half-sister Ariadne. The Minotaur is the first infernal guardian whom Virgil and Dante encounter within the walls of Dis.\nThe Minotaur seems to represent the entire zone of Violence, much as Geryon represents Fraud in Canto XVI, and serves a similar role as gatekeeper for the entire seventh Circle.\nGiovanni Boccaccio writes of the Minotaur in his literary commentary of the Commedia: \"When he had grown up and become a most ferocious animal, and of incredible strength, they tell that Minos had him shut up in a prison called the labyrinth, and that he had sent to him there all those whom he wanted to die a cruel death\". Dante Gabriel Rossetti, in his own commentary, compares the Minotaur with all three sins of violence within the seventh circle: \"The Minotaur, who is situated at the rim of the tripartite circle, fed, according to the poem was biting himself (violence against one's body) and was conceived in the 'false cow' (violence against nature, daughter of God).\"\nVirgil and Dante then pass quickly by to the centaurs (Nessus, Chiron and Pholus) who guard the Flegetonte (\"river of blood\"), to continue through the seventh Circle.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20636", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20636", "title": "Memex", "text": "Hypothetical proto-hypertext system that was first described by Vannevar Bush in 1945\nA memex (a portmanteau of \"memory\" and \"index\") is a hypothetical electromechanical device for interacting with microform documents and described in Vannevar Bush's 1945 article \"As We May Think\". Bush envisioned the memex as a device in which individuals would compress and store all of their books, records, and communications, \"mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility\". The individual was supposed to use the memex as an automatic personal filing system, making the memex \"an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory\".\nThe concept of the memex influenced the development of early hypertext systems and personal knowledge base software. The hypothetical implementation depicted by Bush for the purpose of concrete illustration was based upon a document bookmark list of static microfilm pages and lacked a true hypertext system, where parts of pages would have internal structure beyond the common textual format.\nDevelopment.\nAn electromechanical memex device.\nIn \"As We May Think\", Vannevar Bush describes a memex as an electromechanical device enabling individuals to develop and read a large self-contained research library, create and follow associative trails of links and personal annotations, and recall these trails at any time to share them with other researchers. This device would closely mimic the associative processes of the human mind, but it would be gifted with permanent recollection. As Bush writes, \"Thus science may implement the ways in which man produces, stores, and consults the record of the race\".\nThe technology used would have been a combination of electromechanical controls and microfilm cameras and readers, all integrated into a large desk. Most of the microfilm library would have been contained within the desk, but the user could add or remove microfilm reels at will. A memex would hypothetically read and write content on these microfilm reels, using electric photocells to read coded symbols recorded next to individual microfilm frames while the reels spun at high speed, stopping on command. The coded symbols would enable the memex to index, search, and link content to create and follow associative trails.\nThe top of the desk would have slanting translucent screens on which material could be projected for convenient reading. The top of the memex would have a transparent platen. When a longhand note, photograph, memoranda, or other things were placed on the platen, the depression of a lever would cause the item to be photographed onto the next blank space in a section of the memex film.\nAccording to Bush, the memex could become \"a sort of mechanized private file and library\". The memex device as described by Bush \"would use microfilm storage, dry photography, and analog computing to give postwar scholars access to a huge, indexed repository of knowledge any section of which could be called up with a few keystrokes.\"\nAssociative trails.\nAn associative trail as conceived by Bush would be a way to create a new \"linear\" sequence of microfilm frames across any arbitrary sequence of microfilm frames by creating a chained sequence of links in the way just described, along with personal comments and \"side trails\". At the time, Bush saw the current ways of indexing information as limiting and instead proposed a way to store information that was analogous to the mental association of the human brain: storing information with the capability of easy access at a later time using certain cues (in this case, a series of numbers as a code to retrieve data).\nOther features.\nAccording to Bush, the memex would have features other than linking. The user could record new information on microfilm, by taking photos from paper or from a touch-sensitive translucent screen. A user could \"...insert a comment of his own, either linking it into the main trail or joining it by a side trail to a particular item. ...Thus he builds a trail of his interest through the maze of materials available to him.\" A user could also create a copy of an interesting trail (containing references and personal annotations) and \"...pass it to his friend for insertion in his own memex, there to be linked into the more general trail.\" \nIn September 1945, \"Life\" magazine published an illustration by Alfred D. Crimi showing the \"Memex desk\". According to \"Life\" magazine, the Memex desk \"would instantly bring files and material on an subject to the operator's fingertips\". The mechanical core of the desk would also include \"a mechanism which automatically photographs longhand notes, pictures and letters, then file them in the desk for future reference.\"\nExtending, storing, and consulting the record of the species.\nBush's 1945 \"As We May Think\" idea for the memex extended far beyond a mechanism that might augment the research of one individual working in isolation. In Bush's idea, the ability to connect, annotate, and share both published works and personal trails would profoundly change the process by which the \"world's record\" is created and used:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified. The lawyer has at his touch the associated opinions and decisions of his whole experience, and of the experience of friends and authorities. The patent attorney has on call the millions of issued patents, with familiar trails to every point of his client's interest. The physician, puzzled by a patient's reactions, strikes the trail established in studying an earlier similar case, and runs rapidly through analogous case histories, with side references to the classics for the pertinent anatomy and histology. ...\nThe historian, with a vast chronological account of a people, parallels it with a skip trail that stops only on the salient items and can follow at any time contemporary trails which lead him all over civilization at a particular epoch. There is a new profession of trailblazers, those who find delight in the task of establishing useful trails through the enormous mass of the common record. The inheritance from the master becomes, not only his additions to the world's record but for his disciples the entire scaffolding by which they were erected. \u2014 \"As We May Think\" \nLegacy.\nBush said of his \"As We May Think\" memex device that \"technical difficulties of all sorts have been ignored,\" but that, \"also ignored are means as yet unknown which may come any day to accelerate technical progress as violently as did the advent of the thermionic tube.\" Michael Buckland concluded that Bush's 1945 vision for an information retrieval machine is unhistorically viewed in relation to the subsequent development of electronic computer technology. Buckland studied the historical background of information retrieval in and before 1939 because the Memex was based on Bush's work during 1938\u20131940 in building a photoelectric microfilm selector, an electronic retrieval technology invented by Emanuel Goldberg for Zeiss Ikon in the 1920s. According to Buckland, the legacy of Bush is twofold: a significant engineering achievement in building a rapid prototype microfilm selector, and \"a speculative article\" which through \"the social prestige of its author, has had an immediate and lasting effect in stimulating others.\"\nThe pioneer of human\u2013computer interaction Douglas Engelbart was inspired by Bush's proposal for a co-evolution between humans and machines. In a 1999 publication, Engelbart recollects that reading \"As We May Think\" in 1945 he \"became 'infected' with the idea of building a means to extend and navigate this great pool of human knowledge\". Around 1961, Engelbart re-read Bush's article, and from 1962 onward Engelbart developed a series of technical designs. Engelbart updated the Memex microfilm storage desk and thereby arrived at a pioneering vision for a personal computer connected to an electronic visual display and a mouse pointing device. In 1962, Engelbart sent Bush a draft article for comment; Bush never replied. The article was published in 1963 under the title \"A Conceptual Framework for the Augmentation of Man's Intellect\".\nIn 1965, J. C. R. Licklider dedicated his book \"Libraries of the Future\" to Bush. Licklider wrote that he had often heard of the memex and \"trails of reference\", even before he had read \"As We May Think\". Also in 1965, Ted Nelson coined the word hypertext in a paper that quoted Bush's memex idea at length. In 1968, Nelson collaborated with Andries van Dam to implement the Hypertext Editing System (HES). In his 1987 book entitled \"Literary Machines\", Nelson defined hypertext as \"non-sequential writing with reader-controlled links\". When Tim Berners-Lee built his ENQUIRE software at CERN in 1980, which led to his invention of the World Wide Web in 1989, the ideas developed by Bush, Engelbart and Nelson did not influence his work, since he was not aware of them. However, as Berners-Lee began to refine his ideas, the work of these predecessors would later help to confirm the legitimacy of his concept. In 2003, Microsoft promoted a life-logging research project under the name MyLifeBits as an attempt to fulfill Bush's memex vision.\n1959 Memex II.\nIn 1959, Vannevar Bush described an improved \"Memex II\". In the manuscript draft of \"Memex II\" he wrote, \"Professional societies will no longer print papers...\" and states that individuals will either order sets of papers to come on tape \u2013 complete with photographs and diagrams \u2013 or download 'facsimiles' by telephone. Each society would maintain a 'master memex' containing all papers, references, tables \"intimately interconnected by trails, so that one may follow a detailed matter from paper to paper, going back through the classics, recording criticism in the margins.\"\n1967 Memex revisited.\nIn 1967, Vannevar Bush published a retrospective article entitled \"Memex Revisited\" in his book \"Science Is Not Enough\". Published 22 years after his initial conception of the Memex, Bush details the various technological advancements that have made his vision a possibility. Specifically, Bush cites photocells, transistors, cathode ray tubes, magnetic and videotape, \"high-speed electric circuits\", and \"miniaturization of solid-state devices\" such as the TV and radio. The article claims that magnetic tape would be central to the creation of a modern Memex device. The erasable quality of the tape is of special significance, as this would allow for modification of information stored in the proposed Memex.\nIn the article, Bush stresses the continued importance of supplementing \"how creative men think\" and relates that the systems for indexing data are still insufficient and rely too much on linear pathways rather than the association-based system of the human brain. Bush writes that a machine with the \"speed and flexibility\" of the brain is not attainable, but improvements could be made in regard to the capacity to obtain informational \"permanence and clarity\".\nBush also relates that, unlike digital technology, Memex would be of no significant aid to business or profitable ventures, and as a consequence, its development would occur only long after the mechanization of libraries and the introduction of what he describes as the specialized \"group machine\", which would be useful for the sharing of ideas in fields such as medicine. Furthermore, although Bush discusses the compressional ability and rapidity so key to modern machines, he relates that speed will not be an integral part of Memex, stating that a tenth of a second would be an acceptable interval for its data retrieval, rather than the billionths of a second that modern computers are capable of. \"For Memex,\" he writes, \"the problem is not swift access, but selective access\". Bush states that although the code-reading and potential linking capabilities of the rapid selector would be key to the creation of Memex, there is still an issue of enabling \"moderately rapid access to really large memory storage\". There is an issue concerning selection, Bush conveys, and despite the fact that improvements have been made in the speed of digital selection, according to Bush, \"selection, in the broad sense, is still a stone adze in the hands of the cabinetmaker\". Bush goes on to discuss the record-making process and how Memex could incorporate systems of voice-control and user-propagated learning. He proposes a machine that could respond to \"simple remarks\" as well as build trails based on its user's \"habits of association,\" as Belinda Barnet described them in \"The Technical Evolution of Vannevar Bush's Memex.\" Barnet also makes the distinction between the idea of a constructive Memex and the \"permanent trails\" described in \"As We May Think,\" and attributes Bush's machine learning concepts to Claude Shannon's mechanical mouse and work with \"feedback and machine learning\".\nDARPA Memex Program.\nIn 2014, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), launched a program using the name Memex to fight human trafficking crimes on the dark web. Wade Shen, the program manager for Memex at DARPA cited Bush's hypothetical device as inspiration. DARPA later released the Memex artificial intelligence search technologies as open-source software. \nIn 2016 the White House awarded Chris White, the program manager for Memex, the Presidential Award for Extraordinary Efforts to Combat Trafficking in Persons for his work on Memex. \nDozens of law enforcement organizations worldwide use the Memex software to conduct investigations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20637", "revid": "18731412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20637", "title": "Signal modulation", "text": "Process of varying one or more properties of a periodic waveform\nSignal modulation is the process of varying one or more properties of a periodic waveform in electronics and telecommunication for the purpose of transmitting information.\nThe process encodes information in form of the modulation or message signal onto a carrier signal to be transmitted. For example, the message signal might be an audio signal representing sound from a microphone, a video signal representing moving images from a video camera, or a digital signal representing a sequence of binary digits, a bitstream from a computer. \nThis carrier wave usually has a much higher frequency than the message signal does. This is because it is impractical to transmit signals with low frequencies. Generally, receiving a radio wave requires a radio antenna with a length that is one-fourth of the wavelength of the transmitted wave. For low frequency radio waves, wavelength is on the scale of kilometers and building such a large antenna is not practical.\nAnother purpose of modulation is to transmit multiple channels of information through a single communication medium, using frequency-division multiplexing (FDM). For example, in cable television (which uses FDM), many carrier signals, each modulated with a different television channel, are transported through a single cable to customers. Since each carrier occupies a different frequency, the channels do not interfere with each other. At the destination end, the carrier signal is demodulated to extract the information bearing modulation signal.\nA modulator is a device or circuit that performs modulation. A demodulator (sometimes \"detector\") is a circuit that performs demodulation, the inverse of modulation. A modem (from modulator\u2013demodulator), used in bidirectional communication, can perform both operations. The lower frequency band occupied by the modulation signal is called the \"baseband\", while the higher frequency band occupied by the modulated carrier is called the \"passband\".\nSignal modulation techniques are fundamental methods used in wireless communication to encode information onto a carrier wave by varying its amplitude, frequency, or phase. Key techniques and their typical applications \nTypes of Signal Modulation\n\u2022Amplitude Shift Keying (ASK): Varies the amplitude of the carrier signal to represent data. Simple and energy efficient, but vulnerable to noise. Used in RFID and sensor networks.\n\u2022Frequency Shift Keying (FSK): Changes the frequency of the carrier signal to encode information. Resistant to noise, simple in implementation, often used in telemetry and paging systems.\n\u2022Phase Shift Keying (PSK): Modifies the phase of the carrier signal based on data. Common forms include Binary PSK (BPSK) and Quadrature PSK (QPSK), used in Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and cellular networks. Offers good spectral efficiency and robustness against interference.\n\u2022Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM): Simultaneously varies both amplitude and phase to transmit multiple bits per symbol, increasing data rates. Used extensively in Wi-Fi, cable television, and LTE systems.\n\u2022Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM): Splits the data across multiple, closely spaced sub-carriers, each modulated separately (often with QAM or PSK). Provides high spectral efficiency and robustness in multipath environments and is widely used in WLAN, LTE, and WiMAX.\n\u2022Other advanced techniques:\n\u2022Amplitude Phase Shift Keying (APSK): Combines features of PSK and QAM, mainly used in satellite communications for improved power efficiency.\n\u2022Spread Spectrum (e.g., DSSS): Spreads the signal energy across a wide band for robust, low probability of intercept transmission.\nIn analog modulation, an analog modulation signal is \"impressed\" on the carrier. Examples are amplitude modulation (AM) in which the amplitude (strength) of the carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal, and frequency modulation (FM) in which the frequency of the carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal. These were the earliest types of modulation, and are used to transmit an audio signal representing sound in AM and FM radio broadcasting. More recent systems use digital modulation, which impresses a digital signal consisting of a sequence of binary digits (bits), a bitstream, on the carrier, by means of mapping bits to elements from a discrete alphabet to be transmitted. This alphabet can consist of a set of real or complex numbers, or sequences, like oscillations of different frequencies, so-called frequency-shift keying (FSK) modulation. A more complicated digital modulation method that employs multiple carriers, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), is used in WiFi networks, digital radio stations and digital cable television transmission.\nAnalog modulation methods.\nIn analog modulation, the modulation is applied continuously in response to the analog information signal. Common analog modulation techniques include:\nDigital modulation methods.\nIn digital modulation, an analog carrier signal is modulated by a discrete signal. Digital modulation methods can be considered as digital-to-analog conversion and the corresponding demodulation or detection as analog-to-digital conversion. The changes in the carrier signal are chosen from a finite number of M alternative symbols (the \"modulation alphabet\").\nA simple example: A telephone line is designed for transferring audible sounds, for example, tones, and not digital bits (zeros and ones). Computers may, however, communicate over a telephone line by means of modems, which are representing the digital bits by tones, called symbols. If there are four alternative symbols (corresponding to a musical instrument that can generate four different tones, one at a time), the first symbol may represent the bit sequence 00, the second 01, the third 10 and the fourth 11. If the modem plays a melody consisting of 1000 tones per second, the symbol rate is 1000 symbols/second, or 1000 baud. Since each tone (i.e., symbol) represents a message consisting of two digital bits in this example, the bit rate is twice the symbol rate, i.e. 2000 bits per second.\nAccording to one definition of digital signal, the modulated signal is a digital signal. According to another definition, the modulation is a form of digital-to-analog conversion. Most textbooks would consider digital modulation schemes as a form of digital transmission, synonymous to data transmission; very few would consider it as analog transmission.\nFundamental digital modulation methods.\nThe most fundamental digital modulation techniques are based on keying:\nIn QAM, an in-phase signal (or I, with one example being a cosine waveform) and a quadrature phase signal (or Q, with an example being a sine wave) are amplitude modulated with a finite number of amplitudes and then summed. It can be seen as a two-channel system, each channel using ASK. The resulting signal is equivalent to a combination of PSK and ASK.\nIn all of the above methods, each of these phases, frequencies or amplitudes are assigned a unique pattern of binary bits. Usually, each phase, frequency or amplitude encodes an equal number of bits. This number of bits comprises the \"symbol\" that is represented by the particular phase, frequency or amplitude.\nIf the alphabet consists of formula_1 alternative symbols, each symbol represents a message consisting of \"N\" bits. If the symbol rate (also known as the baud rate) is formula_2 symbols/second (or baud), the data rate is formula_3 bit/second.\nFor example, with an alphabet consisting of 16 alternative symbols, each symbol represents 4 bits. Thus, the data rate is four times the baud rate.\nIn the case of PSK, ASK or QAM, where the carrier frequency of the modulated signal is constant, the modulation alphabet is often conveniently represented on a constellation diagram, showing the amplitude of the I signal at the x-axis, and the amplitude of the Q signal at the y-axis, for each symbol.\nModulator and detector principles of operation.\nPSK and ASK, and sometimes also FSK, are often generated and detected using the principle of QAM. The I and Q signals can be combined into a complex-valued signal \"I\"+\"jQ\" (where \"j\" is the imaginary unit). The resulting so called equivalent lowpass signal or equivalent baseband signal is a complex-valued representation of the real-valued modulated physical signal (the so-called passband signal or RF signal).\nThese are the general steps used by the modulator to transmit data:\nAt the receiver side, the demodulator typically performs:\nAs is common to all digital communication systems, the design of both the modulator and demodulator must be done simultaneously. Digital modulation schemes are possible because the transmitter-receiver pair has prior knowledge of how data is encoded and represented in the communications system. In all digital communication systems, both the modulator at the transmitter and the demodulator at the receiver are structured so that they perform inverse operations.\nAsynchronous methods do not require a receiver reference clock signal that is phase synchronized with the sender carrier signal. In this case, modulation symbols (rather than bits, characters, or data packets) are asynchronously transferred. The opposite is synchronous modulation.\nList of common digital modulation techniques.\nThe most common digital modulation techniques are:\nMSK and GMSK are particular cases of continuous phase modulation. Indeed, MSK is a particular case of the sub-family of CPM known as continuous-phase frequency-shift keying (CPFSK) which is defined by a rectangular frequency pulse (i.e. a linearly increasing phase pulse) of one-symbol-time duration (total response signaling).\nOFDM is based on the idea of frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), but the multiplexed streams are all parts of a single original stream. The bit stream is split into several parallel data streams, each transferred over its own sub-carrier using some conventional digital modulation scheme. The modulated sub-carriers are summed to form an OFDM signal. This dividing and recombining help with handling channel impairments. OFDM is considered as a modulation technique rather than a multiplex technique since it transfers one bit stream over one communication channel using one sequence of so-called OFDM symbols. OFDM can be extended to multi-user channel access method in the orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA) and multi-carrier code-division multiple access (MC-CDMA) schemes, allowing several users to share the same physical medium by giving different sub-carriers or spreading codes to different users.\nOf the two kinds of RF power amplifier, switching amplifiers (Class D amplifiers) cost less and use less battery power than linear amplifiers of the same output power. However, they only work with relatively constant-amplitude-modulation signals such as angle modulation (FSK or PSK) and CDMA, but not with QAM and OFDM. Nevertheless, even though switching amplifiers are completely unsuitable for normal QAM constellations, often the QAM modulation principle are used to drive switching amplifiers with these FM and other waveforms, and sometimes QAM demodulators are used to receive the signals put out by these switching amplifiers.\nAutomatic digital modulation recognition (ADMR).\nAutomatic digital modulation recognition in intelligent communication systems is one of the most important issues in software-defined radio and cognitive radio. According to incremental expanse of intelligent receivers, automatic modulation recognition becomes a challenging topic in telecommunication systems and computer engineering. Such systems have many civil and military applications. Moreover, blind recognition of modulation type is an important problem in commercial systems, especially in software-defined radio. Usually in such systems, there are some extra information for system configuration, but considering blind approaches in intelligent receivers, we can reduce information overload and increase transmission performance. Obviously, with no knowledge of the transmitted data and many unknown parameters at the receiver, such as the signal power, carrier frequency and phase offsets, timing information, etc., blind identification of the modulation is made fairly difficult. This becomes even more challenging in real-world scenarios with multipath fading, frequency-selective and time-varying channels.\nThere are two main approaches to automatic modulation recognition. The first approach uses likelihood-based methods to assign an input signal to a proper class. Another recent approach is based on feature extraction.\nDigital baseband modulation.\nDigital baseband modulation changes the characteristics of a baseband signal, i.e., one without a carrier at a higher frequency.\nThis can be used as equivalent signal to be later frequency-converted to a carrier frequency, or for direct communication in baseband. The latter methods both involve relatively simple line codes, as often used in local buses, and complicated baseband signalling schemes such as used in DSL.\nPulse modulation methods.\nPulse modulation schemes aim at transferring a narrowband analog signal over an analog baseband channel as a two-level signal by modulating a pulse wave. Some pulse modulation schemes also allow the narrowband analog signal to be transferred as a digital signal (i.e., as a quantized discrete-time signal) with a fixed bit rate, which can be transferred over an underlying digital transmission system, for example, some line code. These are not modulation schemes in the conventional sense since they are not channel coding schemes, but should be considered as source coding schemes, and in some cases analog-to-digital conversion techniques.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20638", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20638", "title": "Misogynist", "text": ""}
{"id": "20639", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20639", "title": "Marxist", "text": ""}
{"id": "20640", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20640", "title": "MacOS", "text": "Operating system for Apple computers\nmacOS (previously OS\u00a0X and originally Mac\u00a0OS\u00a0X) is a proprietary Unix-based operating system, derived from OPENSTEP for Mach and FreeBSD, which has been marketed and developed by Apple since 2001. It is the current operating system for Apple's Mac computers. Within the market of desktop and laptop computers, it is the second most widely used desktop OS, after Microsoft Windows and ahead of all Linux distributions, including ChromeOS and SteamOS. As of 2025[ [update]], the most recent release of macOS is macOS 26 Tahoe, the 22nd major version of macOS.\nMac OS X succeeded the classic Mac OS, the primary Macintosh operating system from 1984 to 2001. Its underlying architecture came from NeXT's NeXTSTEP, as a result of , which also brought Steve Jobs back to Apple. The first desktop version, Mac OS X 10.0, was released on March 24, 2001. Mac OS X Leopard and all later versions of macOS, other than OS X Lion, are UNIX 03 certified. Each of Apple's other contemporary operating systems, including iOS, iPadOS, watchOS, tvOS, audioOS and visionOS, are derivatives of macOS. Throughout its history, macOS has supported three major processor architectures: the initial version supported PowerPC-based Macs only, with support for Intel-based Macs beginning with OS X Tiger 10.4.4 and support for ARM-based Apple silicon Macs beginning with macOS Big Sur. Support for PowerPC-based Macs was dropped with OS X Snow Leopard, and it was announced at the 2025 Worldwide Developers Conference that macOS Tahoe will be the last to support Intel-based Macs.\nA prominent part of macOS's original brand identity was the use of the Roman numeral X, pronounced \"ten\", as well as code naming each release after species of big cats, and later, places within California. Apple shortened the name to \"OS X\" in 2011 and then changed it to \"macOS\" in 2016 to align with the branding of Apple's other operating systems. In 2020, macOS Big Sur was presented as version 11\u2014a marked departure after 16 releases of macOS 10\u2014but the naming convention continued to reference places within California. In 2025, Apple unified the version number across all of its products to align with the year after their WWDC announcement, so the release announced at the 2025 WWDC, macOS Tahoe, is macOS 26.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nThe heritage of what would become macOS originated at NeXT, a company founded by Steve Jobs following his departure from Apple in 1985. There, the Unix-like NeXTSTEP operating system was developed, before being launched in 1989. The kernel of NeXTSTEP is based upon the Mach kernel, which was originally developed at Carnegie Mellon University, with additional kernel layers and low-level user space code derived from parts of FreeBSD and other BSD operating systems. Its graphical user interface was built on top of an object-oriented GUI toolkit using the Objective-C programming language.\nThroughout the 1990s, Apple had tried to create a \"next-generation\" OS to succeed its classic Mac OS through the Taligent, Copland and Gershwin projects; however, all were eventually abandoned. This led Apple to acquire NeXT in 1997, allowing NeXTSTEP, later called OPENSTEP, to serve as the basis for Apple's next-generation operating system.\nThe acquisition also led to Steve Jobs returning to Apple as interim and later permanent CEO, shepherding the transformation of the programmer-friendly OPENSTEP into a system that would be adopted by Apple's primary market of home users and creative professionals. The project was codenamed \"Rhapsody\" before being officially named Mac OS X.\nMac OS X.\nThe \"X\" in Mac OS X's name represents the Roman numeral for the number ten, and Apple has stated that it should be pronounced \"ten\" in this context; it is also commonly pronounced like the letter \"X\". The iPhone X, iPhone XR and iPhone XS all later followed this convention.\nPrevious Macintosh operating systems (versions of the classic Mac OS) were named using Arabic numerals, as with Mac OS 8 and Mac OS 9. Until version 11, macOS Big Sur, all versions of the operating system were given version numbers of the form 10.\"x\", with this format persisting from Mac OS X 10.0 through 10.15; starting with macOS Big Sur, Apple switched to integer version numbers that increased by 1 with every major release.\nThe first version of Mac OS X, Mac OS X Server 1.0, was a transitional product, featuring an interface resembling the classic Mac OS, though it was not compatible with software designed for the older system; consumer releases of Mac OS X included more backward compatibility. Mac OS applications could be rewritten to run natively via the Carbon API, with many alternatively able to be run directly through the Classic Environment albeit with a reduction in performance.\nThe consumer version of Mac OS X was launched in March 2001 with Mac OS X 10.0. Reviews were variable, with many praising its sophisticated, glossy Aqua interface, but criticizing it for sluggish performance. With Apple's popularity at a low, the developer of FrameMaker, Adobe Inc., declined to develop new versions of it for Mac OS X. \"Ars Technica\" columnist John Siracusa, who reviewed every major OS X release up to 10.10, described the early releases in retrospect as \"dog-slow, feature poor\" and Aqua as \"unbearably slow and a huge resource hog\".\nApple rapidly developed several new releases of Mac OS X. Apple released Mac OS X 10.1 in October 2001, delivering quality of life enhancements. Beginning in January 2002, Apple preinstalled Mac OS X as the default operating system on all Macs. Later that year Apple released Mac OS X Jaguar (version 10.2), the first version to publicly use its code name in marketing and advertisements. When Mac OS X Panther (10.3) released in 2003, Siracusa noted that \"It's strange to have gone from years of uncertainty and vaporware to a steady annual supply of major new operating system releases.\" Mac OS X Tiger (10.4), which released in 2005, reportedly shocked executives at Microsoft by offering a number of features, such as fast file searching and improved graphics processing, that Microsoft had spent several years struggling to add to Windows Vista with acceptable performance.\nAs the operating system evolved, it moved away from the classic Mac OS, with applications being added and removed. Considering music to be a key market, Apple developed the iPod music player and music software for the Mac, including iTunes and GarageBand. Targeting the consumer and media markets, Apple emphasized its new \"digital lifestyle\" applications such as the iLife suite, integrated home entertainment through the Front Row media center and the Safari web browser. With the increasing popularity of the internet, Apple offered additional online services, including the .Mac, MobileMe and most recently iCloud products. It later began selling third-party applications through the Mac App Store.\nNewer versions of Mac OS X also included modifications to the general interface, moving away from the striped gloss and transparency of the initial versions. Some applications began to use a brushed metal appearance, or non-pinstriped title bar appearance in Mac OS X Tiger. In Mac OS X Leopard (10.5), Apple announced a unification of the interface, with a standardized gray-gradient window style.\nIn 2006, the first Intel Macs were released with a specialized version of Mac OS X Tiger.\nA key development for the system was the announcement and release of the iPhone from 2007 onwards. While Apple's previous iPod media players used a minimal operating system, the iPhone used an operating system based on Mac OS X, which would later be called iPhone OS and then iOS. The simultaneous release of two operating systems based on the same frameworks placed tension on Apple, which cited the iPhone as forcing it to delay Mac OS X Leopard. However, after Apple opened the iPhone to third-party developers, its commercial success drew attention to Mac OS X, with many iPhone software developers showing interest in Mac development.\nIn 2007, Mac OS X Leopard released with universal binary components, allowing installation on both Intel Macs and select PowerPC Macs. It is also the final release with PowerPC Mac support. In 2009, Mac OS X Snow Leopard (10.6) was the first version of Mac OS X to be built exclusively for Intel Macs and the final release with 32-bit Intel Mac support. The name was intended to signal its status as an iteration of Leopard, focusing on technical and performance improvements rather than user-facing features; indeed it was explicitly branded to developers as being a 'no new features' release. Since its release, several OS X or macOS releases (namely OS X Mountain Lion, OS X El Capitan, macOS High Sierra, and macOS Monterey) follow this pattern, with a name derived from its predecessor, similar to the 'tick\u2013tock model' used by Intel.\nStarting in 2011 with Mac OS X Lion (10.7) and OS X Mountain Lion (10.8), Apple moved some applications to a highly skeuomorphic style of design inspired by contemporary versions of iOS while simplifying some elements by making controls such as scroll bars fade out when not in use. This direction was, like brushed metal interfaces, unpopular with some users, although it continued a trend of greater animation and variety in the interface previously seen in design aspects such as the Time Machine backup utility, which presented past file versions against a swirling nebula, and the glossy translucent dock of Leopard and Snow Leopard. In addition, with Lion, Apple ceased to release separate server versions of Mac OS X, selling server tools as a separate downloadable application through the Mac App Store. A review described the trend in the server products as becoming \"cheaper and simpler... shifting its focus from large businesses to small ones.\"\nOS X.\nIn 2012, with the release of OS X Mountain Lion, the name of the system was officially shortened from Mac OS X to OS X, after the previous version shortened the system name in a similar fashion a year prior. That year, Apple removed the head of OS X development, Scott Forstall, and design was changed towards a more minimal direction. Apple's new user interface design, using deep color saturation, text-only buttons and a minimal, 'flat' interface, was debuted with iOS 7 in 2013. With OS X engineers reportedly working on iOS 7, the version released in 2013, OS X Mavericks (10.9), was something of a transitional release, with some of the skeuomorphic design removed, while most of the general interface of Mavericks remained unchanged. The next version, OS X Yosemite (10.10), adopted a design similar to iOS 7 but with greater complexity suitable for an interface controlled with a mouse.\nFrom 2012 onwards, the system has shifted to an annual release schedule similar to that of Mac OS X releases prior to 10.4 Tiger. It also steadily cut the cost of updates from Snow Leopard onwards, before removing upgrade fees altogether in OS X Mavericks. Some journalists and third-party software developers have suggested that this decision, while allowing more rapid feature release, meant less opportunity to focus on stability, with no version of OS X recommendable for users requiring stability and performance above new features. Apple's 2015 update, OS X El Capitan (10.11), was announced to focus specifically on stability and performance improvements.\nmacOS.\nIn 2016, with the release of macOS Sierra (10.12), the name was changed from OS X to macOS with the purpose of aligning it with the branding of Apple's other primary operating systems: iOS, watchOS, and tvOS. macOS Sierra added Siri, iCloud Drive, picture-in-picture support, a Night Shift mode that switches the display to warmer colors at night, and two Continuity features: Universal Clipboard, which syncs a user's clipboard across their Apple devices, and Auto Unlock, which can unlock a user's Mac with their Apple Watch. macOS Sierra also adds support for the Apple File System (APFS), Apple's successor to the dated HFS+ file system. macOS High Sierra (10.13), released in 2017, included performance improvements, Metal 2 and HEVC support, and made APFS the default file system for SSD boot drives.\nIts successor, macOS Mojave (10.14), was released in 2018, adding a dark mode option and a dynamic wallpaper setting. It was succeeded by macOS Catalina (10.15) in 2019, which replaces iTunes with separate apps for different types of media, and introduces the Catalyst system for porting iOS apps.\nIn 2020, Apple announced macOS Big Sur (version 11) at that year's WWDC. This was the first increment in the primary version number of macOS since the release of Mac OS X Public Beta in 2000; updates to macOS Big Sur were given 11.x numbers, matching the version numbering scheme used by Apple's other operating systems. Big Sur brought major changes to the user interface and was the first version to run on Apple Silicon, based on the ARM architecture. The numbering system started with Big Sur continued in 2021 with macOS Monterey (12), 2022 with macOS Ventura (13), 2023 with macOS Sonoma (14), and 2024 with macOS Sequoia (15). \nIn 2025, starting with macOS Tahoe (version 26), macOS's version number will be based on the year following its release, as will the version numbers of iOS, iPadOS, watchOS, tvOS, and visionOS, so that the version numbers are the same for all Apple OSes. macOS Tahoe also brings with it a new user interface design, called Liquid Glass, which will also be used on Apple's other platforms, unifying their design language. Tahoe will be the final release of macOS to run on Intel-based Macs.\nTimeline of releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArchitecture.\nAt macOS's core is a POSIX-compliant operating system built on top of the XNU kernel, (which incorporated large parts of FreeBSD kernel) and FreeBSD userland for the standard Unix facilities available from the command line interface. Apple has released this family of software as a free and open source operating system named Darwin. On top of Darwin, Apple layered a number of components, including the Aqua interface and the Finder, to complete the GUI-based operating system which is macOS.\nWith its original introduction as Mac OS X, the system brought a number of new capabilities to provide a more stable and reliable platform than its predecessor, the classic Mac OS. For example, pre-emptive multitasking and memory protection improved the system's ability to run multiple applications simultaneously without them interrupting or corrupting each other. Many aspects of macOS's architecture are derived from OPENSTEP, which was designed to be portable, to ease the transition from one platform to another. For example, NeXTSTEP was ported from the original 68k-based NeXT workstations to x86 and other architectures before NeXT was purchased by Apple, and OPENSTEP was later ported to the PowerPC architecture as part of the Rhapsody project.\nPrior to macOS High Sierra, and on drives other than solid state drives (SSDs), the default file system is HFS+, which it inherited from the classic Mac OS. Operating system designer Linus Torvalds had criticized HFS+, saying it is \"probably the worst file system ever\", whose design is \"actively corrupting user data\". He criticized the case insensitivity of file names, a design made worse when Apple extended the file system to support Unicode.\nThe Darwin subsystem in macOS manages the file system, which includes the Unix permissions layer. In 2003 and 2005, two Macworld editors expressed criticism of the permission scheme; Ted Landau called misconfigured permissions \"the most common frustration\" in macOS, while Rob Griffiths suggested that some users may even have to reset permissions every day, a process which can take up to 15 minutes. More recently, another Macworld editor, Dan Frakes, called the procedure of repairing permissions vastly overused. He argues that macOS typically handles permissions properly without user interference, and resetting permissions should only be tried when problems emerge.\nThe architecture of macOS incorporates a layered design:\nthe layered frameworks aid rapid development of applications by providing existing code for common tasks. Apple provides its own software development tools, most prominently an integrated development environment called Xcode. Xcode provides interfaces to compilers that support several programming languages including C, C++, Objective-C, and Swift. For the Mac transition to Intel processors, it was modified so that developers could build their applications as a universal binary, which provides compatibility with both the Intel-based and PowerPC-based Macintosh lines. First and third-party applications can be controlled programmatically using the AppleScript framework, retained from the classic Mac OS, or using the newer Automator application that offers pre-written tasks that do not require programming knowledge.\nSoftware compatibility.\nApple offered two main APIs to develop software natively for macOS: Cocoa and Carbon. Cocoa was a descendant of APIs inherited from OPENSTEP with no ancestry from the classic Mac OS, while Carbon was an adaptation of classic Mac OS APIs, allowing Mac software to be minimally rewritten to run natively on Mac OS X.\nThe Cocoa API was created as the result of a 1993 collaboration between NeXT Computer and Sun Microsystems. This heritage is highly visible for Cocoa developers, since the \"NS\" prefix is ubiquitous in the framework, standing variously for NeXTSTEP or NeXT/Sun. The official OPENSTEP API, published in September 1994, was the first to split the API between Foundation and ApplicationKit and the first to use the \"NS\" prefix. Traditionally, Cocoa programs have been mostly written in Objective-C, with Java as an alternative. However, on July 11, 2005, Apple announced that \"features added to Cocoa in Mac OS X versions later than 10.4 will not be added to the Cocoa-Java programming interface.\" macOS also used to support the Java Platform as a \"preferred software package\"\u2014in practice this means that applications written in Java fit as neatly into the operating system as possible while still being cross-platform compatible, and that graphical user interfaces written in Swing look almost exactly like native Cocoa interfaces. Since 2014, Apple has promoted its new programming language Swift as the preferred language for software development on Apple platforms.\nApple's original plan with macOS was to require all developers to rewrite their software into the Cocoa APIs. This caused much outcry among existing Mac developers, who threatened to abandon the platform rather than invest in a costly rewrite, and the idea was shelved. To permit a smooth transition from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X, the Carbon Application Programming Interface (API) was created. Applications written with Carbon were initially able to run natively on both classic Mac OS and Mac OS X, although this ability was later dropped as Mac OS X developed. Carbon was not included in the first product sold as Mac OS X: the little-used original release of Mac OS X Server 1.0, which also did not include the Aqua interface. Apple limited further development of Carbon from the release of Leopard onwards and announced that Carbon applications would not run at 64-bit. A number of macOS applications continued to use Carbon for some time afterwards, especially ones with heritage dating back to the classic Mac OS and for which updates would be difficult, uneconomic or not necessary. This included Microsoft Office up to Office 2016, and Photoshop up to CS5. Early versions of macOS could also run some classic Mac OS applications through the Classic Environment with performance limitations; this feature was removed from 10.5 onwards and all Macs using Intel processors.\nBecause macOS is POSIX compliant, many software packages written for the other Unix-like systems including Linux can be recompiled to run on it, including many scientific and technical programs. Third-party projects such as Homebrew, Fink, MacPorts and pkgsrc provide pre-compiled or pre-formatted packages. Apple and others have provided versions of the X Window System graphical interface which can allow these applications to run with an approximation of the macOS look-and-feel. The current Apple-endorsed method is the open-source XQuartz project; earlier versions could use the X11 application provided by Apple, or before that the XDarwin project.\nApplications can be distributed to Macs and installed by the user from any source and by any method such as downloading (with or without code signing, available via an Apple developer account) or through the Mac App Store, a marketplace of software maintained by Apple through a process requiring the company's approval. Apps installed through the Mac App Store run within a sandbox, restricting their ability to exchange information with other applications or modify the core operating system and its features. This has been cited as an advantage, by allowing users to install apps with confidence that they should not be able to damage their system, but also as a disadvantage due to blocking the Mac App Store's use for professional applications that require elevated privileges. Applications without any code signature cannot be run by default except from a computer's administrator account.\nApple produces macOS applications. Some are included with macOS and some sold separately. This includes iWork, Final Cut Pro, Logic Pro, iLife, and the database application FileMaker. Numerous other developers also offer software for macOS.\nIn 2018, Apple introduced an application layer, codenamed Marzipan, to port iOS apps to macOS. macOS Mojave included ports of four first-party iOS apps including Home and News, and it was announced that the API would be available for third-party developers to use from 2019. With macOS Catalina in 2019, the application layer was made available to third-party developers as Mac Catalyst.\nHardware compatibility.\nList of macOS versions, the supported systems on which they run, and their RAM requirements\nTools such as XPostFacto and patches applied to the installation media have been developed by third parties to enable installation of newer versions of macOS on systems not officially supported by Apple. This includes a number of pre-G3 Power Macintosh systems that can be made to run up to and including Mac OS X 10.2 Jaguar, all G3-based Macs which can run up to and including Tiger, and sub-867\u00a0MHz G4 Macs can run Leopard by removing the restriction from the installation DVD or entering a command in the Mac's Open Firmware interface to tell the Leopard Installer that it has a clock rate of 867\u00a0MHz or greater. Except for features requiring specific hardware such as graphics acceleration or DVD writing, the operating system offers the same functionality on all supported hardware.\nAs most Mac hardware components, or components similar to those, since the Intel transition are available for purchase, some technology-capable groups have developed software to install macOS on non-Apple computers. These are referred to as Hackintoshes, a portmanteau of the words \"hack\" and \"Macintosh\". This violates Apple's EULA (and is therefore unsupported by Apple technical support, warranties etc.), but communities that cater to personal users, who do not install for resale and profit, have generally been ignored by Apple. These self-made computers allow more flexibility and customization of hardware, but at a cost of leaving the user more responsible for their own machine, such as on matter of data integrity or security. Psystar, a business that attempted to profit from selling macOS on non-Apple certified hardware, was sued by Apple in 2008.\nPowerPC\u2013Intel transition.\nIn April 2002, eWeek announced a rumor that Apple had a version of Mac OS X code-named Marklar, which ran on Intel x86 processors. The idea behind Marklar was to keep Mac OS X running on an alternative platform should Apple become dissatisfied with the progress of the PowerPC platform. These rumors subsided until late in May 2005, when various media outlets, such as \"The Wall Street Journal\" and CNET, announced that Apple would unveil Marklar in the coming months.\nOn June 6, 2005, Steve Jobs announced in his keynote address at WWDC that Apple would be making the transition from PowerPC to Intel processors over the following two years, and that Mac OS X would support both platforms during the transition. Jobs also confirmed rumors that Apple had versions of Mac OS X running on Intel processors for most of its developmental life. Intel-based Macs would run a new recompiled version of OS X along with Rosetta, a binary translation layer which enables software compiled for PowerPC Mac OS X to run on Intel Mac OS X machines. The system was included with Mac OS X versions up to version 10.6.8. Apple dropped support for Classic mode on the new Intel Macs. Third party emulation software such as Mini vMac, Basilisk II and SheepShaver provided support for some early versions of Mac OS. A new version of Xcode and the underlying command-line compilers supported building universal binaries that would run on either architecture.\nPowerPC-only software is supported with Apple's official binary translation software, Rosetta, though applications eventually had to be rewritten to run properly on the newer versions released for Intel processors. Apple initially encouraged developers to produce universal binaries with support for both PowerPC and Intel. PowerPC binaries suffer a performance penalty when run on Intel Macs through Rosetta. Moreover, some PowerPC software, such as kernel extensions and System Preferences plugins, are not supported on Intel Macs at all. Plugins for Safari need to be compiled for the same platform as Safari, so when Safari is running on Intel, it requires plug-ins that have been compiled as Intel-only or universal binaries, so PowerPC-only plug-ins will not work. While Intel Macs can run PowerPC, Intel, and universal binaries, PowerPC Macs support only universal and PowerPC builds.\nSupport for the PowerPC platform was dropped following the transition. In 2009, Apple announced at WWDC that Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard would drop support for PowerPC processors and be Intel-only. Rosetta continued to be offered as an optional download or installation choice in Snow Leopard before it was discontinued with Mac OS X 10.7 Lion. In addition, new versions of Mac OS X first- and third-party software increasingly required Intel processors, including new versions of iLife, iWork, Aperture and Logic Pro.\nIntel\u2013Apple silicon transition.\nRumors of Apple shifting Macs from Intel to in-house ARM processors used by iOS devices began circulating as early as 2011, and ebbed and flowed throughout the 2010s. Rumors intensified in 2020, when numerous reports announced that the company would announce its shift to its custom processors at WWDC.\nApple officially announced its shift to processors designed in-house on June 22, 2020, at WWDC 2020, with the transition planned to last for approximately two years. The first release of macOS to support ARM was macOS Big Sur. Big Sur and later versions support Universal 2 binaries, which are applications consisting of both Intel (x86-64) and Apple silicon (AArch64) binaries; when launched, only the appropriate binary is run. Additionally, Intel binaries can be run on Apple silicon-based Macs using the Rosetta 2 binary translation software. The transition was completed at WWDC 2023 with the announcement of the Apple silicon Mac Pro, ending the transition in 3 years, slightly behind schedule.\nThe change in processor architecture allows Macs with ARM processors to be able to run iOS and iPadOS apps natively.\nFeatures.\nUser interface.\nThe macOS user interface places a menu bar along the top edge of the screen, containing the Apple menu and application menus at the start, and status menus at the end. The Dock is placed along the bottom of the screen by default, and contains icons for pinned and active applications, file and folder shortcuts, minimized windows, and the Trash (or Bin). On most windows, the start of the title bar has three buttons resembling a horizontal traffic light, which respectively close, minimize, and resize the window.\nApple has continued to change aspects of the macOS appearance and design, particularly with tweaks to the appearance of windows and the menu bar. Since 2012, Apple has sold almost all of its Mac models with high-resolution Retina displays, and macOS and its APIs have extensive support for resolution-independent development on supporting high-resolution displays. Reviewers have described Apple's support for the technology as superior to that on Windows.\nThe human interface guidelines published by Apple for macOS are followed by many applications, giving them consistent user interface and keyboard shortcuts. Services available in every Cocoa application include spelling and grammar checkers, special characters palette, color picker, font chooser and dictionary. The graphics system OpenGL composites windows onto the screen to allow hardware-accelerated drawing. This technology, introduced in version 10.2, is called Quartz Extreme, a component of Quartz. Quartz's internal imaging model correlates well with the Portable Document Format (PDF) imaging model, making it easy to output PDF to multiple devices. As a side result, PDF viewing and creating PDF documents from any application are built-in features. Reflecting its popularity with design users, macOS also has system support for a variety of professional video and image formats and includes an extensive pre-installed font library, featuring many prominent brand-name designs.\nAqua.\nA major addition between the classic Mac OS and the first major release of Mac OS X was Aqua, a design language with water-like elements. It was designed to appear lickable. Every window element, text, graphic, or widget was drawn on-screen using spatial anti-aliasing technology. The preexisting ColorSync technology was improved and built into the core drawing engine, to provide color matching for printing and multimedia professionals. Drop shadows were added around windows and isolated text elements to provide a sense of depth. New interface elements were integrated, including sheets (dialog boxes attached to specific windows) and drawers, which would slide out and provide options.\nThe use of soft edges, translucent colors, and pinstripes, similar to the hardware design of the first iMacs, brought more texture and color to the user interface when compared to what Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X Server 1.0's Platinum appearance had offered. According to Siracusa, the introduction of Aqua and its departure from the then conventional look \"hit like a ton of bricks.\"\nBruce Tognazzini (who founded the original Apple Human Interface Group) said that the Aqua interface in Mac OS X 10.0 represented a step backwards in usability compared with the original Mac OS interface.\nThird-party developers started producing skins for customizable applications and other operating systems which mimicked the Aqua appearance. To some extent, Apple has used the successful transition to this design as leverage, at various times threatening legal action against people who make or distribute software with an interface the company says is derived from its copyrighted design.\nFollowing a similar design change in iOS 7, OS X Yosemite shifted to a flat design language, simplifying many of the Aqua elements and icons. In 2025, macOS Tahoe adopted the Liquid Glass design language, which was inspired in part by Aqua.\nBuilt-in components.\nThe Finder is a file browser allowing quick access to all areas of the computer, which has been modified throughout subsequent releases of macOS. Quick Look has been part of the Finder since version 10.5. It allows for dynamic previews of files, including videos and multi-page documents without opening any other applications. Spotlight, a file searching technology which has been integrated into the Finder since version 10.4, allows rapid real-time searches of data files; mail messages; photos; and other information based on item properties (metadata) or content.\nApple added Expos\u00e9 in version 10.3 (called Mission Control since version 10.7), a feature which includes three functions to help accessibility between windows and desktop. Its functions are to instantly reveal all open windows as thumbnails for easy navigation to different tasks, display all open windows as thumbnails from the current application, and hide all windows to access the desktop. FileVault is optional encryption of the user's files with the 128-bit Advanced Encryption Standard (AES-128).\nFeatures introduced in version 10.4 include Automator, an application designed to create an automatic workflow for different tasks; Dashboard, a full-screen group of small applications called desktop widgets that can be called up and dismissed in one keystroke; and Front Row, a media viewer interface accessed by the Apple Remote. Sync Services allows applications to access a centralized extensible database for various elements of user data, including calendar and contact items. The operating system then managed conflicting edits and data consistency.\nAll system icons are scalable up to 512\u00d7512 pixels as of version 10.5 to accommodate various places where they appear in larger size, including for example the Cover Flow view, a three-dimensional graphical user interface included with iTunes, the Finder, and other Apple products for visually skimming through files and digital media libraries via cover artwork. That version also introduced Spaces, a virtual desktop implementation which enables the user to have more than one desktop and display them in an Expos\u00e9-like interface; an automatic backup technology called Time Machine, which allows users to view and restore previous versions of files and application data; and Screen Sharing was built in for the first time.\nApple has developed support for emoji characters by including the proprietary Apple Color Emoji font. Apple has also connected macOS with social networks such as Twitter and Facebook through the addition of share buttons for content such as pictures and text. Apple has brought several applications and features that originally debuted in iOS, its mobile operating system, to macOS, notably the intelligent personal assistant Siri, which was introduced in version 10.12 of macOS.\nMultilingual support.\nThere are 47 system languages available in macOS for the user at the moment of installation; the system language is used throughout the entire operating system environment. Input methods for typing in dozens of scripts can be chosen independently of the system language. Updates have added increased support for Chinese characters and interconnections with popular social networks in China.\nUpdating methods.\nmacOS can be updated using the Software Update settings pane in System Settings or the codice_1 command line utility. Until OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion, a separate Software Update application performed this functionality. In Mountain Lion and later, this was merged into the Mac App Store application, although the underlying update mechanism remains unchanged and is fundamentally different from the download mechanism used when purchasing an App Store application. In macOS 10.14 Mojave, the updating function was moved again to the Software Update settings pane.\nMost Macs receive six or seven years of macOS updates. After a new major release of macOS, the previous two releases still receive occasional updates, but many security vulnerabilities are only patched in the latest macOS release.\nRelease history.\nTimeline of versions\nMac OS X versions were named after big cats, with the exception of Mac OS X Server 1.0 and the original public beta, from Mac OS X 10.0 until OS X 10.9 Mavericks, when Apple switched to using California locations. Prior to its release, version 10.0 was code named internally at Apple as \"Cheetah\", and Mac OS X 10.1 was code named internally as \"Puma\". After the immense buzz surrounding Mac OS X 10.2, codenamed \"Jaguar\", Apple's product marketing began openly using the code names to promote the operating system. Mac OS X 10.3 was marketed as \"Panther\", Mac OS X 10.4 as \"Tiger\", Mac OS X 10.5 as \"Leopard\", Mac OS X 10.6 as \"Snow Leopard\", Mac OS X 10.7 as \"Lion\", OS X 10.8 as \"Mountain Lion\", and OS X 10.9 as \"Mavericks\".\n\"Panther\", \"Tiger\" and \"Leopard\" are registered as trademarks of Apple, but \"Cheetah\", \"Puma\" and \"Jaguar\" have never been registered. Apple has also registered \"Lynx\" and \"Cougar\" as trademarks, though these were allowed to lapse. Computer retailer Tiger Direct sued Apple for its use of the name \"Tiger\". On May 16, 2005, a US federal court in the Southern District of Florida ruled that Apple's use did not infringe on Tiger Direct's trademark.\nMac OS X Public Beta.\nOn September 13, 2000, Apple released a US$29.95 \"preview\" version of Mac OS X, internally codenamed Kodiak, to gain feedback from users.\nThe \"PB\", as it was known, marked the first public availability of the Aqua interface and Apple made many changes to the UI based on customer feedback. Mac OS X Public Beta expired and ceased to function in Spring 2001.\nMac OS X 10.0.\nOn March 24, 2001, Apple released Mac OS X 10.0 (internally codenamed Cheetah).\nThe initial version was slow, incomplete, and had very few applications available at launch, mostly from independent developers. While many critics suggested that the operating system was not ready for mainstream adoption, they recognized the importance of its initial launch as a base on which to improve. Simply releasing Mac OS X was received by the Macintosh community as a great accomplishment, for attempts to overhaul the Mac OS had been underway since 1996, and delayed by countless setbacks.\nMac OS X 10.1.\nLater that year, on September 25, 2001, Mac OS X 10.1 (internally codenamed Puma) was released. It featured increased performance and provided missing features, such as DVD playback. Apple released 10.1 as a free upgrade CD for 10.0 users, in addition to the $129 boxed version for people running Mac OS 9. It was discovered that the upgrade CDs were full install CDs that could be used with Mac OS 9 systems by removing a specific file; Apple later re-released the CDs in an actual stripped-down format that did not facilitate installation on such systems. On January 7, 2002, Apple announced that Mac OS X was to be the default operating system for all Macintosh products by the end of that month.\nMac OS X 10.2 Jaguar.\nOn August 23, 2002, Apple followed up with Mac OS X 10.2 Jaguar, the first release to use its code name as part of the branding.\nIt brought significant performance improvements, and an updated version of Aqua's visual design. Jaguar also included over 150 new user-facing features, including Quartz Extreme for compositing graphics directly on an ATI Radeon or Nvidia GeForce2 MX AGP-based video card with at least 16\u00a0MB of VRAM, a system-wide repository for contact information in the new Address Book, and the iChat instant messaging client. The Happy Mac icon \u2014 which had appeared during the Mac OS startup sequence since the original Macintosh \u2014 was replaced with a grey Apple logo.\nMac OS X 10.3 Panther.\nMac OS X v10.3 Panther was released on October 24, 2003. It significantly improved performance and incorporated the most extensive update yet to the user interface. Panther included as many or more new features as Jaguar had the year before, including an updated Finder, incorporating a brushed-metal interface, Fast user switching, Expos\u00e9 (Window manager), FileVault, Safari, iChat AV (which added video conferencing features to iChat), improved Portable Document Format (PDF) rendering and much greater Microsoft Windows interoperability. Support for some early G3 computers such as \"beige\" Power Macs and \"WallStreet\" PowerBooks was discontinued.\nMac OS X 10.4 Tiger.\nMac OS X 10.4 Tiger was released on April 29, 2005. Apple stated that Tiger contained more than 200 new features. As with Panther, certain older machines were no longer supported; Tiger requires a Mac with 256\u00a0MB and a built-in FireWire port. Among the new features, Tiger introduced Spotlight, Dashboard, Smart Folders, updated Mail program with Smart Mailboxes, QuickTime 7, Safari 2, Automator, VoiceOver, Core Image and Core Video. The initial release of the Apple TV used a modified version of Tiger with a different graphical interface and fewer applications and services. On January 10, 2006, Apple released the first Intel-based Macs along with the 10.4.4 update to Tiger. This operating system functioned identically on the PowerPC-based Macs and the new Intel-based machines, with the exception of the Intel release lacking support for the Classic environment.\nMac OS X 10.5 Leopard.\nMac OS X 10.5 Leopard was released on October 26, 2007. It was called by Apple \"the largest update of Mac OS X\". It brought more than 300 new features. Leopard supports both PowerPC- and Intel x86-based Macintosh computers; support for the G3 processor was dropped and the G4 processor required a minimum clock rate of 867\u00a0MHz, and at least 512\u00a0MB of RAM to be installed. The single DVD works for all supported Macs (including 64-bit machines). New features include a new look, an updated Finder, Time Machine, Spaces, Boot Camp pre-installed, full support for 64-bit applications (including graphical applications), new features in Mail and iChat, and a number of new security features. Leopard is an Open Brand UNIX 03 registered product on the Intel platform. It was also the first BSD-based OS to receive UNIX 03 certification. Leopard dropped support for the Classic Environment and all Classic applications. It was the final version of Mac OS X to support the PowerPC architecture.\nMac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard.\nMac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard was released on August 28, 2009. Rather than delivering big changes to the appearance and end user functionality like the previous releases of Mac OS X, Snow Leopard focused on \"under the hood\" changes, increasing the performance, efficiency, and stability of the operating system. For most users, the most noticeable changes were: the disk space that the operating system frees up after a clean install compared to Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard, a more responsive Finder rewritten in Cocoa, faster Time Machine backups, more reliable and user-friendly disk ejects, a more powerful version of the Preview application, as well as a faster Safari web browser. Snow Leopard only supported machines with Intel CPUs, required at least 1\u00a0GB of RAM, and dropped default support for applications built for the PowerPC architecture (Rosetta could be installed as an additional component to retain support for PowerPC-only applications).\nSnow Leopard also featured new 64-bit technology capable of supporting greater amounts of RAM, improved support for multi-core processors through Grand Central Dispatch, and advanced GPU performance with OpenCL.\nThe 10.6.6 update introduced support for the Mac App Store, Apple's digital distribution platform for macOS applications.\nOS X 10.7 Lion.\nOS X 10.7 Lion was released on July 20, 2011. It brought developments made in Apple's iOS, such as an easily navigable display of installed applications called Launchpad and a greater use of multi-touch gestures, to the Mac. This release removed Rosetta, making it incompatible with PowerPC applications.\nChanges made to the GUI include auto-hiding scrollbars that only appear when they are used, and Mission Control which unifies Expos\u00e9, Spaces, Dashboard, and full-screen applications within a single interface. Apple also made changes to applications: they resume in the same state as they were before they were closed, similar to iOS. Documents auto-save by default.\nOS X 10.8 Mountain Lion.\nOS X 10.8 Mountain Lion was released on July 25, 2012. Following the release of Lion the previous year, it was the first of the annual rather than two-yearly updates to OS X (and later macOS), which also closely aligned with the annual iOS operating system updates. It incorporates some features seen in iOS 5, which include Game Center, support for iMessage in the new Messages messaging application, and Reminders as a to-do list app separate from iCal (which is renamed as Calendar, like the iOS app). It also includes support for storing iWork documents in iCloud. Notification Center, which makes its debut in Mountain Lion, is a desktop version similar to the one in iOS 5.0 and higher. Application pop-ups are now concentrated on the corner of the screen, and the Center itself is pulled from the right side of the screen. Mountain Lion also includes more Chinese features including support for Baidu as an option for Safari search engine, QQ, 163.com and 126.com services for Mail, Contacts and Calendar, Youku, Tudou and Sina Weibo are integrated into share sheets.\nStarting with Mountain Lion, Apple software updates (including the OS) are distributed via the App Store. This updating mechanism replaced the Apple Software Update utility.\nOS X 10.9 Mavericks.\nOS X 10.9 Mavericks was released on October 22, 2013. It was a free upgrade to all users running Snow Leopard or later with a 64-bit Intel processor. Its changes include the addition of the previously iOS-only Maps and iBooks applications, improvements to the Notification Center, enhancements to several applications, and many under-the-hood improvements.\nOS X 10.10 Yosemite.\nOS X 10.10 Yosemite was released on October 16, 2014. It features a redesigned user interface similar to that of iOS 7, intended to feature a more minimal, text-based 'flat' design, with use of translucency effects and intensely saturated colors. Apple's showcase new feature in Yosemite is Handoff, which enables users with iPhones running iOS 8.1 or later to answer phone calls, receive and send SMS messages, and complete unfinished iPhone emails on their Mac. As of OS X 10.10.3, Photos replaced iPhoto and Aperture.\nOS X 10.11 El Capitan.\nOS X 10.11 El Capitan was released on September 30, 2015. Similar to Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard, Apple described this release as emphasizing \"refinements to the Mac experience\" and \"improvements to system performance\". Refinements include public transport built into the Maps application, GUI improvements to the Notes application, adopting San Francisco as the system font for clearer legibility, and the introduction of System Integrity Protection.\nThe Metal API, first introduced in iOS 8, was also included in this operating system for \"all Macs since 2012\". According to Apple, Metal accelerates system-level rendering by up to 50 percent, resulting in faster graphics performance for everyday apps. Metal also delivers up to 10 times faster draw call performance for more fluid experience in games and pro apps.\nmacOS 10.12 Sierra.\nmacOS 10.12 Sierra was released to the public on September 20, 2016. New features include the addition of Siri, Optimized Storage, and updates to Photos, Messages, and iTunes.\nmacOS 10.13 High Sierra.\nmacOS 10.13 High Sierra was released to the public on September 25, 2017. Like OS X El Capitan and OS X Mountain Lion, High Sierra is a refinement-based update having very few new features visible to the user, including updates to Safari, Photos, and Mail, among other changes.\nThe major change under the hood is the switch to the Apple File System, optimized for the solid-state storage used in most new Mac computers.\nmacOS 10.14 Mojave.\nmacOS 10.14 Mojave was released on September 24, 2018. The update introduced a system-wide dark mode and several new apps lifted from iOS, such as Apple News. It was the first version to require a GPU that supports Metal. Mojave also changed the system software update mechanism from the App Store (where it had been since OS X Mountain Lion) to a new panel in System Preferences. App updates remain in the App Store.\nmacOS 10.15 Catalina.\nmacOS 10.15 Catalina was released on October 7, 2019. Updates included enhanced voice control, and bundled apps for music, video, and podcasts that together replace the functions of iTunes, and the ability to use an iPad as an external monitor. Catalina officially dropped support for 32-bit applications.\nmacOS 11 Big Sur.\nmacOS Big Sur was announced during the WWDC keynote speech on June 22, 2020, and it was made available to the general public on November 12, 2020. This is the first time the major version number of the operating system has been incremented since the Mac OS X Public Beta in 2000. It brings Arm support, new icons, and aesthetic user interface changes to the system.\nmacOS 12 Monterey.\nmacOS Monterey was announced during the WWDC keynote speech on June 7, 2021, and released on October 25, 2021, introducing Universal Control (which allows input devices to be used with multiple devices simultaneously), Focus modes (which allows selectively limiting notifications and alerts depending on user-defined user/work modes), Shortcuts (a task automation framework previously only available on iOS and iPadOS expected to replace Automator), a redesigned Safari Web browser, and updates and improvements to FaceTime.\nmacOS 13 Ventura.\nmacOS Ventura was announced during the WWDC keynote speech on June 6, 2022 and released on October 24, 2022. It came with the redesigned System Preferences (named System Settings) to a more iOS-like design, and the new Freeform, Weather and Clock apps that run natively on Mac. Users can use an iPhone as a webcam for video conferencing with Continuity Camera. Siri's appearance was changed to look more like the versions on iOS 14 and iPadOS 14. Mail introduced schedule send and undo send for emails, and Message also got the ability to undo send and edit messages. Stage Manager was introduced as a new way to organize all open windows in a desktop. Maps gained the feature for multiple-stop routes, Metal 3 was added with support for spatial and temporal image upscaling, Lockdown mode was added to reduce the risk of a cyberattack, and the ability to play ambient background sounds was added as an accessibility feature in System Settings.\nmacOS 14 Sonoma.\nmacOS Sonoma was announced during the WWDC keynote speech on June 5, 2023, and released on September 26, 2023. macOS Sonoma revamped widgets\u2014they can now be placed anywhere on the desktop. Game mode optimizes game performance by prioritizing gaming tasks and allocating more GPU and CPU capacity to the game, and by doing so is able to provide smoother frame rates for gameplay. The Spotlight Search bar and all app icons were made even more rounded, smoother animations were implemented for notifications and the lock screen, and new slow-motion screensavers of different locations worldwide were added. When logged in, they gradually slow down and become the desktop wallpaper.\nmacOS 15 Sequoia.\nmacOS Sequoia was announced during the WWDC keynote speech on June 10, 2024. It adds support for Apple Intelligence features (for example a redesigned Siri, writing tools, Image Playground, Genmoji, and system-wide integration with GPT-4o), as well as adding iPhone Mirroring, a new dedicated Passwords app for faster autofilling and more organized passwords, and window tiling\u2014a similar feature to Microsoft Windows' Aero Snap window snapping feature.\nmacOS 26 Tahoe.\nmacOS Tahoe was announced on June 9, 2025, during the WWDC 2025 keynote address. It is the first macOS to feature the new Liquid Glass design. It is also the first macOS to use Apple's new release number convention, which gives all of Apple's operating systems the same version number. It was released on September 15, 2025.\nSecurity.\nApple publishes Apple Platform Security documents to lay out the security protections built into macOS and Mac hardware.\nmacOS supports additional hardware-based security features on Apple silicon Macs:\nmacOS's optional Lockdown Mode enables additional protections, such as disabling just-in-time compilation for Safari's JavaScript engine, blocks FaceTime calls unless you have previously called that person or contact, location information is excluded when photos are being shared, Game Center is disabled, and accessories have to be approved and your Mac has to be unlocked. These prevent some vulnerabilities within macOS.\nOnly the latest major release of macOS (currently macOS Tahoe) receives patches for all known security vulnerabilities. The previous two releases receive some security updates, but not for all vulnerabilities known to Apple. In 2021, Apple fixed a critical privilege escalation vulnerability in macOS Big Sur, but a fix remained unavailable for the previous release, macOS Catalina, for 234 days, until Apple was informed that the vulnerability was being used to infect the computers of Hong Kong citizens and other people who visited Hong Kong pro-democracy websites that may have been blocked in Hong Kong.\nmacOS Ventura added support for Rapid Security Response (RSR) updates and Lockdown Mode. Rapid Security Response updates may require a reboot, but take less than a minute to install. In an analysis, Hackintosh developer Mykola Grymalyuk noted that RSR updates can only fix userland vulnerabilities, and cannot patch the macOS kernel. Lockdown Mode is an optional security feature designed to provide extreme protection for users who may be at risk of targeted cyberattacks, such as journalists, activists, and public figures. This mode significantly alters the functionality of the device to enhance security against sophisticated threats, particularly from spyware and state-sponsored attacks. Apple says most people are never impacted by these attacks.\nMalware and spyware.\nIn its earlier years, Mac OS X enjoyed a near-absence of the types of malware and spyware that have affected Microsoft Windows users. macOS has a smaller usage share compared to Windows. Worms, as well as potential vulnerabilities, were noted in 2006, which led some industry analysts and anti-virus companies to issue warnings that Apple's Mac OS X is not immune to malware. Increasing market share coincided with additional reports of a variety of attacks. In early 2011, Mac OS X experienced a large increase in malware attacks, and malware such as Mac Defender, MacProtector, and MacGuard was seen as an increasing problem for Mac users. At first, the malware installer required the user to enter the administrative password, but later versions installed without user input. Initially, Apple support staff were instructed not to assist in the removal of the malware or admit the existence of the malware issue, but as the malware spread, a support document was issued. Apple announced an OS X update to fix the problem. An estimated 100,000 users were affected. Apple releases security updates for macOS regularly, as well as signature files containing malware signatures for Xprotect, an anti-malware feature part of File Quarantine present since Mac OS X Snow Leopard.\nReception.\nUsage share.\nAs of \u00a02023[ [update]], macOS is the second-most widely used general-purpose desktop operating system used on the World Wide Web following Microsoft Windows, with a 15.33% usage share, according to statistics compiled by StatCounter.\nPromotion.\nAs a device company, Apple has mostly promoted macOS to sell Macs, with promotion of macOS updates focused on existing users, promotion at Apple Store and other retail partners, or through events for developers. In larger scale advertising campaigns, Apple specifically promoted macOS as better for handling media and other home-user applications, and comparing Mac OS X (especially versions Tiger and Leopard) with the heavy criticism Microsoft received for the long-awaited Windows Vista operating system.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20642", "revid": "51019143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20642", "title": "Mattel", "text": "American multinational toy manufacturing and entertainment company\nMattel, Inc. ( ), previously known as Mattel Creations, is an American multinational toy manufacturing and entertainment company headquartered in El Segundo, California. Founded in Los Angeles by Harold Matson and husband-and-wife duo Ruth and Elliot Handler in January 1945, Mattel has a presence in 35 countries and territories. Its products are sold in more than 150 countries.\nIt is the world's second largest toy maker in terms of revenue, after the Lego Group. Two of its historic and most valuable brands, Barbie and Hot Wheels, were respectively named the top global toy property and the top-selling global toy of the year for 2020 and 2021 by the NPD Group, a global information research company.\nHistory.\nOrigins and early years.\nBusinessman Harold \"Matt\" Matson and the husband-and-wife duo of Ruth and Elliot Handler founded Mattel initially as Mattel Creations on January 20, 1945, in a garage in Los Angeles. The company name chosen is a portmanteau of the surname of Matson and first name of Elliot. Former chairman and CEO Bob Eckert revealed at a 2013 Christmas Day Peninsula Seniors lecture that the founders, according to Elliot, could not fit Ruth's name into that of their company. The company began selling picture frames and later dollhouse furniture out of the scraps from those frames. Matson sold his share and stake to the Handlers the following year due to poor health, with Ruth Handler taking over his stake. In 1947, the company had its first successful toy, a ukulele called \"Uke-A-Doodle\".\nThe company was incorporated in Hawthorne, California, in 1948. In 1950, the Magic 8 Ball, currently owned by Mattel themselves, was invented by Albert C. Carter and Abe Bookman. Mattel started advertising on television when it became the first sponsor of the \"Mickey Mouse Club\" TV series. The Fisher-Price Corn Popper and the Xylophone were released in 1957. Mattel would ultimately acquire Fisher-Price on August 20, 1993. The Barbie doll debuted on March 9, 1959, going on to become the company's best-selling toy in history. In 1960, Mattel introduced Chatty Cathy, a talking doll that was voiced by June Foray and revolutionized the toy industry, leading to pull-string talking dolls and toys flooding the market throughout the 1960s and 1970s. In 1961, Mattel introduced the Ken doll. The company went public in 1960 and became listed on the New York Stock Exchange three years later. Mattel also acquired several like-minded companies during the 1960s.\nThe \"Barbie Dreamhouse,\" made with cardboard and paper, made its debut in 1962. At the same time, the Astronaut Barbie, the first of many space-themed iterations of the doll, was introduced. In 1965, the company built on its success with the Chatty Cathy doll to introduce the See 'n Say talking toy, spawning a line of products. Barbie traveled to the Moon four years before Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin. In 1967, Mattel released a toy astronaut with space vehicles and a Moon base for boys, with a gumby-like central character named Major Matt Mason.\nOn May 18, 1968, \"Hot Wheels\" was released to the market. Hot Wheels was invented by a team of Mattel inventors, which included a rocket scientist and a car designer. That year also saw another doll release, this time, Christie, Barbie's friend and the first black doll, which in the following years and decades would spawn an endless line of Barbie-themed and branded family and friends. In 1969, Mattel changed the \"Mattel Creations\" and the \"Mattel, Inc. \u2013 Toymakers\" marketing brands to just \"Mattel\" and launched the \"red sun\" logo with the \"Mattel\" wordmark in all capitals for a better identity. In 1970, Hot Wheels forged a sponsorship agreement with drag racing drivers Don \"The Snake\" Prudhomme and Tom \"The Mongoose\" McEwen. In addition to other marketing measures, the two racers' cars, a yellow Barracuda and a red Duster, were reproduced as Hot Wheels toys.\nIn May 1970, Mattel formed a joint venture film production company \"Radnitz/Mattel Productions\" with producer Robert B. Radnitz, which would kickstart Mattel's venture into full-time entertainment to accompany its most famed toy TV commercials, and later entered a multimillion-dollar partnership with Mehra Entertainment, whose CEO, Dr. Nishpeksh Padmamohan Mehra and Dr. Nishchal Shome, are Mattel's Inc.'s main directors for Barbie (film series).\nThe card game Uno (now stylized as UNO) was invented by Merle Robbins in 1971, and was acquired by Mattel in 1996.\nIn 1971, Mattel purchased The Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus from the Feld family for $40 million, whom Mattel kept on as management. Mattel sold the circus corporation by December 1973 although it was profitable; Mattel showed a $29.9 million loss in 1972.\nIn 1974, an investigation found Mattel guilty of issuing false and misleading financial reports, which led to the banishment of Elliot and Ruth Handler from the company they had founded.\nPost-Handlers.\nArthur S. Spear, then a Mattel vice president, took control of the company in 1975 and returned the company to profitability in two years. In 1978, the Mattel Children's Foundation was founded. Ruth Handler sold her stock in 1980 and finally let go of the company she co-founded.\nMattel debuted its Electronics line in 1977 with an all-electronic handheld game. Its success led to its expansion with game consoles, and then the line was eventually incorporated in 1982. Mattel Electronics caused Mattel to take a $394 million loss the following year and almost file for bankruptcy.\nIn 1979, through Feld Productions, Mattel purchased the Holiday on Ice and Ice Follies for $12 million, Also acquired that year was Western Publishing for $120 million in cash and stock. which they sold to Richard A. Bernstein on December four years later.\nIn 1980, Mattel introduced the first diverse line of Barbie dolls with a Hispanic doll and the first African-American Barbie (unrelated to Barbie friend Christie), which will eventually include iterations of Barbie from more than 40 countries.\nIn 1982, He-Man and the \"Masters of the Universe\" line of action figures were released, which inspired a three-issue comic book mini-series, an animated series, and a live-action film.\nThe Felds bought the circus (and related companies) in 1982 for $22.8 million.\nIn the early 1980s, Mattel produced video game systems, under its brands and license from Nintendo.\nIn 1985, the company launched the Barbie \u201cWe Girls Can Do Anything\u201d TV advertising campaign to encourage girls to believe in themselves. They also released the CEO / Day-to-Night Barbie to celebrate women becoming CEOs. In 1986, Barbie joined the list of famous individuals painted by Andy Warhol.\nNew York City-based venture capital firms E.M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Co., and Drexel Burnham Lambert invested a couple of hundred million dollars in Mattel in 1984 to help the company survive. However, the \"Masters of the Universe\" action figure line sales dropped, causing a decrease in revenue in 1987.\nIn the late 1980s, John W. Amerman, who joined Mattel in 1980 as head of its international division, was named the company's new chairman and improved its financial performance in 1987 by focusing on core brands. It paid off as sales of Barbie dolls and accessories increased from $430 million to almost $1 billion between 1987 and 1992.\nMattel secured licensing and sponsorship rights from The Walt Disney Company for a new line of infant and preschool plush toys in 1988, to sponsor attractions and to develop and sell toys at three Disney theme parks. Mattel also negotiated the exclusive rights to sell dolls, stuffed characters and preschool toys based on Disney characters. On January 31, 1988, Mattel shut down its operations in the Philippines and shifted the distribution and sales of Mattel-branded toys and games to Richprime Global, Inc. (formerly Richwell Trading Corporation). Mattel returned to working with Disney the following year.\nIn 1991, Mattel moved its headquarters from Hawthorne to its current El Segundo site, in Los Angeles County.\nUno, Fisher-Price, American Girl, Polly Pocket: 1992\u20132009.\nIn 1992, Mattel created the first President Barbie, claiming that Barbie has run for president seven times since 1992 and released an all-ticket in 2016.\nOn October 8, 1992, Mattel opened its first production factory in Indonesia at Jababeka Industrial Park, Cikarang, West Java as the west plant, and expanded by opening the new plant in 1997, as the east plant. The west plant is now the main factory of Hot Wheels 5-car pack edition, and the east plant is now the main factory of Barbie dolls.\nMattel entered the gaming business in 1992 with the purchase of International Games, creators of UNO and Skip-Bo. The company purchased Fisher-Price, Inc. on August 20, 1993, and Tyco Toys, Inc. (owners of the Matchbox and Dinky Toys brands) in 1997. In 1998, Mattel acquired Pleasant Company (creators of the American Girl brand) and Swindon, England-based toymaker Bluebird Toys (along with its most prized property, \"Polly Pocket\"). In the same year, the first American Girl retail store opened for business in Chicago.\nIn 1997, the Fisher-Price Little People toys underwent a redesign to look more like real kids with different skin colors, added arms and hands, and greater detail on the face, hair, and clothes. Also that year, Mattel acquired View-Master, and Hot Wheels partnered with NASCAR drivers Kyle Petty and Jack Baldwin leading to the production of the first NASCAR-themed vehicles.\nIn 1998, Mattel donated $25 million to help rebuild UCLA's children's hospital, which was later renamed the UCLA Mattel Children's Hospital. Barbie was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame that year and the first \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" theme park, Thomas Land, opened in Fujikyu Park in Japan.\nMattel purchased The Learning Company (formerly SoftKey) in 1999 for $3.5 billion, but sold it the following year at a loss. The company had a $430.9 million net loss that year.\nMattel earned the first grant for the Disney Princess doll license in 2000. In December 2000, Mattel sued Danish-Norwegian Europop band Aqua, claiming their song \"Barbie Girl\" violated the Barbie trademark and turned her into a sex object, referring to her as a \"blonde bimbo\". The lawsuit was rejected two years later.\nIn 2000, Mattel signed a deal with Warner Bros. to become the master licensee for Harry Potter branded toys. It was extended in 2002; Mattel became the master licensee for Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, the Flash, Justice League and Looney Tunes toys for all markets except Asia.\nIn 2001, the first life-sized Hot Wheels car, the Twin Mill, was created. More than twenty life-sized cars were created, and all of them were inducted into the Hot Wheels Garage of Legends.\nAmerican Girl launched its \u201cGirl of the Year\u201d campaign in 2001 to highlight dolls with contemporary stories; each doll is only available for a year.\nIn 2002, the company closed its last factory in the United States; the factory was originally part of Fisher-Price outsourcing production to China. The Mattel factory in China is the same as Miniso-Mattel collaborations products that are made in. A chain of events followed that led to its distribution of millions of hazardous toys, including ones contaminated with lead. On August 14, 2007, Mattel recalled over 18 million products, with Louise Story of \"The New York Times\" in close coverage. Many of the products had surface coatings that contained more than the U.S. legal limit of .06% lead by weight. Other toys were recalled because their strong, detachable magnets could endanger children. Mattel re-wrote its policy on magnets, finally issuing a recall in August 2007. The recall included 7.1 million Polly Pocket toys produced before November 2006, 600,000 Barbie and Tanner Playsets, 1 million Doggie Daycare, Shonen Jump's One Piece and thousands of Batman Manga toys due to exposed magnets. In 2009, Mattel paid a $2.3 million fine to the Consumer Products Safety Commission for marketing, importing, and selling non-compliant toys. Mattel was noted for its crisis response by several newspaper publications, including \"PRWeek\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"Fortune\" and Business Management.\nOn September 13, 2009, Mattel's ticker symbol moved from the NYSE to the NASDAQ Global Select Market (NASDAQ-GS large cap).\nMore acquisitions and brand portfolio expansion: 2010\u20132016.\nAt the end of 2009, Mattel signed a global licensing agreement with WWE to produce action figures and playsets along with props like championship belts and masks, taking over from Jakks Pacific. The first line was introduced in January 2010. Having developed a diverse portfolio of toys in more than 50 global markets and consistently ranked as the No. 1 action figure property in the United States, Mattel launched multiple collaborations such as WWE and \"Ghostbusters\" and WWE and \"Masters of the Universe\".\nThe partnership deal was extended multiple times, most recently in 2025.\nOn June 11, 2010, Mattel launched Monster High, a fashion doll line featuring the teenage children of famous and well-known monsters like Dracula, Frankenstein, Medusa, Werewolf, and The Mummy. It led to popularity and cult following success which Mattel translated into two spin-offs, each with a different focus than Monster High; \"Ever After High\" in 2013 and \"Enchantimals\" four years later. In 2011, Hot Wheels set a new world-record for a jump made by a four-wheeled vehicle at the 100th anniversary of the Indy 500. The 332 feet jump broke the previous 301 feet record set in 2009.\nOn January 5, 2009, HIT Entertainment named Mattel's Fisher-Price division as its global master toy licensee for its \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" franchise (outside of Japan), replacing RC2 Corporation's Learning Curve brand in the North American market as well as the HIT Toy Company for the TrackMaster range. Mattel then agreed to purchase HIT Entertainment from Apax Partners on October 24, 2011, for $680 million, excluding its share of the PBS Kids Sprout channel (now Universal Kids), which would be completed on February 1, 2012, for \u00a3680m, and be managed under Mattel's Fisher-Price unit. In 2012, Mattel introduced a doll, Ella, to the \"Barbie\" line. The doll is bald and was distributed directly through hospitals to children experiencing hair loss due to cancer and other diseases. On October 16, 2013, with reports of high profitability, Mattel launched an in-house film studio, Mattel Playground Productions, through which it produces original films, TV shows, Web series, live events, and games.\n\"Fortune Magazine\" named Mattel one of the top 100 companies to work for in 2013, noting only 1,292 positions were full, out of 164,045 job applications during the previous year, as well as more than 1,000 employees had been with the company longer than 15 years.\nOn February 28, 2014, Mattel acquired Mega Brands. On April 16, 2015, Mattel announced a partnership with invention platform Quirky to crowd-source several products.\nMattel added a princess-themed Barbie line in 2010. Barbie sales began plummeting in 2012, thus removing focus from the \"Disney Princess\" line. Mattel had only sold Cinderella, Ariel, Belle and the two \"Frozen\" princesses (Anna and Elsa) around its last year of the Disney license in early 2016. With these competing lines and an expiration of the brand license at the end of 2015, Disney gave Hasbro a chance to gain the license given their work on Star Wars, which led to a \"Descendants\" license. Disney Consumer Products also made an attempt to evolve the brand from \"damsels\" to \"heroines.\" In September 2014, Disney announced Hasbro as the licensed doll maker for the Disney Princess line starting on January 1, 2016. Mattel again became the licensed doll maker, instead of Hasbro, in January 2022, and the characters of \"Frozen\" were part of the line. The latest collection of dolls was available for purchase in January 2023.\nIn January 2015, board member Christopher Sinclair replaced CEO Bryan Stockton, following with 2/3 of senior executives resigning or receiving lay off. The following month, an upgraded View-Master to provide a virtual reality viewing experience was announced through a partnership with Google Cardboard.\nOn January 21, 2016, Mattel acquired Fuhu, makers of Nabi tablets and other technology-driven hardware, in a bankruptcy proceeding for a sum worth $21 million. On March 30, 2016, Mattel formed a \"senior head\" division named \"Mattel Creations\" to centralize its multi-platform content output. In the process, the production teams and operations of Mattel Playground Productions, HIT Entertainment, and the American Girl content creation team in Middleton, Wisconsin were absorbed into Creations the following day. On July 19, 2016, NBCUniversal announced Mattel's license acquisition to produce toys based on the \"Jurassic Park\" franchise after Hasbro's rights expired in 2017.\nHasbro's failed takeover and Mattel163: 2017\u20132018.\nFormer Google executive Margo Georgiadis was announced as company CEO on January 17, 2017. On November 10, 2017 \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that Hasbro had made a takeover offer for Mattel, with Hasbro worth about $11 billion at the time and Mattel, $5 billion. The latter rejected the offer less than a week later, according to Reuters.\nOn January 29, 2018, Mattel and Chinese internet technology and video game company NetEase formed a joint venture mobile publishing and development studio, Mattel163, aimed at creating apps based on the former's key brands. That same year, American Girl released \u201cCreate Your Own,\u201d allowing kids to create a doll from scratch and customize everything including facial features, hair, accessories and outfits, and the doll's favorite places and hobbies.\nCompany reorganization and production partnership increments: 2018\u2013present.\nOn April 19, 2018, Mattel named former Maker Studios CEO Ynon Kreiz as chairman and the replacement CEO for outgoing CEO Georgiardis, who moved on to head Ancestry.com, effective from April 26, 2018. Two months later, the company laid off 2,200 employees partially due to the liquidation of Toys \"R\" Us in the U.S. Kreiz started reorganization of Mattel which included new board of directors and added that executives having entertainment backgrounds and a global franchise management group had been charged with finding new opportunities in existing markets.\nOn 30 August 2018, Mattel indicated the formation of its global franchise management division to be headed by Janet Hsu as chief franchise management officer. The division was mandated to seek out new commercial opportunities plus to bring together consumer products, content development and distribution, digital gaming, live events, and partnerships. Hsu was previously the CEO of Saban Brands, where Frederic Soulie last worked before being appointed as senior vice president of content distribution and business development in the franchise division on September 28, 2018. Hot Wheels celebrated its 50th anniversary the same year by recreating and selling as a set the original 16 Hot Wheels die-cast cars. That same year in September, \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" announced an alliance with the United Nations to introduce some of the organization's Sustainable Development Goals, including quality education, gender equality, clean water and sanitation, sustainable cities and communities, responsible consumption and production and life on land, into the show's content.\nOn December 24, 2018, Mattel announced the loss of the DC Comics toy license to Spin Master starting in the spring of 2020, hitting an 18-year low on its share price, which concluded at $9.25 per share.\nMattel reorganized Mattel Creations and renamed it \"Mattel Television\" on February 5, 2019, which would be headed by former Disney Branded Television programming executive Adam Bonnett. On June 30, 2020, Fred Soulie in turn was \"role-tripled\" to general manager and senior vice president of the new division.\nOn March 9, 2019, Mattel celebrated Barbie's 60th anniversary. As part of the anniversary celebrations, Mattel released 20 new \"role model dolls in its Shero\" line to recognize influential women around the world. Mattel donated $1 from every sale to its Dream Gap Project Fund, which aims to work with other organizations to end the issue of girls seeing themselves as less capable than boys.\nOn June 14, 2019, Mattel released a new \"Hot Wheels\" ID line of cars, which are embedded with NFC chips so that people can scan the cars and then build tracks, race, and view race stats for combined digital and physical racing play. On December 16, Mattel released an update that allowed kids to scan their cars into an app and then access different coding exercises. On August 19, 2019, Mattel announced a reboot of \"He-Man and the Masters of the Universe\", including new toy lines and brand extensions, a new comic book series and a Netflix series.\nIn October 2019, Mattel released Hot Wheels Monster Trucks, which included a full line of die-cast vehicles, and a national live-event tour, Hot Wheels Monster Trucks Live. The company also released a line of gender-neutral dolls called the \u201cCreatable World\u201d Mattel Children's Foundation announced and organized its second annual \"Global Day of Play\", a company-wide community service initiative that focuses on working with nonprofits and organizations around the world to give children a day focused on the power of play.\nWhile formerly associated with content productions, as of\u00a02020, Mattel Creations began to operate as an e-commerce and content platform of Mattel, Inc. In April 2020, the company released a \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" special titled \"The Royal Engine\" to celebrate the franchise's 75th anniversary, featuring animated versions of Queen Elizabeth and a young Prince Charles introduced by the Duke of Sussex. In the same month, the new Basquiat Barbie was introduced, featuring the work of the artist Jean-Michel Basquiat. Mattel also created an online resource, \"Mattel Playroom\", to provide free games, activities, coloring sheets, DIY projects resources for parents/caregivers and more to help families during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nWarner Music Group's Arts Music division arranged to become the distributor of Mattel's music catalog on May 1, 2020. Arts Music planned to make available hundreds of never-before-released songs and new songs for existing brands, with the 8th May digital launch of \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" birthday album first up which was managed/handled by ADA Worldwide under the pseudonym label: \"Mattel\u2013Arts Music.\" Also in May 2020, Mattel announced an initiative known as \"Play it Forward\" which focuses on using Mattel brands to give back. The first Play it Forward program was #ThankYouHeroes, which included a collection of action figures and Little People characters who represent those who work essential jobs during the COVID-19 pandemic, like doctors, nurses, emergency medical technician (EMTs) and delivery drivers. On October 15, 2020, Mattel celebrated Fisher-Price's 90th anniversary by creating a virtual Toy Museum, which featured more than 90 different exhibits created by artist, set designer and photographer Leila Fakouri. Mattel Creations was also launched that month; it is an e-commerce and content platform. It features limited edition, curated items made in collaboration with pop-culture artists. The site's inaugural collection included the Artist Collaboration Collection, featuring brands Barbie, \"Masters of the Universe\", Hot Wheels, and the Magic 8 Ball as well as artists Gianni Lee, Cristina Martinez, Travis Ragsdale, and Distortedd.\nOn October 12, 2020, Mattel announced a 25th series of \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" but instead retooled it into a traditionally-animated reboot titled \"\", which began on September 13, 2021. That ended the show at 24 series/seasons over 37 years.\nOn November 20, 2021, Mattel launched a non-fungible tokens (NFTs) marketplace to allow fans purchase digital collectibles for its flagship brands Barbie and Hot Wheels.\nOn April 5, 2022, the Mattel board of directors led by its CEO, Ynon Kreiz, named company chief commercial officer, Steven Totzke, as company co-president with Richard L. Dickson alongside his original post and would continue to report to Kreiz as before.\nOn May 25, 2022, Mattel launched the first-ever transgender Barbie doll, held by Laverne Cox.\nAlso in 2022, Miniso Group Holding Ltd (NYSE:MNSO) began its partnership with Mattel Inc to produce the Barbie-themed collaboration products, and become their official merchandise partner globally. More than 120 variants of Miniso-Mattel collaborations products are officially launched by July 21st 2023 in China and US, coinciding with Barbie The Movie launching celebration. The products are launched both in MINISO flagship store in China and Times Square, and also in Mattel headquarters in El Segundo, California.\nIn April 2023, Mattel introduced a Barbie doll with down syndrome in collaboration with National Down Syndrome Society (NDSS), and continued to expand its Barbie line to include more dolls representing individuals with down syndrome and vision impairments in 2024. This initiative is part of Mattel's ongoing efforts to promote diversity and inclusivity, allowing children to see themselves reflected in their toys. At the same time, Miniso Group Holding Limited acquired several percent of Mattel's shares after successfully releasing the Barbie-themed collaboration products since 2023, as part of the Mattel-Miniso IP partnership, and the acquisition was officially announced at the Barbie 65th anniversary celebration in April 2024 when opening its largest Barbie-themed store in Malaysia.\nIn July 2024, the company was approached by the private equity firm, L Catterton, with a total buyout acquisition offer. The deal was ultimately declined.\nIn November 2024, it was discovered on X (formerly Twitter) that a brand of \"Wicked\" themed dolls produced by the company inadvertently linked to an adult website instead of a similar link to the website for the \"Wicked\" movie. Mattel apologized for the error, and asked parents who had bought products with the incorrect website to destroy the packaging.\nEarlier the same year, a song from the movie, Ariana Grande's version of \"Popular\", was leaked via Mattel-produced singing dolls, causing minor backlash.\nOn June 2, 2025, Mattel announced a combination of its audiovisual divisions, Mattel Films and Mattel Television (alternatively known internally as \"Mattel Television Studios\"), into a successor division named \"Mattel Studios\", which will not only serve both functions, but also discontinue them as separate divisions within the company. This could be seen as a revival of the brand/banner Mattel used occasionally or sparingly between 2011 and 2013 in place of their logo in the end credits for media entries for \"Monster High\", \"Ever After High\" and \"Polly Pocket\". Consequently, productions in development at both Mattel Films and Mattel Television will be absorbed into/transferred to this division. With the announcement, Mattel promoted and transferred the head of their filming division, Mattel Films, Robbie Brenner, to the new division as president and its chief content officer. Mattel Studios also named former Legendary Entertainment executive vice president of television and digital media, Jennifer Breslow, the head of its television section and Darian Lanzetta, a former motion picture literary agent at the Creative Artists Agency (CAA) and Tom McNulty, former principal/president at MC Squared Media as co-heads of its filming section. All three are expected to report to Brenner in the future media decisions of Mattel.\nOn July 8, 2025, Mattel launches the first ever Barbie doll with type-1 diabetes, along with two additional new dolls: Peloton fitness instructor, Robin Arzon from the US and model Lila Moss from the UK.\nIn 2025, Mattel collaborated with Italian fashion brand GCDS on a limited-edition Polly Pocket-inspired collection. On August 14, Mattel launched a One-of-a-Kind Barbie Doll to celebrate its 80th anniversary coinciding with 80th anniversary of the Independence of Indonesia.\nMedia and entertainment ventures.\nMattel has a long history of media engagement since its foundation with the advertising of products from its brands including \"Barbie\", \"Monster High\" and \"Polly Pocket\", but the venture into full-time entertainment began in May, 1970, when it teamed up with producer Robert B. Radnitz to form a joint venture film production company, \"Radnitz/Mattel Productions\". \"Masters of the Universe\" and its lead character He-Man had a cartoon series which released between 1983 and 1985 and was followed by a live-action film in 1987. In 1986, Mattel launched a television syndication unit; \"MTS Entertainment\", headed by John M. Weens, to distribute the \"Captain Power and the Soldiers of the Future\" syndicated television show.\n\"My Scene\", with Mattel's flagship \"Barbie\" brand, launched in 2002 and wasted little time in invoking a film franchise of DVD-exclusive/direct-to-DVD animated films. \"Polly Pocket\", which was originally founded and designed by Chris Wiggs in 1983 for his daughter Kate as a private toy and from 1989 housed in Bluebird Toys, which Mattel acquired in 1998, also followed suit.\nWith Lionsgate and its acquired and merged companies in Artisan Entertainment and Family Home Entertainment, Mattel's flagship Barbie brand was adapted into a series of successful animated direct-to-video films, which moved to Universal in late 2006. As of September 2021 it has been jointly handled by Mill Creek Entertainment and NCircle Entertainment, with the latter solely for American retailers. Monster High followed Barbie just months after its launch in 2010 and many \u201cAmerican Girl\u201d films were made.\nMattel agreed to purchase HIT Entertainment without the stake in the Sprout TV channel (formerly \"PBS Kids Sprout\" and now \"Universal Kids\") from Apax Partners on 25 October 2011, for $680 million, which closed on February 1, 2012, making it part of its Fisher-Price division. HIT Entertainment was absorbed into Mattel Creations (now \"Mattel Television\") in 2016 with its intellectual property (IP) brands shared equally between itself and Mattel Films upon the latter's formation on September 6, 2018.\nOn October 16, 2013, with reports of high profitability, Mattel launched an in-house film studio, Mattel Playground Productions (shortened to Mattel PGP or just PGP) as its in-house film studio to handle multimedia productions and foster creative storytelling for its brands for global multi-platform distribution.\nMattel formed a division named \"Mattel Creations\" on March 30, 2016, to absorb Mattel Playground Productions, HIT Entertainment, and the American Girl content creation team in Middleton, Wisconsin and centralize its multimedia content output. Mattel Playground Productions was revived as Mattel Films on September 6, 2018, and it solely bases its films on its brands as opposed to its predecessor. The 2023 movie \"Barbie\" was the first movie released by Mattel Films. Mattel reorganized Mattel Creations, renaming it to Mattel Television on February 5, 2019, hiring former Disney Branded Television programming executive Adam Bonnett as its head.\nMattel announced it started construction on the Mattel Adventure Park, slated to open in 2024 in Glendale, Arizona. The 9-acre park will include popular Mattel brands, including Barbie, Hot Wheels, \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" and Uno. It will have multiple themed roller coaster rides amongst other attractions.\nMattel announced a new game called \"Pictionary Vs. AI\" in September 2023. It is a version of its visual guessing game where an AI model does all the guessing. A smartphone is used as the medium. Players draw cards that assign a given word, then draw whatever that word is before letting AI guess what they've drawn.\nMattel Digital Gaming.\nMattel has expanded its presence in digital gaming, including video games, mobile games, NFTs, and Web3.\nIn 2017, Mattel and tech startup Osmo launched \"MindRacer\", a Hot Wheels racing game for the iPad.\nThe first game to be released, \"UNO!\", originally launched for Facebook Instant Games and was later available for iOS and Android.\nOther mobile and video games include:\nHot Wheels.\nIn September 2021, Mattel and Milestone released \"Hot Wheels Unleashed\" on PC, PS4, PS5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X|S, and Nintendo Switch. In the arcade-style racing game, based on the \"Hot Wheels\" toyline, players race customizable Hot Wheels cars in everyday settings like kitchens and bedrooms. Players had the opportunity to submit their car designs in the \u201cHot Wheels Unleashed Design Battle,\u201d and the winning design was used to create a Hot Wheels toy available for purchase in December 2022. The contest ran between January, 2022 and February 2022, and more than 10,000 livery designs for the Hot Wheels Rodger Dodger die-cast model were submitted using the in-game Livery Editor. The winning Rodger Dodger was transformed into a real Hot Wheels toy made available for purchase globally in December 2022.\nIn June 2022, Hot Wheels partnered with the \"Forza Horizon 5\" video game to reveal a Hot Wheels expansion pack in-game.\n\"He-Man and the Masters of the Universe\".\nIn April 2022, Mattel launched a new game on Roblox inspired by the \"He-Man and the Masters of the Universe\" toy line and Netflix Series. Developed by Gamefan, \"He-Man and the Masters of the Universe: You have the Power\" is a player-versus-player (PvP) battle-style game available through Roblox on Xbox One, PC and mobile devices. In December 2022, Mattel made three \"Masters of the Universe\" characters available for purchase on Rec Room, a virtual reality multiplayer online game. For a limited time in November 2022, \"Masters of the Universe\" characters joined \"Fall Guys\" a free battle royale-style game on Nintendo Switch, PlayStation, Xbox, and PC. Mattel and video game developer Mediatonic later released Masters of the Universe figurines in the style of \"Fall Guys.\"\n\"Minecraft\".\nIn January 2023, Mattel, Mojang Studios, and Cyclone Designs released the \"Minecraft Creator Series Camp Enderwood\" DLC map, in addition to the new \"Minecraft\" toy line released the previous year. In \"Camp Enderwood\", a free download from the Minecraft Marketplace, players engage in a summer camp experience with activities like fishing and hiking.\nBarbie and Polly Pocket.\nIn September 2022, Mattel's Barbie and Polly Pocket characters became available on Roblox's \"Livetopia\", an open-ended role-playing video game. Players also had the chance to explore Barbie's Dreamhouse, in honor of the toy's 60th anniversary. It was announced that a Barbie-themed game called Barbie DreamHouse Tycoon will be coming to Roblox. Players can customize their characters and houses, and they can play career-themed games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20644", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20644", "title": "Mods", "text": ""}
{"id": "20645", "revid": "16078769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20645", "title": "The Medallions", "text": "American doo-wop vocal group\nThe Medallions were an American doo-wop vocal group led by Vernon Green (1937\u20132000).\nHistory.\nFormation.\nThe group formed in Los Angeles, California, United States, in 1954, after Vernon Green was heard singing on the street by Walter \"Dootsie\" Williams, the owner of Dootone Records. Green \u2013 who walked with a cane as a result of childhood polio \u2013 put together a singing group with three friends from Fremont High School, Andrew Blue (tenor), Randolph Bryant (baritone), and Ira Foley (bass), and named them the Medallions because of his own penchant for wearing medallions around his neck. \nReleases and performing.\nTheir first release, \"Buick 59\", based on Todd Rhodes' double-entendre R&amp;B recording \"Rocket 69\", was one of the first releases on Dootone in September 1954. It was backed with a ballad called \"The Letter\", which received extensive airplay in the region. \"The Letter\" contained the nonsense lyric, \"the 'puppetutes' of love\", which was later picked up by the Steve Miller Band as \"the pompatus of love\" and used in their song \"The Joker\". The song also included the nonsense word \"pismotality\", invented by Green.\nBlue was replaced by Willy Graham, and Donald Woods joined to make the group a quintet. The group became a popular attraction in southern California, appearing on bills with stars such as Fats Domino, Percy Mayfield and T-Bone Walker. The Medallions performed for the eleventh famed Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin, Sr. on July 24, 1955. Also featured Big Jay McNeely, Lionel Hampton and his Orchestra, The Penguins and James Moody and his Orchestra.\nThey continued to release singles on Dootone into late 1955, including \"Edna\", a favorite of Frank Zappa when interviewed on the \"Pop Chronicles\" documentary. They also recorded with singer Johnny Morrisette, as Johnny Twovoice &amp; The Medallions. The original version of the Medallions then broke up.\nPost break up and later line-ups.\nGreen then joined forces with a different group, the Dootones, who were sometimes billed as the \"New\" Medallions, before forming a new version of the Medallions with his brother Jimmy Green (tenor), Charles Gardner (tenor, formerly of the Dootones), Albert Johnson (tenor), and Otis Scott (bass). Thereafter, there were numerous personnel changes in the group, with Vernon Green the only constant member, and the group became officially known as Vernon Green and the Medallions. Members included Billy Foster \u2013 who later, as Etta James' boyfriend at the time, received a co-writing credit for the song \"I'd Rather Go Blind\" \u2013 bass singers Bubba (or Buddha) Carter and Joe Williams. In 1957, the group recorded for Specialty Records as the Phantoms, and Green also recorded with the Cameos. Green then returned to Williams' label, by then renamed Dooto Records, with a new line-up of the Medallions comprising himself, his brother Jimmy, Billy Foster and Joe Williams. The group, with a variety of line-ups, later recorded for the Pan World and Minit labels, continuing to release singles into the early 1960s.\nThe group ceased to exist after Green was injured in a car accident in the mid-1960s, although he released a single, \"Can You Talk\", on Dootone as late as 1973. Since the death of Vernon Green in 2000, the group has been occasionally reconstituted by his brother Jimmy Green, Billy Foster, Buddha Carter, Jack Palti and Jerome Evans, who have performed as the New Medallions.\nDiscography.\nSingles\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20646", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20646", "title": "Morphology (linguistics)", "text": "Study of words and their formation\nIn linguistics, morphology is the study of words, including the principles by which they are formed, and how they relate to one another within a language. Most approaches to morphology investigate the structure of words in terms of morphemes, which are the smallest units in a language with some independent meaning. Morphemes include roots that can exist as words by themselves, but also categories such as affixes that can only appear as part of a larger word. For example, in English the root \"catch\" and the suffix \"-ing\" are both morphemes; \"catch\" may appear as its own word, or it may be combined with \"-ing\" to form the new word \"catching\". Morphology also analyzes how words behave as parts of speech, and how they may be inflected to express grammatical categories including number, tense, and aspect. Concepts such as productivity are concerned with how speakers create words in specific contexts, which evolves over the history of a language.\nThe basic fields of linguistics broadly focus on language structure at different \"scales\". Morphology is considered to operate at a scale larger than phonology, which investigates the categories of speech sounds that are distinguished within a spoken language, and thus may constitute the difference between a morpheme and another. Conversely, syntax is concerned with the next-largest scale, and studies how words in turn form phrases and sentences. Morphological typology is a distinct field that categorises languages based on the morphological features they exhibit.\nHistory.\nThe history of ancient Indian morphological analysis dates back to the linguist P\u0101\u1e47ini, who formulated the 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology in the text \"A\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dhy\u0101y\u012b\" by using a constituency grammar. The Greco-Roman grammatical tradition also engaged in morphological analysis. Studies in Arabic morphology, including the \"Mar\u0101\u1e25 Al-Arw\u0101\u1e25\" of A\u1e25mad b. 'Al\u012b Mas'\u016bd, date back to at least 1200 CE.\nThe term \"morphology\" was introduced into linguistics by August Schleicher in 1859.\nFundamental concepts.\nLexemes and word-forms.\nThe term \"word\" has no well-defined meaning. Instead, two related terms are used in morphology: lexeme and word-form. Generally, a lexeme is a set of inflected word-forms that is often represented with the citation form in small capitals. For instance, the lexeme \"eat\" includes the word-forms \"eat\", \"eats\", \"eaten\", and \"ate\". \"Eat\" and \"eats\" are therefore different word-forms of the same lexeme. In contrast, \"eat\" and \"eater\" are distinct lexemes, as they represent two different concepts.\nProsodic word vs. morphological word.\nHere are examples from other languages of the failure of a single phonological word to coincide with a single morphological word form. In Latin, one way to express the concept of 'NOUN-PHRASE1 and NOUN-PHRASE2' (as in \"apples and oranges\") is to suffix '-que' to the second noun phrase: \"apples oranges-and\". An extreme level of the theoretical quandary posed by some phonological words is provided by the Kwak'wala language. In Kwak'wala, as in a great many other languages, meaning relations between nouns, including possession and \"semantic case\", are formulated by affixes, instead of by independent \"words\". The three-word English phrase, \"with his club\", in which 'with' identifies its dependent noun phrase as an instrument and 'his' denotes a possession relation, would consist of two words or even one word in many languages. Unlike most other languages, Kwak'wala semantic affixes phonologically attach not to the lexeme they pertain to semantically but to the preceding lexeme. Consider the following example (in Kwak'wala, sentences begin with what corresponds to an English verb):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThat is, to a speaker of Kwak'wala, the sentence does not contain the \"words\" 'him-the-otter' or 'with-his-club' Instead, the markers -\"i-da\" (PIVOT-'the'), referring to \"man\", attaches not to the noun \"b\u0259gwan\u0259ma\" (\"man\") but to the verb; the markers -\"\u03c7-a\" (ACCUSATIVE-'the'), referring to \"otter\", attach to \"b\u0259gwan\u0259ma\" instead of to \"q'asa\" ('otter'), etc. In other words, a speaker of Kwak'wala does not perceive the sentence to consist of these phonological words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA central publication on this topic is the volume edited by Dixon and Aikhenvald (2002), examining the mismatch between prosodic-phonological and grammatical definitions of \"word\" in various Amazonian, Australian Aboriginal, Caucasian, Eskimo, Indo-European, Native North American, West African, and sign languages. Apparently, a wide variety of languages make use of the hybrid linguistic unit clitic, possessing the grammatical features of independent words but the prosodic-phonological lack of freedom of bound morphemes. The intermediate status of clitics poses a considerable challenge to linguistic theory.\nInflection vs. word formation.\nGiven the notion of a lexeme, it is possible to distinguish two kinds of morphological rules. Some morphological rules relate to different forms of the same lexeme, but other rules relate to different lexemes. Rules of the first kind are inflectional rules, but those of the second kind are rules of word formation. The generation of the English plural \"dogs\" from \"dog\" is an inflectional rule, and compound phrases and words like \"dog catcher\" or \"dishwasher\" are examples of word formation. Informally, word formation rules form \"new\" words (more accurately, new lexemes), and inflection rules yield variant forms of the \"same\" word (lexeme).\nThe distinction between inflection and word formation is not at all clear-cut. There are many examples for which linguists fail to agree whether a given rule is inflection or word formation. The next section will attempt to clarify the distinction.\nWord formation includes a process in which one combines two complete words, but inflection allows the combination of a suffix with a verb to change the latter's form to that of the subject of the sentence. For example: in the present indefinite, 'go' is used with subject I/we/you/they and plural nouns, but third-person singular pronouns (he/she/it) and singular nouns causes 'goes' to be used. The '-es' is therefore an inflectional marker that is used to match with its subject. A further difference is that in word formation, the resultant word may differ from its source word's grammatical category, but in the process of inflection, the word never changes its grammatical category.\nTypes of word formation.\nThere is a further distinction between two primary kinds of morphological word formation: derivation and compounding. The latter is a process of word formation that involves combining complete word forms into a single compound form. \"Dog catcher\", therefore, is a compound, as both \"dog\" and \"catcher\" are complete word forms in their own right but are subsequently treated as parts of one form. Derivation involves affixing bound (non-independent) forms to existing lexemes, but the addition of the affix derives a new lexeme. The word \"independent\", for example, is derived from the word \"dependent\" by using the prefix \"in-\", and \"dependent\" itself is derived from the verb \"depend\". There is also word formation in the processes of clipping in which a portion of a word is removed to create a new one, blending in which two parts of different words are blended into one, acronyms in which each letter of the new word represents a specific word in the representation (NATO for North Atlantic Treaty Organization), borrowing in which words from one language are taken and used in another, and coinage in which a new word is created to represent a new object or concept.\nParadigms and morphosyntax.\nA linguistic paradigm is the complete set of related word forms associated with a given lexeme. The familiar examples of paradigms are the conjugations of verbs and the declensions of nouns. Also, arranging the word forms of a lexeme into tables, by classifying them according to shared inflectional categories such as tense, aspect, mood, number, gender or case, organizes such. For example, the personal pronouns in English can be organized into tables by using the categories of person (first, second, third); number (singular vs. plural); gender (masculine, feminine, neuter); and case (nominative, oblique, genitive).\nThe inflectional categories used to group word forms into paradigms cannot be chosen arbitrarily but must be categories that are relevant to stating the syntactic rules of the language. Person and number are categories that can be used to define paradigms in English because the language has grammatical agreement rules, which require the verb in a sentence to appear in an inflectional form that matches the person and number of the subject. Therefore, the syntactic rules of English care about the difference between \"dog\" and \"dogs\" because the choice between both forms determines the form of the verb that is used. However, no syntactic rule shows the difference between \"dog\" and \"dog catcher\", or \"dependent\" and \"independent\". The first two are nouns, and the other two are adjectives.\nAn important difference between inflection and word formation is that inflected word forms of lexemes are organized into paradigms that are defined by the requirements of syntactic rules, and there are no corresponding syntactic rules for word formation.\nThe relationship between syntax and morphology, as well as how they interact, is called \"morphosyntax\"; the term is also used to underline the fact that syntax and morphology are interrelated. The study of morphosyntax concerns itself with inflection and paradigms, and some approaches to morphosyntax exclude from its domain the phenomena of word formation, compounding, and derivation. Within morphosyntax fall the study of agreement and government.\nAllomorphy.\nAbove, morphological rules are described as analogies between word forms: \"dog\" is to \"dogs\" as \"cat\" is to \"cats\" and \"dish\" is to \"dishes\". In this case, the analogy applies both to the form of the words and to their meaning. In each pair, the first word means \"one of X\", and the second \"two or more of X\", and the difference is always the plural form \"-s\" (or \"-es\") affixed to the second word, which signals the key distinction between singular and plural entities.\nOne of the largest sources of complexity in morphology is that the one-to-one correspondence between meaning and form scarcely applies to every case in the language. In English, there are word form pairs like \"ox/oxen\", \"goose/geese\", and \"sheep/sheep\" whose difference between the singular and the plural is signaled in a way that departs from the regular pattern or is not signaled at all. Even cases regarded as regular, such as \"-s\", are not so simple; the \"-s\" in \"dogs\" is not pronounced the same way as the \"-s\" in \"cats\", and in plurals such as \"dishes\", a vowel is added before the \"-s\". Those cases, in which the same distinction is effected by alternative forms of a \"word\", constitute allomorphy.\nPhonological rules constrain the sounds that can appear next to each other in a language, and morphological rules, when applied blindly, would often violate phonological rules by resulting in sound sequences that are prohibited in the language in question. For example, to form the plural of \"dish\" by simply appending an \"-s\" to the end of the word would result in the form , which is not permitted by the phonotactics of English. To \"rescue\" the word, a vowel sound is inserted between the root and the plural marker, and results. Similar rules apply to the pronunciation of the \"-s\" in \"dogs\" and \"cats\": it depends on the quality (voiced vs. unvoiced) of the final preceding phoneme.\nLexical morphology.\nLexical morphology is the branch of morphology that deals with the lexicon that, morphologically conceived, is the collection of lexemes in a language. As such, it concerns itself primarily with word formation: derivation and compounding.\nModels.\nThere are three principal approaches to morphology and each tries to capture the distinctions above in different ways:\nWhile the associations indicated between the concepts in each item in that list are very strong, they are not absolute.\nMorpheme-based morphology.\nIn morpheme-based morphology, word forms are analyzed as arrangements of morphemes. A morpheme is defined as the minimal meaningful unit of a language. In a word such as \"independently\", the morphemes are said to be \"in-\", \"depend\", \"-ent\", and \"-ly\"; \"depend\" is the (free) root and the other morphemes are, in this case, derivational affixes. In words such as \"dogs\", \"dog\" is the root and the \"-s\" is an inflectional morpheme. In its simplest and most na\u00efve form, this way of analyzing word forms, called \"item-and-arrangement\", treats words as if they were made of morphemes put after each other (\"concatenated\") like beads on a string. More recent and sophisticated approaches, such as distributed morphology, seek to maintain the idea of the morpheme while accommodating non-concatenated, analogical, and other processes that have proven problematic for item-and-arrangement theories and similar approaches.\nMorpheme-based morphology presumes three basic axioms:\nMorpheme-based morphology comes in two flavours, one Bloomfieldian and one Hockettian. For Bloomfield, the morpheme was the minimal form with meaning, but did not have meaning itself. For Hockett, morphemes are \"meaning elements\", not \"form elements\". For him, there is a morpheme plural using allomorphs such as \"-s\", \"-en\" and \"-ren\". Within much morpheme-based morphological theory, the two views are mixed in unsystematic ways so a writer may refer to \"the morpheme plural\" and \"the morpheme \"-s\"\" in the same sentence.\nLexeme-based morphology.\nLexeme-based morphology usually takes what is called an item-and-process approach. Instead of analyzing a word form as a set of morphemes arranged in sequence, a word form is said to be the result of applying rules that alter a word-form or stem in order to produce a new one. An inflectional rule takes a stem, changes it as is required by the rule, and outputs a word form; a derivational rule takes a stem, changes it as per its own requirements, and outputs a derived stem; a compounding rule takes word forms, and similarly outputs a compound stem.\nWord-based morphology.\nWord-based morphology is (usually) a word-and-paradigm approach. The theory takes paradigms as a central notion. Instead of stating rules to combine morphemes into word forms or to generate word forms from stems, word-based morphology states generalizations that hold between the forms of inflectional paradigms. The major point behind this approach is that many such generalizations are hard to state with either of the other approaches. Word-and-paradigm approaches are also well-suited to capturing purely morphological phenomena, such as morphomes. Examples to show the effectiveness of word-based approaches are usually drawn from fusional languages, where a given \"piece\" of a word, which a morpheme-based theory would call an inflectional morpheme, corresponds to a combination of grammatical categories, for example, \"third-person plural\". Morpheme-based theories usually have no problems with this situation since one says that a given morpheme has two categories. Item-and-process theories, on the other hand, often break down in cases like these because they all too often assume that there will be two separate rules here, one for third person, and the other for plural, but the distinction between them turns out to be artificial. The approaches treat these as whole words that are related to each other by analogical rules. Words can be categorized based on the pattern they fit into. This applies both to existing words and to new ones. Application of a pattern different from the one that has been used historically can give rise to a new word, such as \"older\" replacing \"elder\" (where \"older\" follows the normal pattern of adjectival comparatives) and \"cows\" replacing \"kine\" (where \"cows\" fits the regular pattern of plural formation).\nMorphological typology.\nIn the 19th century, philologists devised a now classic classification of languages according to their morphology. Some languages are isolating, and have little to no morphology; others are agglutinative whose words tend to have many easily separable morphemes (such as Turkic languages); others yet are inflectional or fusional because their inflectional morphemes are \"fused\" together (like some Indo-European languages such as Pashto and Russian). That leads to one bound morpheme conveying multiple pieces of information. A standard example of an isolating language is Chinese. An agglutinative language is Turkish (and practically all Turkic languages). Latin and Greek are prototypical inflectional or fusional languages.\nIt is clear that this classification is not at all clearcut, and many languages (Latin and Greek among them) do not neatly fit any one of these types, and some fit in more than one way. A continuum of complex morphology of language may be adopted.\nThe three models of morphology stem from attempts to analyze languages that more or less match different categories in this typology. The item-and-arrangement approach fits very naturally with agglutinative languages. The item-and-process and word-and-paradigm approaches usually address fusional languages.\nAs there is very little fusion involved in word formation, classical typology mostly applies to inflectional morphology. Depending on the preferred way of expressing non-inflectional notions, languages may be classified as synthetic (using word formation) or analytic (using syntactic phrases).\nExamples.\nPingelapese is a Micronesian language spoken on the Pingelap atoll and on two of the eastern Caroline Islands, called the high island of Pohnpei. Similar to other languages, words in Pingelapese can take different forms to add to or even change its meaning. Verbal suffixes are morphemes added at the end of a word to change its form. Prefixes are those that are added at the front. For example, the Pingelapese suffix \u2013\"kin\" means 'with' or 'at.' It is added at the end of a verb.\n\"ius\" = to use \u2192 \"ius-kin\" = to use with\n = to be good \u2192 = to be good at\n\"sa-\" is an example of a verbal prefix. It is added to the beginning of a word and means 'not.'\n = to be correct \u2192 = to be incorrect\nThere are also directional suffixes that when added to the root word give the listener a better idea of where the subject is headed. The verb \"alu\" means to walk. A directional suffix can be used to give more detail.\n\"-da\" = 'up' \u2192 \"aluh-da\" = to walk up\n\"-d\"i = 'down' \u2192 \"aluh-di\" = to walk down\n\"-eng\" = 'away from speaker and listener' \u2192 \"aluh-eng\" = to walk away\nDirectional suffixes are not limited to motion verbs. When added to non-motion verbs, their meanings are a figurative one. The following table gives some examples of directional suffixes and their possible meanings.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20648", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20648", "title": "Melting", "text": "Material phase change\nMelting, or fusion, is a physical process that results in the phase transition of a substance from a solid to a liquid. This occurs when the internal energy of the solid increases, typically by the application of heat or pressure, which increases the substance's temperature to the melting point. At the melting point, the ordering of ions or molecules in the solid breaks down to a less ordered state, and the solid melts to become a liquid.\nSubstances in the molten state generally have reduced viscosity as the temperature increases. An exception to this principle is elemental sulfur, whose viscosity increases in the range of 130\u00a0\u00b0C to 190\u00a0\u00b0C due to polymerization.\nSome organic compounds melt through mesophases, states of partial order between solid and liquid.\nFirst order phase transition.\nFrom a thermodynamics point of view, at the melting point the change in Gibbs free energy \"\u2206G\" of the substances is zero, but there are non-zero changes in the enthalpy (\"H\") and the entropy (\"S\"), known respectively as the enthalpy of fusion (or latent heat of fusion) and the entropy of fusion. Melting is therefore classified as a first-order phase transition. Melting occurs when the Gibbs free energy of the liquid becomes lower than the solid for that material. The temperature at which this occurs is dependent on the ambient pressure.\nLow-temperature helium is the only known exception to the general rule. Helium-3 has a negative enthalpy of fusion at temperatures below 0.3 K. Helium-4 also has a very slightly negative enthalpy of fusion below 0.8 K. This means that, at appropriate constant pressures, heat must be \"removed\" from these substances in order to melt them.\nCriteria.\nAmong the theoretical criteria for melting, the Lindemann and Born criteria are those most frequently used as a basis to analyse the melting conditions.\nThe Lindemann criterion states that melting occurs because of \"vibrational instability\", e.g. crystals melt; when the average amplitude of thermal vibrations of atoms is relatively high compared with interatomic distances, e.g. &lt;\"\u03b4u2\"&gt;1/2 &gt; \"\u03b4LRs\", where \"\u03b4u\" is the atomic displacement, the Lindemann parameter \"\u03b4L\" \u2248 0.20...0.25 and \"Rs\" is one-half of the inter-atomic distance. The \"Lindemann melting criterion\" is supported by experimental data both for crystalline materials and for glass-liquid transitions in amorphous materials.\nThe Born criterion is based on a rigidity catastrophe caused by the vanishing elastic shear modulus, i.e. when the crystal no longer has sufficient rigidity to mechanically withstand the load, it becomes liquid.\nSupercooling.\nUnder a standard set of conditions, the melting point of a substance is a characteristic property. The melting point is often equal to the freezing point. However, under carefully created conditions, supercooling, or superheating past the melting or freezing point can occur. Water on a very clean glass surface will often supercool several degrees below the freezing point without freezing. Fine emulsions of pure water have been cooled to \u221238\u00a0\u00b0C without nucleation to form ice. Nucleation occurs due to fluctuations in the properties of the material. If the material is kept still there is often nothing (such as physical vibration) to trigger this change, and supercooling (or superheating) may occur. Thermodynamically, the supercooled liquid is in the metastable state with respect to the crystalline phase, and it is likely to crystallize suddenly.\nGlasses.\nGlasses are amorphous solids, which are usually fabricated when the molten material cools very rapidly to below its glass transition temperature, without sufficient time for a regular crystal lattice to form. Solids are characterised by a high degree of connectivity between their molecules, and fluids have lower connectivity of their structural blocks. Melting of a solid material can also be considered as a percolation via broken connections between particles e.g. connecting bonds. In this approach melting of an amorphous material occurs, when the broken bonds form a percolation cluster with \"Tg\" dependent on quasi-equilibrium thermodynamic parameters of bonds e.g. on enthalpy (\"Hd\") and entropy (\"Sd\") of formation of bonds in a given system at given conditions:\nformula_1\nwhere \"fc\" is the percolation threshold and \"R\" is the universal gas constant.\nAlthough \"Hd\" and \"Sd\" are not true equilibrium thermodynamic parameters and can depend on the cooling rate of a melt, they can be found from available experimental data on viscosity of amorphous materials.\nEven below its melting point, quasi-liquid films can be observed on crystalline surfaces. The thickness of the film is temperature-dependent. This effect is common for all crystalline materials. This pre-melting shows its effects in e.g. frost heave, the growth of snowflakes, and, taking grain boundary interfaces into account, maybe even in the movement of glaciers.\nRelated concept.\nIn ultrashort pulse physics, a so-called nonthermal melting may take place. It occurs not because of the increase of the atomic kinetic energy, but because of changes of the interatomic potential due to excitation of electrons. Since electrons are acting like a glue sticking atoms together, heating electrons by a femtosecond laser alters the properties of this \"glue\", which may break the bonds between the atoms and melt a material even without an increase of the atomic temperature.\nIn genetics, melting DNA means to separate the double-stranded DNA into two single strands by heating or the use of chemical agents, polymerase chain reaction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20650", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20650", "title": "Macroevolution", "text": "Evolution on a scale at or above the level of species\nMacroevolution comprises the evolutionary processes and patterns which occur at and above the species level. In contrast, microevolution is evolution occurring within the population(s) of a single species. In other words, microevolution is the scale of evolution that is limited to intraspecific (within-species) variation, while macroevolution extends to interspecific (between-species) variation. The evolution of new species (speciation) is an example of macroevolution. This is the common definition for 'macroevolution' used by contemporary scientists. However, the exact usage of the term has varied throughout history.\nMacroevolution addresses the evolution of species and higher taxonomic groups (genera, families, orders, etc) and uses evidence from phylogenetics, the fossil record, and molecular biology to answer how different taxonomic groups exhibit different species diversity and/or morphological disparity.\nOrigin and changing meaning of the term.\nAfter Charles Darwin published his book \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859, evolution was widely accepted to be real phenomenon. However, many scientists still disagreed with Darwin that natural selection was the primary mechanism to explain evolution. Prior to the modern synthesis, during the period between the 1880s to the 1930s (dubbed the 'Eclipse of Darwinism') many scientists argued in favor of alternative explanations. These included 'orthogenesis', and among its proponents was the Russian entomologist Yuri A. Filipchenko.\nFilipchenko appears to have been the one who coined the term 'macroevolution' in his book \"Variabilit\u00e4t und Variation\" (1927). While introducing the concept, he claimed that the field of genetics is insufficient to explain \"the origin of higher systematic units\" above the species level.\nAuf die Weise hebt die heutige Genetik zweifellos den Schleier von der Evolution der Biotypen, Jordanone und Linneone (eine Art Mikroevolution), dagegen jene Evolution der h\u00f6heren systematischen Gruppen, welche von jeher die Geister besonders f\u00fcr sich in Anspruch genommen hat (eine Art Makroevolution), liegt g\u00e4nzlich au\u00dferhalb ihres Gesichtsfeldes, und dieser Umstand scheint uns die von uns oben angef\u00fchrten Erw\u00e4gungen \u00fcber das Fehlen einer inneren Beziehung zwischen der Genetik und der Deszendenzlehre, die sich ja haupts\u00e4chlich mit der Makroevolution befa\u00dft, nur zu unterstreichen.In this way, modern genetics undoubtedly lifts the veil from the evolution of biotypes, Jordanones and Linneones [i.e. variations within a species] (a kind of microevolution), but that evolution of the higher systematic groups, which has always particularly occupied the minds of men (a kind of macroevolution), lies entirely outside its field of vision, and this circumstance seems to us only to emphasize the considerations we have given above about the lack of an inner relationship between genetics and the theory of descent, which is mainly concerned with macroevolution.\u2014Yuri Filipchenko, \"Variabilit\u00e4t und Variation\" (1927), pages 93-94\nFilipchenko believed that the origin of families must require the sudden appearance of new traits which are different in greater magnitude compared to the characters required for the origin of a genus or species. However, this view is no longer consistent with contemporary understanding of evolution. Furthermore, the Linnaean ranks of 'genus' (and higher) are not real entities but arbitrary concepts.\nThe term \"macroevolution\" was adopted by Filipchenko's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Theodosius Dobzhansky in his book \"'Genetics und the Origin of Species'\" (1937) and in \"The Material Basis of Evolution\" (1940) by the geneticist Richard Goldschmidt, a close friend of Filipchenko. Goldschmidt suggested saltational evolutionary changes which found a moderate revival in the hopeful monster concept of evolutionary developmental biology (or evo-devo). Occasionally such dramatic changes can lead to novel features that survive.\nAs an alternative to saltational evolution, Dobzhansky suggested that the difference between macroevolution and microevolution reflects essentially a difference in time-scales, and that macroevolutionary changes were simply the sum of microevolutionary changes over geologic time. This view became broadly accepted in the middle of the last century but it has been challenged by a number of scientists who claim that microevolution is necessary but not sufficient to explain macroevolution. This is the decoupled view (see below).\nMicroevolution vs Macroevolution.\nThere has been considerable debate regarding the connection between microevolution and macroevolution.\nThe 'Extrapolation' view holds that macroevolution is merely cumulative microevolution.\nThe 'Decoupled' view holds that there are separate macroevolutionary processes that cannot be sufficiently explained by microevolutionary processes alone.\nWithin microevolution, the evolutionary process of changing heritable characteristics (e.g. changes in allele frequencies) is described by population genetics, with mechanisms such as mutation, natural selection, and genetic drift, and speciation (e.g. sympatric and allopatric speciation), phyletic gradualism and punctuated equilibrium. Macroevolution asks how higher taxonomic groups (genera, families, orders, etc) have evolved across geography and vast spans of geological time. Important questions and topics include:\nMacroevolutionary processes.\nSpeciation.\nAccording to the modern definition, the evolutionary transition from the ancestral to the daughter species is microevolutionary, because it results from selection (or, more generally, sorting) among varying organisms. However, speciation has also a macroevolutionary aspect, because it produces the interspecific variation species selection operates on. Another macroevolutionary aspect of speciation is the rate at which it successfully occurs, analogous to reproductive success in microevolution.\nSpeciation is the process in which populations within one species change to an extent at which they become reproductively isolated, that is, they cannot interbreed anymore. However, this classical concept has been challenged and more recently, a phylogenetic or evolutionary species concept has been adopted. Their main criteria for new species is to be diagnosable and monophyletic, that is, they form a clearly defined lineage.\nCharles Darwin first discovered that speciation can be extrapolated so that species not only evolve into new species, but also into new genera, families and other groups of\u00a0animals. In other words, macroevolution is reducible to microevolution through selection of traits over long periods of time. In addition, some scholars have argued that selection at the species level is important as well. The advent of genome sequencing enabled the discovery of gradual genetic changes both during speciation but also across higher taxa. For instance, the evolution of humans from ancestral primates or other mammals can be traced to numerous but individual mutations.\nThe diversification of terrestrial species is closely related to global climatic changes, particularly the Cenozoic alternation of warming and cooling episodes. Global analysis of terrestrial mammals supports the view that these physical environmental changes have shaped macroevolutionary patterns by promoting biome specialisation. This specialization leads to significantly higher rates of vicariance and speciation in biome specialist (stenobiomic) lineages compared to generalist lineages.\nEvolution of new organs and tissues.\nOne of the main questions in evolutionary biology is how new structures evolve, such as new organs. Macroevolution is often thought to require the evolution of structures that are 'completely new'. However, fundamentally novel structures are not necessary for dramatic evolutionary change. As can be seen in vertebrate evolution, most \"new\" organs are actually not new\u2014they are simply modifications of previously existing organs. For instance, the evolution of mammal diversity in the past 100 million years has not required any major innovation. All of this diversity can be explained by modification of existing organs, such as the evolution of elephant tusks from incisors. Other examples include wings (modified limbs), feathers (modified reptile scales), lungs (modified swim bladders, e.g. found in fish), or even the heart (a muscularized segment of a vein).\nThe same concept applies to the evolution of \"novel\" tissues. Even fundamental tissues such as bone can evolve from combining existing proteins (collagen) with calcium phosphate (specifically, hydroxy-apatite). This probably happened when certain cells that make collagen also accumulated calcium phosphate to get a proto-bone cell.\nExamples.\nEvolutionary faunas.\nA macroevolutionary benchmark study is Sepkoski's work on marine animal diversity through the Phanerozoic. His iconic diagram of the numbers of marine families from the Cambrian to the Recent illustrates the successive expansion and dwindling of three \"evolutionary faunas\" that were characterized by differences in origination rates and carrying capacities. Long-term ecological changes and major geological events are postulated to have played crucial roles in shaping these evolutionary faunas.\nStanley's rule.\nMacroevolution is driven by differences between species in origination and extinction rates. Remarkably, these two factors are generally positively correlated: taxa that have typically high diversification rates also have high extinction rates. This observation has been described first by Steven Stanley, who attributed it to a variety of ecological factors. Yet, a positive correlation of origination and extinction rates is also a prediction of the Red Queen hypothesis, which postulates that evolutionary progress (increase in fitness) of any given species causes a decrease in fitness of other species, ultimately driving to extinction those species that do not adapt rapidly enough. High rates of origination must therefore correlate with high rates of extinction. Stanley's rule, which applies to almost all taxa and geologic ages, is therefore an indication for a dominant role of biotic interactions in macroevolution.\nEvolution of multicellularity.\nThe evolution of multicellular organisms is one of the major breakthroughs in evolution. The first step of converting a unicellular organism into a metazoan (a multicellular organism) is to allow cells to attach to each other. This can be achieved by one or a few mutations. In fact, many bacteria form multicellular assemblies, e.g. cyanobacteria or myxobacteria. Another species of bacteria, \"Jeongeupia sacculi\", form well-ordered sheets of cells, which ultimately develop into a bulbous structure. Similarly, unicellular yeast cells can become multicellular by a single mutation in the ACE2 gene, which causes the cells to form a branched multicellular form.\nEvolution of bat wings.\nThe wings of bats have the same structural elements (bones) as any other five-fingered mammal (see periodicity in limb development). However, the finger bones in bats are dramatically elongated, so the question is how these bones became so long. It has been shown that certain growth factors such as bone morphogenetic proteins (specifically Bmp2) is over expressed so that it stimulates an elongation of certain bones. Genetic changes in the bat genome identified the changes that lead to this phenotype and it has been recapitulated in mice: when specific bat DNA is inserted in the mouse genome, recapitulating these mutations, the bones of mice grow longer.\nLimb loss in lizards and snakes.\nSnakes evolved from lizards. Phylogenetic analysis shows that snakes are actually nested within the phylogenetic tree of lizards, demonstrating that they have a common ancestor. This split happened about 180 million years ago and several intermediary fossils are known to document the origin. In fact, limbs have been lost in numerous clades of reptiles, and there are cases of recent limb loss. For instance, the skink genus \"Lerista\" has lost limbs in multiple cases, with all possible intermediary steps, that is, there are species which have fully developed limbs, shorter limbs with 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 or no toes at all.\nHuman evolution.\nWhile human evolution from their primate ancestors did not require massive morphological changes, our brain has sufficiently changed to allow human consciousness and intelligence. While the latter involves relatively minor morphological changes it did result in dramatic changes to brain function. Thus, macroevolution does not have to be morphological, it can also be functional.\nThe study of human (brain) evolution benefits from the fact that human and ape genomes are available so that the genomes of our common ancestor can be reconstructed. Even though the precise genetic mechanisms that shaped the human brain are not known, the mutations involved in human brain evolution are largely known, given that the genes expressed in the brain are relatively well understood.\nEvolution of viviparity in lizards.\nMost lizards are egg-laying and thus need an environment that is warm enough to incubate their eggs. However, some species have evolved viviparity, that is, they give birth to live young, as almost all mammals do. In several clades of lizards, egg-laying (oviparous) species have evolved into live-bearing ones, apparently with very little genetic change. For instance, a European common lizard, \"Zootoca vivipara\", is viviparous throughout most of its range, but oviparous in the extreme southwest portion. That is, within a single species, a radical change in reproductive behavior has happened. Similar cases are known from South American lizards of the genus \"Liolaemus\" which have egg-laying species at lower altitudes, but closely related viviparous species at higher altitudes, suggesting that the switch from oviparous to viviparous reproduction does not require many genetic changes.\nResearch topics.\nSubjects studied within macroevolution include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20651", "revid": "2289205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20651", "title": "Martin Waldseem\u00fcller", "text": "German cartographer and scholar (c. 1470 \u2013 1520)\nMartin Waldseem\u00fcller (c.\u20091470 \u2013 16 March 1520) was a German cartographer and humanist scholar. Sometimes known by the Hellenized form of his name, Hylacomylus, his work was influential among contemporary cartographers. His collaborator Matthias Ringmann and he are credited with the first recorded usage of the word \"America\" to name a portion of the New World in honour of Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci in a world map they delineated in 1507. The same map was the first to show the Americas as a distinct landmass clearly separated from Asia by the Pacific Ocean. Waldseem\u00fcller was also the first to produce a printed globe and the first to create a printed wall map of Europe. A set of his maps printed as an appendix to the 1513 edition of Ptolemy's \"Geography\" is considered to be the first example of a modern atlas.\nLife and works.\nDetails of Waldseem\u00fcller's life are scarce. He was born around 1470 in the German town of Wolfenweiler. His father was a butcher and moved to Freiburg (now Freiburg im Breisgau) in about 1480. Records show that Waldseem\u00fcller was enrolled in 1490 at the University of Freiburg, where Gregor Reisch, a noted humanist scholar, was one of his influential teachers; the printer Johannes Schott was his classmate. After finishing at the university, he lived in Basel, where he was ordained a priest, and apparently, gained experience in printing and engraving while working with the printer community in Basel.\nAround 1500, an association of humanist scholars formed in Saint Di\u00e9, in the Duchy of Lorraine, under the patronage of Ren\u00e9 II, Duke of Lorraine. They called themselves the \"Gymnasium Vosagense\" and their leader was Walter Lud. Their initial intention was to publish a new edition of Ptolemy's \"Geography\". Waldseem\u00fcller was invited to join the group and contribute his skills as a cartographer. How he came to the group's attention is unclear, but Lud later described him as a master cartographer. Matthias Ringmann was also brought into the group because of his previous work with the \"Geography\" and his knowledge of Greek and Latin. Ringmann and Waldseem\u00fcller soon became friends and collaborators.\n1507 world map.\nIn 1506, the \"Gymnasium\" obtained a French translation of the Soderini Letter, a booklet attributed to Amerigo Vespucci that provided a sensational account of four alleged Vespucci voyages to explore the coast of lands recently discovered in the western Atlantic. The \"Gymnasium\" surmised that this was the \"new world\" or the \"antipodes\" hypothesized by classical writers. The Soderini Letter gave Vespucci credit for discovery of this new continent and implied that newly obtained Portuguese maps were based on his explorations. They decided to put aside the \"Geography\" for the moment and publish a brief \"Introduction to Cosmography\" with an accompanying world map. The \"Introduction\" was written by Ringmann and included a Latin translation of the Soderini Letter. In a preface to the letter, Ringmann wrote \n\"I see no reason why anyone could properly disapprove of a name derived from that of Amerigo, the discoverer, a man of sagacious genius. A suitable form would be Amerige, meaning Land of Amerigo, or America, since Europe and Asia have received women's names.\"\nWhile Ringmann was writing the \"Introduction\", Waldseem\u00fcller focused on the creation of a world map using an aggregation of sources, including maps based on the works of Ptolemy, Henricus Martellus, Alberto Cantino, and Nicol\u00f2 de Caverio. In addition to a large 12-panel wall map, Waldseem\u00fcller created a smaller, simplified globe. The wall map was decorated with prominent portraits of Ptolemy and Vespucci. The map and globe were notable for showing the New World as a continent separate from Asia and for naming the southern landmass America. By April 1507, the map, globe and accompanying book, \"Introduction to Cosmography\", were published. A thousand copies were printed and sold throughout Europe.\nThe \"Introduction\" and map were a great success, and four editions were printed in the first year alone. The map was widely used in universities and was influential among cartographers who admired the craftsmanship that went into its creation. In the following years, other maps were printed that often incorporated the name America. Although Waldseem\u00fcller had intended the name to apply only to a specific part of Brazil, other maps applied it to the entire continent. In 1538, Gerardus Mercator used America to name both the north and south continents on his influential map, and by this point, the name was securely fixed on the New World.\nPtolemy's \"Geography\" (1513).\nAfter 1507, Waldseem\u00fcller and Ringmann continued to collaborate on a new edition of Ptolemy's \"Geography\". In 1508, Ringmann travelled to Italy and obtained a Greek manuscript of \"Geography\" (\"Codex Vaticanum Graecorum 191\"). With this key reference, they continued to make progress and Waldseem\u00fcller was able to finish his maps. Completion was forestalled, though, when their patron, Duke Ren\u00e9 II, died in 1508. The new edition was finally printed in 1513 by Johannes Schott in Strasbourg. By then, Waldseem\u00fcller had pulled out of the project and was not credited for his cartographic work. Nevertheless, his maps were recognized as important contributions to the science of cartography and were considered a standard reference work for many decades.\nAbout 20 of Waldseem\u00fcller's \"tabulae modernae\" (modern maps) were included in the new \"Geography\" as a separate appendix, \"Claudii Ptolemaei Supplementem\". This supplement constitutes the first modern atlas. Maps of Lorraine and the upper Rhine region were the first printed maps of those regions and were probably based on survey work done by Waldseem\u00fcller himself.\nThe world map published in the 1513 \"Geography\" seems to indicate that Waldseem\u00fcller had second thoughts about the name and the nature of the lands discovered in the western Atlantic. The New World was no longer clearly shown as a continent separate from Asia, and the name America had been replaced with \"Terra Incognita\" (Unknown Land). What caused him to make these changes is not clear, but perhaps he was influenced by contemporary criticism that Vespucci had usurped Columbus's primacy of discovery.\nOther works.\nWaldseem\u00fcller was also interested in surveying and surveying instruments. In 1508, he contributed a treatise on surveying and perspective to the fourth edition of Gregor Reisch's \"Margarita Philosophica\". He included an illustration of a forerunner to the theodolite, a surveying instrument he called the polimetrum. In 1511, he published the \"Carta Itineraria Europae\", a road map of Europe that showed important trade routes and pilgrim routes from central Europe to Santiago de Compostela, Spain. It was the first printed wall map of Europe.\nIn 1516, he produced another large-scale wall map of the world, the \"Carta Marina Navigatoria\", printed in Strasbourg. It was designed in the style of portolan charts and consisted of 12 printed sheets.\nThe Paris Green Globe (or \"Globe vert\"), has been attributed to Waldseem\u00fcller by experts at the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale, but the attribution is not universally accepted.\nWaldseem\u00fcller died without a will on 16 March 1520 in Saint Di\u00e9 in the Upper Rhenish Circle of the Holy Roman Empire, where he had served as a canon in the collegiate Church of Saint Di\u00e9 since 1514.\n1507 map rediscovered.\nThe 1507 wall map was lost for a long time, but a copy was found in Schloss Wolfegg in southern Germany by Joseph Fischer in 1901. It is the only known copy and was purchased by the United States Library of Congress in May 2003 for $10 million, the highest price paid to that time for a historical document. Five copies of Waldseem\u00fcller's globular map survive in the form of \"gores\": printed map sections that were intended to be cut out and pasted onto a wooden globe.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20653", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20653", "title": "Megadeth", "text": "American thrash metal band\nMegadeth is an American thrash metal band formed in Los Angeles in 1983 by vocalist and guitarist Dave Mustaine. Known for their technically complex guitar work and musicianship, Megadeth is one of the \"big four\" of American thrash metal\u2014along with Slayer, Anthrax, and Metallica\u2014and is credited with helping to develop and popularize the genre. Their music features intricate arrangements, fast rhythm sections, dual lead guitars, and lyrical themes such as war, politics, religion, death, and personal relationships.\nIn 1985, Megadeth released their debut album, \"Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!\", on the independent record label Combat Records, to moderate success. It caught the attention of bigger labels, which led to Megadeth signing with Capitol Records. Their first major-label album, \"Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?\", was released in 1986 and was a major hit with the underground metal scene. Band members' substance abuse issues and personal disputes had brought Megadeth negative publicity during the late 1980s. Nonetheless, the band went on to release a number of platinum-selling albums, including \"So Far, So Good... So What!\" (1988), \"Rust in Peace\" (1990) and \"Countdown to Extinction\" (1992). These albums, along with worldwide tours, brought them public recognition. Megadeth's most recent album, \"The Sick, the Dying... and the Dead!\", was released in 2022. On August 14, 2025, Mustaine announced that the band's seventeenth studio album, \"Megadeth\", and its supporting tour will be their last.\nMegadeth has undergone frequent lineup changes throughout its -year career, with Mustaine being the sole consistent member of the band. The band temporarily disbanded in 2002 when Mustaine suffered an arm injury and re-established in 2004 without longtime bassist David Ellefson, who had taken legal action against Mustaine. Ellefson settled out of court and rejoined the band in 2010, but was fired in 2021 amid allegations of sexual misconduct. Megadeth's current lineup includes Mustaine, bassist James LoMenzo, guitarist Teemu M\u00e4ntysaari and drummer Dirk Verbeuren.\nMegadeth earned platinum certifications in the United States for five of its sixteen studio albums, and has received twelve Grammy nominations. Megadeth won its first Grammy Award in 2017 for the song \"Dystopia\" in the Best Metal Performance category. The band's mascot, Vic Rattlehead, regularly appears on album artwork and live shows. Megadeth hosted their own music festival, Gigantour, several times from July 2005 to August 2013, and held its first MegaCruise in October 2019. As of 2023[ [update]], the band sold more than 50 million albums worldwide.\nHistory.\n1983\u20131985: Formation and \"Killing Is My Business\".\nOn April 11, 1983, Dave Mustaine was dismissed from Metallica before the band recorded their debut album \"Kill 'Em All\" due to substance abuse and personal conflicts with James Hetfield kicking his dog. As Metallica's lead guitarist since 1981, Mustaine had composed some of the group's early songs and helped hone the band into a tight live unit. Afterward, Mustaine vowed revenge by forming a band that was faster and heavier than Metallica. On the bus trip back to Los Angeles, Mustaine found a pamphlet by California senator Alan Cranston that read: \"The arsenal of megadeath can't be rid no matter what the peace treaties come to.\" The term \"Megadeath\" stuck with Mustaine and he wrote a song with that title with the spelling slightly changed to Megadeth, which, according to Mustaine, represented the annihilation of power.\nAfter arriving back in Los Angeles, Mustaine began the search for new bandmates for his band. He formed the band Fallen Angels, which included Lor Kane on vocals, Robby McKinney on guitar and Matt Kisselstein on bass, in April 1983. The first Megadeth drummer Dijon Carruthers also joined around this time. The band's name was changed to Megadeth on Kane's recommendation. As the founder, Mustaine added his new neighbors David Ellefson and Greg Handevidt to the band, who had moved from Minnesota to Los Angeles and played bass and guitar, respectively. A demo was recorded by the lineup, which had expanded to include Richard Girod on drums. The band realized that they would have to retool some of the songs following the release of Metallica's debut album, in July 1983, with \"Mechanix\" being the only Metallica-era song on Megadeth's debut album. Megadeth songs from the summer of 1983 included \"No Time\", \"Self Destruct\", \"Hair Pin Trigger\", \"Speak No Evil\", \"Eye for Eye\" and \"Heaven Knows\". \"No Time\" was an early title for \"Set the World Afire\", \"Self Destruct\" was the original title for \"Mary Jane\" and \"Speak No Evil\" was the original title of \"Looking Down the Cross.\"\nWhile Handevidt would only last a few months, Mustaine and Ellefson formed a tight musical bond. Despite his enthusiasm, Mustaine had trouble finding other members to fill out the lineup. He and Ellefson auditioned about 15 drummers, hoping to find one who understood meter changes in music. After playing with Carruthers (who had rejoined the band in the fall) and Girod, they selected Lee Rauch in late 1983. The Mustaine/Rauch/Ellefson lineup was completed by the addition of Slayer guitarist Kerry King, with whom they rehearsed as well.\nSingers who temporarily joined the band included Billy Bonds and John Cyriis, who would found Agent Steel after his firing from Megadeth. Cyriis joined the band after Carruthers persuaded his other bandmates. Following six months of trying to find a lead singer, Mustaine decided to perform lead vocals himself. \nIn 1984, Megadeth recorded a three-song demo tape featuring Mustaine, Ellefson and Rauch. The demo tape, \"Last Rites\", was released on March 9, 1984. It featured early versions of \"Last Rites/Loved to Death\", \"The Skull Beneath the Skin\" and \"Mechanix\", all of which appeared on the band's debut album. \nThe band was unable to find a compatible second guitarist. King filled in on rhythm guitar for several shows in the San Francisco area in 1984, starting with the debut gig on February 17 at Ruthie's Inn in Berkeley, California, as well as a gig at The Keystone in Berkeley that April and would play five shows in total with the band. King went back to Slayer and Rauch was briefly replaced with Minnesota drummer Brett Frederickson, with whom Ellefson had previously played. Jazz fusion drummer Gar Samuelson joined the band in late 1984 and the band played a few gigs as a three piece band, with Samuelson officially joining Megadeth on October 24, 1984. Samuelson had previously been in the jazz band The New Yorkers with guitarist Chris Poland. After seeing Samuelson perform with Megadeth as a trio, Poland went backstage and suggested an impromptu audition as lead guitarist for the band; he joined Megadeth in December 1984.\nAfter considering several labels, Mustaine signed the band to Combat Records, a New York-based Independent record label that offered Megadeth the highest budget to record and tour. In 1985, Combat Records gave the band $8,000 to record and produce its debut album. After spending $4,000 of the budget on drugs, alcohol and food, the band fired the original producer and finished the recording themselves.\nDespite its low-fidelity sound, \"Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!\" was relatively successful in underground metal circles and attracted major-label interest. The band was calling itself State Of The Art Speed Metal. Music writer Joel McIver praised its \"blistering technicality\" and stated that the album \"raised the bar for the whole thrash metal scene, with guitarists forced to perform even more accurately and powerfully\". The front cover marked the debut of band mascot Vic Rattlehead, who regularly appeared on subsequent album artwork.\n\"Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!\" features \"Mechanix\", a song Mustaine wrote during his time with Metallica. Though Mustaine told the band after his dismissal not to use the music he had written, Metallica recorded a different version of the song, \"The Four Horsemen\", with a slower tempo and a melodic middle section. The album also included a cover of Nancy Sinatra's \"These Boots Are Made for Walkin'\u2009\", at a faster tempo and with altered lyrics. Megadeth's version generated controversy during the 1990s, when its writer, Lee Hazlewood, called Mustaine's changes \"vile and offensive\". Under threat of legal action, the song was removed from pressings released from 1995 to 2001.\nIn mid-1985, on a bill with Canadian speed metal band Exciter, Megadeth played its first North American tour: the Killing for a Living Tour. Guitarist Mike Albert replaced Poland, who was battling drug addiction. Although Albert was originally supposed to be a permanent replacement, Poland rejoined Megadeth in October 1985, shortly before the group began recording its second album for Combat.\n1986\u20131987: \"Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?\".\nAccording to Mustaine, Megadeth was under pressure to deliver another successful album: \"That sophomore offering is the 'be-all or end-all' of any band. You either go to the next level, or it's the beginning of the nadir.\" Mustaine composed the music for the album, with the other members adding arrangement ideas.\nThe album was produced on a $25,000 budget from Combat Records. Dissatisfied with its financial limitations, the band left Combat and signed with Capitol Records. Capitol bought the rights to the album, and hired producer Paul Lani to remix the earlier recordings. Released in late 1986, \"Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?\" has clearer production and more sophisticated songwriting. Mustaine wanted to write socially conscious lyrics, unlike mainstream heavy metal bands who sang about \"hedonistic pleasures\". The album was noted for its political commentary and helped Megadeth expand its fanbase. The title track was the album's second single, and was accompanied by a music video that received regular airplay on MTV.\nIn February 1987, Megadeth was the opening act on Alice Cooper's \"Constrictor\" tour, and the following month began its first headlining world tour in the United Kingdom. The 72-week tour was supported by Overkill and Necros, and continued in the United States. During the tour, Mustaine and Ellefson considered firing Samuelson for his drug abuse. According to Mustaine, Samuelson had become too much to handle when intoxicated. Drummer Chuck Behler traveled with Megadeth for the last dates of the tour as the other band members feared Samuelson would not be able to continue. Poland quarreled with Mustaine, and was accused of selling band equipment to buy heroin. As a result, Samuelson and Poland were asked to leave Megadeth in 1987, with Behler becoming the band's full-time drummer.\nPoland was initially replaced by Jay Reynolds of Malice, but as the band began working on its next record, Reynolds was replaced by his guitar teacher, Jeff Young, when Megadeth was six weeks into the recording of its third album.\n1988\u20131989: \"So Far, So Good... So What!\".\nWith a major-label budget, the Paul Lani-produced \"So Far, So Good... So What!\" took over five months to record. The production was plagued with problems, partially due to Mustaine's struggle with drug addiction. Mustaine later said: \"The production of \"So Far, So Good... So What!\" was horrible, mostly due to substances and the priorities we had or didn't have at the time.\" Mustaine clashed with Lani, beginning with Lani's insistence that the drums be recorded separately from the cymbals, an unheard-of process for rock drummers. Mustaine and Lani became estranged during the mixing, and Lani was replaced by Michael Wagener, who remixed the album.\n\"So Far, So Good... So What!\" was released in January 1988 and was well received by fans and critics. The album featured a cover version of the Sex Pistols' \"Anarchy in the U.K.\"; Mustaine changed the lyrics, later saying that he had simply heard them incorrectly. To support the album, Megadeth embarked on a world tour that lasted for nearly eight months. The band (along with Savatage) opened for Dio on their \"Dream Evil\" tour and supported Iron Maiden on their \"Seventh Son of a Seventh Son\" tour, both in the United States. They also headlined a North American tour with Warlock and Sanctuary (whose debut album \"Refuge Denied\" was produced by Mustaine), and a European trek with Testament, Nuclear Assault, Flotsam and Jetsam and Sanctuary.\nIn June 1988, Megadeth appeared in Penelope Spheeris' documentary \"\". The documentary chronicled the Los Angeles heavy metal scene of the late 1980s, and Spheeris, who had directed Megadeth in the video for \"Wake Up Dead\", decided to include them to feature a more serious band in contrast to the glam metal groups. Mustaine remembered the film as a disappointment, as it aligned Megadeth with \"a bunch of shit bands\".\nIn August, the band appeared at the Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington in the United Kingdom, performing to an audience of more than 100,000. One show featured a guest appearance by Metallica drummer (and Mustaine's former bandmate) Lars Ulrich. The band was added to the Monsters of Rock European tour, but left after the first show due to Ellefson's drug problems, for which he was treated immediately. Megadeth was replaced by Testament.\nShortly after the Monsters of Rock appearance, Mustaine fired Behler and Young and canceled Megadeth's Australian tour. \"On the road, things escalated from a small border skirmish into a full-on raging war,\" Mustaine later recalled. \"I think a lot of us were inconsistent because of [drugs].\" During the tour, Mustaine noticed problems developing with Behler and brought in drummer Nick Menza as Behler's drum technician. As with Samuelson, Menza was expected to take over if Behler could not continue the tour. Menza replaced Behler in 1989. Young's dismissal resulted from Mustaine's suspicions that he was having an affair with Mustaine's then-girlfriend, an allegation Young denied.\nThe band was unable to quickly find a suitable replacement for Young. Although 1989 marked the first time since its inception that Megadeth did not tour nor perform at least one show, they recorded a cover version of Alice Cooper's \"No More Mr. Nice Guy\" which appeared on the soundtrack to the Wes Craven horror movie \"Shocker\". The video was directed by Penelope Spheeris, who recalled the filming as a \"Herculean task\" as Mustaine was unable to play guitar because of his drug addiction. During the March 1989 auditions for a new lead guitarist, Mustaine was arrested for driving under the influence and possession of narcotics after crashing into a parked vehicle occupied by an off-duty police officer. Mustaine entered court-ordered drug rehabilitation shortly afterwards, and became drug-free for the first time in ten years.\n1990\u20131991: \"Rust in Peace\".\nWith Mustaine sober, Megadeth continued searching for a new lead guitarist. Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash had been jamming with Mustaine and Ellefson, and although it seemed that he might join Megadeth, he remained with Guns N' Roses. Dimebag Darrell of Pantera was offered the job, but the deal fell through after Mustaine refused his request to recruit his brother, Pantera drummer Vinnie Paul, as he had already hired Menza. The offer was also extended to Criss Oliva who also declined as he did not want to leave Savatage. Jeff Loomis, who would later go on to form progressive metal titans Nevermore, also auditioned though Mustaine deemed him too young to join as Loomis was only 18 at the time.\nMarty Friedman filled the guitarist position at the recommendation of Ron Laffitte, a member of Capitol management. Laffitte had heard \"Dragon's Kiss\", a solo recording by Friedman when he was in Cacophony. Mustaine and Ellefson were satisfied with Friedman's style and thought that he understood Megadeth's music. With Friedman in the group, the band completed what fans consider the definitive Megadeth lineup. The revitalized band entered the studio at Rumbo Recorders in March 1990 with co-producer Mike Clink to begin Megadeth's most critically acclaimed album, \"Rust in Peace\". Clink was the first producer to complete a Megadeth album without being fired. Its recording was documented in \"Rusted Pieces\", a home video released in 1991 with six music videos and an interview with the band.\nReleased in September 1990, \"Rust in Peace\" debuted at number 23 in the United States and number eight in the United Kingdom. Mustaine had developed a writing style with a rhythmically complex, progressive edge, and the songs featured longer guitar solos and frequent tempo changes. Described as a genre-defining work by \"Decibel\", the album solidified Megadeth's reputation in the music industry. It features the singles \"Holy Wars... The Punishment Due\" and \"Hangar 18\", both of which were accompanied by music videos and became live staples. \"Rust in Peace\" received a Grammy nomination in 1991 for Best Metal Performance, and was the group's third platinum album, certified in December 1994.\nEarly in 1990, Megadeth joined Slayer, Testament and Suicidal Tendencies for the successful European Clash of the Titans tour, featuring several American thrash metal bands. An American leg began the following year featuring Megadeth, Slayer and Anthrax, with Alice in Chains as a supporting act. The tour was considered a multi-headliner, as the three main bands alternated time slots. In addition to the Clash of the Titans tour, Megadeth (along with Testament) supported Judas Priest on their \"Painkiller\" tour in North America late in 1990 and appeared at the second Rock in Rio festival in January 1991. In July 1991 the song \"Go to Hell\" was featured in the film \"Bill &amp; Ted's Bogus Journey\" and on its soundtrack.\n1992\u20131993: \"Countdown to Extinction\".\nThe music for Megadeth's fifth studio album was written in two different sessions. The first session occurred after the conclusion of the Clash of the Titans tour, while the second session happened in the fall of 1991 following a one-month break. Recording sessions for the album began in January 1992 at Enterprise Studios in Burbank, California. Max Norman was chosen to produce, as the band was pleased with his mixing of \"Rust in Peace\". Megadeth spent nearly four months in the studio with Norman, writing and recording what became the band's most commercially successful album, \"Countdown to Extinction\". The album, whose title was suggested by Menza, features songwriting contributions from each band member. Ellefson explained that the band changed its approach to songwriting for this album, beginning to write more melodic songs.\nReleased in July 1992, \"Countdown to Extinction\" entered the \"Billboard\" 200 chart at number two and was certified double platinum in the United States. It received a nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 1993 Grammy Awards, and its title track won a Genesis Award from the Humane Society in 1993 for raising awareness for animal rights issues. Ellefson later said that he and Friedman were disappointed that Megadeth did not win the Grammy: \"It was such a bizarre moment, because it was as if the amount of work it had taken to ramp up to that hopeful night was literally gone in a second.\"\nA world tour in support of the album was launched in late 1992, with Pantera and White Zombie as supporting acts. The tour included a North American leg in early 1993, with Stone Temple Pilots as the opening act. One month into the leg, the remaining shows, including dates in Japan, were canceled when Mustaine returned to substance abuse, ending up in a hospital emergency room. After seven weeks in rehab, Mustaine emerged sober again and the band returned to the studio to record \"Angry Again\". The song is featured on the soundtrack of the 1993 film \"Last Action Hero\" and received a Grammy nomination in 1994.\nDuring mid-1993, Megadeth performed at a number of shows with Metallica in Europe. The first was at Milton Keynes Bowl in England, and included Diamond Head. In July, Megadeth was added as the opening act for Aerosmith's Get a Grip Tour, but was removed from the bill after three shows. Aerosmith said that Megadeth was \"dumped\" because of Mustaine's erratic behavior, while Capitol Records said it was due to \"artistic restrictions\". After the canceled US tour, Megadeth returned to the studio to record \"99 Ways to Die\", which appeared on \"The Beavis and Butt-Head Experience\", a compilation album released in November featuring songs interspersed with commentary by the main characters of the animated series \"Beavis and Butt-Head\". The song was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 1995 Grammy Awards. During these sessions, Megadeth recorded a cover version of Black Sabbath's \"Paranoid\", which appeared on the Black Sabbath tribute album \"Nativity in Black\"; it was nominated for a Grammy the following year.\n1994\u20131995: \"Youthanasia\".\nIn early 1994, Megadeth reunited with producer Max Norman for the follow-up to \"Countdown to Extinction\". With three band members living in Arizona, initial work began at Phase Four Studios in Phoenix. A few days into pre-production, problems with Phase Four's equipment forced the band to look for another studio. Mustaine insisted on recording in Arizona, but no suitable recording facility could be found. At Norman's request, the band built its own recording studio in Phoenix in a rented warehouse, later called \"Fat Planet in Hangar 18\". During the studio's construction, much of the pre-production songwriting and arrangements were done at Vintage Recorders in Phoenix. At Norman's suggestion, the tracks on \"Youthanasia\" had a slower tempo than previous albums, at about 120 beats per minute. The band abandoned the progressive approach from its previous albums and focused on stronger vocal melodies and more accessible, radio-friendly arrangements. For the first time, Megadeth wrote and arranged the entire album in the studio, including basic tracks recorded live by the entire band. The album's recording was video recorded and released as \"Evolver: The Making of Youthanasia\" in 1995.\nOn October 1, 1994, as part of the album's promotional efforts, the band launched Megadeth, Arizona, which is considered the very first official artist website ever. It was conceived by Capitol's sales director Robin Bechtel with help from designer Wendy Dougan and copywriter Jane Bogart on a total budget of $30,000 granted by Capitol. Megadeth, Arizona was conceived as \"a virtual cybertown in cyberspace\". It featured a chat room (Megadiner), news about the band (\"Horrorscopes\"), digital postcards and other types of content.\nAfter eight months of studio work, \"Youthanasia\" was released in November 1994. It debuted at number four on the \"Billboard\" 200 and charted in several European countries. The album was certified gold in Canada the day it was released, and was certified platinum in the US two months later. Megadeth hired fashion photographer Richard Avedon to enhance the band's image. Avedon had the band members exchange their jeans and T-shirts for a more conscious appearance. To promote \"Youthanasia\", the band played a Halloween show in New York City called \"Night of the Living Megadeth\", which was broadcast live on MTV. In November, the band performed twice on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\", playing \"Train of Consequences\" on the first appearance and \"A Tout le Monde\" on the second.\nAn eleven-month tour began in South America in November 1994. In 1995, Megadeth played in Europe and North America with several opening acts, including Corrosion of Conformity, Korn and Fear Factory. The tour culminated with an appearance at the Monsters of Rock festival in Brazil, co-headlining with Alice Cooper and Ozzy Osbourne. In January 1995, Megadeth appeared on the soundtrack of the horror movie \"Demon Knight\" with the song \"Diadems\". In July, Megadeth released \"Hidden Treasures\", an extended play featuring songs which originally appeared on movie soundtracks and tribute albums.\n1996\u20131999: \"Cryptic Writings\" and \"Risk\".\nAfter completing the extensive world tour in support of \"Youthanasia\", Megadeth took time off in most of 1996 and nearly broke up. During this period, Mustaine began work on MD.45, a side project with vocalist Lee Ving of Fear. The majority of the songs on the album were intended for Megadeth, but due to the band almost disbanding, Mustaine decided to use them for MD.45 instead. The duo hired drummer Jimmy DeGrasso, who had played with Alice Cooper on the South American Monsters of Rock tour earlier that year. Marty Friedman built a studio in his new home in Phoenix and completed his fourth solo album, released in April 1996.\nIn September 1996, Megadeth went to London to work on songs for the next album. The songwriting was closely supervised by new manager Bud Prager, who contributed musical ideas and lyrics; many lyrics and song titles were changed at his request. Regarding Prager's influence, Mustaine later wrote: \"I figured maybe this guy [Prager] could help me get that intangible number one record I so badly wanted.\" The album, recorded in Nashville, was Megadeth's first collaboration with country pop producer Dann Huff, who had met Mustaine in 1990.\n\"Cryptic Writings\" was released in June 1997. The album peaked at number ten on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was eventually certified gold in the United States. Its lead single, \"Trust\", became Megadeth's highest charting song on the Mainstream Rock Tracks at number five, and was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 1998 Grammy Awards. Although all four singles from the album entered the top 20 on \"Billboard\"'s Mainstream Rock Tracks chart, press response to the album was mixed. The album featured a diverse set of songs which the \"Los Angeles Times\" described as a \"rousing balance\" between older material and experimental songs. Asked about the album's eclecticism, Mustaine said that \"Cryptic Writings\" was divided into thirds. One part was based around faster, more aggressive material, another was \"radio-orientated music like \"Youthanasia\"\", and the final third was more melodic.\nAfter more than a year since the band's last concert, Megadeth returned as a live act in June 1997, beginning a world tour with the Misfits and touring in the United States with Life of Agony and Coal Chamber. In July, the band participated in Ozzfest '98 but, halfway through the tour, Menza reportedly discovered a tumor on his knee and left to undergo surgery. Jimmy DeGrasso, who had collaborated with Mustaine in MD.45, was hired to replace Menza for the remainder of the tour. Though initially meant to be a temporary replacement, DeGrasso joined the band permanently after the tour. Mustaine later said that he dismissed Menza from the band because he believed the drummer had lied about having cancer.\nFollowing the band's mainstream radio success with \"Cryptic Writings\", Megadeth again worked with Dann Huff on its eighth studio album. The band began writing in January 1999, supervised by manager Bud Prager, who was credited with co-writing five of the album's twelve songs. With high expectations following the chart success of \"Trust\", Prager convinced Mustaine to grant Huff even more control over the album's recording, a decision Mustaine later regretted.\n\"Risk\", released in August 1999, was a critical and commercial failure and led to backlash from many longtime fans. Although its two predecessors incorporated rock elements alongside a more traditional heavy metal sound, \"Risk\" was virtually devoid of metal. About the band's musical direction, Dave Mustaine said: \"We hit the nadir of our career with \"Risk\", and I vowed after that we were going to get back to our roots. It took a little bit of time to do that.\" Despite this, \"Risk\" was certified gold in the United States. The album's lead single, \"Crush 'Em\", appeared on the soundtrack for \"\" and was used as an entrance theme for NHL hockey games and professional wrestling events.\nOn July 14, 1999, former drummer Gar Samuelson died of liver failure at age 41 in Orange City, Florida. Eleven days later, during Megadeth's performance at Woodstock 1999, Mustaine dedicated \"Peace Sells\" to Samuelson's memory. That month, Megadeth also recorded a cover version of the Black Sabbath's \"Never Say Die\" for the second Nativity in Black tribute album. The band began a world tour in support of \"Risk\" in September, playing with Iron Maiden during the European leg. Three months into the tour, Friedman announced his resignation from Megadeth, citing musical differences. Mustaine later said: \"I told [Marty] after \"Risk\" that we had to go back to our roots and play metal, and he quit.\"\n2000\u20132002: \"The World Needs a Hero\", breakup, and hiatus.\nIn January 2000, guitarist Al Pitrelli, formerly of Savatage and the Trans-Siberian Orchestra, became Friedman's replacement. Megadeth returned to the studio in April to work on its ninth studio album. A month into production, the band received an offer to join the Maximum Rock tour with Anthrax and M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. Megadeth put the recording on hold and toured North America during the second quarter of 2000. Early in the tour, Anthrax was removed from the bill, allowing Megadeth to play an extended co-headlining set. The tour, however, suffered from poor ticket sales.\nAfter 15 years with Capitol Records, Megadeth left the label in July 2000. According to Mustaine, the departure was due to ongoing tensions with Capitol management. Capitol returned the band's newest recordings and released a greatest hits album, \"\", with two new tracks: \"Kill the King\" and \"Dread and the Fugitive Mind\". In November, Megadeth signed with Sanctuary Records. The band returned to the studio in October to finish its next album, \"The World Needs a Hero\", which was near completion when Megadeth joined the Maximum Rock tour six months earlier. Following the negative response to \"Risk\", Mustaine fired Bud Prager and produced the album himself. The songs were written by Mustaine alone, except for \"Promises\", which had contributions from Pitrelli. Two days before the release of \"The World Needs a Hero\", Megadeth appeared in an episode of VH1's \"Behind the Music\" showcasing Mustaine, Ellefson, several past members, and Mustaine's old Metallica bandmates James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich.\n\"The World Needs a Hero\" was released in May 2001 and debuted at number sixteen on the \"Billboard\" 200. It was banned in Malaysia when the national government determined that the album's artwork was \"unsuitable for the nation's youth\". Consequently, the band canceled its concert of August 2 in Kuala Lumpur. The album marked Megadeth's return to a more aggressive sound after the stylistic variations of its previous two albums, but critics felt it fell short of expectations. Mustaine compared the album to a huge ship at sea, turning and trying to right itself to get back on course. Its lead single, \"Moto Psycho\", reached number 22 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart.\nA European tour with AC/DC in support of \"The World Needs a Hero\" began in mid-2001, followed by an American tour with Iced Earth and Endo in September. Mustaine allowed fans to choose the setlist in each American city. However, the tour was cut short following the September 11 attacks; all dates were canceled, including a DVD shoot in Argentina. The band instead played two shows in Arizona on November 16 and 17, which were filmed and released as Megadeth's first live release, \"Rude Awakening\". That year, \"Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!\" was remixed and remastered; the reissue featured modified artwork and several bonus tracks.\nIn January 2002, Mustaine was hospitalized for the removal of a kidney stone and was administered pain medication that triggered a relapse of his drug addiction. Following his stay, Mustaine checked himself into a treatment center in Texas. While there, Mustaine fell asleep with his left arm over the back of a chair, causing compression of the radial nerve. He was subsequently diagnosed with radial neuropathy, which left him unable to grasp or make a fist with his left hand.\nOn April 3, Mustaine announced in a press release that he was disbanding Megadeth, as his arm injury rendered him unable to play guitar. For the next four months, he had physical therapy five days a week, and slowly began to \"re-teach\" his left hand. To fulfill contract obligations to Sanctuary, Megadeth released the compilation album \"Still Alive... and Well?\". The first half of the album contains live tracks recorded at the Web Theatre in Phoenix, and the second half has studio recordings from \"The World Needs a Hero\".\nFollowing nearly a year of recovery, including physical therapy, Mustaine began work on what was to have been his first solo album. The recording sessions for the new material, with session musicians Vinnie Colaiuta and Jimmie Lee Sloas, began in October 2003 and were completed in April 2004. The project was put on hold when Mustaine agreed to remix and remaster Megadeth's eight-album back catalog on Capitol Records, re-recording portions that were missing.\n2004\u20132005: Reformation and \"The System Has Failed\".\nIn May 2004, Mustaine returned to his solo project. Contractual obligations to the band's European label, EMI, resulted in the recording's release as a Megadeth album. Mustaine reformed the band and contacted the fan-favorite \"Rust in Peace\" lineup to re-record backing tracks. While drummer Nick Menza agreed to return, both Marty Friedman and David Ellefson were unable to come to an agreement with Mustaine. Menza was sent home shortly after rehearsals began, a few days before the start of a tour supporting Megadeth's upcoming album. Mustaine said Menza was insufficiently prepared for the physical demands of a US tour, and \"it just didn't work out\". This was the first album without Ellefson. Chris Poland, who played lead guitar on Megadeth's first two albums, was hired to contribute guitar solos to the new album, working with Mustaine for the first time since the 1990s. Poland opted to serve only as a session musician, wanting to remain focused on his jazz fusion project OHM.\n\"The System Has Failed\" was released in September 2004. Critics heralded it as a return to form; \"Revolver\" gave the album a favorable review, calling it \"Megadeth's most vengeful, poignant and musically complex offering since 1992's \"Countdown to Extinction\"\". The album marked a shift toward the band's earlier sound; journalist Amy Sciarretto of \"CMJ New Music Report\" wrote that the album contained \"neo-thrash riffing with biting, politically charged lyrics\". \"The System Has Failed\" debuted at number eighteen on the \"Billboard\" 200 and was led by \"Die Dead Enough\", which reached number 21 on the US Mainstream Rock chart. Mustaine announced that the album would be the band's last and would be followed by a farewell tour, after which he would focus on a solo career.\nMegadeth began the Blackmail the Universe world tour in October, enlisting touring bassist James MacDonough of Iced Earth and guitarist Glen Drover of Eidolon and King Diamond. Five days before the first show, Menza was replaced by Shawn Drover, who remained with the band as a regular member. The band toured the US with Exodus and Europe with Diamond Head and Dungeon. In June 2005, Capitol released a greatest-hits compilation, \"\", featuring remixed and remastered versions of songs chosen by fans from Megadeth's Capitol albums.\nIn mid-2005, Mustaine organized an annual thrash metal festival tour, Gigantour. Megadeth headlined the inaugural tour with acts such as Dream Theater, Nevermore, Anthrax and Fear Factory. Performances at the Montreal and Vancouver shows were filmed and recorded for a live DVD-and-CD set released in the second quarter of 2006. On October 9, following the successes of \"The System Has Failed\" and the Blackmail the Universe world tour, Mustaine announced to a sold-out crowd at the Pepsi Music Rock Festival in Argentina that Megadeth would continue to record and tour. The concert, held at Obras Sanitarias stadium in Buenos Aires in front of 25,000 fans, was filmed and released on DVD as \"\" in 2007.\n2006\u20132008: \"United Abominations\".\nIn February 2006, bassist James MacDonough left the band over \"personal differences\". He was replaced by James LoMenzo, who had worked with David Lee Roth, White Lion and Black Label Society. The new Megadeth lineup made its live debut headlining the Dubai Desert Rock Festival in the United Arab Emirates with Testament. In March, Capitol released a two-disc DVD, \"Arsenal of Megadeth\", which included archive footage, interviews, live shows, and many of the band's music videos. Due to licensing issues, soundtrack and non-Capitol videos were not included. The second Gigantour began during the third quarter of 2006; Megadeth again headlined, this time with Lamb of God, Opeth, Arch Enemy and Overkill. The 2006 tour included three dates in Australia, supported by Soulfly, Arch Enemy and Caliban.\nIn May 2006, Megadeth announced that its eleventh studio album, \"United Abominations\", was near completion. Originally scheduled for release in October, Mustaine said that the band was \"putting the finishing touches on it\" and postponed its release to May of the following year. He commented on the release: \"Metal needs a really good old-school record again. I believe I have delivered.\" \"United Abominations\" was the band's first album to feature Glen Drover, Shawn Drover and James LoMenzo. It also has a newer version of \"A Tout le Monde\" entitled \"\u00c0 Tout le Monde (Set Me Free)\". The 2007 version is a duet with Cristina Scabbia of Lacuna Coil; it was recorded at a slightly faster tempo than the original and contains an extended solo.\nReleased in May 2007, \"United Abominations\" debuted at number eight on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling 54,000 copies in the first week. In March, Megadeth began a North American tour opening for the newly reformed Heaven &amp; Hell. The band played with Down for Canadian shows and with Machine Head for the US dates. A European summer festival tour followed. Late in the year, Megadeth returned to the United States to headline its Tour of Duty. In November, the band brought Gigantour to Australia with a lineup including Static-X, DevilDriver and Lacuna Coil.\nIn January 2008, Glen Drover quit Megadeth, stating that he was tired of the frequent touring and wanted to spend more time with his family. He also cited personal issues with other band members. Drover was replaced by Chris Broderick, formerly of Nevermore and Jag Panzer. Broderick was initially asked by Mustaine's management company at the end of 2007 if he would be interested in auditioning for Megadeth. After an informal meeting at Mustaine's house, Broderick was introduced as the band's new guitarist. Mustaine complimented Broderick's playing skills and called him \"the best guitarist Megadeth has ever had\". Broderick's former Nevermore bandmate, Van Williams, congratulated Megadeth on \"getting one hell of a good player, more importantly they're getting a great guy to hang out with and a true friend\".\nThe new lineup made its live debut at the Helsinki Ice Hall on February 4. The 2008 Gigantour, with 29 North American dates, began shortly afterwards. Mustaine wanted a shorter lineup, allowing each band a chance to perform well. The third tour featured In Flames, Children of Bodom, Job for a Cowboy and High on Fire. Megadeth continued the Tour of Duty in South America and Mexico in May and June. A compilation album, \"\", was released in September 2008.\n2009\u20132010: \"Endgame\" and Ellefson's return.\nIn February 2009, Megadeth and Testament were scheduled on the European \"Priest Feast\" tour, with Judas Priest as headliners. At this time, Metallica, who had been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, invited Mustaine to attend the ceremony. Mustaine was informed that he would not be inducted to the Hall of Fame because such honors were granted only to those members who received recording credit on a Metallica album. Mustaine congratulated the group respectfully, and honored his commitment to the European tour with Judas Priest. In April, Megadeth and Slayer co-headlined the Canadian Carnage. This was the first time they had performed together in more than 15 years. Machine Head and Suicide Silence opened for the four shows that occurred later in June.\nIn May, Megadeth finished recording its twelfth album, \"Endgame\". The release date for \"Endgame\" was announced on the Megadeth official website, and \"Metal Hammer\" was the first to review the album track-by-track. Megadeth began its Endgame tour in October, and finished it in December. The tour featured a number of supporting acts, including Machine Head, Suicide Silence, and Warbringer. In January 2010, Megadeth was set to embark on the American Carnage tour with Slayer and Testament, but the tour was postponed due to Tom Araya's back surgery. Several weeks later, Megadeth's \"Head Crusher\" was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 2010 Grammy Awards, the band's eighth Grammy nomination in 19 years.\nIn March, Megadeth embarked on the Rust in Peace 20th Anniversary Tour, which took place in North America and had support from Testament and Exodus. During the tour, Megadeth played \"Rust in Peace\" in its entirety. Prior to the start of the tour, early bassist David Ellefson rejoined Megadeth after eight years. In an interview for \"Classic Rock\", he stated that Shawn Drover contacted him, informing him that bassist LoMenzo was leaving the band, saying \"if ever there was a time for you and Dave [Mustaine] to talk, now is it\".\nMegadeth, along with Metallica, Slayer, and Anthrax, collectively known as the \"big four\" of thrash metal, agreed to perform on the same bill during mid-2010. These performances were part of the Sonisphere Festival and were held in a number of European countries. One such performance in Sofia, Bulgaria, was filmed and released as a full-length video entitled \"\". These shows continued the following year in the United States. The first took place in Indio, California, and was the only scheduled show in the United States at the time, although a second American production was held at Yankee Stadium in New York City shortly afterwards.\nIn July 2010, after the European \"big four\" shows, Megadeth and Slayer commenced the first leg of the American Carnage Tour, where Megadeth played \"Rust in Peace\" in its entirety, while Slayer performed its album \"Seasons in the Abyss\", both of which were released in 1990. From these shows onward, Vic Rattlehead started making sustained onstage appearances, to improve the visual facet of Megadeth's live performances. Shortly afterward, the two bands united with Anthrax for the J\u00e4germeister Music Tour in late 2010. During the final show of the tour, Kerry King joined Megadeth on stage at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Hollywood to perform Megadeth's \"Rattlehead\". It was the first time that King had performed onstage with Megadeth since 1984. Megadeth and Slayer again shared the stage for the European Carnage Tour in March and April 2011. Megadeth also headlined the fourth annual Rockstar Mayhem Festival in July and August the same year.\nIn September, the band released the DVD album \"Rust in Peace Live\", recorded at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles. Later that month, Megadeth released \"Sudden Death\" for the video game \"\". The song was commissioned by the publishers of the Guitar Hero franchise, who wanted the track to feature dark lyrics and multiple guitar solos. It was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 2011 Grammy ceremony.\n2011\u20132014: \"Thirteen\" and \"Super Collider\".\nMegadeth returned to its own Vic's Garage studio in 2011 to record its thirteenth album, to be produced by Johnny K, because Andy Sneap, the producer of Megadeth's previous two albums, was unavailable. The album was titled \"Thirteen\" and featured previously released tracks such as \"Sudden Death\" and \"Never Dead\". The album was released in November 2011, and charted at number eleven on the \"Billboard\" 200; its lead single \"Public Enemy No.\u00a01\" received a Grammy nomination for Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance, but did not win. Shortly after the album was released, Dave Mustaine stated that, after a four-year hiatus, there would be a new Gigantour tour in early 2012. The lineup consisted of Mot\u00f6rhead, Volbeat, and Lacuna Coil alongside Megadeth. After the conclusion of Gigantour, Rob Zombie and Megadeth embarked on a nine-date co-headlining US tour in the summer of 2012.\nIn September 2012, it was announced that Megadeth would re-release \"Countdown to Extinction\" in honor of the album's 20th anniversary. To mark the occasion, Megadeth launched a tour in which the band performed the album live in its entirety. One performance, filmed at the Pomona Fox Theater, was released as a live album, \",\" the following year. Another track from \"Thirteen\", \"Whose Life (Is It Anyways?)\", was nominated for Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance at the 2013 Grammy Awards, but lost to Halestorm's \"Love Bites (So Do I)\".\nIn August, Megadeth announced the recording of its fourteenth album with producer Johnny K. At the start of 2013, Megadeth left Roadrunner Records for Mustaine's newly founded label, Tradecraft, distributed through Universal Music Group. The album, \"Super Collider\", was released in June and debuted at number six on the \"Billboard\" 200, the band's highest chart position since 1994's \"Youthanasia\". Critical reaction to the album, however, was mixed, with criticism directed towards the album's deviation from the band's traditional metal sound. Shortly after the release of \"Super Collider\", Mustaine stated that he had already started thinking about a fifteenth Megadeth album. He said this had been spurred by the death of Slayer guitarist Jeff Hanneman, which gave him a sense of mortality. Mustaine elaborated: \"You know, time is short. Nobody knows how long they're gonna live. You see what happened with Jeff Hanneman, so I wanna write as much as I can while I can.\"\nThe 2013 edition of Gigantour featured Black Label Society, Hellyeah, Device, and Newsted as opening bands. At the final show, Jason Newsted, Metallica's former bassist, joined Megadeth onstage to perform \"Phantom Lord\", a song Mustaine had co-written during his stint with Metallica. Early in 2014, Megadeth was slated to play the Soundwave festival in Australia, but pulled out over a disagreement with tour promoter A.\u00a0J. Maddah concerning the band's sideshows with Newsted. \"Icon\", an eleven-song compilation of Megadeth's Capitol-era material, was released as part of Universal Music's Icon series in February.\nMegadeth encountered several setbacks throughout 2014. After Ellefson's brother died of cancer in May, the band cancelled its June tour dates to allow him to mourn. A planned August concert in Tel Aviv was canceled due to an armed conflict between Israel and Gaza. Megadeth was scheduled to appear on Mot\u00f6rhead's Mot\u00f6rboat cruise in late September, but withdrew because of Mustaine's complications following his cervical spine surgery. In October, Mustaine's mother-in-law, who suffered from Alzheimer's, went missing from a campground; her remains were discovered in late November. That same month, Drover quit the band after ten years, wanting to pursue his own musical interests, but has said he is grateful for the career Mustaine gave him. This was quickly followed by the departure of Broderick, due to artistic and musical differences. Ellefson denied rumors that Megadeth would disband, and said he and Mustaine would continue working on new music. Mustaine later said one of the reasons for Broderick and Drover leaving was their frustration over Megadeth's fan base demanding a reunion with Friedman and Menza.\n2015\u20132018: \"Dystopia\".\nLamb of God drummer Chris Adler and guitarist Kiko Loureiro of Angra were brought in to perform on Megadeth's fifteenth studio album after Mustaine unsuccessfully attempted to reunite the \"Rust in Peace\" lineup. In October 2015, Megadeth streamed \"Fatal Illusion\" off the album \"Dystopia\", which was released in January 2016. In support of \"Dystopia\", Megadeth embarked on a North American tour in February and March with Suicidal Tendencies, Children of Bodom and Havok (though Havok was soon removed from the tour by Megadeth's management following a dispute over a contract). Mustaine announced that Adler, who was performing with both Lamb of God and Megadeth, was no longer in the band due to scheduling conflicts between the two bands. He was replaced by Dirk Verbeuren from Soilwork, on Adler's recommendation. A second US tour took place in September and October, with support from Amon Amarth, Suicidal Tendencies, Metal Church, and Butcher Babies. Former drummer Menza died of a heart attack on May 21, 2016, while performing with OHM at a jazz club in Los Angeles.\nAsked about any further Big Four gigs, Mustaine called for \"the powers-that-be\" to help put together a new Big Four tour in 2017 as all the respective bands were promoting new albums. \"Dystopia\"'s title track won the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance at the 2017 Grammy Awards, the band's first win after 12 nominations. Mustaine, Loureiro, Ellefson, and Verbeuren attended the ceremony; however, album drummer and award recipient Chris Adler did not. While accepting the award, the house band played Mustaine's former band Metallica's \"Master of Puppets\" causing some controversy among fans.\nIn a June 2017 interview with No Brown M&amp;Ms, Mustaine said that Megadeth would enter the studio at the end of the year to begin working on their sixteenth studio album. A month later, Mustaine stated on Twitter that he had begun \"collecting ideas\" for the new album, but stated that they would \"probably\" enter the studio in mid-2018 to begin recording it for a 2019 release. The band joined with Scorpions for a co-headlining tour in the fall of 2017.\nIn 2018, Megadeth marked their 35th anniversary by re-releasing their 1985 debut album \"Killing Is My Business... And Business Is Good!\", dubbed \"Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good! - The Final Kill\" on June 8, 2018, as a deluxe package containing remastered versions of all songs to Mustaine's intended vision, a re-cut version of \"These Boots\" lyrically adjusted to Lee Hazlewood's version, rare live performances of songs off the album during Alice Cooper's Live in the Flesh Tour and the 1984 three song demo.\n2019\u20132023: Ellefson's second departure and \"The Sick, the Dying... and the Dead!\".\nOn May 10, 2019, Megadeth entered the studio in Franklin, Tennessee, to begin pre-production of the next album, once again teaming up with \"Dystopia\" co-producer Chris Rakestraw. On June 17, the band announced that all shows scheduled in 2019 (with the exception of the MegaCruise) would be cancelled due to Mustaine being diagnosed with throat cancer; of all the cancelled dates, the band was scheduled to support Ozzy Osbourne on the North American leg of the No More Tours II tour, which had been postponed from the summer of 2019 to the summer of 2020 due to Osbourne sustaining an injury while dealing with pneumonia. They were replaced by Marilyn Manson instead. Despite Mustaine's illness, the band vowed to continue working on their new album. On November 6, Mustaine shared a video on Instagram teasing a track from the band's upcoming album, which was originally set for release in 2019. On July 17, Megadeth announced their partnership with Gimme Radio and Richard Childress Racing on the No. 2 Gimme Radio Chevrolet Camaro, which was driven by Xfinity Series driver Tyler Reddick at the New Hampshire 200 on July 20. On August 21, the band announced that they would embark on their first tour since Mustaine's illness in January and February 2020, with Five Finger Death Punch and Bad Wolves supporting on the European tour.\nThe band was originally scheduled to perform on the first-ever MegaCruise to coincide with the release of the next album, due to sail on October 13, 2019, from Los Angeles and hit ports of San Diego and Ensenada before returning on October 18, including performances by heavy metal acts such as Lamb of God, Anthrax, Testament, Overkill, Corrosion of Conformity, Queensr\u00ffche, Armored Saint, Metal Church, Suicidal Tendencies, DragonForce, Doro, John 5, Death Angel and Toothgrinder, however, Mustaine was not present due to his illness. It was instead a live performance featuring members of each respective band playing Kiss songs.\nMegadeth was originally scheduled to embark on a co-headlining tour in North America with Lamb of God dubbed \"The Metal Tour of the Year\" in the summer of 2020, with Trivium and In Flames as support acts, but was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The tour was rescheduled for the summer of 2021, with Hatebreed replacing In Flames due to the latter being forced to withdraw from the line-up due to international visa issues caused by the pandemic. Megadeth re-entered the studio in Nashville in mid-2020 to resume recording their new album, tentatively planned for release in 2021. While hosting a Masterclass \"Front Row Live\" for fans via Zoom on January 9, 2021, Mustaine announced the title of the band's sixteenth album would be called \"The Sick, the Dying... and the Dead!\", however he indicated that the title might be subject to change.\nIn May 2021, sexually explicit videos of Ellefson were leaked to social media. The videos, reportedly recorded by a 19-year-old fan who was in correspondence with Ellefson, led to initial accusations of child grooming. Ellefson and the fan denied these claims in separate statements and maintained their encounters were consensual. On May 24, Megadeth issued a statement announcing Ellefson's dismissal from the band. Ellefson later confirmed that he had actually been dismissed ten days earlier on May 14; the videos originally surfaced on May 10. Following the controversy, Mustaine said there would be no chance for Ellefson to rejoin the band, while Ellefson said he would pursue legal action against the leaked videos.\nOn Mustaine's Gimme Radio program \"The Dave Mustaine Show\" on June 17, he said that the bass tracks recorded by Ellefson in May 2020 would not appear on the upcoming album and would be re-recorded by a different bassist, which was completed a short time later, but did not say who it was. He also revealed a song title from the album called \"The Dogs of Chernobyl\". Mustaine confirmed soon after that a new bassist was chosen with a picture showing the neck of the bass guitar and the unknown member being shown on the floor behind a chair, however, he did not reveal the name, but would announce it soon. Former bassist James LoMenzo filled in for the band's upcoming tour with Lamb of God, while Steve Di Giorgio of Testament performed as a session bassist on \"The Sick, the Dying... and the Dead!\", which was released in September 2022. LoMenzo was announced as the band's official bassist in May 2022.\nAfter several teasers, \"We'll Be Back\", the first single from the record, was released on June 23, along with the tracklist, followed by next singles \"Night Stalkers\" and \"Soldier On!\", released on July 22 and August 12 respectively.\nIn November 2022, the band released a cover of a Judas Priest song titled \"Delivering The Goods\" from their 1978 album, \"Killing Machine.\"\nOn February 27, 2023, Megadeth was joined by former guitarist Marty Friedman where they performed three songs at the Budokan in Japan. This marked Friedman's first performance with the band since 2000. On June 23, former drummer Lee Rausch died at the age of 58. Friedman made another guest appearance with the band at Wacken Open Air in August 2023.\n2023\u2013present: Kiko Loureiro's departure, \"Megadeth\" and farewell tour.\nOn September 6, 2023, it was announced that lead guitarist Kiko Loureiro would temporarily be leaving the North American portion of the tour and that he would be replaced by Teemu M\u00e4ntysaari. On November 20, 2023, M\u00e4ntysaari joined Megadeth as their lead guitarist, after Loureiro announced he would be extending his absence from the band. Loureiro later confirmed in a November 28, 2023, podcast interview that he would be permanently leaving the band. Loureiro explained his departure in a January 2024 interview with \"Guitar World\", saying: \"I had two viable options: to be in Megadeth or not. I chose my personal life. No regrets.\"\nOn August 14, 2025, Megadeth announced their upcoming studio album, which is set to be their final album, alongside the news of a farewell tour in 2026. Early bassist David Ellefson expressed interest in taking part of the final tour, saying: \"I don't even know if [Mustaine is] retiring. He's just basically saying Megadeth's over...Would I like to be a part of it? Yeah, of course. Who wouldn't? I'm a founding member of it. I'm a 30-plus-year member of it.\" The first single from the upcoming album, \"Tipping Point\", was released on October 3, 2025. The title of the final studio album was revealed at the same time as \"Megadeth\", the eponymous name as the band, with a release date of January 23, 2026. The band performed \"Tipping Point\" live for the first time on October 14 during the band's European tour as the support act for Disturbed.\nAs part of their final tour promoting the album, the band will embark on a headlining Canadian tour from mid-February to early March 2026 with Anthrax and Exodus, and will also support Iron Maiden on the North American leg of their Run for Your Lives World Tour in the fall. Mustaine later stated on November 12, 2025, that their final tour is set to run for 'three to five' years.\nControversies.\nMustaine has made numerous inflammatory statements in the press, usually regarding issues with former Metallica bandmates. The feud stemmed from his ejection from the band, how it was conducted, and disagreements on songwriting credits. Mustaine expressed his anger in the movie \"\" in a scene he later disapproved of as he felt he was mischaracterized, and that it did not represent the full extent of what happened during the meeting.\nDuring a live performance of \"Anarchy in the U.K.\" at a 1988 show in Antrim, Northern Ireland, Mustaine dedicated the song to \"the cause.\" Before the final song, Mustaine said, \"This one's for the cause! Give Ireland back to the Irish!\" The quote was inspired by Paul McCartney's song \"Give Ireland Back to the Irish\". This elicited a riot and fighting among the audience between Irish Nationalists, the majority of whom are Catholic, and the predominantly Protestant, British Unionists in attendance. The band had to travel in a bulletproof bus back to Dublin. This incident served as inspiration for the song \"Holy Wars... The Punishment Due\".\nControversial or misinterpreted lyrics have caused complications for the band. In 1988, MTV deemed that the song \"In My Darkest Hour\" encouraged suicide and banned the video. The station banned the video for \"A Tout le Monde\" for the same reason, though Mustaine said the song was written from the perspective of a dying man saying his last words to his loved ones. According to him, MTV considered the videos for \"Skin o' My Teeth\" and \"Symphony of Destruction\" a \"little bit too harsh\" and refused to play them.\nDuring a world tour in 2001, the Malaysian government canceled the band's show in the nation's capital because the authorities had a negative perception of the group's image and music. The government deemed the band's mascot, Vic Rattlehead, as inappropriate and told the members that they would be arrested if they performed. Dave Mustaine responded: \"I recognize what the Malaysian government is trying to do, and it is admirable of them trying to protect the young people in the country. But it just shows the degree of ignorance and apathy that the government has toward the problem.\"\nIn 2003, after recovering from an arm injury that threatened to end his career, Mustaine became a born-again Christian. Minor controversy was sparked by Mustaine's announcement that Megadeth would not play certain songs live due to his conversion. In May 2005, Mustaine allegedly threatened to cancel shows in Greece and Israel with extreme metal bands Rotting Christ and Dissection due to the bands' anti-Christian beliefs. This caused the two bands to cancel appearances.\nIn July 2004, former bassist Ellefson sued Mustaine for $18.5 million in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. Ellefson alleged that Mustaine short-changed him on profits including tour merchandise and publishing royalties. The suit was dismissed in 2005, and Mustaine filed a countersuit alleging that Ellefson had used the band's name in an advertisement for musical equipment; the suit was settled out of court.\nOn May 10, 2021, sexually explicit videos of Ellefson were posted on Twitter. The videos, reportedly recorded by a fan that Ellefson was in correspondence with, initially led to accusations of child grooming. However, Ellefson and the other party both denied the accusations, and the fan publicly claimed they were a consenting adult and the videos were unknowingly released by a third party. The Scottsdale Police Department (SPD) was contacted by Ellefson, who sought charges for revenge porn. Ellefson took a polygraph test to affirm his claims and presented police with a photo of the fan's driver's license to prove their age. He also shared screen shots of Snapchat and WhatsApp messages related to the allegations. Ellefson's partner admitted that she had shared the video with some friends but wasn't sure how it got leaked out to others. The SPD report states the fan \"was remorseful and agreed to send out a social media statement on...Instagram\" that they were \"a willing consenting adult during their mutual virtual sexual encounter.\" Ellefson then posted her statement and one of his own on May 10, asserting that the allegations of grooming were false. Ellefson stated he has not been extorted in any way, and he believes the videos of their consensual adult encounter were not intentionally leaked. An official statement released the next day from Megadeth stated that the situation was being \"watched closely\". Mustaine announced on May 24, 2021, that Ellefson was fired from the band.\nArtistry.\nMusical style and instrumentation.\nMegadeth are a thrash metal band. They have also been categorized as speed metal. According to Philip Trapp of \"Loudwire\", the band were erroneously labeled as a death metal band by \"The New York Times\" in 1990. He said: \"Now, Megadeth can most certainly be associated with the rise of speed metal, seeing as how the [band] did their best to top Metallica's top speed in the '80s. But perhaps in trying to purposely distill heavy metal's elements down too much, the \"Times\" threw too many genre tags at too wide an assortment of metal bands.\"\nMustaine is the band's primary songwriter. He develops songs starting with a particular riff that, with modifications, becomes the central part of the song. He has said that song fragments are composed separately, and then the band makes a compact structure from them. Drummer Shawn Drover stated that Mustaine had saved many riffs over the years and that some recent material is based on those demo recordings. Ellefson stated that the band constantly creates new material, and that making a recording begins with exchanging ideas after which the band enters the studio and discusses the concept, direction, artwork, and song titles. The lyrics are usually written after the music is arranged. Discussing the band's lyrics, Mustaine said that many of the themes are derived from literature, such as the novels of George Orwell.\nThe music of Megadeth and its underground metal contemporaries from the 1980s featured harsh vocals, double bass drum patterns, staccato riffing, power chords, tremolo picking, and screeching lead guitar work; albums from this period were produced on low budgets. After forming Megadeth, Mustaine followed the thrash metal style of his previous band, Metallica, with more emphasis on speed and intensity. When asked to describe Megadeth's guitar style, Mustaine answered: \"When you go to a show and see a guitar player who just stands there, that's a guitar player. A thrash guitar player is a guy who plays like he wants to beat the guitar's guts out.\" Most of the songs are recorded in standard guitar tuning as Mustaine believes it to provide a superior melody to alternative methods of tuning.\nIn 2017, David Ellefson talked in an interview about how the band recently started to use a lower tuning saying: \"it's just natural with age, for singers it can be a struggle, so rather than quit, than not play, how do you work it around? Well, let's drop the guitars, let's find a way to work around it.\"\nDuring the band's early days, Mustaine was the rhythm guitarist, while Chris Poland played lead. Poland performed only on Megadeth's first two albums at the time of the book's release; (he would go on to play on the 2004 album \"The System Has Failed\"); music journalists Pete Prown and Harvey P. Newquist credit him with making the music more colorful because of his jazz influences. According to former \"Metal Maniacs\" editor Jeff Wagner, the band's songwriting techniques peaked with the fourth album, \"Rust in Peace\", which he described as a \"flurry of precision and fluidity, making good on Megadeth's claim to being the world's state-of-the-art speed metal band\". Musicologist Glenn Pillsbury stated the guitar work on the album was a mixture of Mustaine's \"controlled chaos\" and the \"technical brilliance\" of Marty Friedman. Studio efforts released in the mid- and late 1990s featured songs with compact structures and less complicated riffing.\nLyrical themes.\nMegadeth's lyrics often focus on death, war, politics, and religion. The lyricism centers on nihilistic themes, but occasionally deals with topics such as alienation and social problems. The earliest releases featured themes such as occultism, graphic violence, and Satanism. Nuclear warfare and government conspiracy were preoccupations on albums such as \"Rust in Peace\" and \"Countdown to Extinction\". During Megadeth's commercial peak, Mustaine elaborated on more personal themes such as addiction and intimate relationships. For the lyrics on \"Cryptic Writings\", Mustaine said that he wanted to write songs that had more appeal to a wider audience. The title of \"United Abominations\" is a satiric play on the name of the United Nations; Mustaine criticized the organization's ineffectiveness on a number of songs on that album.\nInfluences.\nTraditional heavy metal bands such as UFO, Black Sabbath, Budgie, Judas Priest, new wave of British heavy metal (NWOBHM) bands such as Raven, Angel Witch, Mot\u00f6rhead, Iron Maiden, Diamond Head, and Venom, and punk rock bands such as the Sex Pistols and Ramones had a significant influence on Megadeth's sound. Hard rock bands such as AC/DC, Queen, Led Zeppelin, and Rush, as well as European acts like Scorpions, Accept, and Mercyful Fate, were also influential on the group's guitar style. Although the music has roots in punk, university professor Jason Bivins wrote that Megadeth followed the basic blueprint of Mot\u00f6rhead and Iron Maiden. He described the style as a mix of \"the instrumental virtuosity of the NWOBHM with the speed and aggression of hardcore punk\", while also drawing lyrical inspiration from the horror-themed punk band Misfits. Mustaine has also listed albums by the Beatles and David Bowie as recordings that influenced him.\nLegacy.\nHaving sold more than 50 million units worldwide, Megadeth is one of the few bands from the 1980s American underground metal scene to have achieved mass commercial success. Along with contemporaries Metallica, Slayer, and Anthrax, Megadeth is regarded as one of the core founding groups of thrash metal. These bands are often referred to as the \"big four\" of thrash metal, responsible for the genre's development and popularization. \"Loudwire\" ranked Megadeth the third best thrash metal band of all time, praising the group's \"provoking lyrics and mind-warping virtuosity\". \"CMJ New Music Report\" called the band's debut album a seminal release and a representative of \"the golden age of speed metal\". Billboard called the band's second album \"Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?\" a \"landmark of the thrash movement\" whose lyrics it found still relevant. MTV also recognized the band as an influential metal act, highlighting the technical aspect of the early albums.\nMegadeth is considered one of the most musically influential groups that originated in the 1980s. As part of the early American thrash metal movement, the band's music was a direct influence on death metal. Sociologist Keith Kahn-Harris wrote that the mainstream success of Megadeth was one of the reasons for the expansion of extreme metal to countries where it had previously been unknown. The band had influenced many metal bands, including Sepultura, Pantera, Slipknot, Bullet for My Valentine, Trivium, Avenged Sevenfold, Arch Enemy, Children of Bodom, Lamb of God, As I Lay Dying, All That Remains, Evile and Toxic Holocaust.\nAccording to Nielsen SoundScan, Megadeth has sold 9.2 million copies of its albums in the United States between 1991 and 2014.\nBand members.\nCurrent\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nAccolades.\nClassic Rock Roll of Honour Awards:\nClio Awards:\nGenesis Awards:\nGrammy Awards:\n\"Loudwire\" Music Awards:\n\"Metal Hammer\" Golden Gods Awards:\n\"Revolver\" Golden Gods Awards:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20659", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20659", "title": "MV Blue Marlin", "text": "Semi-submersible heavy-lift ship\nBlue Marlin and her sister ship compose the \"Marlin\" class of semisubmersible heavy-lift ships operated by Dockwise Shipping of the Netherlands. Designed to transport very large, semisubmersible drilling rigs above the transport ship's deck, she is equipped with 38 cabins to accommodate 60 people, a workout room, sauna and swimming facilities, and a secure citadel for protection against pirate attacks.\nHistory.\n\"Blue Marlin\" and her sister ship were owned by Offshore Heavy Transport of Oslo, Norway, from their construction, in April 2000 and November 1999, respectively, until 6 July 2001, when they were purchased by Dockwise. The U.S. Navy hired \"Blue Marlin\" from Offshore Heavy Transport to move the destroyer back to the United States after the warship was damaged by Al-Qaeda suicide bombers while anchored in the port of Aden, Yemen. During the latter part of 2003, work done on \"Blue Marlin\" boosted her capacity and added two retractable propulsors to improve maneuverability. The ship re-entered service in January 2004. Following these improvements, \"Blue Marlin\" delivered the oil platform \"Thunder Horse PDQ\", weighing 60,000 tons, to Corpus Christi, Texas, for completion.\nIn July 2005 \"Blue Marlin\" moved the gas refinery Sn\u00f8hvit from its construction site in C\u00e1diz to Hammerfest, an 11-day trip. This transport was filmed for the TV show \"Extreme Engineering\" on the Discovery Channel, and also the TV show \"Mega Movers\" on the History Channel.\nIn November 2005, \"Blue Marlin\" left Corpus Christi to move the massive sea-based X-band Radar to Adak, Alaska, via the southern tip of South America and Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. It arrived at Pearl Harbor on 9 January 2006, having travelled 15,000 miles. In January 2007, the \"Blue Marlin\" was employed to move two jackup rigs, the \"Rowan Gorilla VI\" and the GlobalSantaFe \"Galaxy II\", from Halifax Harbour to the North Sea.\nOn 16 June 2012, the ship arrived in Ferrol harbour in preparation for transporting the incomplete amphibious warship HMAS \"Canberra\" to Melbourne. The Australian ship was lifted onto \"Blue Marlin\" on 4 August 2012 and was scheduled to sail on 12 August, bound for the BAE Systems Australia shipyard in Williamstown. The ship passed the Port Phillip Heads and arrived in Melbourne on 17 October 2012.\nOn 5 May 2019, \"Blue Marlin\" was briefly hijacked off the coast of Equatorial Guinea. The crew took shelter in the ship's citadel, while pirates shot up the bridge in frustration. The pirates fled before the arrival of the Equatorial Guinean frigate and Spanish patrol boat .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20660", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20660", "title": "Moonie (nickname)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20663", "revid": "50557623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20663", "title": "Modified Mercalli intensity scale", "text": "Seismic intensity scale used to quantify the degree of shaking during earthquakes\nThe Modified Mercalli intensity scale (MM, MMI, or MCS) measures the effects of an earthquake at a given location. This is in contrast with the seismic magnitude usually reported for an earthquake.\nMagnitude scales measure the inherent force or strength of an earthquake \u2014 an event occurring at greater or lesser depth. (The \"\" scale is widely used.) The MMI scale measures intensity of shaking, at any particular location, on the surface. It was developed from Giuseppe Mercalli's Mercalli intensity scale of 1902.\nWhile shaking experienced at the surface is caused by the seismic energy released by an earthquake, earthquakes differ in how much of their energy is radiated as seismic waves. They also differ in the depth at which they occur; deeper earthquakes have less interaction with the surface, their energy is spread throughout a larger volume, and the energy reaching the surface is spread across a larger area. Shaking intensity is localised. It generally diminishes with distance from the earthquake's epicentre, but it can be amplified in sedimentary basins and in certain kinds of unconsolidated soils.\nIntensity scales categorise intensity empirically, based on the effects reported by untrained observers, and are adapted for the effects that might be observed in a particular region. By not requiring instrumental measurements, they are useful for estimating the magnitude and location of historical (pre-instrumental) earthquakes: the greatest intensities generally correspond to the epicentral area, and their degree and extent (possibly augmented by knowledge of local geological conditions) can be compared with other local earthquakes to estimate the magnitude.\nHistory.\nItalian volcanologist Giuseppe Mercalli formulated his first intensity scale in 1883. It had six degrees or categories, has been described as \"merely an adaptation\" of the then-standard Rossi\u2013Forel scale of 10 degrees, and is now \"more or less forgotten\". Mercalli's second scale, published in 1902, was also an adaptation of the Rossi\u2013Forel scale, retaining the 10 degrees and expanding the descriptions of each degree. This version \"found favour with the users\", and was adopted by the Italian Central Office of Meteorology and Geodynamics.\nIn 1904, Adolfo Cancani proposed adding two additional degrees for very strong earthquakes, \"catastrophe\" and \"enormous catastrophe\", thus creating a 12-degree scale. His descriptions being deficient, August Heinrich Sieberg augmented them during 1912 and 1923, and indicated a peak ground acceleration for each degree. This became known as the \"Mercalli\u2013Cancani scale, formulated by Sieberg\", or the \"Mercalli\u2013Cancani\u2013Sieberg scale\", or simply \"MCS\", and was used extensively in Europe and remains in use in Italy by the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV).\nWhen Harry O. Wood and Frank Neumann translated this into English in 1931 (along with modification and condensation of the descriptions, and removal of the acceleration criterion), they named it the \"modified Mercalli intensity scale of 1931\" (MM31). Some seismologists refer to this version as the \"Wood\u2013Neumann scale\". Wood and Neumann also had an abridged version, with fewer criteria for assessing the degree of intensity.\nThe Wood\u2013Neumann scale was revised in 1956 by Charles Francis Richter and published in his influential textbook \"Elementary Seismology\". Not wanting to have this intensity scale confused with the Richter scale he had developed, he proposed calling it the \"modified Mercalli scale of 1956\" (MM56).\nIn their 1993 compendium of historical seismicity in the United States, Carl Stover and Jerry Coffman ignored Richter's revision, and assigned intensities according to their slightly modified interpretation of Wood and Neumann's 1931 scale, effectively creating a new, but largely undocumented version of the scale.\nThe basis by which the United States Geological Survey (and other agencies) assigns intensities is nominally Wood and Neumann's MM31. However, this is generally interpreted with the modifications summarised by Stover and Coffman because in the decades since 1931, \"some criteria are more reliable than others as indicators of the level of ground shaking\". Also, construction codes and methods have evolved, making much of built environment stronger; these make a given intensity of ground shaking seem weaker. Also, some of the original criteria of the most intense degrees (X and above), such as bent rails, ground fissures, landslides, etc., are \"related less to the level of ground shaking than to the presence of ground conditions susceptible to spectacular failure\".\nThe categories \"catastrophe\" and \"enormous catastrophe\" added by Cancani (XI and XII) are used so infrequently that current USGS practice is to merge them into a single category \"Extreme\" abbreviated as \"X+\".\nScale values.\nThe lesser degrees of the MMI scale generally describe the manner in which the earthquake is felt by people. The greater numbers of the scale are based on observed structural damage.\nThis table gives MMIs that are typically observed at locations near the epicentre of the earthquake.\nCorrelation with magnitude.\nMagnitude and intensity, while related, are very different concepts. Magnitude is a function of the energy liberated by an earthquake, while intensity is the degree of shaking experienced at a point on the surface, and varies from some maximum intensity at or near the epicentre, out to zero at distance. It depends upon many factors, including the depth of the hypocentre, terrain, distance from the epicentre, whether the underlying strata there amplify surface shaking, and any directionality due to the earthquake mechanism. For example, a magnitude 8.2 quake between La Paz and Beni Departments, Bolivia, in 1994, that was 631.3\u00a0km deep, had a maximum felt intensity of IV, while a magnitude 2.2 event in Barrow-in-Furness, England, in 1865, about 1\u00a0km deep, had a maximum felt intensity of VIII, despite the magnitude 8.2 earthquake releasing 1,000,000,000 times more energy than the magnitude 2.2 earthquake.\nThe small table is a rough guide to the degrees of the MMI scale. The colours and descriptive names shown here differ from those used on certain shake maps in other articles.\nEstimating site intensity and its use in seismic hazard assessment.\nDozens of intensity-prediction equations have been published to estimate the macroseismic intensity at a location given the magnitude, source-to-site distance, and perhaps other parameters (e.g. local site conditions). These are similar to ground motion-prediction equations for the estimation of instrumental strong-motion parameters such as peak ground acceleration. A summary of intensity prediction equations is available. Such equations can be used to estimate the seismic hazard in terms of macroseismic intensity, which has the advantage of being related more closely to seismic risk than instrumental strong-motion parameters.\nCorrelation with physical quantities.\nThe MMI scale is not defined in terms of more rigorous, objectively quantifiable measurements such as shake amplitude, shake frequency, peak velocity, or peak acceleration. Human-perceived shaking and building damage are best correlated with peak acceleration for lower-intensity events, and with peak velocity for higher-intensity events.\nComparison to the moment magnitude scale.\nThe effects of any one earthquake can vary greatly from place to place, so many MMI values may be measured for the same earthquake. These values can be displayed best using a contoured map of equal intensity, known as an isoseismal map. However, each earthquake has only one magnitude.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
