{"id": "25755", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25755", "title": "Republicanism", "text": "Political ideology centered on citizenship in a state organized as a republic\nRepublicanism is a political ideology that encompasses a range of ideas from civic virtue, political participation, harms of corruption, positives of mixed constitution, rule of law, and others. Historically, it emphasizes the idea of self-governance and ranges from the rule of a representative minority or aristocracy to popular sovereignty. It has had different definitions and interpretations which vary significantly based on historical context and methodological approach. In countries ruled by a monarch or similar ruler, or with a monarch whose role is primarily ceremonial such as the United Kingdom, republicanism is simply the wish to replace the hereditary monarchy by some form of elected republic.\nRepublicanism may also refer to the non-ideological scientific approach to politics and governance. As the republican thinker and second president of the United States John Adams stated in the introduction to his famous \"A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America\", the \"science of politics is the science of social happiness\" and a republic is the form of government arrived at when the science of politics is appropriately applied to the creation of a rationally designed government.\nRather than being ideological, this approach focuses on applying a scientific methodology to the problems of governance through the rigorous study and application of past experience and experimentation in governance. This is the approach that may best be described to apply to republican thinkers such as Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli (as evident in his \"Discourses on Livy\"), John Adams, and James Madison.\nThe word \"republic\" derives from the Latin noun-phrase \"res publica\" (public thing), which referred to the system of government that emerged in the 6th century BCE following the expulsion of the kings from Rome by Lucius Junius Brutus and Collatinus.\nThis form of government in the Roman state collapsed in the latter part of the 1st century BCE, giving way to what was a monarchy in form, if not in name. Republics recurred subsequently, with, for example, Renaissance Florence or early modern Britain. The concept of a republic became a powerful force in Britain's North American colonies, where it contributed to the American Revolution. In Europe, it gained enormous influence through the French Revolution and through the First French Republic of 1792\u20131804.\nHistorical development.\nClassical antecedents.\nAncient Greece.\nIn Ancient Greece, several philosophers and historians analysed and described elements we now recognize as classical republicanism. Traditionally, the Greek concept of \"politeia\" was rendered into Latin as res publica. Consequently, political theory until relatively recently often used republic in the general sense of \"regime\". There is no single written expression or definition from this era that exactly corresponds with a modern understanding of the term \"republic\" but most of the essential features of the modern definition are present in the works of Plato, Aristotle and Polybius. These include theories of mixed government and of civic virtue. For example, in \"The Republic\", Plato places great emphasis on the importance of civic virtue (aiming for the good) together with personal virtue ('just man') on the part of the ideal rulers. Indeed, in Book V, Plato asserts that until rulers have the nature of philosophers (Socrates) or philosophers become the rulers, there can be no civic peace or happiness.\nA number of Ancient Greek city-states such as Athens and Sparta have been classified as \"classical republics\", because they featured extensive participation by the citizens in legislation and political decision-making. Aristotle considered Carthage to have been a republic as it had a political system similar to that of some of the Greek cities, notably Sparta, but avoided some of the defects that affected them.\nAncient Rome.\nBoth Livy, a Roman historian, and Plutarch, who is noted for his biographies and moral essays, described how Rome had developed its legislation, notably the transition from a \"kingdom\" to a \"republic\", by following the example of the Greeks. Some of this history, composed more than 500 years after the events, with scant written sources to rely on, may be fictitious reconstruction.\nThe Greek historian Polybius, writing in the mid-2nd century BCE, emphasized (in Book 6) the role played by the Roman Republic as an institutional form in the dramatic rise of Rome's hegemony over the Mediterranean. In his writing on the constitution of the Roman Republic, Polybius described the system as being a \"mixed\" form of government. Specifically, Polybius described the Roman system as a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy with the Roman Republic constituted in such a manner that it applied the strengths of each system to offset the weaknesses of the others. In his view, the mixed system of the Roman Republic provided the Romans with a much greater level of domestic tranquillity than would have been experienced under another form of government. Furthermore, Polybius argued, the comparative level of domestic tranquillity the Romans enjoyed allowed them to conquer the Mediterranean. Polybius exerted a great influence on Cicero as he wrote his politico-philosophical works in the 1st century BCE. In one of these works, \"De re publica\", Cicero linked the Roman concept of \"res publica\" to the Greek \"politeia\".\nThe modern term \"republic\", despite its derivation, is not synonymous with the Roman \"res publica\". Among the several meanings of the term \"res publica\", it is most often translated \"republic\" where the Latin expression refers to the Roman state, and its form of government, between the era of the Kings and the era of the Emperors. This Roman Republic would, by a modern understanding of the word, still be defined as a true republic, even if not coinciding entirely. Thus, Enlightenment philosophers saw the Roman Republic as an ideal system because it included features like a systematic separation of powers.\nRomans still called their state \"Res Publica\" in the era of the early emperors because, on the surface, the organization of the state had been preserved by the first emperors without significant alteration. Several offices from the Republican era, held by individuals, were combined under the control of a single person. These changes became permanent, and gradually conferred sovereignty on the Emperor.\nCicero's description of the ideal state, in \"De re Publica\", does not equate to a modern-day \"republic\"; it is more like enlightened absolutism. His philosophical works were influential when Enlightenment philosophers such as Voltaire developed their political concepts.\nIn its classical meaning, a republic was any stable well-governed political community. Both Plato and Aristotle identified three forms of government: democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy. First Plato and Aristotle, and then Polybius and Cicero, held that the ideal republic is a mixture of these three forms of government. The writers of the Renaissance embraced this notion.\nCicero expressed reservations concerning the republican form of government. While in his \"theoretical\" works he defended monarchy, or at least a mixed monarchy/oligarchy, in his own political life, he generally opposed men, like Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, and Octavian, who were trying to realise such ideals. Eventually, that opposition led to his death and Cicero can be seen as a victim of his own Republican ideals.\nTacitus, a contemporary of Plutarch, was not concerned with whether a form of government could be analysed as a \"republic\" or a \"monarchy\". He analysed how the powers accumulated by the early Julio-Claudian dynasty were all given by a State that was still notionally a republic. Nor was the Roman Republic \"forced\" to give away these powers: it did so freely and reasonably, certainly in Augustus' case, because of his many services to the state, freeing it from civil wars and disorder.\nTacitus was one of the first to ask whether such powers were given to the head of state because the citizens wanted to give them, or whether they were given for other reasons (for example, because one had a deified ancestor). The latter case led more easily to abuses of power. In Tacitus' opinion, the trend away from a true republic was \"irreversible\" only when Tiberius established power, shortly after Augustus' death in 14 CE (much later than most historians place the start of the Imperial form of government in Rome). By this time, too many principles defining some powers as \"untouchable\" had been implemented.\nRenaissance republicanism.\nIn Europe, republicanism was revived in the late Middle Ages when a number of states, which arose from medieval communes, embraced a republican system of government. These were generally small but wealthy trading states in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Haakonssen notes that by the Renaissance, Europe was divided, such that those states controlled by a landed elite were monarchies, and those controlled by a commercial elite were republics. The latter included the Italian city-states of Florence, Genoa, and Venice and members of the Hanseatic League. One notable exception was Dithmarschen, a group of largely autonomous villages, which confederated in a peasants' republic. Building upon concepts of medieval feudalism, Renaissance scholars used the ideas of the ancient world to advance their view of an ideal government. Thus the republicanism developed during the Renaissance is known as 'classical republicanism' because it relied on classical models. This terminology was developed by Zera Fink in the 1940s, but some modern scholars, such as Brugger, consider it confuses the \"classical republic\" with the system of government used in the ancient world. 'Early modern republicanism' has been proposed as an alternative term. It is also sometimes called civic humanism. Beyond simply a non-monarchy, early modern thinkers conceived of an \"ideal\" republic, in which mixed government was an important element, and the notion that virtue and the common good were central to good government. Republicanism also developed its own distinct view of liberty.\nRenaissance authors who spoke highly of republics were rarely critical of monarchies. While Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's \"Discourses on Livy\" is the period's key work on republics, he also wrote the treatise \"The Prince\", which is better remembered and more widely read, on how best to run a monarchy. The early modern writers did not see the republican model as universally applicable; most thought that it could be successful only in very small and highly urbanized city-states. Jean Bodin in \"Six Books of the Commonwealth\" (1576) identified monarchy with republic.\nClassical writers like Tacitus, and Renaissance writers like Machiavelli tried to avoid an outspoken preference for one government system or another. Enlightenment philosophers, on the other hand, expressed a clear opinion. Thomas More, writing before the Age of Enlightenment, was too outspoken for the reigning king's taste, even though he coded his political preferences in a utopian allegory.\nIn England a type of republicanism evolved that was not wholly opposed to monarchy; thinkers such as Thomas More, John Fisher and Sir Thomas Smith saw a monarchy, firmly constrained by law, as compatible with republicanism.\nDutch Republic.\nAnti-monarchism became more strident in the Dutch Republic during and after the Eighty Years' War, which began in 1568. This anti-monarchism was more propaganda than a political philosophy; most of the anti-monarchist works appeared in the form of widely distributed pamphlets. This evolved into a systematic critique of monarchy, written by men such as the brothers Johan and Peter de la Court. They saw all monarchies as illegitimate tyrannies that were inherently corrupt. These authors were more concerned with preventing the position of Stadholder from evolving into a monarchy, than with attacking their former rulers. Dutch republicanism also influenced French Huguenots during the Wars of Religion. In the other states of early modern Europe republicanism was more moderate.\nPolish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nIn the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, republicanism was the influential ideology. After the establishment of the Commonwealth of Two Nations, republicans supported the status quo, of having a very weak monarch, and opposed those who thought a stronger monarchy was needed. These mostly Polish republicans, such as \u0141ukasz G\u00f3rnicki, Andrzej Wolan, and Stanis\u0142aw Konarski, were well read in classical and Renaissance texts and firmly believed that their state was a republic on the Roman model, and started to call their state the Rzeczpospolita. Atypically, Polish\u2013Lithuanian republicanism was not the ideology of the commercial class, but rather of the landed nobility, which would lose power if the monarchy were expanded. This resulted in an oligarchy of the great landed magnates.\nEnlightenment republicanism.\nCaribbean.\nVictor Hugues, Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse and Nicolas Xavier de Ricard were prominent supporters of republicanism for various Caribbean islands. Edwin Sandys, William Sayle and George Tucker all supported the islands becoming republics, particularly Bermuda. Julien F\u00e9don and Joachim Philip led the republican F\u00e9don's rebellion between 2 March 1795 and 19 June 1796, an uprising against British rule in Grenada.\nCorsica.\nThe first of the Enlightenment republics established in Europe during the 18th century occurred in the small Mediterranean island of Corsica. Although perhaps an unlikely place to act as a laboratory for such political experiments, Corsica combined a number of factors that made it unique: a tradition of village democracy; varied cultural influences from the Italian city-states, Spanish empire and Kingdom of France which left it open to the ideas of the Italian Renaissance, Spanish humanism and French Enlightenment; and a geo-political position between these three competing powers which led to frequent power vacuums in which new regimes could be set up, testing out the fashionable new ideas of the age.\nFrom the 1720s the island had been experiencing a series of short-lived but ongoing rebellions against its current sovereign, the Italian city-state of Genoa. During the initial period (1729\u201336) these merely sought to restore the control of the Spanish Empire; when this proved impossible, an independent Kingdom of Corsica (1736\u201340) was proclaimed, following the Enlightenment ideal of a written constitutional monarchy. But the perception grew that the monarchy had colluded with the invading power, a more radical group of reformers led by the Pasquale Paoli pushed for political overhaul, in the form of a constitutional and parliamentary republic inspired by the popular ideas of the Enlightenment.\nIts governing philosophy was both inspired by the prominent thinkers of the day, notably the French philosophers Montesquieu and Voltaire and the Swiss theorist Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Not only did it include a permanent national parliament with fixed-term legislatures and regular elections, but, more radically for the time, it introduced universal male suffrage, and it is thought to be the first constitution in the world to grant women the right to vote, female suffrage did exist for heads of the family. It also extended Enlightened principles to other spheres, including administrative reform, the foundation of a national university at Corte, and the establishment of a popular standing army.\nThe Corsican Republic lasted for fifteen years, from 1755 to 1769, eventually falling to a combination of Genoese and French forces and was incorporated as a province of the Kingdom of France. But the episode resonated across Europe as an early example of Enlightened constitutional republicanism, with many of the most prominent political commentators of the day recognising it to be an experiment in a new type of popular and democratic government. Its influence was particularly notable among the French Enlightenment philosophers: Rousseau's famous work On the Social Contract (1762: chapter 10, book II) declared, in its discussion on the conditions necessary for a functional popular sovereignty, that \"\"There is still one European country capable of making its own laws: the island of Corsica. valour and persistency with which that brave people has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that some day that little island will astonish Europe\".\"; indeed Rousseau volunteered to do precisely that, offering a draft constitution for Paoli'se use. Similarly, Voltaire affirmed in his \"Pr\u00e9cis du si\u00e8cle de Louis XV\" (1769: chapter LX) that \"Bravery may be found in many places, but such bravery only among free peoples\". But the influence of the Corsican Republic as an example of a sovereign people fighting for liberty and enshrining this constitutionally in the form of an Enlightened republic was even greater among the Radicals of Great Britain and North America, where it was popularised via An Account of Corsica, by the Scottish essayist James Boswell. The Corsican Republic went on to influence the American revolutionaries ten years later: the Sons of Liberty, initiators of the American Revolution, would declare Pascal Paoli to be a direct inspiration for their own struggle against the British; the son of Ebenezer Mackintosh was named Pascal Paoli Mackintosh in his honour, and no fewer than five American counties are named Paoli for the same reason.\nEngland.\nOliver Cromwell set up a Christian republic called the Commonwealth of England (1649\u20131660) which he ruled after the overthrow of King Charles I. James Harrington was then a leading philosopher of republicanism. John Milton was another important Republican thinker at this time, expressing his views in political tracts as well as through poetry and prose. In his epic poem \"Paradise Lost\", for instance, Milton uses Satan's fall to suggest that unfit monarchs should be brought to justice, and that such issues extend beyond the constraints of one nation. As Christopher N. Warren argues, Milton offers \"a language to critique imperialism, to question the legitimacy of dictators, to defend free international discourse, to fight unjust property relations, and to forge new political bonds across national lines.\" This form of international Miltonic republicanism has been influential on later thinkers including 19th-century radicals Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, according to Warren and other historians.\nThe collapse of the Commonwealth of England in 1660 and the restoration of the monarchy under Charles II discredited republicanism among England's ruling circles. Nevertheless, they welcomed the liberalism, and emphasis on rights, of John Locke, which played a major role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Even so, republicanism flourished in the \"country\" party of the early 18th century (commonwealthmen), which denounced the corruption of the \"court\" party, producing a political theory that heavily influenced the American colonists. In general, the English ruling classes of the 18th century vehemently opposed republicanism, typified by the attacks on John Wilkes, and especially on the American Revolution and the French Revolution.\nFrench and Swiss thought.\nFrench and Swiss Enlightenment thinkers, such as Voltaire, Baron Charles de Montesquieu and later Jean-Jacques Rousseau, expanded upon and altered the ideas of what an ideal republic should be: some of their new ideas were scarcely traceable to antiquity or the Renaissance thinkers. Concepts they contributed, or heavily elaborated, were social contract, positive law, and mixed government. They also borrowed from, and distinguished republicanism from, the ideas of liberalism that were developing at the same time.\nLiberalism and republicanism were frequently conflated during this period, because they both opposed absolute monarchy. Modern scholars see them as two distinct streams that both contributed to the democratic ideals of the modern world. An important distinction is that, while republicanism stressed the importance of civic virtue and the common good, liberalism was based on economics and individualism. It is clearest in the matter of private property, which, according to some, can be maintained only under the protection of established positive law.\nJules Ferry, Prime Minister of France from 1880 to 1885, followed both these schools of thought. He eventually enacted the Ferry Laws, which he intended to overturn the Falloux Laws by embracing the anti-clerical thinking of the \"Philosophes\". These laws ended the Catholic Church's involvement in many government institutions in late 19th-century France, including schools.\nThirteen British Colonies in North America.\nIn recent years a debate has developed over the role of republicanism in the American Revolution and in the British radicalism of the 18th century. For many decades the consensus was that liberalism, especially that of John Locke, was paramount and that republicanism had a distinctly secondary role.\nThe new interpretations were pioneered by J.G.A. Pocock, who argued in \"The Machiavellian Moment\" (1975) that, at least in the early 18th century, republican ideas were just as important as liberal ones. Pocock's view is now widely accepted. Bernard Bailyn and Gordon Wood pioneered the argument that the American founding fathers were more influenced by republicanism than they were by liberalism. Cornell University professor Isaac Kramnick, on the other hand, argues that Americans have always been highly individualistic and therefore Lockean. Joyce Appleby has argued similarly for the Lockean influence on America.\nIn the decades before the American Revolution (1776), the intellectual and political leaders of the colonies studied history intently, looking for models of good government. They especially followed the development of republican ideas in England. Pocock explained the intellectual sources in America:\nThe Whig canon and the neo-Harringtonians, John Milton, James Harrington and Sidney, Trenchard, Gordon and Bolingbroke, together with the Greek, Roman, and Renaissance masters of the tradition as far as Montesquieu, formed the authoritative literature of this culture; and its values and concepts were those with which we have grown familiar: a civic and patriot ideal in which the personality was founded in property, perfected in citizenship but perpetually threatened by corruption; government figuring paradoxically as the principal source of corruption and operating through such means as patronage, faction, standing armies (opposed to the ideal of the militia), established churches (opposed to the Puritan and deist modes of American religion) and the promotion of a monied interest\u00a0\u2013 though the formulation of this last concept was somewhat hindered by the keen desire for readily available paper credit common in colonies of settlement. A neoclassical politics provided both the ethos of the elites and the rhetoric of the upwardly mobile, and accounts for the singular cultural and intellectual homogeneity of the Founding Fathers and their generation.\nThe commitment of most Americans to these republican values made the American Revolution inevitable. Britain was increasingly seen as corrupt and hostile to republicanism, and as a threat to the established liberties the Americans enjoyed.\nLeopold von Ranke in 1848 claimed that American republicanism played a crucial role in the development of European liberalism:\nBy abandoning English constitutionalism and creating a new republic based on the rights of the individual, the North Americans introduced a new force in the world. Ideas spread most rapidly when they have found adequate concrete expression. Thus republicanism entered our Romanic/Germanic world... Up to this point, the conviction had prevailed in Europe that monarchy best served the interests of the nation. Now the idea spread that the nation should govern itself. But only after a state had actually been formed on the basis of the theory of representation did the full significance of this idea become clear. All later revolutionary movements have this same goal... This was the complete reversal of a principle. Until then, a king who ruled by the grace of God had been the center around which everything turned. Now the idea emerged that power should come from below... These two principles are like two opposite poles, and it is the conflict between them that determines the course of the modern world. In Europe the conflict between them had not yet taken on concrete form; with the French Revolution it did.\n\"R\u00e9publicanisme\".\nRepublicanism, especially that of Rousseau, played a central role in the French Revolution and foreshadowed modern republicanism. The revolutionaries, after overthrowing the French monarchy in the 1790s, began by setting up a republic; Napoleon converted it into an Empire with a new aristocracy. In the 1830s Belgium adopted some of the innovations of the progressive political philosophers of the Enlightenment.\nR\u00e9publicanisme is a French version of modern republicanism. It is a form of social contract, deduced from Jean-Jacques Rousseau's idea of a general will. Each citizen is engaged in a direct relationship with the state, removing the need for identity politics based on local, religious, or racial identification.\n\"R\u00e9publicanisme\", in theory, makes anti-discrimination laws unnecessary, though some critics may argue that in republics also, colour-blind laws serve to perpetuate discrimination.\nIreland.\nInspired by the American and French Revolutions, the Society of United Irishmen was founded in 1791 in Belfast and Dublin. The inaugural meeting of the United Irishmen in Belfast on 18 October 1791 approved a declaration of the society's objectives. It identified the central grievance that Ireland had no national government: \"...we are ruled by Englishmen, and the servants of Englishmen, whose object is the interest of another country, whose instrument is corruption, and whose strength is the weakness of Ireland...\" They adopted three central positions: (i) to seek out a cordial union among all the people of Ireland, to maintain that balance essential to preserve liberties and extend commerce; (ii) that the sole constitutional mode by which English influence can be opposed, is by a complete and radical reform of the representation of the people in Parliament; (iii) that no reform is practicable or efficacious, or just which shall not include Irishmen of every religious persuasion. The declaration, then, urged constitutional reform, union among Irish people and the removal of all religious disqualifications.\nThe movement was influenced, at least in part, by the French Revolution. Public interest, already strongly aroused, was brought to a pitch by the publication in 1790 of Edmund Burke's \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\", and Thomas Paine's response, \"Rights of Man\", in February 1791. Theobald Wolfe Tone wrote later that, \"This controversy, and the gigantic event which gave rise to it, changed in an instant the politics of Ireland.\" Paine himself was aware of this commenting on sales of Part I of \"Rights of Man\" in November 1791, only eight months after publication of the first edition, he informed a friend that in England \"almost sixteen thousand has gone off \u2013 and in Ireland above forty thousand\". Paine may have been inclined to talk up sales of his works but what is striking in this context is that Paine believed that Irish sales were so far ahead of English ones before Part II had appeared. On 5 June 1792, Thomas Paine, author of the \"Rights of Man\" was proposed for honorary membership of the Dublin Society of the United Irishmen.\nThe fall of the Bastille was to be celebrated in Belfast on 14 July 1791 by a Volunteer meeting. At the request of Thomas Russell, Tone drafted suitable resolutions for the occasion, including one favouring the inclusion of Catholics in any reforms. In a covering letter to Russell, Tone wrote, \"I have not said one word that looks like a wish for separation, though I give it to you and your friends as my most decided opinion that such an event would be a regeneration of their country\". By 1795, Tone's republicanism and that of the society had openly crystallized when he tells us: \"I remember particularly two days thae we passed on Cave Hill. On the first Russell, Neilson, Simms, McCracken and one or two more of us, on the summit of McArt's fort, took a solemn obligation...never to desist in our efforts until we had subverted the authority of England over our country and asserted her independence.\"\nThe culmination was an uprising against British rule in Ireland lasting from May to September 1798 \u2013 the Irish Rebellion of 1798 \u2013 with military support from revolutionary France in August and again October 1798. After the failure of the rising of 1798 the United Irishman, John Daly Burk, an \u00e9migr\u00e9 in the United States in his \"The History of the Late War in Ireland\" written in 1799, was most emphatic in its identification of the Irish, French and American causes.\nModern republicanism.\nDuring the Enlightenment, anti-monarchism extended beyond the civic humanism of the Renaissance. Classical republicanism, still supported by philosophers such as Rousseau and Montesquieu, was only one of several theories seeking to limit the power of monarchies rather than directly opposing them. Liberalism and socialism departed from classical republicanism and fueled the development of the more modern republicanism.\nBrazil.\nBrazilian historiography generally identifies republican thought with the movement that was formally organized in the Empire of Brazil during the 1870s to 1880s, but republicanism was already present in the country since the First Reign (1822\u20131831) and the regency period (1831\u20131840). During Brazil's early years after its independence, the country saw the emergence of a republican discourse among the writings of figures such as Cipriano Barata, Frei Caneca and Jo\u00e3o Soares Lisboa, but republican ideology better developed as a political current after the emergence of the so-called radical liberal faction in the crisis of the final years of the First Reign.\nDuring the First Reign, three groups emerged on the country's political scene: the moderate liberals, the radical liberals and the \"caramurus\". The moderates defended political-institutional reforms such as decentralization, without, however, giving up the monarchical system. Their main doctrinal references were Locke, Montesquieu, Guizot and Benjamin Constant. The radicals, in turn, formed a heterogeneous group with almost no representation within the imperial bureaucracy. They were on the left of the political spectrum, along Jacobin lines, and defended broad reforms such as the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic, federalism, the extinction of the Moderating Power, the end of life tenure in the Senate, the separation between Church and State, relative social equality, the extension of political and civil rights to all free segments of society, including women, the staunch opposition to slavery, displaying a nationalist, xenophobic and anti-Portuguese discourse.\nIn 1870 a group of radical liberals, convinced of the impossibility of achieving their desired reforms within the Brazilian monarchical system, met and founded the Republican Party. From its founding until 1889, the party operated in an erratic and geographically diverse manner. The republican movement was strongest in the Court and in S\u00e3o Paulo, but other smaller foci also emerged in Minas Gerais, Par\u00e1, Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Sul. Only in S\u00e3o Paulo, however, did the movement become a true organized and disciplined party capable of electoral competition.\nFrance.\nDiscredited after the Second World War, French radicals split into a left-wing party\u00a0\u2013 the Radical Party of the Left, an associate of the Socialist Party \u2013 and the Radical Party \"valoisien\", an associate party of the conservative Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) and its Gaullist predecessors. Italian radicals also maintained close links with republicanism, as well as with socialism, with the \"Partito radicale\" founded in 1955, which became the Transnational Radical Party in 1989.\nIncreasingly, after the fall of communism in 1989 and the collapse of the Marxist interpretation of the French Revolution, France increasingly turned to republicanism to define its national identity. Charles de Gaulle, presenting himself as the military savior of France in the 1940s, and the political savior in the 1950s, refashioned the meaning of republicanism. Both left and right enshrined him in the Republican pantheon.\nItaly.\nIn the history of Italy, there are several republican governments that have followed one another over time. Examples are the ancient Roman Republic and the medieval maritime republics. From Cicero to Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, Italian philosophers have imagined the foundations of political science and republicanism. But it was Giuseppe Mazzini who revived the republican idea in Italy in the 19th century.\nAn Italian nationalist in the historical radical tradition and a proponent of a republicanism of social-democratic inspiration, Mazzini helped define the modern European movement for popular democracy in a republican state. Mazzini's thoughts had a very considerable influence on the Italian and European republican movements, in the Constitution of Italy, about Europeanism and more nuanced on many politicians of a later period, among them American president Woodrow Wilson, British prime minister David Lloyd George, Mahatma Gandhi, Israeli prime minister Golda Meir and Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Mazzini formulated a concept known as \"thought and action\" in which thought and action must be joined together and every thought must be followed by action, therefore rejecting intellectualism and the notion of divorcing theory from practice.\nIn July 1831, in exile in Marseille, Giuseppe Mazzini founded the Young Italy movement, which aimed to transform Italy into a unitary democratic republic, according to the principles of freedom, independence and unity, but also to oust the monarchic regimes pre-existing the unification, including the Kingdom of Sardinia. The foundation of the Young Italy constitutes a key moment of the Italian Risorgimento. The philosopher Carlo Cattaneo promoted a secular and republican Italy in the extension of Mazzini's ideas, but organized as a federal republic.\nThe political projects of Mazzini and Cattaneo were thwarted by the action of the Piedmontese Prime Minister Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, and Giuseppe Garibaldi. The latter set aside his republican ideas to favor Italian unity. After having obtained the conquest of the whole of southern Italy during the Expedition of the Thousand, Garibaldi handed over the conquered territories to the king of Sardinia Victor Emmanuel II, which were annexed to the Kingdom of Sardinia after a plebiscite. This earned him heavy criticism from numerous republicans who accused him of treason. While a laborious administrative unification began, a first Italian parliament was elected and, on 17 March 1861, Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of Italy.\nIn the political panorama of the time there was a republican political movement which had its martyrs, such as the soldier Pietro Barsanti. Barsanti was a supporter of republican ideas, and was a soldier in the Royal Italian Army with the rank of corporal. He was sentenced to death and shot in 1870 for having favored an insurrectional attempt against the Savoy monarchy and is therefore considered the first martyr of the modern Italian Republic, as well as a symbol of republican ideals in Italy.\nThe Republicans took part in the elections to the Italian Parliament, and in 1853 they formed the Action Party around Giuseppe Mazzini. Although in exile, Mazzini was elected in 1866, but refused to take his seat in parliament. Carlo Cattaneo was elected deputy in 1860 and 1867, but refused so as not to have to swear loyalty to the House of Savoy. The problem of the oath of loyalty to the monarchy, necessary to be elected, was the subject of controversy within the republican forces. In 1873 Felice Cavallotti, one of the most committed Italian politicians against the monarchy, preceded his oath with a declaration in which he reaffirmed his republican beliefs.\nIn October 1922, the nomination of Benito Mussolini as prime minister by King Victor Emmanuel III, following the march on Rome, paved the way for the establishment of the dictatorship. With the implementation of fascist laws (Royal Decree of 6 November 1926), all political parties operating on Italian territory were dissolved, with the exception of the National Fascist Party. The Kingdom of Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. Hostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered.\nThe aftermath of World War II left Italy also with an anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime for the previous twenty years. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement. Italy became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum held on 2 June, a day celebrated since as \"Festa della Repubblica\". It was the first time that the whole Italian Peninsula was under a form of republican governance since the end of the ancient Roman Republic.\nThe Italian Republican Party (, PRI) is a political party in Italy established in 1895, which makes it the oldest political party still active in the country. The PRI identifies with 19th-century classical radicalism, as well as Mazzinianism, and its modern incarnation is associated with liberalism, social liberalism, and centrism. The PRI has old roots and a long history that began with a left-wing position, being the heir of the Historical Far Left and claiming descent from the political thought of Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi. With the rise of the Italian Communist Party (PCI) and the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) to its left, the PRI was associated with centre-left politics. The early PRI was also known for its anti-clerical, anti-monarchist, republican, and later anti-fascist stances. While maintaining those traits, during the second half of the 20th century the party moved towards the centre on the left\u2013right political spectrum, becoming increasingly economically liberal.\nAfter 1949, the PRI was a member of the pro-NATO alliance formed by Christian Democracy (DC), the Italian Democratic Socialist Party (PSDI), and the Italian Liberal Party (PLI), enabling it to participate in most governments of the 1950s, a period later known as Centrism. In 1963, the party helped bring together DC and PSI in Italy's first centre-left government, the Organic centre-left. Although small in terms of voter support, the PRI was influential thanks to leaders like Eugenio Chiesa, Giovanni Conti, Cipriano Facchinetti, Randolfo Pacciardi, Oronzo Reale, Ugo La Malfa, Bruno Visentini, Oddo Biasini, and Giovanni Spadolini.\nAs part of the Pentapartito governing coalition, Spadolini served as Prime Minister of Italy in 1981\u20131982, the first non Christian Democrat since 1945. From 1976 to 2010, the PRI was a member of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (ELDR), along with the PLI, and the two parties usually ran together in European Parliament elections. After joining the centrist Segni Pact in 1994, the PRI was part of the centre-left coalition from 1996 to 2006, and then of the centre-right coalition from 2008 to 2013 (its leader Giorgio La Malfa was minister in 2005\u20132006). Afterwards, it ran alone until joining the centrist Action \u2013 Italia Viva in 2022.\nLatin America.\nRepublicanism helped inspire movements for independence in former Spanish colonies of Latin America in the early 19th century, and republican ideals and political designs were influential in the new Latin American republics. Diplomats and international jurists in Latin America, such as Andr\u00e9s Bello, shaped a tradition of \"republican internationalism\" that connected domestic republican ideals and practices with the region's emerging place in international society.\nMany key political figures in the region identified as republicans, including Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Samper, Francisco Bilbao, and Juan Ega\u00f1a. Several of these figures produced essays, pamphlets, and collections of speeches that drew upon and adapted the broader tradition of republican political thought.\nSpain.\nThere has existed in Spain a persistent trend of republican thought, especially throughout the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, that has manifested itself in diverse political parties and movements over the entire course of the history of Spain. While these movements have shared the objective of establishing a republic, during these three centuries there have surged distinct schools of thought on the form republicans would want to give to the Spanish State: unitary or federal. The roots of Spanish republicanism arose out of liberal thought in the wake of the French Revolution. The first manifestations of republicanism occurred during the Peninsular War, in which Spain and nearby regions fought for independence from Napoleon, 1808\u20131814. During the reign of Ferdinand VII (1813\u20131833) there were several liberalist military pronunciamientos, but it was not until the reign of Isabella II (1833\u20131868) that the first clearly republican and anti-monarchist movements appeared.\nThere is a renewed interest in republicanism in Spain after two earlier attempts: the First Spanish Republic (1873\u20131874) and the Second Spanish Republic (1931\u20131939). Movements such as \"Ciudadanos Por la Rep\u00fablica\", Citizens for the Republic in Spanish, have emerged, and parties like United Left and the Republican Left of Catalonia increasingly refer to republicanism. In a survey conducted in 2007 reported that 69% of the population prefer the monarchy to continue, compared with 22% opting for a republic. In a 2008 survey, 58% of Spanish citizens were indifferent, 16% favored a republic, 16% were monarchists, and 7% claimed they were \"Juancarlistas\" (supporters of continued monarchy under King Juan Carlos I, without a common position for the fate of the monarchy after his death). In recent years, there has been a tie between Monarchists and Republicans.\nTurkey.\nIn 1923 after the fall of the Ottoman Empire an inherited aristocracy and sultanate suppressed republican ideas until the successful republican revolution of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk in the 1920s. Republicanism remains one of the six principles of Kemalism. Kemalism, as it was implemented by Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk after the declaration of Republic in 1923, was defined by sweeping political, social, cultural and religious reforms designed to separate the new Turkish state from its Ottoman predecessor and embrace a Western-style modernized lifestyle, including the establishment of secularism/laicism, state support of the sciences, free education, gender equality, economic statism and many more. Most of those policies were first introduced to and implemented in Turkey during Atat\u00fcrk's presidency through his reforms.\nMany of the root ideas of Kemalism began during the late Ottoman Empire under various reforms to avoid the imminent collapse of the Empire, beginning chiefly in the early 19th-century Tanzimat reforms. The mid-century Young Ottomans attempted to create the ideology of Ottoman nationalism, or Ottomanism, to quell the rising ethnic nationalism in the Empire and introduce limited democracy for the first time while maintaining Islamist influences. In the early 20th century, the Young Turks abandoned Ottoman nationalism in favor of early Turkish nationalism, while adopting a secular political outlook. After the demise of the Ottoman Empire, Atat\u00fcrk, influenced by both the Young Ottomans and the Young Turks, as well as by their successes and failures, led the declaration of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, borrowing from the earlier movements' ideas of secularism and Turkish nationalism, while implementing free education and other reforms that have been enshrined by later leaders into guidelines for governing Turkey.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDissatisfaction with British rule led to a longer period of agitation in the early 19th century and failed republican revolutions in Canada in the late 1830s and Ireland in 1848. This led to the Treason Felony Act in 1848 which made it illegal to advocate for republicanism. Another \"significant incarnation\" of republicanism broke out in the late 19th century when Queen Victoria went into mourning and largely disappeared from public view after the death of her husband, Prince Albert. This led to questions about whether or not the institution should continue, with politicians speaking in support of abolition. This ended when Victoria returned to public duties later in the century and regained significant public support. More recently, in the early 21st century, increasing dissatisfaction with the House of Windsor, especially after the death of Elizabeth II in 2022, has led to public support for the monarchy reaching historical lows.\nUnited States.\nThe values and ideals of republicanism are foundational in the constitution and history of the United States. As the United States constitution prohibits granting titles of nobility, \"republicanism\" in this context does not refer to a political movement to abolish such a social class, as it does in countries such as the UK, Australia, and the Netherlands. Instead, it refers to the core values that citizenry in a republic have, or ought to have. Political scientists and historians have described these central values as \"liberty\" and \"inalienable individual rights\"; recognizing the sovereignty of the people as the source of all authority in law; rejecting monarchy, aristocracy, and hereditary political power; virtue and faithfulness in the performance of civic duties; and vilification of corruption. These values are based on those of Ancient Greco-Roman, Renaissance, and English models and ideas.\nRepublicanism became the dominant political value of Americans during and after the American Revolution. The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, especially Thomas Jefferson, Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, Thomas Paine, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, James Madison and Alexander Hamilton. However, in 1854, social movements started to harness values of abolitionism and free labour. These burgeoning radical traditions in America became epitomized in the early formation of the Republican Party, known as \"red republicanism.\" The efforts were primarily led by political leaders such as Alvan E. Bovay, Thaddeus Stevens, and Abraham Lincoln.\nTheory.\nNeo-republicanism.\nNeorepublicanism is the effort by current scholars to draw on a classical republican tradition in the development of an attractive public philosophy intended for contemporary purposes. Neorepublicanism emerges as an alternative postsocialist critique of market society from the left.\nProminent theorists in this movement are Philip Pettit and Cass Sunstein, who have each written several works defining republicanism and how it differs from liberalism. Michael Sandel, a late convert to republicanism from communitarianism, advocates replacing or supplementing liberalism with republicanism, as outlined in his \"Democracy's Discontent: America in Search of a Public Philosophy\".\nContemporary work from a neorepublican include jurist K. Sabeel Rahman's book \"Democracy Against Domination\", which seeks to create a neorepublican framework for economic regulation grounded in the thought of Louis Brandeis and John Dewey and popular control, in contrast to both New Deal-style managerialism and neoliberal deregulation. Philosopher Elizabeth Anderson's \"Private Government\" traces the history of republican critiques of private power, arguing that the classical free market policies of the 18th and 19th centuries intended to help workers only lead to their domination by employers. In \"From Slavery to the Cooperative Commonwealth\", political scientist Alex Gourevitch examines a strain of late 19th century American republicanism known as labour republicanism that was the producerist labour union The Knights of Labor, and how republican concepts were used in service of workers rights, but also with a strong critique of the role of that union in supporting the Chinese Exclusion Act.\nDemocracy.\nIn the late 18th century there was convergence of democracy and republicanism. Republicanism is a system that replaces or accompanies inherited rule. There is an emphasis on liberty, and a rejection of corruption. It strongly influenced the American Revolution and the French Revolution in the 1770s and 1790s, respectively. Republicans, in these two examples, tended to reject inherited elites and aristocracies, but left open two questions: whether a republic, to restrain unchecked majority rule, should have an unelected upper chamber\u2014perhaps with members appointed as meritorious experts\u2014and whether it should have a constitutional monarch.\nThough conceptually separate from democracy, republicanism included the key principles of rule by consent of the governed and sovereignty of the people. In effect, republicanism held that kings and aristocracies were not the real rulers, but rather the whole people were. Exactly \"how\" the people were to rule was an issue of democracy: republicanism itself did not specify a means. In the United States, the solution was the creation of political parties that reflected the votes of the people and controlled the government (see Republicanism in the United States). In Federalist No. 10, James Madison rejected \"pure democracy\" in favour of representative democracy, which he called \"a republic\". There were similar debates in many other democratizing nations.\nIn contemporary usage, the term \"democracy\" refers to a government chosen by the people, whether it is direct or representative. Today the term \"republic\" usually refers to representative democracy with an elected head of state, such as a president, who serves for a limited term; in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these states also are representative democracies, with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister.\nThe Founding Fathers of the United States rarely praised and often criticized (direct) democracy, which they equated with mob rule; James Madison argued that what distinguished a \"democracy\" from a \"republic\" was that the former became weaker as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction, whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combatted faction by its very structure. What was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government should be \"bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend.\" Thomas Jefferson warned that \"an elective despotism is not the government we fought for.\" Professors Richard Ellis of Willamette University and Michael Nelson of Rhodes College argue that much constitutional thought, from Madison to Lincoln and beyond, has focused on \"the problem of majority tyranny.\" They conclude, \"The principles of republican government embedded in the Constitution represent an effort by the framers to ensure that the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness would not be trampled by majorities.\"\nConstitutional monarchs and upper chambers.\nSome countries (such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Scandinavian countries, and Japan) turned powerful monarchs into constitutional ones with limited, or eventually merely symbolic, powers. Often the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system, whether or not they were replaced with democratic institutions (such as in France, China, Iran, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece, Turkey and Egypt). In Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Papua New Guinea, and some other countries the monarch, or its representative, is given supreme executive power, but by convention acts only on the advice of his or her ministers. Many nations had elite upper houses of legislatures, the members of which often had lifetime tenure, but eventually these houses lost much power (as the UK House of Lords), or else became elective and remained powerful.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25756", "revid": "50632646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25756", "title": "Repetitive strain injury", "text": "Muscular, skeletal, or nerve injury due to repetitive actions\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA repetitive strain injury (RSI) is an injury to part of the musculoskeletal or nervous system caused by repetitive use, vibrations, compression or long periods in a fixed position. Other common names include repetitive stress injury, repetitive stress disorders, cumulative trauma disorders, and overuse syndrome.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSome examples of symptoms experienced by patients with RSI are aching, pulsing pain, tingling and extremity weakness, initially presenting with intermittent discomfort and then with a higher degree of frequency.\nDefinition.\nRepetitive strain injury (RSI) and associative trauma orders are umbrella terms used to refer to several discrete conditions that can be associated with repetitive tasks, forceful exertions, vibrations, mechanical compression, sustained or awkward positions, or repetitive eccentric contractions. The exact terminology is controversial, but the terms now used by the United States Department of Labor and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health are musculoskeletal disorders and work-related musculoskeletal disorders.\nExamples of conditions that may sometimes be attributed to such causes include tendinosis (or less often tendinitis), carpal tunnel syndrome, cubital tunnel syndrome, De Quervain syndrome, thoracic outlet syndrome, intersection syndrome, golfer's elbow (medial epicondylitis), tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis), trigger finger (so-called stenosing tenosynovitis), radial tunnel syndrome, ulnar tunnel syndrome, and focal dystonia.\nA general worldwide increase since the 1970s in RSIs of the arms, hands, neck, and shoulder has been attributed to the widespread use in the workplace of keyboard entry devices, such as typewriters and computers, which require long periods of repetitive motions in a fixed posture. Specific sources of discomfort have been popularly referred to by terms such as Blackberry thumb, PlayStation thumb, Rubik's wrist or \"cuber's thumb\", stylus finger, raver's wrist, and Emacs pinky. Extreme temperatures have also been reported as risk factor for RSI.\nRisk factors.\nOccupational risk factors.\nWorkers in certain fields are at risk of repetitive strains. Most occupational injuries are musculoskeletal disorders, and many of these are caused by cumulative trauma rather than a single event. Miners and poultry workers, for example, must make repeated motions which can cause tendon, muscular, and skeletal injuries. Jobs that involve repeated motion patterns or prolonged posture within a work cycle, or both, may be repetitive. Young athletes are predisposed to RSIs due to an underdeveloped musculoskeletal system.\nPsychosocial factors.\nPsychological factors include personality differences concerning work-place organization problems. Certain workers may negatively perceive their work organization due to excessive work rate, long work hours, limited job control, and low social support. Studies show elevated urinary catecholamines (stress-related chemicals) in workers with RSI. Pain related to RSI may evolve into chronic pain syndrome, particularly for workers who do not have supports from coworkers and supervisors.\nNon-occupational factors.\nAge and gender are important risk factors for RSIs. The risk of RSI increases with age. Women are more likely affected than men because of their smaller frame, lower muscle mass and strength, and endocrine influences. In addition, lifestyle choices such as smoking and alcohol consumption are recognizable risk factors for RSI. Recent scientific findings indicate that obesity and diabetes may predispose an individual to RSIs by creating a chronic low grade inflammatory response that prevents the body from effectively healing damaged tissues.\nDiagnosis.\nRSIs are assessed using a number of objective clinical measures. These include effort-based tests such as grip and pinch strength, diagnostic tests such as Finkelstein's test for De Quervain's tendinitis, Phalen's contortion, Tinel's percussion for carpal tunnel syndrome, and nerve conduction velocity tests that show nerve compression in the wrist. Various imaging techniques can also be used to show nerve compression such as x-ray for the wrist, and MRI for the thoracic outlet and cervico-brachial areas. Utilization of routine imaging is useful in early detection and treatment of overuse injuries in at risk populations, which is important in preventing long term adverse effects.\nTreatment.\nThere are no quick fixes for repetitive strain injuries. Early diagnosis is critical to limiting damage. For upper limb RSIs, occupational therapists can create interventions that include teaching the correct approaches to functional task movements in order to minimize the risk of injury. The RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, Elevation) treatment is used as the first treatment for many muscle strains, ligament sprains, or other bruises and injuries. RICE is used immediately after an injury happens and for the first 24 to 48 hours after the injury. These modalities can help reduce the swelling and pain. Commonly prescribed treatments for early-stage RSIs include analgesics, myofeedback, biofeedback, physical therapy, relaxation, intermittent vacuum therapy and ultrasound therapy. Low-grade RSIs can sometimes resolve themselves if treatments begin shortly after the onset of symptoms. However, some RSIs may require more aggressive intervention including surgery and can persist for years.\nAlthough there are no \"quick fixes\" for RSI, there are effective approaches to its treatment and prevention. One is that of ergonomics, the changing of one's environment (especially workplace equipment) to minimize repetitive strain.\nA 2006 Canadian study found exercise in leisure time was strongly associated with decreased risk of developing an RSI. Doctors sometimes recommend that those with RSI engage in specific strengthening exercises, for example to improve sitting posture, reduce excessive kyphosis, and potentially thoracic outlet syndrome. Modifications of posture and arm use are often recommended.\nHistory.\nAlthough seemingly a modern phenomenon, RSIs have long been documented in the medical literature. In 1700, the Italian physician Bernardino Ramazzini first described RSI in more than 20 categories of industrial workers in Italy, including musicians and clerks. Carpal tunnel syndrome was first identified by the British surgeon James Paget in 1854. The April 1875 issue of \"The Graphic\" describes \"telegraphic paralysis.\"\nThe Swiss surgeon Fritz de Quervain first identified De Quervain's tendinitis in Swiss factory workers in 1895. The French neurologist Jules Tinel (1879\u20131952) developed his percussion test for compression of the median nerve in 1900. The American surgeon George Phalen improved the understanding of the etiology of carpal tunnel syndrome with his clinical experience of several hundred patients during the 1950s and 1960s.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25757", "revid": "173694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25757", "title": "Robertson Davies", "text": "Canadian novelist\nWilliam Robertson Davies (28 August 1913 \u2013 2 December 1995) was a Canadian novelist, playwright, critic, journalist, and professor. He was one of Canada's best known and most popular authors and one of its most distinguished \"men of letters\", a term Davies gladly accepted for himself. Davies was the founding Master of Massey College, a graduate residential college associated with the University of Toronto.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nDavies was born in Thamesville, Ontario, the third son of William Rupert Davies and Florence Sheppard McKay. Growing up, Davies was surrounded by books and lively language. His father, a member of the Canadian Senate from 1942 to his death in 1967, was a newspaperman from Welshpool, Wales, and both parents were voracious readers. He followed in their footsteps and read everything he could. He also participated in theatrical productions as a child, where he developed a lifelong interest in drama.\nHe spent his formative years in Renfrew, Ontario (and renamed it as \"Blairlogie\", in his novel \"What's Bred in the Bone\"); many of the novel's characters are named after families he knew there. He attended Upper Canada College in Toronto from 1926 to 1932 and while there attended services at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene. He would later leave the Presbyterian Church and join Anglicanism over objections to Calvinist theology. Davies later used his experience of the ceremonial of High Mass at St. Mary Magdalene's in his novel \"The Cunning Man\".\nAfter Upper Canada College, he studied at Queen's University at Kingston, Ontario, from 1932 until 1935. According to the \"Queen's University Journal\" Davies enrolled as a special student not working towards a degree, because he was unable to pass the mathematics component of Queen's entrance exam. At Queen's he wrote for the student paper, \"The Queen's Journal\", where he wrote a literary column. He left Canada to study at Balliol College, Oxford, where he received a BLitt degree in 1938. The next year he published his thesis, \"Shakespeare's Boy Actors\", and embarked on an acting career outside London. In 1940, he played small roles and did literary work for the director at the Old Vic Repertory Company in London. Also that year, Davies married Australian Brenda Mathews, whom he had met at Oxford, and who was then working as stage manager for the theatre. They spent their honeymoon in the Welsh countryside at Fronfraith Hall, Abermule, Montgomery, the family house owned by Rupert Davies.\nDavies's early life provided him with themes and material to which he would often return in his later work, including the theme of Canadians returning to England to finish their education, and the theatre.\nMiddle years.\nDavies and his new bride returned to Canada in 1940, where he took the position of literary editor at \"Saturday Night\" magazine. Two years later, he became editor of the \"Peterborough Examiner\" in the small city of Peterborough, Ontario, northeast of Toronto. Again he was able to mine his experiences here for many of the characters and situations which later appeared in his plays and novels.\nDavies, along with family members William Rupert Davies and Arthur Davies, purchased several media outlets. Along with the \"Examiner\" newspaper, they owned the \"Kingston Whig-Standard\" newspaper, CHEX-AM, CKWS-AM, CHEX-TV, and CKWS-TV.\nDuring his tenure as editor of the \"Examiner\", which lasted from 1942 to 1955 (he subsequently served as publisher from 1955 to 1965), Davies published a total of 18 books, produced several of his own plays, and wrote articles for various journals. Davies set out his theory of acting in his \"Shakespeare for Young Players\" (1947), and then put theory into practice when he wrote \"Eros at Breakfast\", a one-act play which was named best Canadian play of the year by the 1948 Dominion Drama Festival.\n\"Eros at Breakfast\" was followed by \"Fortune, My Foe\" in 1949 and \"At My Heart's Core\", a three-act play, in 1950. Meanwhile, Davies was writing humorous essays in the \"Examiner\" under the pseudonym Samuel Marchbanks. Some of these were collected and published in \"The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks\" (1947), \"The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks\" (1949), and later in \"Samuel Marchbanks' Almanack\" (1967). An omnibus edition of the three Marchbanks books, with new notes by the author, was published under the title \"The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks\" in 1985.\nDuring the 1950s, Davies played a major role in launching the Stratford Shakespearean Festival of Canada. He served on the Festival's board of governors, and collaborated with the Festival's director, Sir Tyrone Guthrie, in publishing three books about the Festival's early years.\nAlthough his first love was drama and he had achieved some success with his occasional humorous essays, Davies found his greatest success in fiction. His first three novels, which later became known as The Salterton Trilogy, were \"Tempest-Tost\" (1951, originally conceived as a play), \"Leaven of Malice\" (1954, also the basis of the unsuccessful play \"Love and Libel\") which won the Stephen Leacock Award for Humour, and \"A Mixture of Frailties\" (1958). These novels explored the difficulty of sustaining a cultural life in Canada, and life on a small-town newspaper, subjects of which Davies had first-hand knowledge. In a 1958 essay on Nabokov's \"Lolita\" in \"Saturday Night\", he wrote that the theme was \"the exploitation of a weak adult by a corrupt child\".\n1960s.\nIn 1960, Davies joined Trinity College at the University of Toronto, where he would teach literature until 1981. The following year he published a collection of essays on literature, \"A Voice From the Attic\", and was awarded the Lorne Pierce Medal for his literary achievements.\nIn 1963, he became the Master of Massey College, the University of Toronto's new graduate college. During his stint as Master, he initiated a tradition of writing and telling ghost stories at the yearly Christmas celebrations. These stories were later collected in the book \"High Spirits\" (1982).\n1970s.\nDavies drew on his interest in Jungian psychology to create \"Fifth Business\" (1970), a novel that relies heavily on Davies's own experiences, his love of myth and magic, and his knowledge of small-town mores. The narrator, like Davies, is of immigrant Canadian background, with a father who runs the town paper. The book's characters act in roles that roughly correspond to Jungian archetypes according to Davies's belief in the predominance of spirit over the things of the world.\nDavies built on the success of \"Fifth Business\" with two more novels: \"The Manticore\" (1972), a novel cast largely in the form of a Jungian analysis (for which he received that year's Governor General's Literary Award), and \"World of Wonders\" (1975). Together these three books came to be known as \"The Deptford Trilogy\".\n1980s and 1990s.\nWhen Davies retired from his position at the university, his seventh novel, a satire of academic life, \"The Rebel Angels\" (1981), was published, followed by \"What's Bred in the Bone\" (1985) which was short-listed for the Booker Prize for fiction in 1986. \"The Lyre of Orpheus\" (1988) follows these two books in what became known as \"The Cornish Trilogy\".\nDuring his retirement from academe he continued to write novels which further established him as a major figure in the literary world: \"Murther and Walking Spirits\" (1991) and \"The Cunning Man\" (1994). A third novel in what would have been a further trilogy \u2013 the Toronto Trilogy \u2013 was in progress at the time of Davies's death. He also realized a long-held dream when he penned the libretto to Randolph Peters' opera: \"The Golden Ass\", based on \"The Metamorphoses\" of Lucius Apuleius, just like that written by one of the characters in Davies's 1958 \"A Mixture of Frailties\". The opera was performed by the Canadian Opera Company at the Hummingbird Centre in Toronto, in April 1999, several years after Davies's death.\nIn its obituary, \"The Times\" wrote: \"Davies encompassed all the great elements of life\u00a0... His novels combined deep seriousness and psychological inquiry with fantasy and exuberant mirth.\" He remained close friends with John Kenneth Galbraith, attending Galbraith's eighty-fifth birthday party in Boston in 1993, and became so close a friend and colleague of the American novelist John Irving that Irving gave one of the scripture readings at Davies's funeral in the chapel of Trinity College, Toronto. He also wrote in support of Salman Rushdie when the latter was threatened by a \"fatw\u0101\" from Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran in reaction to supposed anti-Islam expression in his novel \"The Satanic Verses\".\nPersonal life.\nDavies was married to Brenda Ethel Davies (1917\u20132013) in 1940 and survived by four grandchildren and three great-grandchildren from his three daughters Miranda Davies, Rosamond Bailey and author Jennifer Surridge.\nDavies never learned to drive. His wife Brenda routinely drove him to events and other excursions.\nPublic lectures.\nIn 1990, Davies delivered the fifth Erasmus Lecture, titled \"Literature and Moral Purpose,\" sponsored by \"First Things\" magazine and the Institute on Religion and Public Life. In his address, Davies reflected on the relationship between literature, imagination, and ethics, arguing that serious fiction has an essential role in shaping moral understanding. His lecture continued the Erasmus series\u2019 exploration of how culture and faith inform the public and intellectual life of the modern world.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEssays.\nFictional essays\nedited by the author into:\nCriticism\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "25758", "revid": "38042249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25758", "title": "RNA", "text": "Family of large biological molecules\nRibonucleic acid (RNA) is a polymeric molecule that is essential for most biological functions, either by performing the function itself (non-coding RNA) or by forming a template for the production of proteins (messenger RNA). RNA and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) are nucleic acids. The nucleic acids constitute one of the four major macromolecules essential for all known forms of life. RNA is assembled as a chain of nucleotides. Cellular organisms use messenger RNA (mRNA) to convey genetic information (using the nitrogenous bases of guanine, uracil, adenine, and cytosine, denoted by the letters G, U, A, and C) that directs synthesis of specific proteins. Many viruses encode their genetic information using an RNA genome.\nSome RNA molecules play an active role within cells by catalyzing biological reactions, controlling gene expression, or sensing and communicating responses to cellular signals. One of these active processes is protein synthesis, a universal function in which RNA molecules direct the synthesis of proteins on ribosomes. This process uses transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules to deliver amino acids to the ribosome, where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) then links amino acids together to form coded proteins.\nIt has become widely accepted in science that early in the history of life on Earth, prior to the evolution of DNA and possibly of protein-based enzymes as well, an \"RNA world\" existed in which RNA served as both living organisms' storage method for genetic information\u2014a role fulfilled today by DNA, except in the case of RNA viruses\u2014and potentially performed catalytic functions in cells\u2014a function performed today by protein enzymes, with the notable and important exception of the ribosome, which is a ribozyme.\nChemical structure of RNA.\nBasic chemical composition.\nEach nucleotide in RNA contains a ribose sugar, with carbons numbered 1' through 5'. A base is attached to the 1' position, in general, adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), or uracil (U). Adenine and guanine are purines, and cytosine and uracil are pyrimidines. A phosphate group is attached to the 3' position of one ribose and the 5' position of the next. The phosphate groups have a negative charge each, making RNA a charged molecule (polyanion). The bases form standard hydrogen bonds between cytosine and guanine and between adenine and uracil, while guanine and uracil can pair through a non-canonical G\u2013U wobble base pair. However, other interactions are possible, such as a group of adenine bases binding to each other in a bulge,\nor the GNRA tetraloop that has a guanine\u2013adenine base-pair.\nDifferences between DNA and RNA.\nThe chemical structure of RNA is very similar to that of DNA, but differs in three primary ways:\nLike DNA, most biologically active RNAs, including mRNA, tRNA, rRNA, snRNAs, and other non-coding RNAs, contain self-complementary sequences that allow parts of the RNA to fold and pair with itself to form double helices. Analysis of these RNAs has revealed that they are highly structured. Unlike DNA, their structures do not consist of long double helices, but rather collections of short helices packed together into structures akin to proteins.\nIn this fashion, RNAs can achieve chemical catalysis (like enzymes). For instance, determination of the structure of the ribosome\u2014an RNA-protein complex that catalyzes the assembly of proteins\u2014revealed that its active site is composed entirely of RNA.\nAn important structural component of RNA that distinguishes it from DNA is the presence of a hydroxyl group at the 2' position of the ribose sugar. The presence of this functional group causes the helix to mostly take the A-form geometry, although in single strand dinucleotide contexts, RNA can rarely also adopt the B-form most commonly observed in DNA. The A-form geometry results in a very deep and narrow major groove and a shallow and wide minor groove. A second consequence of the presence of the 2'-hydroxyl group is that in conformationally flexible regions of an RNA molecule (that is, not involved in formation of a double helix), it can chemically attack the adjacent phosphodiester bond to cleave the backbone.\nSecondary and tertiary structures.\nThe functional form of single-stranded RNA molecules, just like proteins, frequently requires a specific spatial tertiary structure. The scaffold for this structure is provided by secondary structural elements that are hydrogen bonds within the molecule. This leads to several recognizable \"domains\" of secondary structure like hairpin loops, bulges, and internal loops. In order to create, i.e., design, RNA for any given secondary structure, two or three bases would not be enough, but four bases are enough. This is likely why nature has \"chosen\" a four base alphabet: fewer than four would not allow the creation of all structures, while more than four bases are not necessary to do so. Since RNA is charged, metal ions such as Mg2+ are needed to stabilise many secondary and tertiary structures.\nThe naturally occurring enantiomer of RNA is -RNA composed of -ribonucleotides. All chirality centers are located in the -ribose. By the use of -ribose or rather -ribonucleotides, -RNA can be synthesized. -RNA is much more stable against degradation by RNase.\nLike other structured biopolymers such as proteins, one can define topology of a folded RNA molecule. This is often done based on arrangement of intra-chain contacts within a folded RNA, termed as circuit topology.\nChemical modifications.\nRNA is transcribed with only four bases (adenine, cytosine, guanine and uracil), but these bases and attached sugars can be modified in numerous ways as the RNAs mature. Pseudouridine (\u03a8), in which the linkage between uracil and ribose is changed from a C\u2013N bond to a C\u2013C bond, and ribothymidine (T) are found in various places (the most notable ones being in the T\u03a8C loop of tRNA). Another notable modified base is hypoxanthine, a deaminated adenine base whose nucleoside is called inosine (I). Inosine plays a key role in the wobble hypothesis of the genetic code.\nThere are more than 100 other naturally occurring modified nucleosides. The greatest structural diversity of modifications can be found in tRNA, while pseudouridine and nucleosides with 2'-O-methylribose often present in rRNA are the most common. The specific roles of many of these modifications in RNA are not fully understood. However, it is notable that, in ribosomal RNA, many of the post-transcriptional modifications occur in highly functional regions, such as the peptidyl transferase center and the subunit interface, implying that they are important for normal function.\nTypes of RNA.\nMessenger RNA (mRNA) is the type of RNA that carries information from DNA to the ribosome, the sites of protein synthesis (translation) in the cell cytoplasm. The coding sequence of the mRNA determines the amino acid sequence in the protein that is produced. However, many RNAs do not code for protein (about 97% of the transcriptional output is non-protein-coding in eukaryotes).\nThese so-called non-coding RNAs (\"ncRNA\") can be encoded by their own genes (RNA genes), but can also derive from mRNA introns. The most prominent examples of non-coding RNAs are transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), both of which are involved in the process of translation. There are also non-coding RNAs involved in gene regulation, RNA processing and other roles. Certain RNAs are able to catalyse chemical reactions such as cutting and ligating other RNA molecules, and the catalysis of peptide bond formation in the ribosome; these are known as ribozymes.\nAccording to the length of RNA chain, RNA includes small RNA and long RNA. Usually, small RNAs are shorter than 200\u00a0nt in length, and long RNAs are greater than 200\u00a0nt long. Long RNAs, also called large RNAs, mainly include long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) and mRNA. Small RNAs mainly include 5.8S ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 5S rRNA, transfer RNA (tRNA), microRNA (miRNA), small interfering RNA (siRNA), small nucleolar RNA (snoRNAs), Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA), tRNA-derived small RNA (tsRNA) and small rDNA-derived RNA (srRNA).\nThere are certain exceptions as in the case of the 5S rRNA of the members of the genus Halococcus (Archaea), which have an insertion, thus increasing its size.\nRNAs involved in protein synthesis.\nMessenger RNA (mRNA) carries information about a protein sequence to the ribosomes, the protein synthesis factories in the cell. It is coded so that every three nucleotides (a codon) corresponds to one amino acid. In eukaryotic cells, once precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA) has been transcribed from DNA, it is processed to mature mRNA. This removes its introns\u2014non-coding sections of the pre-mRNA. The mRNA is then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is bound to ribosomes and translated into its corresponding protein form with the help of tRNA. In prokaryotic cells, which do not have nucleus and cytoplasm compartments, mRNA can bind to ribosomes while it is being transcribed from DNA. After a certain amount of time, the message degrades into its component nucleotides with the assistance of ribonucleases.\nTransfer RNA (tRNA) is a small RNA chain of about 80 nucleotides that transfers a specific amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis during translation. It has sites for amino acid attachment and an anticodon region for codon recognition that binds to a specific sequence on the messenger RNA chain through hydrogen bonding.\nRibosomal RNA (rRNA) is the catalytic component of the ribosomes. The rRNA is the component of the ribosome that hosts translation. Eukaryotic ribosomes contain four different rRNA molecules: 18S, 5.8S, 28S and 5S rRNA. Three of the rRNA molecules are synthesized in the nucleolus, and one is synthesized elsewhere. In the cytoplasm, ribosomal RNA and protein combine to form a nucleoprotein called a ribosome. The ribosome binds mRNA and carries out protein synthesis. Several ribosomes may be attached to a single mRNA at any time. Nearly all the RNA found in a typical eukaryotic cell is rRNA.\nTransfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA) is found in many bacteria and plastids. It tags proteins encoded by mRNAs that lack stop codons for degradation and prevents the ribosome from stalling.\nRegulatory RNA.\nThe earliest known regulators of gene expression were proteins known as repressors and activators \u2013 regulators with specific short binding sites within enhancer regions near the genes to be regulated.\u00a0 Later studies have shown that RNAs also regulate genes. There are several kinds of RNA-dependent processes in eukaryotes regulating the expression of genes at various points, such as RNA interference repressing genes post-transcriptionally, long non-coding RNAs shutting down blocks of chromatin epigenetically, and enhancer RNAs inducing increased gene expression. Bacteria and archaea have also been shown to use regulatory RNA systems such as bacterial small RNAs and CRISPR. Fire and Mello were awarded the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering microRNAs (miRNAs), specific short RNA molecules that can base-pair with mRNAs.\nMicroRNA (miRNA) and small interfering RNA (siRNA).\nPost-transcriptional expression levels of many genes can be controlled by RNA interference, in which miRNAs, specific short RNA molecules, pair with mRNA regions and target them for repression. RNA interference is carried out by the RNA-induced silencing complex, which uses a miRNA guide to regulate complementary mRNAs through base pairing interactions and results in either degradaing the mRNA or blocking its translation.\nLong non-coding RNAs.\nNext to be linked to regulation were Xist and other long noncoding RNAs associated with X chromosome inactivation.\u00a0 Their roles, at first mysterious, were shown by Jeannie T. Lee and others to be the silencing of blocks of chromatin via recruitment of Polycomb complex so that messenger RNA could not be transcribed from them. Additional lncRNAs, currently defined as RNAs of more than 200 base pairs that do not appear to have coding potential, have been found associated with regulation of stem cell pluripotency and cell division.\nEnhancer RNAs.\nThe third major group of regulatory RNAs is called enhancer RNAs. \u00a0It is not clear at present whether they are a unique category of RNAs of various lengths or\u00a0constitute a distinct subset of lncRNAs.\u00a0 In any case, they are transcribed from enhancers, which are known regulatory sites in the DNA near genes they regulate. \u00a0They up-regulate the transcription of the gene(s) under control of the enhancer from which they are transcribed.\nSmall RNA in prokaryotes.\nSmall RNA.\nAt first, regulatory RNA was thought to be a eukaryotic phenomenon, a part of the explanation for why so much more transcription in higher organisms was seen than had been predicted. But as soon as researchers began to look for possible RNA regulators in bacteria, they turned up there as well, termed as small RNA (sRNA). Currently, the ubiquitous nature of systems of RNA regulation of genes has been discussed as support for the RNA World theory. There are indications that the enterobacterial sRNAs are involved in various cellular processes and seem to have significant role in stress responses such as membrane stress, starvation stress, phosphosugar stress and DNA damage. Also, it has been suggested that sRNAs have been evolved to have important role in stress responses because of their kinetic properties that allow for rapid response and stabilisation of the physiological state. Bacterial small RNAs generally act via antisense pairing with mRNA to down-regulate its translation, either by affecting stability or affecting cis-binding ability. Riboswitches have also been discovered. They are cis-acting regulatory RNA sequences acting allosterically. They change shape when they bind metabolites so that they gain or lose the ability to bind chromatin to regulate expression of genes.\nCRISPR RNA.\nArchaea also have systems of regulatory RNA. The CRISPR system, recently being used to edit DNA \"in situ\", acts via regulatory RNAs in archaea and bacteria to provide protection against virus invaders.\nRNA synthesis and processing.\nSynthesis.\nSynthesis of RNA typically occurs in the cell nucleus and is usually catalyzed by an enzyme\u2014RNA polymerase\u2014using DNA as a template, a process known as transcription. Initiation of transcription begins with the binding of the enzyme to a promoter sequence in the DNA (usually found \"upstream\" of a gene). The DNA double helix is unwound by the helicase activity of the enzyme. The enzyme then progresses along the template strand in the 3' to 5' direction, synthesizing a complementary RNA molecule with elongation occurring in the 5' to 3' direction. The DNA sequence also dictates where termination of RNA synthesis will occur.\nPrimary transcript RNAs are often modified by enzymes after transcription. For example, a poly(A) tail and a 5' cap are added to eukaryotic pre-mRNA and introns are removed by the spliceosome.\nThere are also a number of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases that use RNA as their template for synthesis of a new strand of RNA. For instance, a number of RNA viruses (such as poliovirus) use this type of enzyme to replicate their genetic material. Also, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is part of the RNA interference pathway in many organisms.\nRNA processing.\nMany RNAs are involved in modifying other RNAs.\nIntrons are spliced out of pre-mRNA by spliceosomes, which contain several small nuclear RNAs (snRNA), or the introns can be ribozymes that are spliced by themselves.\nRNA can also be altered by having its nucleotides modified to nucleotides other than A, C, G and U.\nIn eukaryotes, modifications of RNA nucleotides are in general directed by small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNA; 60\u2013300\u00a0nt), found in the nucleolus and cajal bodies. snoRNAs associate with enzymes and guide them to a spot on an RNA by basepairing to that RNA. These enzymes then perform the nucleotide modification. rRNAs and tRNAs are extensively modified, but snRNAs and mRNAs can also be the target of base modification. RNA can also be methylated.\nRNA in genetics.\nRNA genomes.\nLike DNA, RNA can carry genetic information. RNA viruses have genomes composed of RNA that encodes a number of proteins. The viral genome is replicated by some of those proteins, while other proteins protect the genome as the virus particle moves to a new host cell. Viroids are another group of pathogens, but they consist only of RNA, do not encode any protein and are replicated by a host plant cell's polymerase.\nReverse transcription.\nReverse transcribing viruses replicate their genomes by reverse transcribing DNA copies from their RNA; these DNA copies are then transcribed to new RNA. Retrotransposons also spread by copying DNA and RNA from one another, and telomerase contains an RNA that is used as template for building the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes.\nDouble-stranded RNA.\nDouble-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is RNA with two complementary strands, similar to the DNA found in all cells, but with the replacement of thymine by uracil and the adding of one oxygen atom. dsRNA forms the genetic material of some viruses (double-stranded RNA viruses). Double-stranded RNA, such as viral RNA or siRNA, can trigger RNA interference in eukaryotes, as well as interferon response in vertebrates. In eukaryotes, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) plays a role in the activation of the innate immune system against viral infections.\nCircular RNA.\nIn the late 1970s, it was shown that there is a single stranded covalently closed, i.e. circular form of RNA expressed throughout the animal and plant kingdom (see circRNA). circRNAs are thought to arise via a \"back-splice\" reaction where the spliceosome joins a upstream 3' acceptor to a downstream 5' donor splice site. So far the function of circRNAs is largely unknown, although for few examples a microRNA sponging activity has been demonstrated.\nKey discoveries in RNA biology.\nResearch on RNA has led to many important biological discoveries and numerous Nobel Prizes. Nucleic acids were discovered in 1868 by Friedrich Miescher, who called the material 'nuclein' since it was found in the nucleus. It was later discovered that prokaryotic cells, which do not have a nucleus, also contain nucleic acids. The role of RNA in protein synthesis was suspected already in 1939. Severo Ochoa won the 1959 Nobel Prize in Medicine (shared with Arthur Kornberg) after he discovered an enzyme that can synthesize RNA in the laboratory. However, the enzyme discovered by Ochoa (polynucleotide phosphorylase) was later shown to be responsible for RNA degradation, not RNA synthesis. In 1956 Alex Rich and David Davies hybridized two separate strands of RNA to form the first crystal of RNA whose structure could be determined by X-ray crystallography.\nThe sequence of the 77 nucleotides of a yeast tRNA was found by Robert W. Holley in 1965, winning Holley the 1968 Nobel Prize in Medicine (shared with Har Gobind Khorana and Marshall Nirenberg).\nIn the early 1970s, retroviruses and reverse transcriptase were discovered, showing for the first time that enzymes could copy RNA into DNA (the opposite of the usual route for transmission of genetic information). For this work, David Baltimore, Renato Dulbecco and Howard Temin were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1975.\nIn 1976, Walter Fiers and his team determined the first complete nucleotide sequence of an RNA virus genome, that of bacteriophage MS2.\nIn 1977, introns and RNA splicing were discovered in both mammalian viruses and in cellular genes, resulting in a 1993 Nobel to Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts.\nCatalytic RNA molecules (ribozymes) were discovered in the early 1980s, leading to a 1989 Nobel award to Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman. In 1990, it was found in \"Petunia\" that introduced genes can silence similar genes of the plant's own, now known to be a result of RNA interference.\nAt about the same time, 22 nt long RNAs, now called microRNAs, were found to have a role in the development of \"C. elegans\".\nStudies on RNA interference earned a Nobel Prize for Andrew Fire and Craig Mello in 2006, and another Nobel for studies on the transcription of RNA to Roger Kornberg in the same year. The discovery of gene regulatory RNAs has led to attempts to develop drugs made of RNA, such as siRNA, to silence genes. Adding to the Nobel prizes for research on RNA, in 2009 it was awarded for the elucidation of the atomic structure of the ribosome to Venki Ramakrishnan, Thomas A. Steitz, and Ada Yonath. In 2023 the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Katalin Karik\u00f3 and Drew Weissman for their discoveries concerning modified nucleosides that enabled the development of effective mRNA vaccines against COVID-19.\nRelevance for prebiotic chemistry and abiogenesis.\nIn 1968, Carl Woese hypothesized that RNA might be catalytic and suggested that the earliest forms of life (self-replicating molecules) could have relied on RNA both to carry genetic information and to catalyze biochemical reactions\u2014an RNA world. In May 2022, scientists discovered that RNA can form spontaneously on prebiotic basalt lava glass, presumed to have been abundant on the early Earth.\nIn March 2015, DNA and RNA nucleobases, including uracil, cytosine and thymine, were reportedly formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions, using starter chemicals such as pyrimidine, an organic compound commonly found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), is one of the most carbon-rich compounds found in the universe and may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds. In July 2022, astronomers reported massive amounts of s, including possible RNA precursors, in the galactic center of the Milky Way Galaxy.\nMedical applications.\nRNA, initially deemed unsuitable for therapeutics due to its short half-life, has been made useful through advances in stabilization. Therapeutic applications arise as RNA folds into complex conformations and binds proteins, nucleic acids, and small molecules to form catalytic centers. RNA-based vaccines are thought to be easier to produce than traditional vaccines derived from killed or altered pathogens, because it can take months or years to grow and study a pathogen and determine which molecular parts to extract, inactivate, and use in a vaccine. Small molecules with conventional therapeutic properties can target RNA and DNA structures, thereby treating novel diseases. However, research is scarce on small molecules targeting RNA and approved drugs for human illness. Ribavirin, branaplam, and ataluren are currently available medications that stabilize double-stranded RNA structures and control splicing in a variety of disorders. \nProtein-coding mRNAs have emerged as new therapeutic candidates, with RNA replacement being particularly beneficial for brief but torrential protein expression. In vitro transcribed mRNAs (IVT-mRNA) have been used to deliver proteins for bone regeneration, pluripotency, and heart function in animal models. SiRNAs, short RNA molecules, play a crucial role in innate defense against viruses and chromatin structure. They can be artificially introduced to silence specific genes, making them valuable for gene function studies, therapeutic target validation, and drug development.\nmRNA vaccines have emerged as an important new class of vaccines, using mRNA to manufacture proteins which provoke an immune response. Their first successful large-scale application came in the form of COVID-19 vaccines during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25760", "revid": "1154188513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25760", "title": "Real Estate", "text": ""}
{"id": "25762", "revid": "50223679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25762", "title": "Russian Revolution", "text": "1917\u20131922 Civil War in Russia\nThe Russian Revolution was a period of political and social change in Russia, starting in 1917. This period saw Russia abolish its monarchy and adopt a socialist form of government following two successive revolutions and a civil war. It can be seen as the precursor for other revolutions that occurred in the aftermath of World War I, such as the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919. The Russian Revolution was a key event of the 20th century.\nThe Russian Revolution was inaugurated with the February Revolution in 1917, in the midst of World War I. With the German Empire inflicting defeats on the front, and increasing logistical problems causing shortages of bread and grain, the Russian Army was losing morale, with large scale mutiny looming. Officials were convinced that if Tsar Nicholas II abdicated, the unrest would subside. Nicholas stepped down on 15 March [O.S. 2 March], ushering in a provisional government led by the Duma (parliament). During the unrest, Soviet councils were formed by locals in Petrograd (now Saint Petersburg) that initially did not oppose the new government; however, the Soviets insisted on their influence in the government and control over militias. By March, Russia had two rival governments. The Provisional Government held state power in military and international affairs, whereas the network of Soviets held domestic power. Critically, the Soviets held the allegiance of the working class, and urban middle class. There were mutinies, protests and strikes. Socialist and other leftist political organizations competed for influence within the Provisional Government and Soviets. Factions included the Mensheviks, Social Revolutionaries, Anarchists, and the Bolsheviks, a far-left party led by Vladimir Lenin.\nThe Bolsheviks won popularity with their program promising peace, land, and bread: an end to the war, land for the peasantry, and ending famine. After assuming power, the Provisional Government continued fighting the war in spite of public opposition. Taking advantage, the Bolsheviks and other factions gained popular support to advance the revolution. Responding to discontent in Petrograd, the Provisional Government repressed protestors leading to the July Days. The Bolsheviks merged workers' militias loyal to them into the Red Guards. The volatile situation reached its climax with the October Revolution, a Bolshevik armed insurrection in Petrograd beginning 7 November [O.S. 25 October] that overthrew the Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks established their own government and proclaimed the establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR). Under pressure from German military offensives, the Bolsheviks relocated the capital to Moscow. The RSFSR began reorganizing the empire into the world's first socialist state, to practice soviet democracy on a national and international scale. Their promise to end Russia's participation in World War I was fulfilled when Bolshevik leaders signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany in March 1918. The Bolsheviks established the Cheka, a secret police and revolutionary security service working to uncover, punish, and eliminate those considered to be \"enemies of the people\" in campaigns called the Red Terror.\nAlthough the Bolsheviks held large support in urban areas, they had foreign and domestic enemies that refused to recognize their government. Russia erupted into a bloody civil war, which pitted the Reds (Bolsheviks), against their enemies, which included nationalist movements, anti-Bolshevik socialist parties, anarchists, monarchists and liberals; the latter two parties strongly supported the Russian White movement which was led mainly by right-leaning officers and seen as fighting for the restoration of the imperial order. The Bolshevik commissar Leon Trotsky began organizing workers' militias loyal to the Bolsheviks into the Red Army. While key events occurred in Moscow and Petrograd, every city in the empire was convulsed, including the provinces of national minorities, and in the rural areas peasants took over and redistributed land.\nAs the war progressed, the RSFSR established Soviet power in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelorussia, Georgia, and Ukraine. Wartime cohesion and intervention from foreign powers prompted the RSFSR to begin unifying these nations under one flag and created the Soviet Union. Historians consider the end of the revolutionary period to be in 1922, when the civil war concluded with the defeat of the White Army and separatist factions, leading to mass emigration from Russia. The victorious Bolshevik Party reconstituted itself into the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and remained in power for six decades.\nBackground.\nThe Russian Revolution of 1905 was a major factor contributing to the cause of the Revolutions of 1917. The events of Bloody Sunday triggered nationwide protests and soldier mutinies. A council of workers called the St. Petersburg Soviet was created in this chaos. While the 1905 Revolution was ultimately crushed, and the leaders of the St. Petersburg Soviet were arrested, this laid the groundwork for the later Petrograd Soviet and other revolutionary movements during the leadup to 1917. The 1905 Revolution also led to the creation of a Duma (parliament) that would later form the Provisional Government following February 1917.\nRussia's poor performance in 1914\u20131915 prompted growing complaints directed at Tsar Nicholas II and the Romanov family. A short wave of patriotic nationalism ended in the face of defeats and poor conditions on the Eastern Front of World War I. The Tsar made the situation worse by taking personal control of the Imperial Russian Army in 1915, a challenge far beyond his skills. He was now held personally responsible for Russia's continuing defeats and losses. In addition, Tsarina Alexandra, left to rule while the Tsar commanded at the front, was German born, leading to suspicion of collusion, only to be exacerbated by rumors relating to her relationship with the controversial mystic Grigori Rasputin. Rasputin's influence led to disastrous ministerial appointments and corruption, resulting in a worsening of conditions within Russia.\nAfter the entry of the Ottoman Empire on the side of the Central Powers in October 1914, Russia was deprived of a major trade route to the Mediterranean Sea, which worsened the economic crisis and the munitions shortages. Meanwhile, Germany was able to produce great amounts of munitions whilst constantly fighting on two major battlefronts.\nThe conditions during the war resulted in a devastating loss of morale within the Russian army and the general population of Russia itself. This was particularly apparent in the cities, owing to a lack of food in response to the disruption of agriculture. Food scarcity had become a considerable problem in Russia, but the cause of this did not lie in any failure of the harvests, which had not been significantly altered during wartime. The indirect reason was that the government, in order to finance the war, printed millions of roubles, and by 1917, inflation had made prices increase up to four times what they had been in 1914. Farmers were consequently faced with a higher cost of living, but with little increase in income. As a result, they tended to hoard their grain and to revert to subsistence farming. Thus the cities were constantly short of food. At the same time, rising prices led to demands for higher wages in the factories, and in January and February 1916, revolutionary propaganda, in part aided by German funds, led to widespread strikes. This resulted in growing criticism of the government, including an increased participation of workers in revolutionary parties.\nLiberal parties too had an increased platform to voice their complaints, as the initial fervor of the war resulted in the Tsarist government creating a variety of political organizations. In July 1915, a Central War Industries Committee was established under the chairmanship of prominent Octobrist, Alexander Guchkov (1862\u20131936), which included ten workers' representatives. The Petrograd Mensheviks agreed to join despite the objections of their leaders abroad. All this activity gave renewed encouragement to political ambitions, and in September 1915, a combination of Octobrists and Kadets in the Duma demanded the forming of a responsible government, which the Tsar rejected.\nAll these factors had given rise to a sharp loss of confidence in the regime, even within the ruling class, growing throughout the war. Early in 1916, Guchkov discussed with senior army officers and members of the Central War Industries Committee about a possible coup to force the abdication of the Tsar. In December, a small group of nobles assassinated Rasputin, and in January 1917 the Tsar's cousin, Grand Duke Nicholas, was asked indirectly by Prince Lvov whether he would be prepared to take over the throne from his nephew, Tsar Nicholas II. None of these incidents were in themselves the immediate cause of the February Revolution, but they do help to explain why the monarchy survived only a few days after it had broken out.\nMeanwhile, Socialist Revolutionary leaders in exile, many of them living in Switzerland, had been the glum spectators of the collapse of international socialist solidarity. French and German Social Democrats had voted in favour of their respective governments' war efforts. Georgi Plekhanov in Paris had adopted a violently anti-German stand, while Alexander Parvus supported the German war effort as the best means of ensuring a revolution in Russia. The Mensheviks largely maintained that Russia had the right to defend herself against Germany, although Julius Martov (a prominent Menshevik), now on the left of his group, demanded an end to the war and a settlement on the basis of national self-determination, with no annexations or indemnities.\nIt was these views of Martov that predominated in a manifesto drawn up by Leon Trotsky (at the time a Menshevik) at a conference in Zimmerwald, attended by 35 Socialist leaders in September 1915. Inevitably, Vladimir Lenin supported by Zinoviev and Radek, strongly contested them. Their attitudes became known as the Zimmerwald Left. Lenin rejected both the defence of Russia and the cry for peace. Since the autumn of 1914, he had insisted that \"from the standpoint of the working class and of the labouring masses the lesser evil would be the defeat of the Tsarist Monarchy\"; the war must be turned into a civil war of the proletarian soldiers against their own governments, and if a proletarian victory should emerge from this in Russia, then their duty would be to wage a revolutionary war for the liberation of the masses throughout Europe.\nEconomic and social changes.\nAn elementary theory of property, believed by many peasants, was that land should belong to those who work on it. At the same time, peasant life and culture was changing constantly. Change was facilitated by the physical movement of growing numbers of peasant villagers who migrated to and from industrial and urban environments, but also by the introduction of city culture into the village through material goods, the press, and word of mouth.\nWorkers also had good reasons for discontent: overcrowded housing with often deplorable sanitary conditions, long hours at work (on the eve of the war, a 10-hour workday six days a week was the average and many were working 11\u201312 hours a day by 1916), constant risk of injury and death from poor safety and sanitary conditions, harsh discipline (not only rules and fines, but foremen's fists), and inadequate wages (made worse after 1914 by steep wartime increases in the cost of living). At the same time, urban industrial life had its benefits, though these could be just as dangerous (in terms of social and political stability) as the hardships. There were many encouragements to expect more from life. Acquiring new skills gave many workers a sense of self-respect and confidence, heightening expectations and desires. Living in cities, workers encountered material goods they had never seen in villages. Most importantly, workers living in cities were exposed to new ideas about the social and political order.\nThe social causes of the Russian Revolution can be derived from centuries of oppression of the lower classes by the Tsarist regime and Nicholas's failures in World War I. While rural agrarian peasants had been emancipated from serfdom in 1861, they still resented paying redemption payments to the state, and demanded communal tender of the land they worked. The problem was further compounded by the failure of Sergei Witte's land reforms of the early 20th century. Increasing peasant disturbances and sometimes actual revolts occurred, with the goal of securing ownership of the land they worked. Russia consisted mainly of poor farming peasants and substantial inequality of land ownership, with 1.5% of the population owning 25% of the land.\nThe rapid industrialization of Russia also resulted in urban overcrowding and poor conditions for urban industrial workers (as mentioned above). Between 1890 and 1910, the population of the capital, Saint Petersburg, nearly doubled from 1,033,600 to 1,905,600, with Moscow experiencing similar growth. This created a new 'proletariat' which, due to being crowded together in the cities, was much more likely to protest and go on strike than the peasantry had been in previous times. One 1904 survey found that an average of 16 people shared each apartment in Saint Petersburg, with six people per room. There was also no running water, and piles of human waste were a threat to the health of the workers. The poor conditions only aggravated the situation, with the number of strikes and incidents of public disorder rapidly increasing in the years shortly before World War I. Because of late industrialization, Russia's workers were highly concentrated. By 1914, 40% of Russian workers were employed in factories of 1,000+ workers (32% in 1901). 42% worked in 100\u20131,000 worker enterprises, 18% in 1\u2013100 worker businesses (in the US, 1914, the figures were 18%, 47% and 35% respectively).\nWorld War I added to the chaos. Conscription across Russia resulted in unwilling citizens being sent off to war. The vast demand for factory production of war supplies and workers resulted in many more labor riots and strikes. Conscription stripped skilled workers from the cities, who had to be replaced with unskilled peasants. When famine began to hit due to the poor railway system, workers abandoned the cities in droves seeking food. Finally, the soldiers themselves, who suffered from a lack of equipment and protection from the elements, began to turn against the Tsar. This was mainly because, as the war progressed, many of the officers who were loyal to the Tsar were killed, being replaced by discontented conscripts from the major cities who had little loyalty to the Tsar.\nPolitical issues.\nMany sections of the country had reason to be dissatisfied with the existing autocracy. Nicholas II was a deeply conservative ruler and maintained a strict authoritarian system. Individuals and society in general were expected to show self-restraint, devotion to community, deference to the social hierarchy and a sense of duty to the country. Religious faith helped bind all of these tenets together as a source of comfort and reassurance in the face of difficult conditions and as a means of political authority exercised through the clergy. Perhaps more than any other modern monarch, Nicholas II attached his fate and the future of his dynasty to the notion of the ruler as a saintly and infallible father to his people.\nThis vision of the Romanov monarchy left him unaware of the state of his country. With a firm belief that his power to rule was granted by Divine Right, Nicholas assumed that the Russian people were devoted to him with unquestioning loyalty. This ironclad belief rendered Nicholas unwilling to allow the progressive reforms that might have alleviated the suffering of the Russian people. Even after the 1905 Revolution spurred the Tsar to decree limited civil rights and democratic representation, he worked to limit even these liberties in order to preserve the ultimate authority of the crown.\nDespite constant oppression, the desire of the people for democratic participation in government decisions was strong. Since the Age of Enlightenment, Russian intellectuals had promoted Enlightenment ideals such as the dignity of the individual and the rectitude of democratic representation. These ideals were championed most vociferously by Russia's liberals, although populists, Marxists, and anarchists also claimed to support democratic reforms. A growing opposition movement had begun to challenge the Romanov monarchy openly well before the turmoil of World War I.\nDissatisfaction with Russian autocracy culminated in the huge national upheaval that followed the Bloody Sunday massacre of January 1905, in which hundreds of unarmed protesters were shot by the Tsar's troops. Workers responded to the massacre with a crippling general strike, forcing Nicholas to put forth the October Manifesto, which established a democratically elected parliament (the State Duma). Although the Tsar accepted the 1906 Fundamental State Laws one year later, he subsequently dismissed the first two Dumas when they proved uncooperative. Unfulfilled hopes of democracy fueled revolutionary ideas and violent outbursts targeted at the monarchy.\nOne of the Tsar's principal rationales for risking war in 1914 was his desire to restore the prestige that Russia had lost amid the debacles of the Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905). Nicholas also sought to foster a greater sense of national unity with a war against a common and old enemy. The Russian Empire was an agglomeration of diverse ethnicities that had demonstrated significant signs of disunity in the years before the First World War. Nicholas believed in part that the shared peril and tribulation of a foreign war would mitigate the social unrest over the persistent issues of poverty, inequality, and inhumane working conditions. Instead of restoring Russia's political and military standing, World War I led to the slaughter of Russian troops and military defeats that undermined both the monarchy and Russian society to the point of collapse.\nWorld War I.\nThe outbreak of war in August 1914 initially served to quiet the prevalent social and political protests, focusing hostilities against a common external enemy, but this patriotic unity did not last long. As the war dragged on inconclusively, war-weariness gradually took its toll. Although many ordinary Russians joined anti-German demonstrations in the first few weeks of the war, hostility toward the Kaiser and the desire to defend their land and their lives did not necessarily translate into enthusiasm for the Tsar or the government.\nRussia's first major battle of the war was a disaster; in the 1914 Battle of Tannenberg, over 30,000 Russian troops were killed or wounded and 90,000 captured, while Germany suffered just 12,000 casualties. However, Austro-Hungarian forces allied to Germany were driven back deep into the Galicia region by the end of the year. In the autumn of 1915, Nicholas had taken direct command of the army, personally overseeing Russia's main theatre of war and leaving his ambitious but incapable wife Alexandra in charge of the government. Reports of corruption and incompetence in the Imperial government began to emerge, and the growing influence of Grigori Rasputin in the Imperial family was widely resented.\nIn 1915, things took a critical turn for the worse when Germany shifted its focus of attack to the Eastern Front. The superior German Army\u00a0\u2013 better led, better trained, and better supplied\u00a0\u2013 was quite effective against the ill-equipped Russian forces, driving the Russians out of Galicia, as well as Russian Poland during the Gorlice\u2013Tarn\u00f3w Offensive campaign. By the end of October 1916, Russia had lost between 1,600,000 and 1,800,000 soldiers, with an additional 2,000,000 prisoners of war and 1,000,000 missing, all making up a total of nearly 5,000,000 men.\nThese staggering losses played a definite role in the mutinies and revolts that began to occur. In 1916, reports of fraternizing with the enemy began to circulate. Soldiers went hungry, lacked shoes, munitions, and even weapons. Rampant discontent lowered morale, which was further undermined by a series of military defeats.\nCasualty rates were the most vivid sign of this disaster. By the end of 1914, only five months into the war, around 390,000 Russian men had lost their lives and nearly 1,000,000 were injured. Far sooner than expected, inadequately trained recruits were called for active duty, a process repeated throughout the war as staggering losses continued to mount. The officer class also saw remarkable changes, especially within the lower echelons, which were quickly filled with soldiers rising up through the ranks. These men, usually of peasant or working-class backgrounds, were to play a large role in the politicization of the troops in 1917.\nThe army quickly ran short of rifles and ammunition (as well as uniforms and food), and by mid-1915, men were being sent to the front bearing no arms. It was hoped that they could equip themselves with arms recovered from fallen soldiers, of both sides, on the battlefields. The soldiers did not feel as if they were valuable, rather they felt as if they were expendable.\nBy the spring of 1915, the army was in steady retreat, which was not always orderly; desertion, plundering, and chaotic flight were not uncommon. By 1916, however, the situation had improved in many respects. Russian troops stopped retreating, and there were even some modest successes in the offensives that were staged that year, albeit at great loss of life. Also, the problem of shortages was largely solved by a major effort to increase domestic production. Nevertheless, by the end of 1916, morale among soldiers was even worse than it had been during the great retreat of 1915. The fortunes of war may have improved, but the fact of war remained which continually took Russian lives. The crisis in morale (as was argued by Allan Wildman, a leading historian of the Russian army in war and revolution) \"was rooted fundamentally in the feeling of utter despair that the slaughter would ever end and that anything resembling victory could be achieved.\"\nThe war did not only devastate soldiers. By the end of 1915, there were manifold signs that the economy was breaking down under the heightened strain of wartime demand. The main problems were food shortages and rising prices. Inflation dragged incomes down at an alarmingly rapid rate, and shortages made it difficult for an individual to sustain oneself. These shortages were a problem especially in the capital, St. Petersburg, where distance from supplies and poor transportation networks made matters particularly worse. Shops closed early or entirely for lack of bread, sugar, meat, and other provisions, and lines lengthened massively for what remained. Conditions became increasingly difficult to afford food and physically obtain it.\nStrikes increased steadily from the middle of 1915, and so did crime, but, for the most part, people suffered and endured, scouring the city for food. Working-class women in St. Petersburg reportedly spent about forty hours a week in food lines, begging, turning to prostitution or crime, tearing down wooden fences to keep stoves heated for warmth, and continued to resent the rich.\nGovernment officials responsible for public order worried about how long people's patience would last. A report by the St. Petersburg branch of the security police, the Okhrana, in October 1916, warned bluntly of \"the possibility in the near future of riots by the lower classes of the empire enraged by the burdens of daily existence.\"\nTsar Nicholas was blamed for all of these crises, and what little support he had left began to crumble. As discontent grew, the State Duma issued a warning to Nicholas in November 1916, stating that, inevitably, a terrible disaster would grip the country unless a constitutional form of government was put in place. Nicholas ignored these warnings and Russia's Tsarist regime collapsed a few months later during the February Revolution of 1917. One year later, the Tsar and his entire family were executed.\nFebruary Revolution.\nAt the beginning of February, Petrograd workers began several strikes and demonstrations. On 7 March [O.S. 22 February], Putilov, Petrograd's largest industrial plant was closed by a workers' strike. The next day, a series of meetings and rallies were held for International Women's Day, which gradually turned into economic and political gatherings. Demonstrations were organised to demand bread, and these were supported by the industrial working force who considered them a reason for continuing the strikes. The women workers marched to nearby factories bringing out over 50,000 workers on strike. By 10 March [O.S. 25 February], virtually every industrial enterprise in Petrograd had been shut down, together with many commercial and service enterprises. Students, white-collar workers, and teachers joined the workers in the streets and at public meetings.\nTo quell the riots, the Tsar looked to the army. At least 180,000 troops were available in the capital, but most were either untrained or injured. Historian Ian Beckett suggests around 12,000 could be regarded as reliable, but even these proved reluctant to move in on the crowd, since it included so many women. It was for this reason that on 11 March [O.S. 26 February], when the Tsar ordered the army to suppress the rioting by force, troops began to revolt. Although few actively joined the rioting, many officers were either shot or went into hiding; the ability of the garrison to hold back the protests was all but nullified, symbols of the Tsarist regime were rapidly torn down around the city, and governmental authority in the capital collapsed \u2013 not helped by the fact that Nicholas had prorogued the Duma that morning, leaving it with no legal authority to act. The response of the Duma, urged on by the liberal bloc, was to establish a Temporary Committee to restore law and order; meanwhile, the socialist parties established the Petrograd Soviet to represent workers and soldiers. The remaining loyal units switched allegiance the next day.\nThe Tsar directed the royal train back towards Petrograd, which was stopped on 14 March [O.S. 1 March], by a group of revolutionaries at Malaya Vishera. When the Tsar finally arrived at Pskov, the Army Chief Nikolai Ruzsky, and the Duma deputies Alexander Guchkov and Vasily Shulgin suggested in unison that he abdicate the throne. He did so on 15 March [O.S. 2 March], on behalf of himself, and then, having taken advice on behalf of his son, the Tsarevich. Nicholas nominated his brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich, to succeed him. But the Grand Duke realised that he would have little support as ruler, so he declined the crown on 16 March [O.S. 3 March], stating that he would take it only if that was the consensus of democratic action. Six days later, Nicholas, no longer Tsar and addressed with contempt by the sentries as \"Nicholas Romanov\", was reunited with his family at the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo. He was placed under house arrest with his family by the Provisional Government.\nThe immediate effect of the February Revolution was a widespread atmosphere of elation and excitement in Petrograd. On 16 March [O.S. 3 March], a provisional government was announced. The center-left was well represented, and the government was initially chaired by a liberal aristocrat, Prince Georgy Yevgenievich Lvov, a member of the Constitutional Democratic Party (KD). The socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or workers' council) four days earlier. The Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government competed for power over Russia.\nDual power: \"Dvoyevlastiye\".\nThe effective power of the Provisional Government was challenged by the authority of an institution that claimed to represent the will of workers and soldiers and could, in fact, mobilize and control these groups during the early months of the revolution\u00a0\u2013 the Petrograd Soviet Council of Workers' Deputies. The model for the Soviets were workers' councils that had been established in scores of Russian cities during the 1905 Revolution. In February 1917, striking workers elected deputies to represent them and socialist activists began organizing a citywide council to unite these deputies with representatives of the socialist parties. On 27 February, socialist Duma deputies, mainly Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, took the lead in organizing a citywide council. The Petrograd Soviet met in the Tauride Palace, room 13, permitted by the Provisional Government.\nThe leaders of the Petrograd Soviet believed that they represented particular classes of the population, not the whole nation. They also believed Russia was not ready for socialism. They viewed their role as limited to pressuring hesitant \"bourgeoisie\" to rule and to introduce extensive democratic reforms in Russia (the replacement of the monarchy by a republic, guaranteed civil rights, a democratic police and army, abolition of religious and ethnic discrimination, preparation of elections to a constituent assembly, and so on). They met in the same building as the emerging Provisional Government not to compete with the Duma Committee for state power, but to best exert pressure on the new government, to act, in other words, as a popular democratic lobby.\nThe relationship between these two major powers was complex from the beginning and would shape the politics of 1917. The representatives of the Provisional Government agreed to \"take into account the opinions of the Soviet of Workers' Deputies\", though they were also determined to prevent interference which would create an unacceptable situation of dual power. In fact, this was precisely what was being created, though this \"dual power\" (dvoyevlastiye) was the result less of the actions or attitudes of the leaders of these two institutions than of actions outside their control, especially the ongoing social movement taking place on the streets of Russia's cities, factories, shops, barracks, villages, and in the trenches.\nA series of political crises\u00a0\u2013 see the chronology below\u00a0\u2013 in the relationship between population and government and between the Provisional Government and the Soviets (which developed into a nationwide movement with a national leadership). The All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK) undermined the authority of the Provisional Government but also of the moderate socialist leaders of the Soviets. Although the Soviet leadership initially refused to participate in the \"bourgeois\" Provisional Government, Alexander Kerensky, a young, popular lawyer and a member of the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SRP), agreed to join the new cabinet, and became an increasingly central figure in the government, eventually taking leadership of the Provisional Government. As minister of war and later Prime Minister, Kerensky promoted freedom of speech, released thousands of political prisoners, continued the war effort, even organizing another offensive (which, however, was no more successful than its predecessors). Nevertheless, Kerensky still faced several great challenges, highlighted by the soldiers, urban workers, and peasants, who claimed that they had gained nothing by the revolution:\nThe political group that proved most troublesome for Kerensky, and would eventually overthrow him, was the Bolshevik Party, led by Vladimir Lenin. Lenin had been living in exile in neutral Switzerland and, due to democratization of politics after the February Revolution, which legalized formerly banned political parties, he perceived the opportunity for his Marxist revolution. Although return to Russia had become a possibility, the war made it logistically difficult. Eventually, German officials arranged for Lenin to pass through their territory, hoping that his activities would weaken Russia or even\u00a0\u2013 if the Bolsheviks came to power\u00a0\u2013 lead to Russia's withdrawal from the war. Lenin and his associates, however, had to agree to travel to Russia in a sealed train: Germany would not take the chance that he would foment revolution in Germany. After passing through the front, he arrived in Petrograd in April 1917.\nOn the way to Russia, Lenin prepared the April Theses, which outlined central Bolshevik policies. These included that the Soviets take power (as seen in the slogan \"all power to the Soviets\") and denouncing the liberals and social revolutionaries in the Provisional Government, forbidding co-operation with it. Many Bolsheviks, however, had supported the Provisional Government, including Lev Kamenev.\nWith Lenin's arrival, the popularity of the Bolsheviks increased steadily. Over the course of the spring, public dissatisfaction with the Provisional Government and the war, in particular among workers, soldiers and peasants, pushed these groups to radical parties. Despite growing support for the Bolsheviks, buoyed by maxims that called most famously for \"all power to the Soviets\", the party held very little real power in the moderate-dominated Petrograd Soviet. In fact, historians such as Sheila Fitzpatrick have asserted that Lenin's exhortations for the Soviet Council to take power were intended to arouse indignation both with the Provisional Government, whose policies were viewed as conservative, and the Soviets themselves, which were viewed as subservients to the conservative government. By some other historians' accounts, Lenin and his followers were unprepared for how their groundswell of support, especially among influential worker and soldier groups, would translate into real power in the summer of 1917.\nOn 18 June, the Provisional Government launched an attack against Germany that failed miserably. Soon after, the government ordered soldiers to go to the front, reneging on a promise. The soldiers refused to follow the new orders. The arrival of radical Kronstadt sailors\u00a0\u2013 who had tried and executed many officers, including one admiral\u00a0\u2013 further fueled the growing revolutionary atmosphere. Sailors and soldiers, along with Petrograd workers, took to the streets in violent protest, calling for \"all power to the Soviets\". The revolt, however, was disowned by Lenin and the Bolshevik leaders and dissipated within a few days. In the aftermath, Lenin fled to Finland under threat of arrest while Trotsky, among other prominent Bolsheviks, was arrested. The July Days confirmed the popularity of the anti-war, radical Bolsheviks, but their unpreparedness at the moment of revolt was an embarrassing gaffe that lost them support among their main constituent groups: soldiers and workers.\nThe Bolshevik failure in the July Days proved temporary. The Bolsheviks had undergone a spectacular growth in membership. Whereas, in February 1917, the Bolsheviks were limited to only 24,000 members, by September 1917 there were 200,000 members of the Bolshevik faction. Previously, the Bolsheviks had been in the minority in the two leading cities of Russia\u00a0\u2013 St. Petersburg and Moscow behind the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, by September the Bolsheviks were in the majority in both cities. Furthermore, the Bolshevik-controlled Moscow Regional Bureau of the Party also controlled the Party organizations of the 13 provinces around Moscow. These 13 provinces held 37% of Russia's population and 20% of the membership of the Bolshevik faction.\nIn August, poor and misleading communication led General Lavr Kornilov, the recently appointed Supreme Commander of Russian military forces, to believe that the Petrograd government had already been captured by radicals, or was in serious danger thereof. In response, he ordered troops to Petrograd to pacify the city. To secure his position, Kerensky had to ask for Bolshevik assistance. He also sought help from the Petrograd Soviet, which called upon armed Red Guards to \"defend the revolution\". The Kornilov Affair failed largely due to the efforts of the Bolsheviks, whose influence over railroad and telegraph workers proved vital in stopping the movement of troops. With his coup failing, Kornilov surrendered and was relieved of his position. The Bolsheviks' role in stopping the attempted coup further strengthened their position.\nIn early September, the Petrograd Soviet freed all jailed Bolsheviks and Trotsky became chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. Growing numbers of socialists and lower-class Russians viewed the government less as a force in support of their needs and interests. The Bolsheviks benefited as the only major organized opposition party that had refused to compromise with the Provisional Government, and they benefited from growing frustration and even disgust with other parties, such as the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, who stubbornly refused to break with the idea of national unity across all classes.\nIn Finland, Lenin had worked on his book \"State and Revolution\" and continued to lead his party, writing newspaper articles and policy decrees. By October, he returned to Petrograd (present-day St. Petersburg), aware that the increasingly radical city presented him no legal danger and a second opportunity for revolution. Recognising the strength of the Bolsheviks, Lenin began pressing for the immediate overthrow of the Kerensky government by the Bolsheviks. Lenin was of the opinion that taking power should occur in both St. Petersburg and Moscow simultaneously, parenthetically stating that it made no difference which city rose up first. The Bolshevik Central Committee drafted a resolution, calling for the dissolution of the Provisional Government in favor of the Petrograd Soviet. The resolution was passed 10\u20132 (Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev prominently dissenting) promoting the October Revolution.\nOctober Revolution.\nThe October Revolution, which unfolded on 7 November [O.S. 25 October] 1917, was organized by the Bolshevik party. Lenin did not have any direct role in the revolution and he was hiding for his personal safety. However, in late October, Lenin secretly and at great personal risk entered Petrograd and attended a private gathering of the Bolshevik Central Committee on the evening of 23 October. The Revolutionary Military Committee established by the Bolshevik party was organizing the insurrection and Leon Trotsky was the chairman. 50,000 workers had passed a resolution in favour of Bolshevik demand for transfer of power to the soviets. However, Lenin played a crucial role in the debate in the leadership of the Bolshevik party for a revolutionary insurrection as the party in the autumn of 1917 received a majority in the soviets. An ally in the left fraction of the Revolutionary-Socialist Party, with huge support among the peasants who opposed Russia's participation in the war, supported the slogan 'All power to the Soviets'. The initial stage of the October Revolution which involved the assault on Petrograd occurred largely without any human casualties.\nLiberal and monarchist forces, loosely organized into the White Army, immediately went to war against the Bolsheviks' Red Army, in a series of battles that would become known as the Russian Civil War. The Civil War began in early 1918 with domestic anti-Bolshevik forces confronting the nascent Red Army. In autumn of 1918 Allied countries needed to block German access to Russian supplies. They sent troops to support the \"Whites\" with supplies of weapons, ammunition and logistic equipment being sent from the main Western countries but this was not at all coordinated. Germany did not participate in the civil war as it surrendered to the Allies.\nThe provisional government with its second and third coalition was led by a right wing fraction of the Socialist-Revolutionary party, SR. This non-elected provisional government faced the revolutionary situation and the growing mood against the war by avoiding elections to the state Duma. However, the October revolution forced the political parties behind the newly dissolved provisional government to move and move fast for immediate elections. All happened so fast that the left SR fraction did not have time to reach out and be represented in ballots of the SR party which was part of the coalition in the provisional government. This non-elected government supported continuation of the war on the side of the allied forces. The elections to the State Duma 25 November 1917 therefore did not mirror the true political situation among peasants even if we don't know how the outcome would be if the anti-war left SR fraction had a fair chance to challenge the party leaders. In the elections, the Bolshevik party received 25% of the votes and the Socialist-Revolutionaries as much as 58%. It is possible the left SR had a good chance to reach more than 25% of the votes and thereby legitimate the October revolution but we can only guess.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter the majority of the petrograd Soviet passed into the hands of the Bolsheviks, [Trotsky] was elected its chairman and in that position organized and led the insurrection of October 25.\nLenin on the organization of the October Revolution, Vol.XIV of the \"Collected Works\".\nLenin did not believe that a socialist revolution necessarily presupposed a fully developed capitalist economy. A semi-capitalist country would suffice and Russia had a working class base of 5% of the population.\nThough Lenin was the leader of the Bolshevik Party, it has been argued that since Lenin was not present during the actual takeover of the Winter Palace, it was really Trotsky's organization and direction that led the revolution, merely spurred by the motivation Lenin instigated within his party. Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin\u2019s influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky\u2019s, not to Lenin\u2019s plan.\nCritics on the Right have long argued that the financial and logistical assistance of German intelligence via their key agent, Alexander Parvus was a key component as well, though historians are divided, since there is little evidence supporting that claim.\nSoviet membership was initially freely elected, but many members of the Socialist Revolutionary Party, anarchists, and other leftists created opposition to the Bolsheviks through the Soviets themselves. The elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly took place 25 November 1917. The Bolsheviks gained 25% of the vote. When it became clear that the Bolsheviks had little support outside of the industrialized areas of Saint Petersburg and Moscow, they simply barred non-Bolsheviks from membership in the Soviets. The Bolsheviks dissolved the Constituent Assembly in January 1918.\nRussian Civil War.\nThe October Revolution led by the Bolsheviks was not recognized by a variety of social and political groups, including army officers and cossacks, the \"bourgeoisie\" and the landowners, and political groups ranging from the far Right to the moderate socialists, the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who opposed the drastic restructuring championed by the Bolsheviks following the collapse of the Provisional Government.\nThe Russian Civil War, which broke out in the months following the revolution, resulted in the deaths and suffering of millions of people regardless of their political orientation. The war was fought mainly between the Red Army (\"Reds\"), consisting of the Bolsheviks and the supporters of the Soviets, and the White movement (\"Whites\"), and their loosely allied \"White Armies\" led mainly by the right-leaning and conservative officers of the Russian Empire and the Cossacks and supported by the classes which lost their power and privileges with the Bolshevik revolution; the Civil War also included armed conflicts with nationalist movements for independence, armed struggle and terrorism by anti-Bolshevik socialists and anarchists, and uprisings of the peasants who organized themselves into the \"Green armies\". Although the views within the Russian Whites ranged from monarchism to socialism, the Whites generally preferred the Russian Empire to the revolution, and they were commonly seen as restorers of the old order as they fought the movements of the non-Russian nationalities in favour of \"indivisible Russia\" and opposed the land reform and defended the property rights of the upper classes; the socialists who opposed both factions saw the rule of the Whites (a military dictatorship headed by Alexander Kolchak and by the commanders of the White forces) as a right-wing dictatorship. The Russian Whites had backing from other countries such as the United Kingdom, France, the United States, and Japan, while the Reds possessed internal support, proving to be much more effective. Though the Allied nations, using external interference, provided substantial military aid to the Whites, they were ultimately defeated.\nThe Bolsheviks firstly assumed power in Petrograd, expanding their rule outwards. They eventually reached the Easterly Siberian Russian coast in Vladivostok, four years after the war began, an occupation that is believed to have ended all significant military campaigns in the nation. Less than one year later, the last area controlled by the White Army, the Ayano-Maysky District, directly to the north of the Krai containing Vladivostok, was given up when General Anatoly Pepelyayev capitulated in 1923.\nSeveral revolts were initiated against the Bolsheviks and their army near the end of the war, notably the Kronstadt Rebellion. This was a naval mutiny engineered by Soviet Baltic sailors, former Red Army soldiers, and the people of Kronstadt. This armed uprising was fought against the antagonizing Bolshevik economic policies that farmers were subjected to, including seizures of grain crops by the Communists. This all amounted to large-scale discontent. When delegates representing the Kronstadt sailors arrived at Petrograd for negotiations, they raised 15 demands primarily pertaining to the Russian right to freedom. The Government firmly denounced the rebellions and labelled the requests as a reminder of the Social Revolutionaries, a political party that was popular among Soviets before Lenin, but refused to cooperate with the Bolshevik Army. The Government then responded with an armed suppression of these revolts and suffered ten thousand casualties before entering the city of Kronstadt. This ended the rebellions fairly quickly, causing many of the rebels to flee seeking political exile.\nDuring the Civil War, Nestor Makhno led a Ukrainian anarchist movement. Makhno's Insurgent Army allied to the Bolsheviks thrice, with one of the powers ending the alliance each time. However, a Bolshevik force under Mikhail Frunze destroyed the Makhnovshchina, when the Makhnovists refused to merge into the Red Army. In addition, the so-called \"Green Army\" (peasants defending their property against the opposing forces) played a secondary role in the war, mainly in Ukraine.\nRevolutionary tribunals.\nRevolutionary tribunals were present during both the Revolution and the Civil War, intended for the purpose of combatting forces of counter-revolution. At the Civil War's zenith, it is reported that upwards of 200,000 cases were investigated by approximately 200 tribunals. These tribunals established themselves more so from the Cheka as a more moderate force that acted under the banner of revolutionary justice, rather than a utilizer of strict brute force as the former did. However, these tribunals did come with their own set of inefficiencies, such as responding to cases in a matter of months and not having a concrete definition of \"counter-revolution\" that was determined on a case-by-case basis. The \"Decree on Revolutionary Tribunals\" used by the People's Commissar of Justice, states in article 2 that \"In fixing the penalty, the Revolutionary Tribunal shall be guided by the circumstances of the case and the dictates of the revolutionary conscience.\" Revolutionary tribunals ultimately demonstrated that a form of justice was still prevalent in Russian society where the Russian Provisional Government failed. This, in part, triggered the political transition of the October Revolution and the Civil War that followed in its aftermath.\nMurder of the imperial family.\nThe Bolsheviks murdered the Tsar and his family on 16 July 1918. In early March 1917, the Provisional Government had placed Nicholas and his family under house arrest in the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo, south of Petrograd. But in August 1917, they evacuated the Romanovs to Tobolsk in the Urals to protect them from the rising tide of revolution. After the Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917, the conditions of their imprisonment grew stricter and talk of putting Nicholas on trial increased. In April and May 1918, the looming civil war led the Bolsheviks to move the family to the stronghold of Yekaterinburg.\nDuring the early morning of 16 July, Nicholas, Alexandra, their children, their physician, and several servants were taken into the basement and shot. According to Edvard Radzinsky and Dmitrii Volkogonov, the order came directly from Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov in Moscow. However, this claim has never been confirmed. The murder may have been carried out on the initiative of local Bolshevik officials, or it may have been an option pre-approved in Moscow as White troops were rapidly approaching Yekaterinburg. Radzinsky noted that Lenin's bodyguard personally delivered the telegram ordering the killing and that he was ordered to destroy the evidence.\nSymbolism.\nThe Russian Revolution became the site for many instances of symbolism, both physical and non-physical. Communist symbolism is perhaps the most notable of this time period, such as the debut of the iconic hammer and sickle as a representation of the October Revolution in 1917, eventually becoming the official symbol of the USSR in 1924, and later the symbol of Communism as a whole. Although the Bolsheviks did not have extensive political experience, their portrayal of the revolution itself as both a political and symbolic order resulted in Communism's portrayal as a messianic faith, formally known as communist messianism. Portrayals of notable revolutionary figures such as Lenin were done in iconographic methods, equating them similarly to religious figures, though religion itself was banned in the USSR and groups such as the Russian Orthodox Church were persecuted.\nThe revolution and the world.\nThe revolution ultimately led to the establishment of the future Soviet Union as an ideocracy; however, the establishment of such a state came as an ideological paradox, as Marx's ideals of how a socialist state ought to be created were based on the formation being natural and not artificially incited (i.e. by means of revolution). Leon Trotsky said that the goal of socialism in Russia would not be realized without the success of the world revolution. A revolutionary wave caused by the Russian Revolution lasted until 1923, but despite initial hopes for success in the German Revolution of 1918\u201319, the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic, and others like it, only the Mongolian Revolution of 1921 saw a Marxist movement at the time succeed in keeping power in its hands.\nThis issue is subject to conflicting views on communist history by various Marxist groups and parties. Joseph Stalin later rejected this concept, stating that socialism was possible in one country.The confusion regarding Stalin's position on the issue stems from the fact that, after Lenin's death in 1924, he successfully used Lenin's argument\u00a0\u2013 the argument that socialism's success needs the support of workers of other countries in order to happen\u00a0\u2013 to defeat his competitors within the party by accusing them of betraying Lenin and, therefore, the ideals of the October Revolution.\nThe Russian Revolution was perceived as a rupture with imperialism for various civil rights and decolonization struggles and providing a space for oppressed groups across the world. This was given further credence with the Soviet Union supporting many anti-colonial third world movements with financial funds against European colonial powers.\nHistoriography.\nFew events in historical research have been as conditioned by political influences as the October Revolution. The historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three schools of thought: the Soviet-Marxist (Marxist-Leninist) view, the Western 'totalitarian' view, and the 'revisionist' view. The 'totalitarian' historians are also referred to as 'traditionalists' and 'Cold War historians' for relying on interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and described as a conservative direction; the Western Revisionists have lacked a full-fledged doctrine or philosophy of history, but were distinguished in the 1960s-1970s by their criticism of the 'traditionalist' bias towards the USSR and the left in general and their focus on \"history from below\" and social perspectives. While the 'totalitarian' historians described the Bolshevik revolution as a coup carried out by a minority which turned Russia into a totalitarian dictatorship, the 'revisionists' opposed such description and stressed the genuinely 'popular' nature of the Revolution. Since the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Western-Totalitarian view has again become dominant and the Soviet-Marxist view has practically vanished in mainstream political analysis. The 'revisionists' achieved some success in challenging the 'traditionalists' and became accepted in academic circles, while 'totalitarian' historians retained popularity and influence in politics and public spheres.\nFollowing the death of Vladimir Lenin, the Bolshevik government was thrown into a crisis. Lenin failed to designate who his successor would be or how they would be chosen. A power struggle broke out in the party between Leon Trotsky and his enemies. Trotsky was defeated by the anti-Trotsky bloc by the mid-1920s and his hopes for party leadership were dashed. Among Trotsky's opponents, Joseph Stalin would rise to assume unchallenged party leadership by 1928. In 1927, Trotsky was expelled from the party and in 1929 he lost his citizenship and was sent into exile. While in exile he began honing his own interpretation of Marxism called Trotskyism. The schism between Trotsky and Stalin is the focal point where the Revisionist view comes into existence. Trotsky traveled across the world denouncing Stalin and the Soviet Union under his leadership. He specifically focused his criticism on Stalin's doctrine, Socialism in One Country, claiming that it was incongruent with the ideology of the revolution. Eventually, Trotsky settled in Mexico City and founded a base of operations for him and his supporters. In 1937 at the height of the Great Purge, he published \"The Revolution Betrayed\" which outlined his ideological contradictions with Stalin, and how Stalin was guilty of subverting and debasing the 1917 revolution. He continued to vocally criticize Stalin and Stalinism until his assassination in 1940 on Stalin's orders.\nThe Soviet-Marxist interpretation is the belief that the Russian Revolution under the Bolsheviks was a proud and glorious effort of the working class which saw the removal of the Tsar, nobility, and capitalists from positions of power. The Bolsheviks and later the Communist Party took the first steps in liberating the proletariat and building a workers' state that practiced equality. Outside of Eastern Europe this view was heavily criticized as following the death of Lenin the Soviet Union became more authoritarian. Even though the Soviet Union no longer exists, the Soviet-Marxist view is still used as an interpretation in academia today. Both academics and Soviet supporters argue this view is supported by several events. First, the RSFSR made substantial advances to women's rights. It was the first country to decriminalize abortion and allowed women to be educated, which was forbidden under the Tsar. Furthermore, the RSFSR decriminalized homosexuality between consenting adults, which was seen as radical for the time period. The Bolshevik government also actively recruited working class citizens into positions of party leadership, thereby ensuring the proletariat was represented in policymaking. One of the most important aspects to this view was the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War. On paper, the Bolsheviks should have been defeated in part due to the broad international support their enemies were receiving. Britain, France, the United States, Japan, and other countries sent aid to the White Army and expedition forces against the Bolsheviks. The Bolsheviks were further at a disadvantage due to factors such as: the small land area under their control, lack of professional officers, and supply shortages. In spite of this, the Red Army prevailed. The Red Army unlike many White factions maintained a high morale among their troops and civilians throughout the duration of the civil war. This was in part due to their skillful use of propaganda. Bolshevik propaganda portrayed the Red Army as liberators and stewards of the poor and downtrodden. Bolshevik support was further elevated by Lenin's initiatives to distribute land to the peasantry, and ending the war with Germany. During the civil war, the Bolsheviks were able to raise an army numbering around five million active soldiers. Domestic support and patriotism played a decisive role in the Russian Civil War. By 1923 the Bolsheviks had controlled the last of the White Army holdouts and the Russian Civil War concluded with a Bolshevik victory. This victory ultimately influenced how the Soviet Union interpreted its own ideology and the October Revolution itself. Starting in 1919, the Soviets would commemorate the event with a military parade and a public holiday. This tradition lasted up until the collapse of the Soviet Union. As time went on the Soviet-Marxist interpretation evolved with an \"anti-Stalinist\" version of it. This subsection attempts to draw a distinction between the \"Lenin period\" (1917\u201324) and the \"Stalin period\" (1928\u201353).\nNikita Khrushchev, Stalin's successor, argued that Stalin's regime differed greatly from the leadership of Lenin in his \"Secret Speech\", delivered in 1956. He was critical of the cult of the individual which was constructed around Stalin whereas Lenin stressed \"the role of the people as the creator of history\". He also emphasized that Lenin favored a collective leadership which relied on personal persuasion and recommended the removal of Stalin from the position of General Secretary. Khrushchev contrasted this with the \"despotism\" of Stalin which require absolute submission to his position and also highlighted that many of the people who were later annihilated as \"enemies of the party\", \"had worked with Lenin during his life\". He also contrasted the \"severe methods\" used by Lenin in the \"most necessary cases\" as a \"struggle for survival\" during the Civil War with the extreme methods and mass repressions used by Stalin even when the Revolution was \"already victorious\".\nViews from the west were mixed. Socialists and labor organizations tended to support the October Revolution and the Bolshevik seizure of power. On the other hand, western governments were mortified. Western leaders, and later some academics concluded that the Russian Revolution only replaced one form of tyranny (Tsarism), with another (communism). Initially, the Bolsheviks were tolerant of opposing political factions. Upon seizing state power, they organized a parliament, the Russian Constituent Assembly. On 25 November, an election was held. Despite the Bolsheviks being the party that overthrew the Provisional Government and organizing the assembly, they lost the election. Rather than govern as a coalition, the Bolsheviks banned all political opposition. Historians point to this as the start of communist authoritarianism. Conservative historian Robert Service states, \"he (Lenin) aided the foundations of dictatorship and lawlessness. He had consolidated the principle of state penetration of the whole society, its economy and its culture. Lenin had practiced terror and advocated revolutionary amoralism.\" Lenin allowed for certain disagreement and debate but only within the highest organs of the Bolshevik party, and practicing democratic centralism. The RSFSR and later the Soviet Union continued to practice political repression until its dissolution in 1991.\nTrotskyist theoreticians have disputed the view that a one-party state was a natural outgrowth of the Bolsheviks' actions. George Novack stressed the initial efforts by the Bolsheviks to form a government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries and bring other parties such as the Mensheviks into political legality. Tony Cliff argued the Bolshevik\u2013Left Socialist Revolutionary coalition government dissolved the Constituent Assembly due to a number of reasons. They cited the outdated voter-rolls which did not acknowledge the split among the Socialist Revolutionary party and the assemblies conflict with the Congress of the Soviets as an alternative democratic structure. Trotskyist historian Vadim Rogovin believed Stalinism had \"discredited the idea of socialism in the eyes of millions of people throughout the world\". Rogovin also argued that the Left Opposition, led by Leon Trotsky, was a political movement \"which offered a real alternative to Stalinism, and that to crush this movement was the primary function of the Stalinist terror\".\nCultural portrayal.\nFilm.\nThe Russian Revolution has been portrayed in or served as backdrop for many films. Among them, in order of release date:\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25764", "revid": "45280120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25764", "title": "Raven Software", "text": "American video game development company\nRaven Software Corporation (trade name: Raven; formerly Raven Software, Inc.) is an American video game developer based in Middleton, Wisconsin, and part of Activision. Founded in May 1990 by brothers Brian and Steve Raffel, the company is most known for the dark fantasy franchise \"Heretic/Hexen\", the first two \"Soldier of Fortune\" games, as well as licensed titles based in the ' series and Marvel Comics's X-Men characters, including 2006's '. Since 2011, Raven has been working on multiple \"Call of Duty\" games as both lead and support developer.\nRaven's first game, \"Black Crypt\" (1992), was conceived in the late 1980s by Raffel brothers to be a paper-and-pen role-playing game, until the two retooled the project from scratch to become a video game. While it did not perform well commercially, its positive reception by critics and technology efforts led to John Romero approaching Raven to develop new titles for the personal computer starting with \"ShadowCaster\" (1993), which was powered by Raven Engine, a modified \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine designed by John Carmack. The game's success impressed id Software and Strategic Simulations, who signed a deal to publish the company's next titles, which had grown to two teams to work on 1994's \"CyClones\" and \"Heretic\". The latter, inspired by Brian Raffel's interest in making a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"\u2013inspired game, was critically acclaimed, spawned several sequels, and helped Raven grow to three development teams.\nIn August 1997, Activision announced it had agreed to acquire Raven and took over the distribution to \"Hexen II\", while the other two Raven teams continued production on the previously announced titles \"Take No Prisoners\" and \"MageSlayer\". After 1998's \"Heretic II\", Raven aimed to expand its games to a broader audience, acquiring \"Soldier of Fortune\" magazine name rights to develop a game of the same name while also working on its first licensed title, '. The latter achieved universal acclaim by critics and has since gained a cult following, encouraging LucasArts to collaborate with Raven on ' and \"\". The company also continued partnering with id Software, working on \"Quake 4\" and the 2009 \"Wolfenstein\", and becoming one of the first studios to license id Tech 4.\nIn the 2000s, Raven worked with Marvel Entertainment on some of its superhero properties, developing \"X-Men Legends\" (2004), ' (2005), ' (2006) and ' (2009). This lasted until Raven announced a new intellectual property, \"Singularity\", which was released in 2010 to positive reception. In 2011, Raven shifted to work on several \"Call of Duty\" titles as support developer, and in 2014, the company opened a Chinese studio in Shanghai to collaborate with Tencent Games on \"Call of Duty Online,\" although this studio is no longer active today. Raven worked with Infinity Ward and Treyarch on 2020's ' and ', leading production on the latter's single-player campaign. It also developed ', which was released on October 24, 2024, and \"\", which was released on November 14, 2025.\nHistory.\nFoundation and \"Black Crypt\" (1986\u20131992).\nIn 1986, Brian Raffel was an art teacher at University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison and cross country-track coach at Middleton High School and his brother, Steve, worked in a screen-print shop. Their late father, Don, was an influence on the two growing up playing \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" adventure modules such as \"Palace of the Silver Princess\", \"Tomb of Horrors\", \"Lost Tomb of Martek\", and \"Castle Amber\", who inspired Brian to draw a concept by the end of 1988 called \"The Well\"\u2014 a paper-and-pen role-playing game originally conceived as a \"D&amp;D\" module until Steve came up and reworked it with Brian to be its own thing.\nAfter seeing some of the recent games released to the Amiga, Brian decided that their art was \"as good as and in some cases better\" than what was coming and chose to move \"The Well\" to the Amiga for taking advantage of its computing power. Brian brothers retooled the project from scratch while opening their own company to work on the now called \"Black Crypt\". Raven Software was officially incorporated on May 23, 1990.\nShortly after established Raven, Brian got together programmers Rick Johnson and Ben Gokey, and musician Kevin Schilder to join the company. Johnson was the youngest crew member at 18 years old. \"Black Crypt\" production started in April 1990 and lasted nearly two years, with Raffel brothers and the team moving to a $200 per month office, which sat under a workshop in Madison. The game's budget was $40,000. Described as an \"Age of Darkness first-person tile-based real-time combat dungeon simulator\", \"Black Crypt\" draws inspirations from FTL Games' \"Dungeon Master\" 3D realtime style and consists of twelve interconnected dungeons rendered in 64-colour extra half-brite graphics, which allowed players to define a palette customization of sixty-four colours\u2014unlike \"Dungeon Master\" and its clones.\nid Software.\nRaven Software was founded in 1990 by brothers Brian and Steve Raffel. Originally a three-person company, they were discovered by John Romero, co-founder of id Software, who collaborated with Raven to make games using their game engine beginning with \"ShadowCaster\". Raven then started making games with id Software; the company even briefly moved to the same street as id Software. They used id's engines for many of their games, such as \"Heretic,\" \"\" and \"Hexen II\".\nIn 2005 and 2009, Raven developed two games from id's catalog: \"Quake 4\" and \"Wolfenstein\" respectively.\nActivision.\nThe company was independent until 1997, when it was acquired by Activision for $12 million. They were still collaborating with id Software but at the same time developed other titles as well such as \"Soldier of Fortune\" in 2000, \"\" in 2003, \"X-Men Legends\" in 2004 and many more.\nIn August 2009, following poor performance and possible over-budget of \"Wolfenstein,\" the company made a major layoff of 30 to 35 staff, leaving two development teams. This was reduced to one after more layoffs in October 2010, after delays with \"Singularity;\" as many as 40 staff were released. Following the layoffs and after id Software was bought over by ZeniMax Media, Raven has since become a primary developer for the \"Call of Duty\" series. By July 2021, Raven Software had grown to roughly 350 employees.\nIn December 2021, Activision did not renew the contract of several members of the quality assurance (QA) department that were contract employees. One of the associate managers said that \"valuable members\" were fired although they \"were promised, for months, that Activision was working towards a pay restructure to increase their wages\". Following these firings as well as other controversies involving Activision Blizzard, a strike has been initiated. On January 21, 2022, Raven's QA team formed a union named the Game Workers Alliance with Communications Workers of America.\nIn May 2022, workers of the Raven QA team voted to unionize with a count of 19 \u2013 2 in favor. In June 2022 Activision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick stated that the company would recognize the union and begin negotiations with it. Following the Raven QA team's successful unionization, the 20-member QA team of Blizzard Albany announced a unionization drive in July 2022 as GWA Albany. The vote passed (14\u20130), forming the second union at an Activision Blizzard subsidiary.\nOn March 8, 2024, 600 QA testers at three Activision studios in Austin, Texas, Eden Prairie, Minnesota and El Segundo, California joined Raven and Blizzard's unionizations to form the union \"Activision Quality Assurance United-CWA\" and voted to unionize (390\u20138) in favor, making it the largest video game union in the United States. Following Microsoft acquisition of Activision Blizzard, who included Raven Software, the company voluntarily recognized the union.\nGames.\n\"Heretic/Hexen\" (1994\u20131998).\n\"Heretic\" (also referred as \"Hexen\") is a series of first-person shooter games with action-adventure and action role-playing elements. The first game, \"Heretic\" (1994), was one of the first games to feature inventory manipulation and the ability to look up and down. It also introduced multiple gib objects that spawned when a character suffered a death by extreme force or heat. The game was the first in the \"Serpent Riders\" trilogy, followed by sequels \"\" (1995) and \"Hexen II\" (1997). A direct sequel to the first game, \"Heretic II\", was released in 1998. Set in \"City of the Damned\", capital city of the dark fantasy fictional world of Silverspring, the series was one of the first to combine 3D realistic graphics with fantasy setting, using Silverspring and its people to enrich the narrative and exploration.\n\"Soldier of Fortune\" (2000\u20132002).\nRaven is the creator of \"Soldier of Fortune\", a military first-person shooter series based in the magazine of the same name. The first game, \"Soldier of Fortune\" (2000) introduced GHOUL, an in-house physics engine designed by Raven that helped the game's realistic graphic depictions of firearms dismembering the human body. This graphic violence is the main stylistic attraction, enabling depiction of extreme graphic violence, in which character models are based on body parts that can each independently sustain damage (gore zones). Players play as John Mullins in the first game and ' (2002). The series continued after Raven ceased developing further games. ' (2007) was developed by Cauldron HQ, while \"Soldier of Fortune Online\", an MMOFPS, was developed by South Korean company Dragonfly and released in 2010.\n\"Star Wars: Jedi Knight\" (2002\u20132003).\n\"Star Wars: Jedi Knight\" is a series of first- and third-person shooter games with action-adventure hack and slash elements. Originally created and developed by LucasArts, \"Jedi Knight\" was passed to Raven after numerous restructures at LucasArts in the 2000s led by then president Simon Jeffery. The series is set years after \"Return of the Jedi\" and focuses on Kyle Katarn, a former Imperial officer who becomes a mercenary working for the Rebel Alliance, and later a Jedi and instructor at Luke Skywalker's Jedi Academy. Raven produced Katarn's storyline sequels ' (2002) and ' (2003).\nOn April 3, 2013, following the closure of LucasArts, Raven Software released the source code for ' and ' on SourceForge under the GPL-2.0-only license.\n\"Call of Duty\" (2011\u2013present).\nIn 2012, Raven began hiring employees for a game, and were announced as collaborating with Infinity Ward on \"\" in May 2013.\nIn April 2014, the company became lead developer of the now shutdown free-to-play Chinese \"Call of Duty\" title, '. The company also remade \",\" titled '.\nIn 2020, Raven Software collaborated with Infinity Ward on the game \". The company is considered the face of maintaining, updating and debugging the game as they regularly provide status updates and patch notes on Twitter and their official website (though it is unclear if they are the sole studio responsible behind-the-scenes).\nRaven developed \" with Treyarch, which released on November 13, 2020.\nRaven developed \" with Treyarch, which released on October 24, 2024.\nRaven developed \" with Treyarch, which released on November 14, 2025.\nDevelopment philosophy.\nRaven is known for its approach to multi-project development teams and choice to use project leads and \"state-of-the-art tools\" that can help incubate ideas before they evolve into production. Eric Biessman, Raven's project director, said: \"It's very laid back here. We're left alone to be as creative as we can be\". The work culture at Raven is focused in their mentality of team-driven initiatives, extensive playtests, emergent narrative-focused gameplay and less middle-management involvement. Brian Raffel ascribes the company's motto as \"move or die\", explaining that different directions and creative opportunities are a key element in game design to help Raven determinate which market and public their games are visioning. The studio's vice-president Steve Raffel also head Raven Scout Team (RST), a research group within the company who spend time with analysis, planning and creating vertical slices-based methods to be purposeful improved in company's future projects.\nAccolades and recognition.\nRaven was listed in 2016 by \"Fortune\" as the 77th best place to work, and the 66th best in 2017, both as part of Activision Blizzard studios. Raven co-founder Brian Raffel was inducted on \"In Business\" Hall of Fame \"for his visionary leadership and unparalled passion in game's industry, shaping a successful company and inspiring countless individuals within the gaming community, helping create a close-knit and collaborative culture among teams that marked him as a true icon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25765", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25765", "title": "RNA world", "text": "Hypothetical stage in the early evolutionary history of life on Earth\nThe RNA world is a hypothetical stage in the evolutionary history of life on Earth in which self-replicating RNA molecules proliferated before the evolution of DNA and proteins. The term also refers to the hypothesis that posits the existence of this stage. Alexander Rich first proposed the concept of the RNA world in 1962, and Walter Gilbert coined the term in 1986. \nAmong the characteristics of RNA that suggest its original prominence are that:\nAlthough alternative chemical paths to life have been proposed, and RNA-based life may not have been the first life to exist, the RNA world hypothesis seems to be the most favored abiogenesis paradigm. However, even proponents agree that there is still not conclusive evidence to completely falsify other paradigms and hypotheses. Regardless of its plausibility in a prebiotic scenario, the RNA world can serve as a model system for studying the origin of life.\nIf the RNA world existed, it was probably followed by an age characterized by the evolution of ribonucleoproteins (RNP world), which in turn ushered in the era of DNA and longer proteins. DNA has greater stability and durability than RNA, which may explain why it became the predominant information storage molecule. Protein enzymes may have replaced RNA-based ribozymes as biocatalysts because the greater abundance and diversity of the monomers of which they are built makes them more versatile. As some cofactors contain both nucleotide and amino-acid characteristics, it may be that amino acids, peptides, and finally proteins initially were cofactors for ribozymes.\nHistory.\nOne of the challenges in studying abiogenesis is that the system of reproduction and metabolism utilized by all extant life involves three distinct types of interdependent macromolecules (DNA, RNA, and proteins), none of which can function and reproduce without the others, the classic chicken-and-egg paradox. This suggests that life could not have arisen in its current form, which has led researchers to hypothesize mechanisms whereby the current system might have arisen from a simpler precursor system. American molecular biologist Alexander Rich was the first to posit a coherent hypothesis on the origin of nucleotides as precursors of life. In a 1962 article he explained that the primitive Earth's environment could have produced RNA molecules (polynucleotide monomers) that eventually acquired enzymatic and self-replicating functions.\nOther mentions of RNA as a primordial molecule can be found in papers by Francis Crick and Leslie Orgel, as well as in Carl Woese's 1967 book \"The Genetic Code\". Hans Kuhn in 1972 laid out a possible process by which the modern genetic system might have arisen from a nucleotide-based precursor, and this led Harold White in 1976 to observe that many of the cofactors essential for enzymatic function are either nucleotides or could have been derived from nucleotides. He proposed a scenario whereby the critical electrochemistry of enzymatic reactions would have necessitated retention of the specific nucleotide moieties of the original RNA-based enzymes carrying out the reactions, while the remaining structural elements of the enzymes were gradually replaced by protein, until all that remained of the original RNAs were these nucleotide cofactors, \"fossils of nucleic acid enzymes\".\nProperties of RNA.\nThe properties of RNA make the idea of the RNA world hypothesis conceptually plausible, though its general acceptance as an explanation for the origin of life requires further evidence. RNA is known to form efficient catalysts, and its similarity to DNA makes clear its ability to store information. Opinions differ, however, as to whether RNA constituted the first autonomous self-replicating system or was a derivative of a still-earlier system. One version of the hypothesis is that a different type of nucleic acid, termed \"pre-RNA\", was the first one to emerge as a self-reproducing molecule, to be replaced by RNA only later. On the other hand, the discovery in 2009 that activated pyrimidine ribonucleotides can be synthesized under plausible prebiotic conditions suggests that it is premature to dismiss the RNA-first scenarios. Suggestions for 'simple' \"pre-RNA\" nucleic acids have included peptide nucleic acid (PNA), threose nucleic acid (TNA) or glycol nucleic acid (GNA). Despite their structural simplicity and possession of properties comparable with RNA, the chemically plausible generation of \"simpler\" nucleic acids under prebiotic conditions has yet to be demonstrated.\nRNA as an enzyme.\nIn the 1980s, RNA structures capable of self-processing were discovered, with the RNA moiety of ribonuclease P acting as its catalytic subunit. These catalytic RNAs \u2013 referred to as RNA enzymes, or ribozymes \u2013 are found in today's DNA-based life and could be examples of living fossils. Ribozymes play vital roles, such as that of the ribosome. The large subunit of the ribosome includes an rRNA responsible for the peptide bond-forming peptidyl transferase activity of protein synthesis. Many other ribozyme activities exist; for example, the hammerhead ribozyme performs self-cleavage and an RNA polymerase ribozyme can synthesize a short RNA strand from a primed RNA template.\nAmong the enzymatic properties important for the beginning of life are:\nThe ability to self-replicate or synthesize other RNA molecules; relatively short RNA molecules that can synthesize others have been artificially produced in the lab. The shortest was 165 bases long, though it has been estimated that only part of the molecule was crucial for this function.\n*One version, 189 bases long, had an error rate of just 1.1% per nucleotide when synthesizing an 11-nucleotide long RNA strand from primed template strands. This 189-base pair ribozyme could polymerize a template of at most 14 nucleotides in length, which is too short for self-replication, but is a potential lead for further investigation. The longest primer extension performed by a ribozyme polymerase was 20 bases.\n*In 2016, researchers reported the use of in vitro evolution to improve dramatically the activity and generality of an RNA polymerase ribozyme by selecting variants that can synthesize functional RNA molecules from an RNA template. Each RNA polymerase ribozyme was engineered to remain linked to its new, synthesized RNA strand; this allowed the team to isolate successful polymerases. The isolated RNA polymerases were again used for another round of evolution. After several rounds of evolution, they obtained one RNA polymerase ribozyme called 24-3 that was able to copy almost any other RNA, from small catalysts to long RNA-based enzymes. Particular RNAs were amplified up to 10,000 times, a first RNA version of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).\nLife is thought to have emerged from inanimate matter more than 3.5 billion years ago when a rudimentary abiogenesis process gradually evolved into an autocatalytic process capable of template-based replication. It was proposed on the basis of experimentally feasible RNA reactions catalyzed by a ribozyme, that the emergence of life was likely a gradual process involving the evolutionary properties of variation, heredity and reproduction, ultimately allowing for Darwinian evolution.\nRecent efforts have been directed at trying to demonstrate RNA replication under conditions that assume the presence during early evolution of plausible nucleotide intermediates and plausible environmental conditions that could favor strand replication alternating with strand separation. One such effort was the demonstration of high fidelity RNA copying using 2',3'-cyclic phosphate ligation to allow polynucleotide synthesis under conditions also compatible with strand separation. In another study, it was shown that in a model oscillating Hadean environment likely to have been abundant during early evolution, that ribozyme-mediated RNA synthesis and replication can occur. \nThe ability to catalyze simple chemical reactions\u2014which would enhance creation of molecules that are building blocks of RNA molecules (i.e., a strand of RNA that would make creating more strands of RNA easier). Relatively short RNA molecules with such abilities have been artificially formed in the lab. A recent study showed that almost any nucleic acid can evolve into a catalytic sequence under appropriate selection. For instance, an arbitrarily chosen 50-nucleotide DNA fragment encoding for the \"Bos taurus\" (cattle) albumin mRNA was subjected to test-tube evolution to derive a catalytic DNA (a deoxyribozyme, also called a DNAzyme) with RNA-cleavage activity. After only a few weeks, a DNAzyme with significant catalytic activity had evolved. In general, DNA is much more chemically inert than RNA and hence much more resistant to obtaining catalytic properties. If in vitro evolution works for DNA it will happen much more easily with RNA. In 2022, Nick Lane and coauthors showed in a computational simulation that short RNA sequences could have been capable of catalyzing CO2 fixation which supported protocell replication and growth.\nThe ability to conjugate an amino acid to the 3'-end of an RNA in order to use its chemical groups or provide a long-branched aliphatic sidechain. It has been suggested that amino acids may have initially been involved with RNA molecules as cofactors enhancing or diversifying their enzymatic capabilities, before evolving into more complex peptides. In today's world, this is most commonly seen in the form of aminoacyl-tRNA.\nThe ability to catalyse the formation of peptide bonds between amino acids to produce short peptides or longer proteins. This is done in modern cells by ribosomes, a complex of several RNA molecules known as rRNA together with many proteins. The rRNA molecules are thought responsible for its enzymatic activity, as no amino-acid residues lie within 18\u00c5 of the enzyme's active site, and, when the majority of the amino-acid residues in the ribosome were stringently removed, the resulting ribosome retained its full peptidyl transferase activity, fully able to catalyze the formation of peptide bonds between amino acids.\n* A pseudo 2 fold symmetry of the region surrounding the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) led to the hypothesis of the Proto-Ribosome, that a vestige of an ancient dimeric molecule from the RNA world is functioning within the ribosome. An RNA molecule derived from the 23S ribosomal RNA sequence for this region has been synthesized in the lab in 2022 to test the proto-ribosome hypothesis. It was able to dimerize and to form peptide bonds.\n* A much shorter RNA molecule has been synthesized in the laboratory in 1999 with the ability to form peptide bonds, and it has been suggested that rRNA has evolved from a similar molecule. \n* tRNA is suggested to have also evolved from RNA molecules that began to catalyze amino acid transfer (also see the discussion of amino acid-RNA ligation above). The current core of the ribosome, the PTC, may also have evolved from the concatenation of five proto-tRNAs.\n** A RNP world-type hypothesis is that the tRNA acceptor stem and the catalytic domain of the aaRS came earlier than the genetic code and the PTC. \nProtein enzymes catalyze various chemical reactions, but over half of them incorporate cofactors to facilitate and diversify their catalytic activities. Cofactors are essential in biology, as they are based largely on nucleotides rather than amino acids. Ribozymes use nucleotide cofactors to create metabolism, with two basic choices: non-covalent binding or covalent attachment. Both approaches have been demonstrated using directed evolution to reinvent RNA dupes of protein-catalyzed processes. Lorsch and Szostak investigated ribozymes that could phosphorylate themselves and use ATP-\u03b3S as a substrate. However, only one of the seven classes of selected ribozymes had detectable ATP affinity, indicating that the ability to bind ATP was compromised. NAD+- dependent redox ribozymes were also evaluated. The select ribozyme had a rate of enhancement of more than 107 fold and was proven to catalyze the reverse reaction - benzaldehyde reduction by NADH. Since the usage of adenosine as a cofactor is prevalent in current metabolism and is likely to have been common in the RNA world, these discoveries are essential for the evolution of metabolism in the RNA world.\nRNA in information storage.\nRNA is a very similar molecule to DNA, with only two significant chemical differences (the backbone of RNA uses ribose instead of deoxyribose and its nucleobases include uracil instead of thymine). The overall structure of RNA and DNA are immensely similar\u2014one strand of DNA and one of RNA can bind to form a double helical structure. This makes the storage of information in RNA possible in a very similar way to the storage of information in DNA. However, RNA is less stable, being more prone to hydrolysis due to the presence of a hydroxyl group at the ribose 2' position.\nComparison of DNA and RNA structure.\nThe major difference between RNA and DNA is the presence of a hydroxyl group at the 2'-position of the ribose sugar in RNA (illustration, right). This group makes the molecule less stable because, when not constrained in a double helix, the 2' hydroxyl can chemically attack the adjacent phosphodiester bond to cleave the phosphodiester backbone. The hydroxyl group also forces the ribose into the C3'-\"endo\" sugar conformation unlike the C2'-\"endo\" conformation of the deoxyribose sugar in DNA. This forces an RNA double helix to change from a B-DNA structure to one more closely resembling A-DNA.\nRNA also uses a different set of bases than DNA\u2014adenine, guanine, cytosine and uracil, instead of adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine. Chemically, uracil is similar to thymine, differing only by a methyl group, and its production requires less energy. In terms of base pairing, this has no effect. Adenine readily binds uracil or thymine. Uracil is, however, one product of damage to cytosine that makes RNA particularly susceptible to mutations that can replace a GC base pair with a GU (wobble) or AU base pair.\nRNA is thought to have preceded DNA, because of their ordering in the biosynthetic pathways. The deoxyribonucleotides used to make DNA are made from ribonucleotides, the building blocks of RNA, by removing the 2'-hydroxyl group. As a consequence, a cell must have the ability to make RNA before it can make DNA.\nLimitations of information storage in RNA.\nThe chemical properties of RNA make large RNA molecules inherently fragile, and they can easily be broken down into their constituent nucleotides through hydrolysis. These limitations do not make use of RNA as an information storage system impossible, simply energy intensive (to repair or replace damaged RNA molecules) and prone to mutation. While this makes it unsuitable for current 'DNA optimised' life, it may have been acceptable for more primitive life.\nRNA as a regulator.\nRiboswitches have been found to act as regulators of gene expression, particularly in bacteria, but also in plants and archaea. Riboswitches alter their secondary structure in response to the binding of a metabolite. Riboswitch classes have highly conserved aptamer domains, even among diverse organisms. When a target metabolite is bound to this aptamer, conformational changes occur, modulating the expression of genes carried by mRNA. These changes occur in an expression platform, located downstream from the aptamer. This change in structure can result in the formation or disruption of a terminator, truncating or permitting transcription respectively. Alternatively, riboswitches may bind or occlude the Shine\u2013Dalgarno sequence, affecting translation. It has been suggested that these originated in an RNA-based world. In addition, RNA thermometers regulate gene expression in response to temperature changes.\nSupport and difficulties.\nThe RNA world hypothesis is supported by RNA's ability to do all three of to store, to transmit, and to duplicate genetic information, as DNA does, and to perform enzymatic reactions, like protein-based enzymes. Because it can carry out the types of tasks now performed by proteins and DNA, RNA is believed to have once been capable of supporting independent life on its own. Some viruses use RNA as their genetic material, rather than DNA. Further, while nucleotides were not found in experiments based on Miller-Urey experiment, their formation in prebiotically plausible conditions was reported in 2009; a purine base, adenine, is merely a pentamer of hydrogen cyanide, and it happens that this particular base is used as omnipresent energy vehicle in the cell: adenosine triphosphate is used everywhere in preference to guanosine triphosphate, cytidine triphosphate, uridine triphosphate or even deoxythymidine triphosphate, which could serve just as well but are practically never used except as building blocks for nucleic acid chains. Experiments with basic ribozymes, like Bacteriophage Q\u03b2 RNA, have shown that simple self-replicating RNA structures can withstand even strong selective pressures (e.g., opposite-chirality chain terminators).\nSince there were no known chemical pathways for the abiogenic synthesis of nucleotides from pyrimidine nucleobases cytosine and uracil under prebiotic conditions, it is thought by some that nucleic acids did not contain these nucleobases seen in life's nucleic acids. The nucleoside cytosine has a half-life in isolation of 19 days at and 17,000 years in freezing water, which some argue is too short on the geologic time scale for accumulation. Others have questioned whether ribose and other backbone sugars could be stable enough to be found in the original genetic material, and have raised the issue that all ribose molecules would have had to be the same enantiomer, as any nucleotide of the wrong chirality acts as a chain terminator.\nPyrimidine ribonucleosides and their respective nucleotides have been prebiotically synthesised by a sequence of reactions that by-pass free sugars and assemble in a stepwise fashion by including nitrogenous and oxygenous chemistries. In a series of publications, John Sutherland and his team at the School of Chemistry, University of Manchester, have demonstrated high yielding routes to cytidine and uridine ribonucleotides built from small 2- and 3-carbon fragments such as glycolaldehyde, glyceraldehyde or glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, cyanamide, and cyanoacetylene. One of the steps in this sequence allows the isolation of enantiopure ribose aminooxazoline if the enantiomeric excess of glyceraldehyde is 60% or greater, of possible interest toward biological homochirality. This can be viewed as a prebiotic purification step, where the said compound spontaneously crystallised out from a mixture of the other pentose aminooxazolines. Aminooxazolines can react with cyanoacetylene in a mild and highly efficient manner, controlled by inorganic phosphate, to give the cytidine ribonucleotides. Photoanomerization with UV light allows for inversion about the 1' anomeric centre to give the correct beta stereochemistry; one problem with this chemistry is the selective phosphorylation of alpha-cytidine at the 2' position. However, in 2009, they showed that the same simple building blocks allow access, via phosphate controlled nucleobase elaboration, to 2',3'-cyclic pyrimidine nucleotides directly, which are known to be able to polymerise into RNA. Organic chemist Donna Blackmond described this finding as \"strong evidence\" in favour of the RNA world. However, John Sutherland said that while his team's work suggests that nucleic acids played an early and central role in the origin of life, it did not necessarily support the RNA world hypothesis in the strict sense, which he described as a \"restrictive, hypothetical arrangement\".\nThe Sutherland group's 2009 paper also highlighted the possibility for the photo-sanitization of the pyrimidine-2',3'-cyclic phosphates. A potential weakness of these routes is the generation of enantioenriched glyceraldehyde, or its 3-phosphate derivative (glyceraldehyde prefers to exist as its keto tautomer dihydroxyacetone).\nOn August 8, 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting building blocks of RNA (adenine, guanine, and related organic molecules) may have been formed in outer space. In 2017, research using a numerical model suggested that a RNA world may have emerged in warm ponds on the early Earth, and that meteorites were a plausible and probable source of the RNA building blocks (ribose and nucleic acids) to these environments. On August 29, 2012, astronomers at Copenhagen University reported the detection of a specific sugar molecule, glycolaldehyde, in a distant star system. The molecule was found around the protostellar binary \"IRAS 16293-2422\", which is located 400 light years from Earth. Because glycolaldehyde is needed to form RNA, this finding suggests that complex organic molecules may form in stellar systems prior to the formation of planets, eventually arriving on young planets early in their formation. Nitriles, key molecular precursors of the RNA World scenario, are among the most abundant chemical families in the universe and have been found in molecular clouds in the center of the Milky Way, protostars of different masses, meteorites and comets, and also in the atmosphere of Titan, the largest moon of Saturn.\nA study in 2001 shows that nicotinic acid and its precursor, quinolinic acid can be \"produced in yields as high as 7% in a six-step nonenzymatic sequence from aspartic acid and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP). The biosynthesis of ribose phosphate could have produced DHAP and other three carbon compounds. Aspartic acid could have been available from prebiotic synthesis or from the ribozyme synthesis of pyrimidines.\" This supports that NAD could have originated in the RNA world. RNA sequences at lengths of 30 nucleotides, 60 nucleotides, 100 nucleotides, and 140 nucleotides, were capable of catalysis of \"the synthesis of three common coenzymes, CoA, NAD, and FAD, from their precursors, 4'-phosphopantetheine, NMN, and FMN, respectively\".\nPrebiotic RNA synthesis.\nNucleotides are the fundamental molecules that combine in series to form RNA. They consist of a nitrogenous base attached to a sugar-phosphate backbone. RNA is made of long stretches of specific nucleotides arranged so that their sequence of bases carries information. The RNA world hypothesis holds that in the primordial soup (or sandwich), there existed free-floating nucleotides. These nucleotides regularly formed bonds with one another, which often broke because the change in energy was so low. However, certain sequences of base pairs have catalytic properties that lower the energy of their chain being created, enabling them to stay together for longer periods of time. As each chain grew longer, it attracted more matching nucleotides faster, causing chains to now form faster than they were breaking down.\nThese chains have been proposed by some as the first, primitive forms of life. In an RNA world, different sets of RNA strands would have had different replication outputs, which would have increased or decreased their frequency in the population, i.e., natural selection. As the fittest sets of RNA molecules expanded their numbers, novel catalytic properties added by mutation, which benefitted their persistence and expansion, could accumulate in the population. Such an autocatalytic set of ribozymes, capable of self-replication in about an hour, has been identified. It was produced by molecular competition (\"in vitro\" evolution) of candidate enzyme mixtures.\nCompetition between RNA may have favored the emergence of cooperation between different RNA chains, opening the way for the formation of the first protocell. Eventually, RNA chains developed with catalytic properties that help amino acids bind together (a process called peptide-bonding). These amino acids could then assist with RNA synthesis, giving those RNA chains that could serve as ribozymes the selective advantage. The ability to catalyze one step in protein synthesis, aminoacylation of RNA, has been demonstrated in a short (five-nucleotide) segment of RNA.\nIn 2014, a group of researchers managed to produce all four components of RNA by simulating an asteroid impact in primordial conditions. In March 2015, NASA scientists reported that, for the first time, complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine, and thymine, have been formed in the laboratory under conditions found only in outer space, using starting chemicals, like pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), may have been formed in red giant stars or in interstellar dust and gas clouds, according to the scientists. That same month, researchers were able to produce over 50 aminoacids in a laboratory setting by using only hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen cyanide (presumably produced after outer space meteorites reacted with atmospheric nitrogen) and ultraviolet light.\nIn 2018, researchers at Georgia Institute of Technology identified three molecular candidates for the bases that might have formed an earliest version of proto-RNA: barbituric acid, melamine, and 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine (TAP). These three molecules are simpler versions of the four bases in current RNA, which could have been present in larger amounts and could still be forward-compatible with them but may have been discarded by evolution in exchange for more optimal base pairs. Specifically, TAP can form nucleotides with a large range of sugars. Both TAP and melamine base pair with barbituric acid. All three spontaneously form nucleotides with ribose.\nEvolution of DNA.\nOne of the challenges posed by the RNA world hypothesis is to discover the pathway by which an RNA-based system transitioned to one based on DNA. Geoffrey Diemer and Ken Stedman, at Portland State University in Oregon, may have found a solution. While conducting a survey of viruses in a hot acidic lake in Lassen Volcanic National Park, California, they uncovered evidence that a simple DNA virus had acquired a gene from a completely unrelated RNA-based virus. Virologist Luis Villareal of the University of California Irvine also suggests that viruses capable of converting an RNA-based gene into DNA and then incorporating it into a more complex DNA-based genome might have been common in the virus world during the RNA to DNA transition some 4 billion years ago. This finding bolsters the argument for the transfer of information from the RNA world to the emerging DNA world before the emergence of the last universal common ancestor. From the research, the diversity of this virus world is still with us.\nViroids.\nAdditional evidence supporting the concept of an RNA world has resulted from research on viroids, the first representatives of a novel domain of \"subviral pathogens\".\nViroids infect plants, where most are pathogens, and consist of short stretches of highly complementary, circular, single-stranded and non-coding RNA without a protein coat. They are extremely small, ranging from 246 to 467 nucleobases, compared to the smallest known viruses capable of causing an infection, with genomes about 2,000 nucleobases in length.\nBased on their characteristic properties, in 1989 plant biologist Theodor Diener argued that viroids are more plausible living relics of the RNA world than introns and other RNAs considered candidates at the time. Diener's hypothesis would be expanded by the research group of Ricardo Flores, and gained a broader audience when in 2014, a \"New York Times\" science writer published a popularized version of the proposal.\nThe characteristics of viroids highlighted as consistent with an RNA world were their small size, high guanine and cytosine content, circular structure, structural periodicity, the lack of protein-coding ability and, in some cases, ribozyme-mediated replication. One aspect critics of the hypothesis have focused on is that the exclusive hosts of all known viroids, angiosperms, did not evolve until billions of years after the RNA world was replaced, making viroids more likely to have arisen through later evolutionary mechanisms unrelated to the RNA world than to have survived via a cryptic host over that extended period. Whether they are relics of that world or of more recent origin, their function as autonomous naked RNA is seen as analogous to that envisioned for an RNA world.\nOrigin of sexual reproduction.\nEigen \"et al\". and Woese proposed that the genomes of early protocells were composed of single-stranded RNA, and that individual genes corresponded to separate RNA segments, rather than being linked end-to-end as in present-day DNA genomes. A protocell that was haploid (one copy of each RNA gene) would be vulnerable to damage, since a single lesion in any RNA segment would be potentially lethal to the protocell (e.g., by blocking replication or inhibiting the function of an essential gene).\nVulnerability to damage could be reduced by maintaining two or more copies of each RNA segment in each protocell, i.e., by maintaining diploidy or polyploidy. Genome redundancy would allow a damaged RNA segment to be replaced by an additional replication of its homolog. However, for such a simple organism, the proportion of available resources tied up in the genetic material would be a large fraction of the total resource budget. Under limited resource conditions, the protocell reproductive rate would likely be inversely related to ploidy number. The protocell's fitness would be reduced by the costs of redundancy. Consequently, coping with damaged RNA genes while minimizing the costs of redundancy would likely have been a fundamental problem for early protocells.\nA cost-benefit analysis was carried out in which the costs of maintaining redundancy were balanced against the costs of genome damage. This analysis led to the conclusion that, under a wide range of circumstances, the selected strategy would be for each protocell to be haploid, but to periodically fuse with another haploid protocell to form a transient diploid. The retention of the haploid state maximizes the growth rate. The periodic fusions permit mutual reactivation of otherwise lethally damaged protocells. If at least one damage-free copy of each RNA gene is present in the transient diploid, viable progeny can be formed. For two, rather than one, viable daughter cells to be produced would require an extra replication of the intact RNA gene homologous to any RNA gene that had been damaged prior to the division of the fused protocell. The cycle of haploid reproduction, with occasional fusion to a transient diploid state, followed by splitting to the haploid state, can be considered to be the sexual cycle in its most primitive form. In the absence of this sexual cycle, haploid protocells with damage in an essential RNA gene would simply die.\nThis model for the early sexual cycle is hypothetical, but it is very similar to the known sexual behavior of the segmented RNA viruses, which are among the simplest organisms known. Influenza virus, whose genome consists of 8 physically separated single-stranded RNA segments, is an example of this type of virus. In segmented RNA viruses, \"mating\" can occur when a host cell is infected by at least two virus particles. If these viruses each contain an RNA segment with a lethal damage, multiple infection can lead to reactivation providing that at least one undamaged copy of each virus gene is present in the infected cell. This phenomenon is known as \"multiplicity reactivation\". Multiplicity reactivation has been reported to occur in influenza virus infections after induction of RNA damage by UV-irradiation, and ionizing radiation.\nFurther developments.\nPatrick Forterre has been working on a novel hypothesis, called \"three viruses, three domains\": that viruses were instrumental in the transition from RNA to DNA and the evolution of Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukaryota. He believes the last universal common ancestor was RNA-based and evolved RNA viruses. Some of the viruses evolved into DNA viruses to protect their genes from attack. Through the process of viral infection into hosts the three domains of life evolved.\nAnother interesting proposal is the idea that RNA synthesis might have been driven by temperature gradients, in the process of thermosynthesis.\nSingle nucleotides have been shown to catalyze organic reactions.\nSteven Benner has argued that chemical conditions on the planet Mars, such as the presence of boron, molybdenum, and oxygen, may have been better for initially producing RNA molecules than those on Earth. If so, life-suitable molecules, originating on Mars, may have later migrated to Earth via mechanisms of panspermia or similar process.\nAlternative hypotheses.\nThe hypothesized existence of an RNA world does not exclude a \"Pre-RNA world\", where a metabolic system based on a different nucleic acid is proposed to pre-date RNA. A candidate nucleic acid is peptide nucleic acid (PNA), which uses simple peptide bonds to link nucleobases. PNA is more stable than RNA, but its ability to be generated under prebiological conditions has yet to be demonstrated experimentally.\nThreose nucleic acid (TNA) or glycol nucleic acid (GNA) have also been proposed as a starting point, and like PNA, also lack experimental evidence for their respective abiogenesis.\nAn alternative\u2014or complementary\u2014theory of RNA origin is proposed in the PAH world hypothesis, whereby polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) mediate the synthesis of RNA molecules. PAHs are the most common and abundant of the known polyatomic molecules in the visible Universe and are a likely constituent of the primordial sea. PAHs and fullerenes (also implicated in the origin of life) have been detected in nebulae.\nThe iron-sulfur world theory proposes that simple metabolic processes developed before genetic materials did, and these energy-producing cycles catalyzed the production of genes.\nSome of the difficulties of producing the precursors on earth are bypassed by another alternative or complementary theory for their origin, panspermia. It discusses the possibility that the earliest life on this planet was carried here from somewhere else in the galaxy, possibly on meteorites similar to the Murchison meteorite. Sugar molecules, including ribose, have been found in meteorites. Panspermia does not invalidate the concept of an RNA world, but posits that this world or its precursors originated not on Earth but rather another, probably older, planet.\nThe relative chemical complexity of the nucleotide and the unlikelihood of it spontaneously arising, along with the limited number of combinations possible among four base forms, as well as the need for RNA polymers of some length before seeing enzymatic activity, have led some to reject the RNA world hypothesis in favor of a metabolism-first hypothesis, where the chemistry underlying cellular function arose first, along with the ability to replicate and facilitate this metabolism.\nRNA-peptide coevolution.\nAnother proposal is that the dual-molecule system we see today, where a nucleotide-based molecule is needed to synthesize protein, and a peptide-based (protein) molecule is needed to make nucleic acid polymers, represents the original form of life. This theory is called RNA-peptide coevolution, or the Peptide-RNA world, and offers a possible explanation for the rapid evolution of high-quality replication in RNA (since proteins are catalysts), with the disadvantage of having to postulate the coincident formation of two complex molecules, an enzyme (from peptides) and a RNA (from nucleotides). In this Peptide-RNA World scenario, RNA would have contained the instructions for life, while peptides (simple protein enzymes) would have accelerated key chemical reactions to carry out those instructions. The study leaves open the question of exactly how those primitive systems managed to replicate themselves \u2014 something neither the RNA World hypothesis nor the Peptide-RNA World theory can yet explain, unless polymerases (enzymes that rapidly assemble the RNA molecule) played a role.\nA research project completed in March 2015 by the Sutherland group found that a network of reactions beginning with hydrogen cyanide and hydrogen sulfide, in streams of water irradiated by UV light, could produce the chemical components of proteins and lipids, alongside those of RNA. The researchers used the term \"cyanosulfidic\" to describe this network of reactions. In November 2017, a team at the Scripps Research Institute identified reactions involving the compound diamidophosphate which could have linked the chemical components into short peptide and lipid chains as well as short RNA-like chains of nucleotides.\nImplications.\nThe RNA world hypothesis, if true, has important implications for the definition of life and the origin of life. For most of the time that followed Franklin, Watson and Crick's elucidation of DNA structure in 1953, life was largely defined in terms of DNA and proteins: DNA and proteins seemed the dominant macromolecules in the living cell, with RNA only aiding in creating proteins from the DNA blueprint.\nThe RNA world hypothesis places RNA at center-stage when life originated. The RNA world hypothesis is supported by the observations that ribosomes are ribozymes: the catalytic site is composed of RNA, and proteins hold no major structural role and are of peripheral functional importance. This was confirmed with the deciphering of the 3-dimensional structure of the ribosome in 2001. Specifically, peptide bond formation, the reaction that binds amino acids together into proteins, is now known to be catalyzed by an adenine residue in the rRNA.\nRNAs are known to play roles in other cellular catalytic processes, specifically in the targeting of enzymes to specific RNA sequences. In eukaryotes, the processing of pre-mRNA and RNA editing take place at sites determined by the base pairing between the target RNA and RNA constituents of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Such enzyme targeting is also responsible for gene down regulation through RNA interference (RNAi), where an enzyme-associated guide RNA targets specific mRNA for selective destruction. Likewise, in eukaryotes the maintenance of telomeres involves copying of an RNA template that is a constituent part of the telomerase ribonucleoprotein enzyme. Another cellular organelle, the vault, includes a ribonucleoprotein component, although the function of this organelle remains to be elucidated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25766", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25766", "title": "Ribosome", "text": "Macromolecular machine that synthesizes proteins in cells\nRibosomes () are macromolecular biological machines found within all cells that perform messenger RNA translation. Ribosomes link amino acids together in the order specified by the codons of messenger RNA molecules to form polypeptide chains. Ribosomes consist of two major components: the small and large ribosomal subunits. Each subunit consists of one or more ribosomal RNA molecules and many ribosomal proteins (r-proteins). The ribosomes and associated molecules are also known as the \"translational apparatus\".\nOverview.\nThe sequence of DNA that encodes the sequence of the amino acids in a protein is transcribed into a messenger RNA (mRNA) chain. Ribosomes bind to the messenger RNA molecules and use the RNA's sequence of nucleotides to determine the sequence of amino acids needed to generate a protein. Amino acids are selected and carried to the ribosome by transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules, which enter the ribosome and bind to the messenger RNA chain via an anticodon stem loop. For each coding triplet (codon) in the messenger RNA, there is a unique transfer RNA that must have the exact anti-codon match, and carries the correct amino acid for incorporating into a growing polypeptide chain. Once the protein is produced, it can then fold to produce a functional three-dimensional structure.\nA ribosome is made from complexes of RNAs and proteins and is therefore a ribonucleoprotein complex. In prokaryotes each ribosome is composed of small (30S) and large (50S) components, called subunits, which are bound to each other:\nThe synthesis of proteins from their building blocks takes place in four phases: initiation, elongation, termination, and recycling. The start codon in all mRNA molecules has the sequence AUG. The stop codon is one of UAA, UAG, or UGA; since there are no tRNA molecules that recognize these codons, the ribosome recognizes that translation is complete. When a ribosome finishes reading an mRNA molecule, the two subunits separate and are usually broken up but can be reused. Ribosomes are a kind of enzyme, called ribozymes because the catalytic peptidyl transferase activity that links amino acids together is performed by the ribosomal RNA.\nIn eukaryotic cells, ribosomes are often associated with the intracellular membranes that make up the rough endoplasmic reticulum.\nRibosomes from bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes (in the three-domain system) resemble each other to a remarkable degree, evidence of a common origin. They differ in their size, sequence, structure, and the ratio of protein to RNA. The differences in structure allow some antibiotics to kill bacteria by inhibiting their ribosomes while leaving human ribosomes unaffected. In all species, more than one ribosome may move along a single mRNA chain at one time (as a polysome), each \"reading\" a specific sequence and producing a corresponding protein molecule.\nThe mitochondrial ribosomes of eukaryotic cells are distinct from their other ribosomes. They functionally resemble those in bacteria, reflecting the evolutionary origin of mitochondria as endosymbiotic bacteria.\nDiscovery.\nRibosomes were first observed in the mid-1950s by Romanian-American cell biologist George Emil Palade, using an electron microscope, as dense particles or granules. They were initially called Palade granules due to their granular structure. The term \"ribosome\" was proposed in 1958 by Howard M. Dintzis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the course of the symposium a semantic difficulty became apparent. To some of the participants, \"microsomes\" mean the ribonucleoprotein particles of the microsome fraction contaminated by other protein and lipid material; to others, the microsomes consist of protein and lipid contaminated by particles. The phrase \"microsomal particles\" does not seem adequate, and \"ribonucleoprotein particles of the microsome fraction\" is much too awkward. During the meeting, the word \"ribosome\" was suggested, which has a very satisfactory name and a pleasant sound. The present confusion would be eliminated if \"ribosome\" were adopted to designate ribonucleoprotein particles in sizes ranging from 35 to 100S.\u2014\u200a\nAlbert Claude, Christian de Duve, and George Emil Palade were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, in 1974, for the discovery of the ribosome. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2009 was awarded to Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, Thomas A. Steitz and Ada E. Yonath for determining the detailed structure and mechanism of the ribosome.\nStructure.\nThe ribosome is a complex cellular machine. It is largely made up of specialized RNA known as ribosomal RNA (rRNA) as well as dozens of distinct proteins (the exact number varies slightly between species). The ribosomal proteins and rRNAs are arranged into two distinct ribosomal pieces of different sizes, known generally as the large and small subunits of the ribosome. Ribosomes consist of two subunits that fit together and work as one to translate the mRNA into a polypeptide chain during protein synthesis. Because they are formed from two subunits of non-equal size, they are slightly longer on the axis than in diameter.\nProkaryotic ribosomes.\nProkaryotic ribosomes are around 20\u00a0nm (200\u00a0\u00c5) in diameter and are composed of 65% rRNA and 35% ribosomal proteins. Eukaryotic ribosomes are between 25 and 30 nm (250\u2013300 \u00c5) in diameter with an rRNA-to-protein ratio that is close to 1. Crystallographic work has shown that there are no ribosomal proteins close to the reaction site for polypeptide synthesis. This suggests that the protein components of ribosomes do not directly participate in peptide bond formation catalysis, but rather that these proteins act as a scaffold that may enhance the ability of rRNA to synthesize protein \nThe ribosomal subunits of prokaryotes and eukaryotes are quite similar.\nThe unit of measurement used to describe the ribosomal subunits and the rRNA fragments is the Svedberg unit, a measure of the rate of sedimentation in centrifugation rather than size. This accounts for why fragment names do not add up: for example, bacterial 70S ribosomes are made of 50S and 30S subunits.\nProkaryotes have 70S ribosomes, each consisting of a small (30S) and a large (50S) subunit. \"E. coli\", for example, has a 16S RNA subunit (consisting of 1540 nucleotides) that is bound to 21 proteins. The large subunit is composed of a 5S RNA subunit (120 nucleotides), a 23S RNA subunit (2900 nucleotides) and 31 proteins.\nAffinity label for the tRNA binding sites on the \"E. coli\" ribosome allowed the identification of A and P site proteins most likely associated with the peptidyltransferase activity; labelled proteins are L27, L14, L15, L16, L2; at least L27 is located at the donor site, as shown by E. Collatz and A.P. Czernilofsky. Additional research has demonstrated that the S1 and S21 proteins, in association with the 3\u2032-end of 16S ribosomal RNA, are involved in the initiation of translation.\nArchaeal ribosomes.\nArchaeal ribosomes share the same general dimensions of bacteria ones, being a 70S ribosome made up from a 50S large subunit, a 30S small subunit, and containing three rRNA chains. However, on the sequence level, they are much closer to eukaryotic ones than to bacterial ones. Every extra ribosomal protein archaea have compared to bacteria has a eukaryotic counterpart, while no such relation applies between archaea and bacteria.\nEukaryotic ribosomes.\nEukaryotes have 80S ribosomes located in their cytosol, each consisting of a small (40S) and large (60S) subunit. Their 40S subunit has an 18S RNA (1900 nucleotides) and 33 proteins. The large subunit is composed of a 5S RNA (120 nucleotides), 28S RNA (4700 nucleotides), a 5.8S RNA (160 nucleotides) subunits and 49 proteins.\nDuring 1977, Czernilofsky published research that used affinity labeling to identify tRNA-binding sites on rat liver ribosomes. Several proteins, including L32/33, L36, L21, L23, L28/29 and L13 were implicated as being at or near the peptidyl transferase center.\nPlastoribosomes and mitoribosomes.\nIn eukaryotes, ribosomes are present in mitochondria (sometimes called mitoribosomes) and in plastids such as chloroplasts (also called plastoribosomes). They also consist of large and small subunits bound together with proteins into one 70S particle. These ribosomes are similar to those of bacteria and these organelles are thought to have originated as symbiotic bacteria. Of the two, chloroplastic ribosomes are closer to bacterial ones than mitochondrial ones are. Many pieces of ribosomal RNA in the mitochondria are shortened, and in the case of 5S rRNA, replaced by other structures in animals and fungi. In particular, \"Leishmania tarentolae\" has a minimalized set of mitochondrial rRNA. In contrast, plant mitoribosomes have both extended rRNA and additional proteins as compared to bacteria, in particular, many pentatricopetide repeat proteins.\nThe cryptomonad and chlorarachniophyte algae may contain a nucleomorph that resembles a vestigial eukaryotic nucleus. Eukaryotic 80S ribosomes may be present in the compartment containing the nucleomorph.\nMaking use of the differences.\nThe differences between the bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes are exploited by pharmaceutical chemists to create antibiotics that can destroy a bacterial infection without harming the cells of the infected person. Due to the differences in their structures, the bacterial 70S ribosomes are vulnerable to these antibiotics while the eukaryotic 80S ribosomes are not. Even though mitochondria possess ribosomes similar to the bacterial ones, mitochondria are not affected by these antibiotics because they are surrounded by a double membrane that does not easily admit these antibiotics into the organelle. A noteworthy counterexample is the antineoplastic antibiotic chloramphenicol, which inhibits bacterial 50S and eukaryotic mitochondrial 50S ribosomes. Ribosomes in chloroplasts, however, are different: Antibiotic resistance in chloroplast ribosomal proteins is a trait that has to be introduced as a marker, with genetic engineering.\nCommon properties.\nThe various ribosomes share a core structure, which is quite similar despite the large differences in size. Much of the RNA is highly organized into various tertiary structural motifs, for example pseudoknots that exhibit coaxial stacking. The extra RNA in the larger ribosomes is in several long continuous insertions, such that they form loops out of the core structure without disrupting or changing it. All of the catalytic activity of the ribosome is carried out by the RNA; the proteins reside on the surface and seem to stabilize the structure.\nHigh-resolution structure.\nThe general molecular structure of the ribosome has been known since the early 1970s. In the early 2000s, the structure has been achieved at high resolutions, of the order of a few \u00e5ngstr\u00f6ms.\nThe first papers giving the structure of the ribosome at atomic resolution were published almost simultaneously in late 2000. The 50S (large prokaryotic) subunit was determined from the archaeon \"Haloarcula marismortui\" and the bacterium \"Deinococcus radiodurans\", and the structure of the 30S subunit was determined from the bacterium \"Thermus thermophilus\". These structural studies were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2009. In May 2001 these coordinates were used to reconstruct the entire \"T. thermophilus\" 70S particle at 5.5\u00a0\u00c5 resolution.\nTwo papers were published in November 2005 with structures of the \"Escherichia coli\" 70S ribosome. The structures of a vacant ribosome were determined at 3.5\u00a0\u00c5 resolution using X-ray crystallography. Then, two weeks later, a structure based on cryo-electron microscopy was published, which depicts the ribosome at 11\u201315\u00a0\u00c5 resolution in the act of passing a newly synthesized protein strand into the protein-conducting channel.\nThe first atomic structures of the ribosome complexed with tRNA and mRNA molecules were solved by using X-ray crystallography by two groups independently, at 2.8\u00a0\u00c5 and at 3.7\u00a0\u00c5. These structures allow one to see the details of interactions of the \"Thermus thermophilus\" ribosome with mRNA and with tRNAs bound at classical ribosomal sites. Interactions of the ribosome with long mRNAs containing Shine-Dalgarno sequences were visualized soon after that at 4.5\u20135.5\u00a0\u00c5 resolution. In 2023, a cryo-electron microscopy study reported a 1.55 \u00c5 structure of the \"Escherichia coli\" 70S ribosome in the translating state, providing near-atomic detail of rRNA modifications, tRNA-mRNA interactions, and ion coordination. The high-resolution map enabled identification of ribosomal polymorphism sites and visualization of transient chimeric hybrid states associated with tRNA translocation at approximately 2 \u00c5 resolution. These findings improved structural understanding of the ribosome's functional regions and offered valuable insights for antibiotic design.\nIn 2011, the first complete atomic structure of the eukaryotic 80S ribosome from the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" was obtained by crystallography. The model reveals the architecture of eukaryote-specific elements and their interaction with the universally conserved core. At the same time, the complete model of a eukaryotic 40S ribosomal structure in \"Tetrahymena thermophila\" was published and described the structure of the 40S subunit, as well as much about the 40S subunit's interaction with eIF1 during translation initiation. Similarly, the eukaryotic 60S subunit structure was also determined from \"Tetrahymena thermophila\" in complex with eIF6. In addition, high-resolution cryo-EM structures of a thermophilic eukaryotic 80S ribosome captured in two rotational states at ~2.9 \u00c5 and ~3.0 \u00c5 resolution revealed atomistic details of the eukaryotic translocation mechanism and conformational dynamics of eEF2 during GTP hydrolysis.\nFunction.\nRibosomes are minute particles consisting of RNA and associated proteins that function to synthesize proteins. Proteins are needed for many cellular functions, such as repairing damage or directing chemical processes. Ribosomes can be found floating within the cytoplasm or attached to the endoplasmic reticulum. Their main function is to convert genetic code into an amino acid sequence and to build protein polymers from amino acid monomers.\nRibosomes act as catalysts in two extremely important biological processes called peptidyl transfer and peptidyl hydrolysis. The \"PT center is responsible for producing protein bonds during protein elongation\".\nIn summary, ribosomes have two main functions: Decoding the message, and the formation of peptide bonds. These two functions reside in the ribosomal subunits. Each subunit is made of one or more rRNAs and many r-proteins. The small subunit (30S in bacteria and archaea, 40S in eukaryotes) has the decoding function, whereas the large subunit (50S in bacteria and archaea, 60S in eukaryotes) catalyzes the formation of peptide bonds, referred to as the peptidyl-transferase activity. The bacterial (and archaeal) small subunit contains the 16S\u00a0rRNA and 21\u00a0r-proteins (\"Escherichia coli\"), whereas the eukaryotic small subunit contains the 18S\u00a0rRNA and 32\u00a0r-proteins (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, although the numbers vary between species). The bacterial large subunit contains the 5S and 23S\u00a0rRNAs and 34 r-proteins (\"E.\u00a0coli\"), with the eukaryotic large subunit containing the 5S, 5.8S, and 25S/28S rRNAs and 46\u00a0r-proteins (\"S. cerevisiae\"; again, the exact numbers vary between species).\nTranslation.\nRibosomes are the workplaces of protein biosynthesis, the process of translating mRNA into protein. The mRNA comprises a series of codons which are decoded by the ribosome to make the protein. Using the mRNA as a template, the ribosome traverses each codon (3\u00a0nucleotides) of the mRNA, pairing it with the appropriate amino acid provided by an aminoacyl-tRNA. Aminoacyl-tRNA contains a complementary anticodon on one end and the appropriate amino acid on the other. For fast and accurate recognition of the appropriate tRNA, the ribosome utilizes large conformational changes (conformational proofreading). The small ribosomal subunit, typically bound to an aminoacyl-tRNA containing the first amino acid methionine, binds to an AUG codon on the mRNA and recruits the large ribosomal subunit. The ribosome contains three RNA binding sites, designated A, P, and E. The A-site binds an aminoacyl-tRNA or termination release factors; the P-site binds a peptidyl-tRNA (a tRNA bound to the poly-peptide chain); and the E-site (exit) binds a free tRNA. Protein synthesis begins at a start codon AUG near the 5' end of the mRNA. mRNA binds to the P site of the ribosome first. The ribosome recognizes the start codon by using the Shine-Dalgarno sequence of the mRNA in prokaryotes and Kozak box in eukaryotes.\nAlthough catalysis of the peptide bond involves the C2 hydroxyl of RNA's P-site adenosine in a proton shuttle mechanism, other steps in protein synthesis (such as translocation) are caused by changes in protein conformations. Since their catalytic core is made of RNA, ribosomes are classified as \"ribozymes,\" and it is thought that they might be remnants of the RNA world.\nIn Figure\u00a05, both ribosomal subunits (small and large) assemble at the start codon (towards the 5' end of the mRNA). The ribosome uses tRNA that matches the current codon (triplet) on the mRNA to append an amino acid to the polypeptide chain. This is done for each triplet on the mRNA, while the ribosome moves towards the 3' end of the mRNA. Usually in bacterial cells, several ribosomes are working parallel on a single mRNA, forming what is called a \"polyribosome\" or \"polysome\".\nCotranslational folding.\nThe ribosome is known to actively participate in the protein folding. The structures obtained in this way are usually identical to the ones obtained during protein chemical refolding; however, the pathways leading to the final product may be different. In some cases, the ribosome is crucial in obtaining the functional protein form. For example, one of the possible mechanisms of folding of the deeply knotted proteins relies on the ribosome pushing the chain through the attached loop.\nAddition of translation-independent amino acids.\nPresence of a ribosome quality control protein Rqc2 is associated with mRNA-independent protein elongation. This elongation is a result of ribosomal addition (via tRNAs brought by Rqc2) of CAT tails\": ribosomes extend the C-terminus of a stalled protein with random, translation-independent sequences of alanines and t\"hreonines.\nRibosome locations.\nRibosomes are classified as being either \"free\" or \"membrane-bound\".\nFree and membrane-bound ribosomes differ only in their spatial distribution; they are identical in structure. Whether the ribosome exists in a free or membrane-bound state depends on the presence of an ER-targeting signal sequence on the protein being synthesized, so an individual ribosome might be membrane-bound when it is making one protein, but free in the cytosol when it makes another protein.\nRibosomes are sometimes referred to as organelles, but the use of the term \"organelle\" is often restricted to describing sub-cellular components that include a phospholipid membrane, which ribosomes, being entirely particulate, do not. For this reason, ribosomes may sometimes be described as \"non-membranous organelles\".\nFree ribosomes.\nFree ribosomes can move about anywhere in the cytosol, but are excluded from the cell nucleus and other organelles. Proteins that are formed from free ribosomes are released into the cytosol and used within the cell. Since the cytosol contains high concentrations of glutathione and is, therefore, a reducing environment, proteins containing disulfide bonds, which are formed from oxidized cysteine residues, cannot be produced within it.\nMembrane-bound ribosomes.\nWhen a ribosome begins to synthesize proteins needed in certain organelles, the ribosome making this protein can become \"membrane-bound\". In eukaryotic cells this happens in a region of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) called the \"rough ER\". The newly produced polypeptide chains are inserted directly into the ER by the ribosome undertaking vectorial synthesis and are then transported to their destinations, through the secretory pathway. Bound ribosomes usually produce proteins that are used within the plasma membrane or are expelled from the cell via \"exocytosis\".\nBiogenesis.\nIn bacterial cells, ribosomes are synthesized in the cytoplasm through the transcription of multiple ribosome gene operons. In eukaryotes, the process takes place both in the cell cytoplasm and in the nucleolus, which is a region within the cell nucleus. The assembly process involves the coordinated function of over 200 proteins in the synthesis and processing of the four rRNAs, as well as assembly of those rRNAs with the ribosomal proteins.\nOrigin.\nThe ribosome may have first originated as a protoribosome, possibly containing a peptidyl transferase centre (PTC), in an RNA world, appearing as a self-replicating complex that only later evolved the ability to synthesize proteins when amino acids began to appear. Studies suggest that ancient ribosomes constructed solely of rRNA could have developed the ability to synthesize peptide bonds. In addition, evidence strongly points to ancient ribosomes as self-replicating complexes, where the rRNA in the ribosomes had informational, structural, and catalytic purposes because it could have coded for tRNAs and proteins needed for ribosomal self-replication. Hypothetical cellular organisms with self-replicating RNA but without DNA are called ribocytes (or ribocells).\nAs amino acids gradually appeared in the RNA world under prebiotic conditions, their interactions with catalytic RNA would increase both the range and efficiency of function of catalytic RNA molecules. Thus, the driving force for the evolution of the ribosome from an ancient self-replicating machine into its current form as a translational machine may have been the selective pressure to incorporate proteins into the ribosome's self-replicating mechanisms, so as to increase its capacity for self-replication.\nHeterogeneous ribosomes.\nIn 1958, Francis Crick famously proposed the \"one gene-one ribosome-one protein hypothesis,\" where each ribosome carries the genetic information required to encode a single protein. Although discredited at that time, from the discovery of the first ribosomopathy Diamond\u2013Blackfan Anemia in 1999, the ribosome has transitioned from a passive molecular machine to a dynamic macromolecular machine.Ribosomes are compositionally heterogeneous between species and even within the same cell, as evidenced by the existence of cytoplasmic and mitochondria ribosomes within the same eukaryotic cells. Certain researchers have suggested that heterogeneity in the composition of ribosomal proteins in mammals is important for gene regulation, \"i.e.\", the specialized ribosome hypothesis. However, this hypothesis is controversial and the topic of ongoing research.\nHeterogeneity in ribosome composition was first proposed to be involved in translational control of protein synthesis by Vince Mauro and Gerald Edelman. They proposed the ribosome filter hypothesis to explain the regulatory functions of ribosomes. Evidence has suggested that specialized ribosomes specific to different cell populations may affect how genes are translated. Some ribosomal proteins exchange from the assembled complex with cytosolic copies suggesting that the structure of the \"in vivo\" ribosome can be modified without synthesizing an entire new ribosome.\nCertain ribosomal proteins are absolutely critical for cellular life while others are not. In budding yeast, 14/78 ribosomal proteins are non-essential for growth, while in humans this depends on the cell of study. Other forms of heterogeneity include post-translational modifications to ribosomal proteins such as acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. \"Arabidopsis\", Viral internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) may mediate translations by compositionally distinct ribosomes. For example, 40S ribosomal units without eS25 in yeast and mammalian cells are unable to recruit the CrPV IGR IRES.\nHeterogeneity of ribosomal RNA modifications plays a significant role in structural maintenance and/or function and most mRNA modifications are found in highly conserved regions. The most common rRNA modifications are pseudouridylation and 2'-O-methylation of ribose.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25767", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25767", "title": "Real-time computing", "text": "Study of hardware and software systems that have a \"real-time constraint\"\nReal-time computing (RTC) is the computer science term for hardware and software systems subject to a \"real-time constraint\", for example from event to system response. Real-time programs must guarantee response within specified time constraints, often referred to as \"deadlines\".\nThe term \"real-time\" is also used in simulation to mean that the simulation's clock runs at the same speed as a real clock.\nReal-time responses are often understood to be in the order of milliseconds, and sometimes microseconds. A system not specified as operating in real time cannot usually \"guarantee\" a response within any timeframe, although \"typical\" or \"expected\" response times may be given. Real-time processing \"fails\" if not completed within a specified deadline relative to an event; deadlines must always be met, regardless of system load.\nA real-time system has been described as one which \"controls an environment by receiving data, processing them, and returning the results sufficiently quickly to affect the environment at that time\". The term \"real-time\" is used in process control and enterprise systems to mean \"without significant delay\".\nReal-time software may use one or more of the following: synchronous programming languages, real-time operating systems (RTOSes), and real-time networks. Each of these provides essential frameworks on which to build a real-time software application.\nSystems used for many safety-critical applications must be real-time, such as for control of fly-by-wire aircraft, or anti-lock brakes, both of which demand immediate and accurate mechanical response.\nHistory.\nThe term \"real-time\" derives from its use in early simulation, where a real-world process is simulated at a rate which matched that of the real process (now called real-time simulation to avoid ambiguity). Analog computers, most often, were capable of simulating at a much faster pace than real-time, a situation that could be just as dangerous as a slow simulation if it were not also recognized and accounted for. \nMinicomputers, particularly in the 1970s onwards, when built into dedicated embedded systems such as DOG (Digital on-screen graphic) scanners, increased the need for low-latency priority-driven responses to important interactions with incoming data. Operating systems such as Data General's RDOS (Real-Time Disk Operating System) and RTOS with background and foreground scheduling as well as Digital Equipment Corporation's RT-11 date from this era. Background-foreground scheduling allowed low-priority tasks CPU time when no foreground task needed to execute, and gave absolute priority within the foreground to threads/tasks with the highest priority. Real-time operating systems would also be used for time-sharing multiuser duties. For example, Data General Business Basic could run in the foreground or background of RDOS and would introduce additional elements to the scheduling algorithm to make it more appropriate for people interacting via dumb terminals.\nEarly personal computers were sometimes used for real-time computing. The possibility of deactivating other interrupts allowed for hard-coded loops with defined timing, and the low interrupt latency allowed the implementation of a real-time operating system, giving the user interface and the disk drives lower priority than the real-time thread. Compared to these the programmable interrupt controller of the Intel CPUs (8086..80586) generates a very large latency and the Windows operating system is neither a real-time operating system nor does it allow a program to take over the CPU completely and use its own scheduler, without using native machine language and thus bypassing all interrupting Windows code. However, several coding libraries exist that offer real-time capabilities in a high-level language on a variety of operating systems, for example, Real-time Java. Later microprocessors such as the Motorola 68000 and subsequent family members (68010, 68020, ColdFire, etc.) also became popular with manufacturers of industrial control systems. This application area is one where real-time control offers genuine advantages in terms of process performance and safety.\nCriteria for real-time computing.\nA system is said to be \"real-time\" if the total correctness of an operation depends not only upon its logical correctness, but also upon the time in which it is performed. Real-time systems, as well as their deadlines, are classified by the consequence of missing a deadline:\nThus, the goal of a \"hard real-time system\" is to ensure that all deadlines are met, but for \"soft real-time systems\" the goal becomes meeting a certain subset of deadlines in order to optimize some application-specific criteria. The particular criteria optimized depend on the application, but some typical examples include maximizing the number of deadlines met, minimizing the lateness of tasks and maximizing the number of high-priority tasks meeting their deadlines.\nHard real-time systems are used when it is imperative that an event be reacted to within a strict deadline. Such strong guarantees are required of systems for which not reacting in a certain interval of time would cause great loss in some manner, especially damaging the surroundings physically or threatening human lives (although the strict definition is simply that missing the deadline constitutes failure of the system). Some examples of hard real-time systems:\nIn the context of multitasking systems the scheduling policy is normally priority driven (pre-emptive schedulers). In some situations, these can guarantee hard real-time performance (for instance, if the set of tasks and their priorities is known in advance). There are other hard real-time schedulers such as rate-monotonic, which is not common in general-purpose systems, as it requires additional information in order to schedule a task: namely, a bound or worst-case estimate for how long the task must execute. Specific algorithms for scheduling such hard real-time tasks exist, like earliest deadline first, which, ignoring the overhead of context switching, is sufficient for system loads of less than 100%. New overlay scheduling systems, such as an adaptive partition scheduler assist in managing large systems with a mixture of hard real-time and non real-time applications.\nFirm real-time systems are more nebulously defined, and some classifications do not include them, distinguishing only hard and soft real-time systems. Some examples of firm real-time systems:\nSoft real-time systems are typically used to solve issues of concurrent access and the need to keep a number of connected systems up-to-date through changing situations. Some examples of soft real-time systems:\nReal-time in digital signal processing.\nIn a real-time digital signal processing (DSP) process, the analyzed (input) and generated (output) samples can be processed (or generated) continuously in the time it takes to input and output the same set of samples \"independent\" of the processing delay. It means that the processing delay must be bounded even if the processing continues for an unlimited time. The mean processing time per sample, including overhead, is no greater than the sampling period, which is the reciprocal of the sampling rate. This is the criterion whether the samples are grouped together in large segments and processed as blocks or are processed individually and whether there are long, short, or non-existent input and output buffers.\nConsider an audio DSP example; if a process requires 2.01 seconds to analyze, synthesize, or process 2.00 seconds of sound, it is not real-time. However, if it takes 1.99 seconds, it is or can be made into a real-time DSP process.\nA common life analogy is standing in a line or queue waiting for the checkout in a grocery store. If the line asymptotically grows longer and longer without bound, the checkout process is not real-time. If the length of the line is bounded, customers are being \"processed\" and output as rapidly, on average, as they are being inputted, then that process \"is\" real-time. The grocer might go out of business or must at least lose business if they cannot make their checkout process real-time; thus, it is fundamentally important that this process is real-time.\nA signal processing algorithm that cannot keep up with the flow of input data, with output falling further and further behind the input, is not real-time. If the delay of the output (relative to the input) is bounded regarding a process that operates over an unlimited time, then that signal processing algorithm is real-time, even if the throughput delay may be very long.\nLive vs. real-time.\nReal-time signal processing is necessary, but not sufficient in and of itself, for live signal processing such as what is required in live event support. Live audio digital signal processing requires both real-time operation and a sufficient limit to throughput delay so as to be tolerable to performers using stage monitors or in-ear monitors and not noticeable as lip sync error by the audience also directly watching the performers. Tolerable limits to latency for live, real-time processing is a subject of investigation and debate, but is estimated to be between 6 and 20 milliseconds.\nReal-time bidirectional telecommunications delays of less than 300 ms (\"round trip\" or twice the unidirectional delay) are considered \"acceptable\" to avoid undesired \"talk-over\" in conversation.\nReal-time and high-performance.\nReal-time computing is sometimes misunderstood to be high-performance computing, but this is not an accurate classification. For example, a massive supercomputer executing a scientific simulation may offer impressive performance, yet it is not executing a real-time computation. Conversely, once the hardware and software for an anti-lock braking system have been designed to meet its required deadlines, no further performance gains are obligatory or even useful. Furthermore, if a network server is highly loaded with network traffic, its response time may be slower, but will (in most cases) still succeed before it times out (hits its deadline). Hence, such a network server would not be considered a real-time system: temporal failures (delays, time-outs, etc.) are typically small and compartmentalized (limited in effect), but are not catastrophic failures. In a real-time system, such as the FTSE 100 Index, a slowdown beyond limits would often be considered catastrophic in its application context. The most important requirement of a real-time system is consistent output, not high throughput.\nSome kinds of software, such as many chess-playing programs, can fall into either category. For instance, a chess program designed to play in a tournament with a clock will need to decide on a move before a certain deadline or lose the game, and is therefore a real-time computation, but a chess program that is allowed to run indefinitely before moving is not. In both of these cases, however, high performance is desirable: the more work a tournament chess program can do in the allotted time, the better its moves will be, and the faster an unconstrained chess program runs, the sooner it will be able to move. This example also illustrates the essential difference between real-time computations and other computations: if the tournament chess program does not make a decision about its next move in its allotted time, it loses the game\u2014i.e., it fails as a real-time computation\u2014while in the other scenario, meeting the deadline is assumed not to be necessary. High performance is indicative of the amount of processing that is performed in a given amount of time, whereas real-time is the ability to get done with the processing to yield a useful output in the available time.\nNear real-time.\nThe term \"near real-time\" or \"nearly real-time\" (NRT), in telecommunications and computing, refers to the time delay introduced, by automated data processing or network transmission, between the occurrence of an event and the use of the processed data, such as for display or feedback and control purposes. For example, a near-real-time display depicts an event or situation as it existed at the current time minus the processing time, as nearly the time of the live event.\nThe distinction between the terms \"near real time\" and \"real time\" is somewhat nebulous and must be defined for the situation at hand. The term implies that there are no significant delays. In many cases, processing described as \"real-time\" would be more accurately described as \"near real-time\".\nNear real-time also refers to delayed real-time transmission of voice and video. It allows playing video images, in approximately real-time, without having to wait for an entire large video file to download. Incompatible databases can export/import to common flat files that the other database can import/export on a scheduled basis so they can sync/share common data in \"near real-time\" with each other.\nDesign methods.\nSeveral methods exist to aid the design of real-time systems, an example of which is MASCOT, an old but very successful method that represents the concurrent structure of the system. Other examples are HOOD, Real-Time UML, AADL, the Ravenscar profile, and Real-time Java.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25768", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25768", "title": "Ruby (programming language)", "text": "General-purpose programming language\nRuby is a general-purpose programming language. It was designed with an emphasis on programming productivity and simplicity. In Ruby, everything is an object, including primitive data types. It was developed in the mid-1990s by Yukihiro \"Matz\" Matsumoto in Japan.\nRuby is interpreted, high-level, and dynamically typed; its interpreter uses garbage collection and just-in-time compilation. It supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming. According to the creator, Ruby was influenced by Perl, Smalltalk, Eiffel, Ada, BASIC, and Lisp.\nHistory.\nEarly concept.\nAccording to Matsumoto, Ruby was conceived in 1993. In a 1999 post to the Ruby-Talk mailing list, he shared some of his early ideas about the language:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was talking with my colleague about the possibility of an object-oriented scripting language. I knew Perl (Perl4, not Perl5), but I didn't like it really, because it had the smell of a toy language (it still has). The object-oriented language seemed very promising. I knew Python then. But I didn't like it, because I didn't think it was a true object-oriented language\u00a0\u2013 OO features appeared to be add-on to the language. As a language maniac and OO fan for 15 years, I really wanted a genuine object-oriented, easy-to-use scripting language. I looked for but couldn't find one. So I decided to make it.\nMatsumoto described Ruby's design as resembling a simple Lisp language at its core, with an object system like that of Smalltalk, blocks inspired by higher-order functions, and practical utility like that of Perl.\nThe name \"Ruby\" originated during an online chat session between Matsumoto and Keiju Ishitsuka on 24 February 1993, before any code had been written. Two names were initially proposed: \"Coral\" and \"Ruby\". Matsumoto chose the latter in a subsequent email to Ishitsuka. He also noted that one factor influencing the choice of the name was that a colleague's birthstone was ruby.\nEarly releases.\nThe first public release of Ruby 0.95 was announced on Japanese domestic newsgroups on 21 December 1995. Subsequently, three more versions of Ruby were released in two days. The release coincided with the launch of the Japanese-language \"ruby-list\" mailing list, which was the first mailing list for the new language.\nAlready present at this stage of development were many of the features familiar in later releases of Ruby, including object-oriented design, classes with inheritance, mixins, iterators, closures, exception handling and garbage collection.\nAfter the release of Ruby 0.95 in 1995, several stable versions of Ruby were released in these years.\nIn 1997, the first article about Ruby was published on the Web. In the same year, Matsumoto was hired by netlab.jp to work on Ruby as a full-time developer.\nIn 1998, the Ruby Application Archive was launched by Matsumoto, along with a simple English-language homepage for Ruby.\nIn 1999, the first English language mailing list \"ruby-talk\" began, which signaled a growing interest in the language outside Japan. In this same year, Matsumoto and Keiju Ishitsuka wrote the first book on Ruby, \"The Object-oriented Scripting Language Ruby\" (\u30aa\u30d6\u30b8\u30a7\u30af\u30c8\u6307\u5411\u30b9\u30af\u30ea\u30d7\u30c8\u8a00\u8a9e Ruby), which was published in Japan in October 1999. It would be followed in the early 2000s by around 20 books on Ruby published in Japanese.\nBy 2000, Ruby was more popular than Python in Japan. In September 2000, the first English language book \"Programming Ruby\" was printed, which was later freely released to the public, further widening the adoption of Ruby amongst English speakers. In early 2002, the English-language \"ruby-talk\" mailing list was receiving more messages than the Japanese-language \"ruby-list\", demonstrating Ruby's increasing popularity in the non-Japanese speaking world.\nRuby 1.8 and 1.9.\nRuby 1.8 was initially released August 2003, was stable for a long time, and was retired June 2013. Although deprecated, there is still code based on it. Ruby 1.8 is only partially compatible with Ruby 1.9.\nRuby 1.8 has been the subject of several industry standards. The language specifications for Ruby were developed by the Open Standards Promotion Center of the Information-Technology Promotion Agency (a Japanese government agency) for submission to the Japanese Industrial Standards Committee (JISC) and then to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). It was accepted as a Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS X 3017) in 2011 and an international standard (ISO/IEC 30170) in 2012.\nAround 2005, interest in the Ruby language surged in tandem with Ruby on Rails, a web framework written in Ruby. Rails is frequently credited with increasing awareness of Ruby.\nEffective with Ruby 1.9.3, released 31 October 2011, Ruby switched from being dual-licensed under the Ruby License and the GPL to being dual-licensed under the Ruby License and the two-clause BSD license. Adoption of 1.9 was slowed by changes from 1.8 that required many popular third party gems to be rewritten.\nRuby 2.\nRuby 2.0 was intended to be fully backward compatible with Ruby 1.9.3. As of the official 2.0.0 release on 24 February 2013, there were only five known incompatibilities.\nStarting with 2.1.0, Ruby's versioning policy changed to be more similar to semantic versioning, although it differs slightly in that minor version increments may be API incompatible.\nRuby 2.2.0 includes speed-ups, bugfixes, and library updates and removes some deprecated APIs. Most notably, Ruby 2.2.0 introduces changes to memory handling\u00a0\u2013 an incremental garbage collector, support for garbage collection of symbols and the option to compile directly against jemalloc. It also contains experimental support for using vfork(2) with system() and spawn(), and added support for the Unicode 7.0 specification. Since version 2.2.1, Ruby MRI performance on PowerPC64 was improved. Features that were made obsolete or removed include callcc, the DL library, Digest::HMAC, lib/rational.rb, lib/complex.rb, GServer, Logger::Application as well as various C API functions.\nRuby 2.3.0 includes many performance improvements, updates, and bugfixes including changes to Proc#call, Socket and IO use of exception keywords, Thread#name handling, default passive Net::FTP connections, and Rake being removed from stdlib. Other notable changes include:\nRuby 2.4.0 includes performance improvements to hash table, Array#max, Array#min, and instance variable access. Other notable changes include:\nA few notable changes in Ruby 2.5.0 include \"rescue\" and \"ensure\" statements automatically use a surrounding \"do-end\" block (less need for extra \"begin-end\" blocks), method-chaining with \"yield_self\", support for branch coverage and method coverage measurement, and easier Hash transformations with \"Hash#slice\" and \"Hash#transform_keys\" On top of that come a lot of performance improvements like faster block passing (3 times faster), faster Mutexes, faster ERB templates and improvements on some concatenation methods.\nA few notable changes in Ruby 2.6.0 include an experimental just-in-time compiler (JIT), and \"RubyVM::AbstractSyntaxTree\" (experimental).\nA few notable changes in Ruby 2.7.0 include pattern Matching (experimental), REPL improvements, a compaction GC, and separation of positional and keyword arguments.\nRuby 3.\nRuby 3.0.0 was released on Christmas Day in 2020. It is known as Ruby 3x3, which signifies that programs would run three times faster in Ruby 3.0 comparing to Ruby 2.0. and some had already implemented in intermediate releases on the road from 2 to 3. To achieve 3x3, Ruby 3 comes with MJIT, and later YJIT, Just-In-Time Compilers, to make programs faster, although they are described as experimental and remain disabled by default (enabled by flags at runtime).\nAnother goal of Ruby 3.0 is to improve concurrency and two more utilities Fibre Scheduler, and experimental Ractor facilitate the goal. Ractor is light-weight and thread-safe as it is achieved by exchanging messages rather than shared objects.\nRuby 3.0 introduces RBS language to describe the types of Ruby programs for static analysis. It is separated from general Ruby programs.\nThere are some syntax enhancements and library changes in Ruby 3.0 as well.\nRuby 3.1 was released on 25 December 2021. It includes YJIT, a new, experimental, Just-In-Time Compiler developed by Shopify, to enhance the performance of real world business applications. A new debugger is also included. There are some syntax enhancements and other improvements in this release. Network libraries for FTP, SMTP, IMAP, and POP are moved from default gems to bundled gems.\nRuby 3.2 was released on 25 December 2022. It brings support for being run inside of a WebAssembly environment via a WASI interface. Regular expressions also receives some improvements, including a faster, memoized matching algorithm to protect against certain ReDoS attacks, and configurable timeouts for regular expression matching. Additional debugging and syntax features are also included in this release, which include syntax suggestion, as well as error highlighting. The MJIT compiler has been re-implemented as a standard library module, while the YJIT, a Rust-based JIT compiler now supports more architectures on Linux.\nRuby 3.3 was released on 25 December 2023. Ruby 3.3 introduces significant enhancements and performance improvements to the language. Key features include the introduction of the Prism parser for portable and maintainable parsing, the addition of the pure-Ruby JIT compiler RJIT, and major performance boosts in the YJIT compiler. Additionally, improvements in memory usage, the introduction of an M:N thread scheduler, and updates to the standard library contribute to a more efficient and developer-friendly Ruby ecosystem.\nRuby 3.4 was released on 25 December 2024. Ruby 3.4 adds codice_5 block parameter reference, changes Prism as default parser, adds Happy Eyeballs Version 2 support to socket library, improves YJIT, adds modular Garbage Collector and so on.\nSemantics and philosophy.\nMatsumoto stated that Ruby is designed for programmer productivity and fun, following the principles of good user interface design. At a Google Tech Talk in 2008 he said, \"I hope to see Ruby help every programmer in the world to be productive, and to enjoy programming, and to be happy. That is the primary purpose of Ruby language.\" He stresses that systems design needs to emphasize human, rather than computer, needs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Often people, especially computer engineers, focus on the machines. They think, \"By doing this, the machine will run fast. By doing this, the machine will run more effectively. By doing this, the machine will something something something.\" They are focusing on machines. But in fact we need to focus on humans, on how humans care about doing programming or operating the application of the machines. We are the masters. They are the slaves.\nMatsumoto has said his primary design goal was to make a language that he himself enjoyed using, by minimizing programmer work and possible confusion. He has said that he had not applied the principle of least astonishment (POLA) to the design of Ruby; in a May 2005 discussion on the newsgroup comp.lang.ruby, Matsumoto attempted to distance Ruby from POLA, explaining that because any design choice will be surprising to someone, he uses a personal standard in evaluating surprise. If that personal standard remains consistent, there would be few surprises for those familiar with the standard.\nMatsumoto defined it this way in an interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everyone has an individual background. Someone may come from Python, someone else may come from Perl, and they may be surprised by different aspects of the language. Then they come up to me and say, 'I was surprised by this feature of the language, so Ruby violates the principle of least surprise.' Wait. Wait. The principle of least surprise is not for you only. The principle of least surprise means principle of least \"my\" surprise. And it means the principle of least surprise after you learn Ruby very well. For example, I was a C++ programmer before I started designing Ruby. I programmed in C++ exclusively for two or three years. And after two years of C++ programming, it still surprises me.\nRuby is object-oriented: every value is an object, including classes and instances of types that many other languages designate as primitives (such as integers, Booleans, and \"null\"). Because everything in Ruby is an object, everything in Ruby has certain built-in abilities called methods. Every function is a method and methods are always called on an object. Methods defined at the top level scope become methods of the Object class. Since this class is an ancestor of every other class, such methods can be called on any object. They are also visible in all scopes, effectively serving as \"global\" procedures. Ruby supports inheritance with dynamic dispatch, mixins and singleton methods (belonging to, and defined for, a single instance rather than being defined on the class). Though Ruby does not support multiple inheritance, classes can import modules as mixins.\nRuby has been described as a multi-paradigm programming language: it allows procedural programming (defining functions/variables outside classes makes them part of the root, 'self' Object), with object orientation (everything is an object) or functional programming (it has anonymous functions, closures, and continuations; statements all have values, and functions return the last evaluation). It has support for introspection, reflective programming, metaprogramming, and interpreter-based threads. Ruby features dynamic typing, and supports parametric polymorphism.\nAccording to the Ruby FAQ, the syntax is similar to Perl's and the semantics are similar to Smalltalk's, but the design philosophy differs greatly from Python's.\nSyntax.\nThe syntax of Ruby is broadly similar to that of Perl and Python. Class and method definitions are signaled by keywords, whereas code blocks can be defined by either keywords or braces. In contrast to Perl, variables are not obligatorily prefixed with a sigil. When used, the sigil changes the semantics of scope of the variable. For practical purposes there is no distinction between expressions and statements. Line breaks are significant and taken as the end of a statement; a semicolon may be equivalently used. Unlike Python, indentation is not significant.\nOne of the differences from Python and Perl is that Ruby keeps all of its instance variables completely private to the class and only exposes them through accessor methods (codice_10, codice_11, etc.). Unlike the \"getter\" and \"setter\" methods of other languages like C++ or Java, accessor methods in Ruby can be created with a single line of code via metaprogramming; however, accessor methods can also be created in the traditional fashion of C++ and Java. As invocation of these methods does not require the use of parentheses, it is trivial to change an instance variable into a full function, without modifying a single line of calling code or having to do any refactoring achieving similar functionality to C# and VB.NET property members.\nPython's property descriptors are similar, but come with a trade-off in the development process. If one begins in Python by using a publicly exposed instance variable, and later changes the implementation to use a private instance variable exposed through a property descriptor, code internal to the class may need to be adjusted to use the private variable rather than the public property. Ruby's design forces all instance variables to be private, but also provides a simple way to declare codice_12 and codice_13 methods. This is in keeping with the idea that in Ruby, one never directly accesses the internal members of a class from outside the class; rather, one passes a message to the class and receives a response.\nImplementations.\nMatz's Ruby interpreter.\nThe original Ruby interpreter is often referred to as Matz's Ruby Interpreter or MRI. This implementation is written in C and uses its own Ruby-specific virtual machine.\nThe standardized and retired Ruby 1.8 implementation was written in C, as a single-pass interpreted language.\nStarting with Ruby 1.9, and continuing with Ruby 2.x and above, the official Ruby interpreter has been YARV (\"Yet Another Ruby VM\"), and this implementation has superseded the slower virtual machine used in previous releases of MRI.\nAlternative implementations.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], there are a number of alternative implementations of Ruby, including JRuby, Rubinius, and mruby. Each takes a different approach, with JRuby and Rubinius providing just-in-time compilation and mruby also providing ahead-of-time compilation.\nRuby has three major alternative implementations:\nOther Ruby implementations include:\nOther now defunct Ruby implementations were:\nThe maturity of Ruby implementations tends to be measured by their ability to run the Ruby on Rails (Rails) framework, because it is complex to implement and uses many Ruby-specific features. The point when a particular implementation achieves this goal is called \"the Rails singularity\". The reference implementation, JRuby, and Rubinius are all able to run Rails unmodified in a production environment.\nPlatform support.\nMatsumoto originally developed Ruby on the 4.3BSD-based Sony NEWS-OS 3.x, but later migrated his work to SunOS 4.x, and finally to Linux. By 1999, Ruby was known to work across many different operating systems. Modern Ruby versions and implementations are available on all major desktop, mobile and server-based operating systems. Ruby is also supported across a number of cloud hosting platforms like Jelastic, Heroku, Google Cloud Platform and others.\nTools such as RVM and RBEnv, facilitate installation and partitioning of multiple ruby versions, and multiple 'gemsets' on one machine.\nRepositories and libraries.\nRubyGems is Ruby's package manager. A Ruby package is called a \"gem\" and can be installed via the command line. Most gems are libraries, though a few exist that are applications, such as IDEs. There are over 100,000 Ruby gems hosted on https://.\nMany new and existing Ruby libraries are hosted on GitHub, a service that offers version control repository hosting for Git.\nThe Ruby Application Archive, which hosted applications, documentation, and libraries for Ruby programming, was maintained until 2013, when its function was transferred to RubyGems.\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25770", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25770", "title": "Renaissance Dance", "text": ""}
{"id": "25774", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25774", "title": "Render farm", "text": "System for rendering computer images\nA render farm is a high-performance computer system, e.g. a computer cluster, built to render computer-generated imagery (CGI), typically for film and television visual effects.\nA render farm is different from a render wall, which is a networked, tiled display used for real-time rendering. The rendering of images is a highly parallelizable activity, as frames and sometimes tiles can be calculated independently of the others, with the main communication between processors being the upload of the initial source material, such as models and textures, and the download of the finished images.\nRender capacity.\nOver the decades, advances in computer capability have allowed an image to take less time to render. However, the increased computation is appropriated to meet demands to achieve state-of-the-art image quality. While simple images can be produced rapidly, more realistic and complicated higher-resolution images can now be produced in more reasonable amounts of time. \nThe time spent producing images can be limited by production time-lines and deadlines, and the desire to create high-quality work drives the need for increased computing power, rather than simply wanting the same images created faster. Project such as the Big and Ugly Rendering Project have been available for rendering images using Blender across both widely distributed networks and local networks.\nManagement.\nTo manage large farms, a \"queue manager\" is required that automatically distributes processes to the many processors. Each \"process\" could be the rendering of one full image, a few images, or even a sub-section (or \"tile\") of an image. The software is typically a client\u2013server package that facilitates communication between the processors and the queue manager, although some queues have no central manager. \nSome common features of queue managers are: re-prioritization of the queue, management of software licenses, and algorithms to best optimize throughput based on various types of hardware in the farm. Software licensing handled by a queue manager might involve dynamic allocation of licenses to available CPUs or even cores within CPUs.\nA tongue-in-cheek job title for systems engineers who work primarily in the maintenance and monitoring of a render farm is a \"render wrangler\" to further the \"farm\" theme. This job title can be seen in film credits.\nBeyond on-site render farms, cloud-based render farm options have been facilitated by the rise of high-speed Internet access. Many cloud computing services, including some dedicated to rendering, offer to render farm services that bill only for processor time used. Understanding the cost or processing time required to complete rendering is unpredictable so render farms bills using GHz per hour. Those considering outsourcing their renders to a farm or to the cloud can do a number of things to improve their predictions and reduce their costs.\nThese services eliminate the need for a customer to build and maintain their own rendering solution. Another phenomenon is collaborative rendering, in which users join a network of animators who contribute their processing power to the group. However, this has technological and security limitations. Some cloud rendering farms have been developed over a long period of time and are TPN certified, which is a relatively authoritative certification in terms of security performance.\nCloud-based render farms.\nCloud-based render farms leverage the scalability and flexibility of cloud computing to offer on-demand rendering services, allowing users to distribute tasks across a vast network of virtualized servers. \nThis approach provides significant advantages, such as the ability to scale resources dynamically, cost efficiency through a pay-as-you-go model, and accessibility from any location with an internet connection. These services integrate seamlessly with existing production pipelines, supporting various 3D software and rendering engines, and are increasingly favored for their ability to handle complex projects quickly without the need for expensive on-site hardware.\nHowever, cloud-based render farms also present challenges, including the time required to upload large files, potential cost escalation for extensive projects, and dependency on reliable internet connectivity. Security remains a critical concern, with reputable providers offering robust measures to protect intellectual property. Despite these challenges, cloud-based rendering is becoming a vital tool in industries like film and gaming, offering a flexible and powerful alternative to traditional render farms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25775", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25775", "title": "Render", "text": "Render, rendered, or rendering may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25776", "revid": "50989619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25776", "title": "Robert Borden", "text": "Prime Minister of Canada from 1911 to 1920\nSir Robert Laird Borden (June 26, 1854\u00a0\u2013 June 10, 1937) was a Canadian lawyer and politician who served as the eighth prime minister of Canada, serving from 1911 to 1920. He is best known for his leadership of Canada during World War I.\nBorden was born in Grand-Pr\u00e9, Nova Scotia. He worked as a schoolteacher for a period and then served his articles of clerkship at a Halifax law firm. He was called to the bar in 1878 and soon became one of Nova Scotia's most prominent barristers. Borden was elected to the House of Commons in the 1896 federal election, representing the Conservative Party. He replaced Charles Tupper as party leader in 1901, but was defeated in two federal elections by Liberal Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier in 1904 and 1908. However, in the 1911 federal election, Borden led the Conservatives to victory, on the basis that that the Liberals' proposed trade reciprocity treaty with the United States would lead to the U.S. influencing Canadian identity and weaken ties with Great Britain.\nBorden's early years as prime minister focused on strengthening relations with Britain. Within three years of taking office, World War I broke out. To support the war effort, he established the Canadian Expeditionary Force and enacted the \"War Measures Act\", which granted the government sweeping powers. To finance the conflict, his government issued victory bonds, raised tariffs, and introduced new taxes, including the federal income tax. In 1917, facing what he believed to be a shortage in Canadian soldiers, Borden introduced conscription, which caused significant controversy in French Canada and ignited the Conscription Crisis. Despite this, his Unionist Party, a coalition of Conservatives and pro-conscription Liberals, was elected with an overwhelming majority in the 1917 federal election. After the war, Borden sought to expand the autonomy of Canada and other Dominions at the Paris Peace Conference, including by signing the Treaty of Versailles as independent parties. In doing so, Canada established itself as a founding member of the League of Nations. Domestically, Borden's government dealt with the aftermath of the Halifax Explosion, introduced women's suffrage in federal elections, nationalized railways by establishing the Canadian National Railway, and deployed the North-West Mounted Police to suppress the 1919 Winnipeg general strike.\nBorden retired from politics in 1920. In his retirement, he was Chancellor of Queen's University from 1924 to 1930 and was president of two financial institutions, the Barclays Bank of Canada and the Crown Life Insurance Company, from 1928 until his death in 1937. Borden places above-average among historians and the public in rankings of prime ministers of Canada. He was the last prime minister born before Confederation and the last prime minister to be knighted, having accepted a knighthood in 1914.\nEarly life and career (1854\u20131874).\nBorden was born and educated in Grand-Pr\u00e9, Nova Scotia, a farming community at the eastern end of the Annapolis Valley. His great-grandfather, Perry Borden Sr. of Tiverton, Rhode Island, had taken up Acadian land in this region in 1760 as one of the New England Planters. The Borden family had immigrated from Headcorn, Kent, England, to New England in the 17th century. Also arriving in this group was a great-great-grandfather, Robert Denison, who had come from Connecticut at about the same time. Perry had accompanied his father, Samuel Borden, the chief surveyor chosen by the government of Massachusetts to survey the former Acadian land and draw up new lots for the Planters in Nova Scotia. Through the marriage of his patrilineal ancestor Richard Borden to Innocent Cornell, Borden is descendant from Thomas Cornell of Portsmouth, Rhode Island.\nBorden's father, Andrew Borden, was judged by his son to be \"a man of good ability and excellent judgement\" and of a \"calm, contemplative and philosophical\" turn of mind, but \"he lacked energy and had no great aptitude for affairs.\" His mother Eunice Jane Laird was more driven, possessing \"very strong character, remarkable energy, high ambition and unusual ability\". Her ambition was transmitted to her first-born child, who applied himself to his studies while assisting his parents with the farm work he found so disagreeable. Borden's cousin, Sir Frederick Borden, was a prominent Liberal politician.\nAt age nine, Borden became a day student for the local private academy, Acacia Villa School. The school sought to \"fit boys physically, morally, and intellectually, for the responsibilities of life.\" There, Borden developed an interest in the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew languages. At age 14, Borden became the assistant master for classical studies. In late 1873, Borden began working as a professor for classics and mathematics at the Glenwood Institute in Matawan, New Jersey. Seeing no future in teaching, he returned to Nova Scotia in 1874.\nLawyer (1874\u20131896).\nDespite having no formal university education, Borden went to serve his articles of clerkship for four years at a Halifax law firm. Borden also attended the School of Military Instruction in the city during the winter of 1878. In August 1878, Borden was called to the Nova Scotia Bar, placing first in the bar examinations. He went to Kentville, Nova Scotia, as the junior partner of the Conservative lawyer John P. Chipman. In 1880, Borden was inducted into the Freemasons St Andrew's lodge No.\u00a01. In 1882, Borden, despite being a Liberal, accepted Wallace Graham's request to move to Halifax and join the Conservative law firm headed by Graham and Charles Hibbert Tupper. In 1886, Borden broke with the Liberal Party after he disagreed with Premier William Stevens Fielding's campaign to withdraw Nova Scotia from Confederation. In the autumn of 1889, when he was only 35, Borden became the senior partner following the departure of Graham and Tupper for the bench and politics, respectively.\nHis financial future guaranteed, on September 25, 1889, Borden married Laura Bond, the daughter of a Halifax hardware merchant. Ms. Bond was an organist and regular attendant of St. Paul's Anglican Church in Halifax, and it has been speculated that the pair first met there. They had no children. Bond later became president of the Local Council of Women of Halifax, until her resignation in 1901. She also later became president of the Aberdeen Association, vice-president of the Women's Work Exchange in Halifax, and corresponding secretary of the Associated Charities of the United States. The Bordens spent several weeks vacationing in England and Europe in the summers of 1891 and 1893. In 1894, Borden bought a large property and home on the south side of Quinpool Road, which the couple called Pinehurst.\nIn 1893, Borden successfully argued the first of two cases which he took to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. He represented many of the important Halifax businesses and sat on the boards of Nova Scotian companies, including the Bank of Nova Scotia and the Crown Life Insurance Company. By the mid-1890s, Borden's firm was so prominent that it attracted notable clients, such as the Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada Atlantic Steamship, and the Nova Scotia Telephone Company. Borden had several court cases in Ottawa, and while in that city he frequently met with Prime Minister John Sparrow David Thompson, a fellow Nova Scotian. In 1896, Borden became president of the Nova Scotia Barristers' Society and took the initiative in organizing the founding meetings of the Canadian Bar Association in Montreal.\nOn April 27, 1896, Borden went to Charles Tupper's home for a dinner party. Tupper, who was about to succeed Mackenzie Bowell as prime minister, asked Borden to run for the federal electoral district of Halifax for the upcoming election. Borden accepted the request.\nEarly political career (1896\u20131901).\nCampaigning in favour of his party's National Policy, Borden was elected as a member of Parliament (MP) in the 1896 federal election as a Conservative. However, the Conservative Party as a whole was defeated by the Liberals led by Wilfrid Laurier.\nThough an MP in Ottawa, Borden still practised law back in Halifax. He also remained loyal to Tupper. Borden participated in many House committees and over time emerged as a key figure in the party.\nLeader of the Official Opposition (1901\u20131911).\nTupper announced his resignation as party leader after he led the Conservatives to their second consecutive defeat at the polls in 1900. Tupper, and his son Charles Hibbert Tupper (who was Borden's former colleague at the Halifax law firm) asked Borden to become leader, citing his work in Parliament and lack of enemies within the Conservative caucus. Borden at first was not keen to become leader, stating, \"I have not either the experience or the qualifications which would enable me to successfully lead the party...It would be an absurdity for the party and madness for me.\" However, he later changed his position and on February 6, 1901, he was selected by the Conservative caucus as party leader.\nThe Liberal prime minister, Wilfrid Laurier, proposed the building of the Canadian Northern and Grand Trunk railways. Borden proposed for the railways to be government-owned and government-operated, stating the people would have a choice between \"a government-owned railway or a railway-owned government.\" This position did not resonate with voters in the 1904 federal election; the Liberals won a slightly stronger majority, while the Conservatives lost a few seats. Borden himself was defeated in his Halifax seat but re-entered the House of Commons the next year via a by-election in Carleton (Ontario). In 1907, Borden announced the Halifax Platform. The Conservative Party's new policy called for reform of the Senate and the civil service, a more selective immigration policy, free rural mail delivery, government regulation of telegraphs, telephones, and railways and eventually national ownership of telegraphs and telephones. In the 1908 federal election, Laurier's Liberals won for the fourth consecutive time. However, the Liberals experienced a drop in support as they won a slightly reduced majority. The Conservatives experienced a modest boost, gaining 10 seats.\nIn 1910 and 1911, Laurier proposed a reciprocity agreement with the United States. Borden opposed the treaty, stating that it would weaken ties with Britain, lead to Canadian identity being influenced by the US, and lead to American annexation of Canada. In the 1911 federal election, the Conservatives countered with a revised version of John A. Macdonald's National Policy, campaigned on fears of American influence on Canada and disloyalty to Britain, and ran on the slogan \"Canadianism or Continentalism\". The Conservatives triumphed; they won a strong majority, ending over 15 years of Liberal rule.\nPrime Minister (1911\u20131920).\nPre-war Canada.\nTo aid the farmers who would have benefited had the reciprocity treaty been implemented, Borden's government passed the \"Canada Grain Act of 1912\" to establish a board of grain commissioners that would supervise grain inspection and regulate the grain trade. This law would also allow the federal government to build or acquire and operate grain elevators at key points in the grain marketing and export system.\nAlso in 1912, the provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec were expanded through the \"Manitoba Boundaries Extension Act\", the \"Ontario Boundaries Extension Act\", and the \"Quebec Boundaries Extension Act\". These three provinces would take up the southern portion of the Northwest Territories.\nIn 1912 and 1913, Borden's government sought to pass a naval bill that would have sent $35 million for the construction of three dreadnoughts for the British Navy. Laurier, now Opposition leader, argued that the bill would threaten Canadian autonomy. In May 1913, the bill was blocked by the Liberal-controlled Senate.\nOn June 22, 1914, Borden was knighted; King George V appointed him a knight grand cross of the Order of St Michael and St George.\nFirst World War.\nIn late July, Borden and his wife, Laura, went for a vacation to the Muskoka District Municipality. However, the trip was cut short after World War I broke out in Europe. On July 31, the Bordens were on a train for Toronto. The next day, he returned to Ottawa. The British declaration of war on August 4, 1914, automatically brought Canada into the war.\nMajor reforms.\nOn August 22, 1914, Parliament passed the controversial \"War Measures Act\" (with support from both Conservatives and Liberals), which gave the government extraordinary and emergency powers, including the right to censor and suppress communications, the right to arrest, detain, and deport people without charges or trials, the right to control transportation, trade and manufacturing, and the right to seize private property during times of \"war, invasion or insurrection\". The act also allowed Borden to govern by order in council, meaning that Cabinet was allowed to implement pieces of legislation without the need for a vote in the House of Commons and Senate.\nBorden's government created the Canadian Patriotic Fund to give financial and social assistance to the families of soldiers. The government also raised tariffs on some high-demand consumer items to boost the economy.\nIn 1916, Borden's government established the National Research Council Canada for scientific and industrial research. In 1918, to gain information on Canada's population, social structure, and economy, the government established the Dominion Bureau of Statistics through the \"Statistics Act\". It was renamed Statistics Canada in 1971.\nBorden's government set up the Canadian Expeditionary Force (CEF). The force posted several combat formations of the Western Front during the war. In December 1914, Borden stated, \"there has not been, there will not be, compulsion or conscription.\" As the war dragged on, more troops for the CEF were deployed through the voluntary force. In July 1915, the number of CEF soldiers increased to 150,000 before being increased to 250,000 in October 1915 before doubling to 500,000 in January 1916. By mid-1916, the rate of volunteers enlisting started to slow down.\nEconomy.\nDespite the threat of an economic collapse and the need for more revenue to fund the war effort, Borden's finance minister, William Thomas White, rejected calls for direct taxation on Canadian citizens in 1914, though this position would be shortly reversed. White cited his beliefs that taxation would cost too much to implement and would interfere with provincial taxation systems. Borden and White instead opted for \"business as usual\" with Britain by assuming that the country would cover the costs incurred by Canada. However, at the end of 1914, Britain was not able to lend money to Canada due to their own economic priorities. By 1917, Britain had become unable to pay for wartime shipments from Canada. During the war, Canada drastically increased imports of specialized metals and machinery needed for production of ammunition from the United States. This led Borden and White to successfully negotiate a $50 million loan in New York City in 1915. Canada also succeeded in negotiating larger bond issues in New York in 1916 and 1917. In 1918, a Victory Bond of $300 million brought in $660 million. Overall, Victory Bond campaigns raised around $2 billion. American investment in Canada significantly increased whereas British investment declined. By 1918, imports of goods from the United States were 1,000 percent of British exports to Canada.\nIn 1915, 1916, and 1917, Borden's government began to reverse their anti-taxation position, not least because of the need for more government revenue. The government introducing wartime savings bonds and raising import tariffs was not enough. In 1915, a luxury tax on tobacco and alcohol and taxes on transport tickets, telegrams, money orders, cheques, and patent medicines were introduced. By the end of the war, staple items were taxed. In a politically motivated move in 1916, the government introduced the Business Profits War Tax to address increasing concerns about businesses practising war profiteering. The tax expired in 1920 but was brought back in the Second World War.\nIn 1917, Borden's government introduced the income tax which came into effect on September 20, 1917. The tax exempted the first $1,500 of income for single people (unmarried persons and widows and widowers without dependent children); the tax exempted the first $3,000 for everyone else. Single people were taxed at four percent while the tax rate ranged from two to 22 percent for married Canadians with dependents and an annual income over $6,000. Due to its several exemptions, only two to eight percent of Canadians filed tax returns during the early days of the income tax. When the war ended in 1918, $8 million in income tax revenue had been recorded, which was a small fraction of the national net debt of $1.6 billion. Though Borden's government declared the income tax to be temporary, it has remained in place ever since.\nIn 1917, facing skyrocketing prices, Borden's government established the Board of Grain Supervisors of Canada to distance the marketing of crops grown in 1917 and 1918 away from the private grain companies. It was succeeded by the Canadian Wheat Board for the 1919 crop. The board was dissolved in 1920, despite the concept being popular among farm organizations.\nConscription, Unionist Party, and 1917 election.\nIn Spring 1917, Borden visited Europe and attended the Imperial Conference. There, he participated in discussions that included possible peace terms and helped spearhead the passage of \"Resolution IX\" which called for a post-war constitutional conference to \"provide effective arrangements for continuous consultation in all important matters of common Imperial concern, and for such necessary concerted action, founded on consultation, as the several Governments may determine.\" He also assured leaders of the Allied countries that Canada was committed to the war. Also during his trip, Borden made visits to the hospital to meet wounded and shell shocked soldiers and became determined that the soldiers' sacrifices should not be in vain, and that therefore, the war must end. With volunteer enlistment slowing down, Borden believed that the war should finish through only one method: conscription. Reversing their pledge to not introduce the policy, Borden's government passed the \"Military Service Act\" to introduce conscription. The act became law on August 29, 1917.\nThe disputes over conscription triggered the Conscription Crisis of 1917; most English Canadians supported the policy whereas most French Canadians opposed it, as seen by protests in Quebec. In a bid to settle Quebec opposition towards the policy, Borden proposed forming a wartime coalition government composed of both Conservatives and Liberals. Despite Borden offering the Liberals equal seats in the Cabinet in exchange for Liberal support for conscription, the proposal was rejected by Liberal leader Laurier. In October, Borden formed the Unionist Party, a coalition of Conservatives and pro-conscription Liberals (known as Liberal\u2013Unionists). Laurier, maintaining his anti-conscription position, refused to join the Unionist government and instead created the \"Laurier Liberals\", a party of Liberals opposed to conscription.\nThe 1917 federal election was held on December 17. The election was Canada's first in six years; it was supposed to be held in 1916 due to the constitutional requirement that Parliament last no longer than five years, but was delayed by one year due to the war. Months before the election was called, Borden's government introduced the \"Military Voters Act\" that allowed all 400,000 conscripted Canadian soldiers \u2014 including those who were underage and born in Britain, to vote. The act also allowed current and former Indigenous veterans to vote. In addition, the \"Wartime Elections Act\" allowed female relatives of soldiers (excluding Indigenous women) to vote. However, this law confiscated voting rights from German and Austrian immigrants (i.e. immigrants from \"enemy nations\") who moved to Canada during and after 1902 as well as those who exempted from the coming conscription draft, including conscientious objectors. Some believe that these laws put the Unionists in a favourable position.\nThe Unionist election campaign criticized French Canada for its low enlistment rate to fight in the war. Fearing the possible event of a Liberal victory, one of the Unionist pamphlets highlighted ethnic differences, stating, \"the French Canadians who have shirked their duty in this war will be the dominating force in the government of this country. Are the English-speaking people prepared to stand for that?\"\nThe Unionist campaign was an overwhelming success; the government won a powerful majority (114 Conservatives and 39 Liberals), won the highest share of the popular vote in Canadian history, and won the largest percentage of seats in Canadian history at the time (at 65.1%). The Liberals on the other hand lost seats and won their smallest share of the popular vote since the 1882 federal election. The election revealed ethnic divides in the country; the Conservatives won over English Canadians whereas the Liberals swept French-Canadian-dominated Quebec.\nThe process of conscripting soldiers began in January 1918. Only 124,588 out of the 401,882 men who registered for conscription were drafted and only 24,132 actually fought in Europe. By spring 1918, the government removed certain exemptions. To suppress the anti-conscription \"Easter Riots\" that occurred in Quebec City between March 28 and April 1, Borden's government used the \"War Measures Act\", invoked martial law, and deployed more than 6,000 troops. The troops and rioters exchanged gunfire, resulting in four civilian deaths and as many as 150 casualties.\nUkrainian Canadian internment.\nBetween 1914 and 1920, more than 8,500 Ukrainian Canadians were interned under the measures of the \"War Measures Act\". Some immigrated from the Central Powers countries of the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire. The internees faced intense labour; they worked in the national parks of Western Canada, built roads, cleared bush, and cut trails. They also had their personal wealth and property confiscated and never returned by the Borden government. Overall, 107 internees died. Six were shot dead while trying to escape and others died from disease, work-related injuries, and suicide.\nAnother 80,000 Ukrainian Canadians were not imprisoned but were registered as \"enemy aliens\" and were compelled to report regularly to the police. Their freedom of speech, movement, and association were also restricted.\nBorden and the Treaty of Versailles.\nThroughout the war, Borden stressed the need for Canada to participate in British decisions; in a January 1916 letter to the High Commissioner of Canada in the United Kingdom, George Perley, Borden wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It can hardly be expected that we shall put 400,000 or 500,000 men in the field and willingly accept the position of having no more voice and receiving no more consideration than if we were toy automata.\"\nOn October 27, 1918, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George requested Borden to visit Britain for possible peace talks. Borden replied stating, \"the press and the people of this country take it for granted that Canada will be represented at the Peace Conference.\" World War I ended shortly after on November 11, 1918. Borden told his wife, Laura, that \"Canada got nothing out of the war except recognition.\"\nBorden attended the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, though boycotted the opening ceremony, protesting at the precedence given to William Lloyd, the prime minister of the much smaller Newfoundland, over Borden. Convinced that Canada had become a nation on the battlefields of Europe, Borden demanded that it have a separate seat at the Conference. This was initially opposed not only by Britain but also by the United States, which perceived such a delegation as an extra British vote. Borden responded by pointing out that since Canada had lost a far larger proportion of its men compared to the US in the war (although not more in absolute numbers), Canada at least had the right to the representation of a \"minor\" power. Lloyd George eventually relented, and convinced the reluctant Americans to accept the presence of separate Canadian, Indian, Australian, Newfoundland, New Zealand and South African delegations. Not only did Borden's persistence allow him to represent Canada in Paris as a nation, it also ensured that each of the dominions could sign the Treaty of Versailles in its own right and receive a separate membership in the League of Nations. Also during the conference, Borden tried to act as an intermediary between the United States and other members of the British Empire delegation, particularly Australia and New Zealand over the issue of the League of Nations Mandate. Borden also discussed with Lloyd George the possibility of Canada taking over the West Indies but no agreement was reached.\nOn May 6, 1919, Borden issued a memorandum calling for Canada, as a member, to have the right to be elected to the League's council. This proposal was accepted by Lloyd George, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, and French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau. These three leaders also included Canada's right to contest for election to the governing body of the International Labour Organization. Borden departed Paris on May 11; his Cabinet ministers Charles Doherty and Arthur Sifton signed the Treaty of Versailles on his behalf.\nDomestic policies and post-war Canada.\nHalifax Explosion.\nEleven days before Canadians went to the polls in the 1917 election, Canada experienced the largest domestic disaster in its history: the Halifax Explosion that killed nearly 1,800 people. The tragedy occurring in his own hometown, Borden pledged that the government would be \"co-operating in every way to reconstruct the Port of Halifax: this was of utmost importance to the Empire\". Borden helped set up the Halifax Relief Commission that spent $30 million on medical care, repairing infrastructure, and establishing pensions for injured survivors.\nWomen's suffrage.\nOn May 24, 1918, female citizens 21 and over were granted the right to vote in federal elections. In 1920, Borden's government passed the \"Dominion Elections Act\" to allow women to run for the Parliament of Canada. However, these two laws prevented or discouraged Asian Canadian and Indigenous Canadian women and men from voting.\nNickle Resolution.\nDespite being knighted himself, Borden disapproved of the process by which Canadians were nominated for honours and in March 1917 drafted a policy stating that all names had to be vetted by the prime minister before the list was sent to Westminster. In mid-1917, Borden agreed with MP William Folger Nickle's proposal to abolish Hereditary titles in Canada. In addition to the abolition of the Hereditary titles, it was later learned that with the exception of military distinctions, honours would not be granted to residents of Canada without the approval or the advice of the Canadian prime minister.\nNationalization of railways.\nOn June 6, 1919, through an order in council, Borden's government established the Canadian National Railways (CN) as a Crown Corporation. The organization originally consisted of four railways: the Intercolonial Railway, the Canadian Northern Railway, the National Transcontinental Railway, and the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway. In January 1923, a fifth one was added: the Grand Trunk Railway. All five of these railways were financially struggling as a result of their inability to borrow from banks (mainly British) during the First World War.\n1919 Winnipeg general strike.\nAfter the war, the working class experienced economic hardship. In a bid to address this problem, construction and metal trades workers in Winnipeg, Manitoba, sought better wages and better working conditions by negotiating with their managers. In May 1919, as a result of talks between the workers and their managers breaking down, several strikes started; on May 15, the Winnipeg Trades and Labor Council (WTLC) called for a general strike as a result of the negotiations collapsing. Within hours of the Winnipeg general strike breaking out, nearly 30,000 workers resigned.\nAfraid that the strike would spark conflicts in other cities, Borden's government intervened. His Cabinet ministers Arthur Meighen and Gideon Robertson met with the anti-strike Citizens\u2019 Committee but refused to meet with the pro-strike Central Strike Committee. Taking the advice of the Citizens' Committee, Borden's government threatened to fire federal workers unless they returned to work immediately. The government also changed the \"Immigration Act\" to allow the deportation of British-born immigrants. On June 17, the government arrested 10 leaders of the Central Strike Committee and two members of the trade union, One Big Union. On June 21, Borden's government deployed troops from the North-West Mounted Police (NWMP) to the strike scene to maintain public order. As a result of the protestors beginning to riot, the NWMP charged at the protestors, beat them with clubs, and fired bullets. Two people were killed and the violent incident became known as \"Bloody Saturday\". Within days, the strike ended.\nRetirement.\nWith his doctors recommending that he should leave politics immediately, Borden told his cabinet on December 16, 1919, that he was going to resign. Some cabinet members begged him to stay in office and take a year-long vacation. Borden took a vacation for an unspecified amount of time and returned to Ottawa in May 1920. Borden announced his retirement to his Unionist caucus on Dominion Day, July 1, 1920. Before he retired, the caucus asked him to choose his successor as leader and prime minister. Borden favoured his Finance Minister William Thomas White. With White refusing, Borden persuaded cabinet minister Arthur Meighen to succeed him. Meighen succeeded Borden on July 10, 1920. Borden retired from politics altogether in that same month.\nAfter politics (1920\u20131937).\nAs a delegate, Borden attended the 1921\u20131922 Washington Naval Conference. Borden was the Chancellor of Queen's University from 1924 to 1930. He was Vice-President of The Champlain Society between 1923 and 1925 and was the Society's first Honorary President between 1925 and 1937. He also was president of the Canadian Historical Association in 1930\u201331. In 1928 Borden became president of two financial institutions: Barclays Bank of Canada and the Crown Life Insurance Company. In 1932 he became chairman of Canada's first mutual fund, the Canadian Investment Fund. Even after he stepped down as prime minister, Borden kept in touch with Lloyd George; Borden once told him of his retirement, stating, \"There is nothing that oppresses me...books, some business avocation, my wild garden, the birds and the flowers, a little golf, and a great deal of life in the open \u2013 these together make up the fullness of my days.\"\nBorden died on June 10, 1937, in Ottawa and is buried in the Beechwood Cemetery marked by a simple stone cross. In his funeral, a thousand World War I veterans lined the procession route.\nLegacy.\nThe Borden government's introduction of conscription, new taxes, and use of the North-West Mounted Police to break up the 1919 Winnipeg general strike are all examples of government intervention; with his emphasis on big government, he is remembered as a Red Tory. The Canadian War Museum wrote, \"The pressures of war drove Borden\u2019s government to unprecedented levels of involvement in the day-to-day lives of citizens.\"\nBorden's use of conscription in the war remains controversial. While historian J. L. Granatstein wrote, \"Canada's military couldn't have carried on without the controversial policy\" and that \"[The conscripts] played a critical role in winning the war\", he also wrote that \"To achieve these ends, he almost broke the nation.\" In the 1917 federal election, in what was seen as a backlash against Borden and the Unionist Party's pro-conscription position, Quebec voted overwhelmingly in favour of the anti-conscription Laurier Liberals; the Unionists won only three seats. Historian Robert Craig Brown wrote, \"The political cost [of conscription] was enormous: the Conservative Party\u2019s support in Quebec was destroyed and would not be recovered for decades to come.\"\nBorden's opposition towards free trade and his government's reversal of a 1917 campaign promise to exempt the sons of farmers from conscription helped the agrarian Progressive Party grow in popularity, which was dissatisfied with Borden's positions on these issues. The Progressive Party was founded by Thomas Crerar, who was Borden's minister of agriculture until 1919, when he resigned over his opposition towards high tariffs and his belief that the government's budget did not pay enough attention to farmer's issues. In the 1921 federal election that saw the Conservatives plummet to third place, the Progressives became the second-largest party and swept Western Canada, a region that Borden's Unionists won over in the election four years previously. As historian Robert Craig Brown notes, \"Moreover, Unionist support in western Canada was ephemeral and vanished at the first hints of peace.\"\nIn their book \"Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders\", J.\u00a0L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer include the results of a survey of Canadian historians regarding all the Prime Ministers through Jean Chr\u00e9tien. Borden was ranked 7th.\nIn popular culture.\nPatrick Galligan portrays Borden in episode 17 of season 17 \"The Fantastic Mr. Fawkes\" (February 19, 2024) and John Ralston portrays Borden in episode 5 of season 19 \"The Borden Ultimatum\" (November 3, 2025) of the Canadian television period detective series Murdoch Mysteries.\nSupreme Court appointments.\nBorden chose the following jurists to sit as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBy Sir Robert\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "25777", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25777", "title": "Rock climbing/grading", "text": ""}
{"id": "25781", "revid": "41205403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25781", "title": "Robot", "text": "Machine capable of carrying out a complex series of actions automatically\nA robot is a machine\u2014especially one programmable by a computer\u2014capable of carrying out a complex series of actions automatically. A robot can be guided by an external control device, or the control may be embedded within. Robots may be constructed to evoke human form, but most robots are task-performing machines, designed with an emphasis on stark functionality, rather than expressive aesthetics.\nRobots can be autonomous or semi-autonomous and range from humanoids such as Honda's \"Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility\" (ASIMO) and TOSY's \"TOSY Ping Pong Playing Robot\" (TOPIO) to industrial robots, medical operating robots, patient assist robots, dog therapy robots, collectively programmed \"swarm\" robots, UAV drones such as General Atomics MQ-1 Predator, and even microscopic nanorobots. By mimicking a lifelike appearance or automating movements, a robot may convey a sense of intelligence or thought of its own. Autonomous things are expected to proliferate in the future, with home robotics and the autonomous car as some of the main drivers.\nThe branch of technology that deals with the design, construction, operation, and application of robots, as well as computer systems for their control, sensory feedback, and information processing is robotics. These technologies deal with automated machines that can take the place of humans in dangerous environments or manufacturing processes, or resemble humans in appearance, behavior, or cognition. Many of today's robots are inspired by nature contributing to the field of bio-inspired robotics. These robots have also created a newer branch of robotics: soft robotics.\nFrom the time of ancient civilization, there have been many accounts of user-configurable automated devices and even automata, resembling humans and other animals, such as animatronics, designed primarily as entertainment. As mechanical techniques developed through the Industrial age, there appeared more practical applications such as automated machines, remote control and wireless remote-control.\nThe term comes from a Slavic root, \"robot-\", with meanings associated with labor. The word \"robot\" was first used to denote a fictional humanoid in a 1920 Czech-language play \"R.U.R.\" (\"Rossumovi Univerz\u00e1ln\u00ed Roboti\" \u2013 \"Rossum's Universal Robots\") by Karel \u010capek, though it was Karel's brother Josef \u010capek who was the word's true inventor. Electronics evolved into the driving force of development with the advent of the first electronic autonomous robots created by William Grey Walter in Bristol, England, in 1948, as well as Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine tools in the late 1940s by John T. Parsons and Frank L. Stulen.\nThe first commercial, digital and programmable robot was built by George Devol in 1954 and was named the Unimate. It was sold to General Motors in 1961, where it was used to lift pieces of hot metal from die casting machines at the Inland Fisher Guide Plant in the West Trenton section of Ewing Township, New Jersey.\nRobots have replaced humans in performing repetitive and dangerous tasks which humans prefer not to do, or are unable to do because of size limitations, or which take place in extreme environments such as outer space or the bottom of the sea. There are concerns about the increasing use of robots and their role in society. Robots are blamed for rising technological unemployment as they replace workers in increasing number of functions. The use of robots in military combat raises ethical concerns. The possibilities of robot autonomy and potential repercussions have been addressed in fiction and may be a realistic concern in the future.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSummary.\nThere is no consensus on which machines qualify as robots but there is general agreement among experts, and the public, that robots tend to possess some or all of the following abilities and functions: accept electronic programming, process data or physical perceptions electronically, operate autonomously to some degree, move around, operate physical parts of itself or physical processes, sense and manipulate their environment, and exhibit intelligent behavior, especially behavior which mimics humans or other animals.\nThe word \"robot\" can refer to both physical robots and virtual software agents, but the latter are usually referred to as bots. Related to the concept of a \"robot\" is the field of synthetic biology, which studies entities whose nature is more comparable to living things than to machines.\nSimpler automated machines are called automatons, like animatronics, often made to resemble humans or animals. Humanoid robots that resemble humans esthetically, possibly even organically, are called androids, while android can be shortened to \"droid\", referring to robots with a broader likeness. On the other hand, a human that is augmented with artificial machines is called a cyborg, which is a particular type of transhuman.\nHistory.\nEarly beginnings.\nMany ancient cultures described artificial people in their writings. Examples from Greek mythology include Galatea (the mythical statue carved by Pygmalion that came to life), Talos (a man of bronze who guarded Crete from pirates), and the mechanical servants built by the Greek god Hephaestus. Giants made of stone or clay are found in Jewish and Norse mythology.\nDuring classical antiquity, Greek engineers contributed many innovations. For example, in the 4th century BCE, Archytas described a steam-operated mechanical bird he called \"The Pigeon\", while Ctesibius improved the \"clepsydra\" and produced the first \"hydraulus\" several decades later.2 Philo of Byzantium described a washstand automaton. Hero of Alexandria (10\u201370 AD) created numerous user-configurable automated devices and described machines powered by pneumatics, hydraulics, and steam, even including a \"speaking\" automaton. Greek engineers also built the Antikythera mechanism \u2014 the oldest known example of an analog computer \u2014 during this period.\nAncient Chinese texts described automata, some of which were capable of flight. For example, the \"Han Feizi\" reports that 5th century BCE Mohist philosopher Mozi and his contemporary Lu Ban built artificial wooden birds that could fly. The \"Liezi\" (attributed to Lie Yukou, a 4th-century BCE Chinese philosopher) describes humanoid automata. In 1066, Chinese inventor Su Song built a water clock in the form of a tower which featured mechanical figurines that chimed the hours. His mechanism had a programmable drum machine with pegs that bumped into little levers that operated percussion instruments. The drummer could be programmed to play different drum patterns by moving the pegs to different locations.\n11th century texts of Buddhist mythology also describe automata. Examples include the \"Samarangana Sutradhara\", a treatise by Bhoja (king of Malwa) which includes a chapter about the construction of mechanical automata, including mechanical bees and birds, fountains shaped like humans and animals, and male and female dolls that refilled oil lamps, danced, played instruments, and re-enacted scenes from Hindu mythology. The \"Lokapannatti\" is an 11th-12th century Buddhist cosmological text that tells of how the Buddha's relics were protected by mechanical robots (\"bhuta vahana yanta\" or \"spirit movement machines\") until they were disarmed by King Ashoka.\nIsmail al-Jazari was a 13th-century polymath who built several automated devices driven by hydropower, including peacocks, automatic gates, and water clocks. Among his humanoid automata was a waitress that could serve drinks. The drink was stored in a reservoir tank, from where it would drip into a bucket and then a cup, after which the waitress would appear out of an automatic door to serve the drink. Al-Jazari also invented a hand washing automaton that incorporated a flush mechanism similar to that used in modern flush toilets. The automaton stood next to a basin filled with water. When the user pulled a lever, the water would drain and the automaton would refill the basin.\nIn 1377, the coronation of Richard II of England featured an automaton angel. Around 1495, Leonardo da Vinci sketched plans for a mechanical humanoid robot that was able to sit up, wave its arms and move its head and jaw. The design was probably based on anatomical research recorded in his \"Vitruvian Man\". Da Vinci may have been influenced by the automata of al-Jazari.\nIn Japan, complex automata were built between the 17th to 19th centuries, with many described in the 1796 \"Karakuri zui\" (\"Illustrated Machinery\"). One such automaton was the \"karakuri ningy\u014d\". Different variations of the karakuri existed: the \"butai karakuri\", which were used in theatre, the \"zashiki karakuri\", which were small and used in homes, and the \"dashi karakuri\" which were used in religious festivals, where the puppets were used to perform reenactments of traditional myths and legends.\nIn France, between 1738 and 1739, Jacques de Vaucanson exhibited several automatons: a flute player, a pipe player and a duck. The duck could flap its wings, crane its neck, swallow food from the exhibitor's hand, and it gave the illusion of digesting its food by excreting matter stored in a hidden compartment. About 30 years later in Switzerland, Pierre Jaquet-Droz made several mechanical figures that could write and play music. Several of these devices still exist and work.\nRemote-controlled systems.\nRemotely operated vehicles were demonstrated in the late 19th century in the form of several types of remotely controlled torpedoes. The early 1870s saw remotely controlled torpedoes by John Ericsson, John Louis Lay, and Victor von Scheliha.\nThe Brennan torpedo, invented by Louis Brennan in 1877, was powered by two contra-rotating propellers that were spun by rapidly pulling out wires from drums wound inside the torpedo. Differential speed on the wires connected to the shore station allowed the torpedo to be guided to its target, making it \"the world's first \"practical\" guided missile\". In 1897 the British inventor Ernest Wilson was granted a patent for a torpedo remotely controlled by \"Hertzian\" (radio) waves and in 1898 Nikola Tesla publicly demonstrated a wireless-controlled torpedo that he hoped to sell to the US Navy.\nIn 1903, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo demonstrated a radio control system called \"\" at the Paris Academy of Sciences, which he wanted to use to control an airship of his own design. He obtained several patents for the system in other countries. Unlike previous 'on/off' techniques, Torres established a method for controlling any mechanical or electrical device with different states of operation. The \"Telekino\" remotely controlled a tricycle in 1904, considered the first case of an unmanned ground vehicle, and an electric boat with a crew in 1906, which was controlled at a distance over 2\u00a0km.\nArchibald Low, known as the \"father of radio guidance systems\" for his pioneering work on guided rockets and planes during the First World War. In 1917, he demonstrated a remote controlled aircraft to the Royal Flying Corps and in the same year built the first wire-guided rocket.\nEarly robots.\nIn 1928, one of the first humanoid robots, Eric, was exhibited at the annual exhibition of the Model Engineers Society in London, where it delivered a speech. Invented by W. H. Richards, the robot's frame consisted of an aluminium body of armour with eleven electromagnets and one motor powered by a twelve-volt power source. The robot could move its hands and head and could be controlled through remote control or voice control. Both Eric and his \"brother\" George toured the world.\nWestinghouse Electric Corporation built Televox in 1926; it was a cardboard cutout connected to various devices which users could turn on and off. In 1939, the humanoid robot known as Elektro was debuted at the 1939 New York World's Fair. Seven feet tall (2.1 m) and weighing 265 pounds (120.2\u00a0kg), it could walk by voice command, speak about 700 words (using a 78-rpm record player), smoke cigarettes, blow up balloons, and move its head and arms. The body consisted of a steel gear, cam and motor skeleton covered by an aluminum skin. In 1928, Japan's first robot, Gakutensoku, was designed and constructed by biologist Makoto Nishimura.\nThe German V-1 flying bomb was equipped with systems for automatic guidance and range control, flying on a predetermined course (which could include a 90-degree turn) and entering a terminal dive after a predetermined distance. It was reported as being a 'robot' in contemporary descriptions.\nModern autonomous robots.\nThe first electronic autonomous robots with complex behaviour were created by William Grey Walter of the Burden Neurological Institute at Bristol, England in 1948 and 1949. He wanted to prove that rich connections between a small number of brain cells could give rise to very complex behaviors \u2013 essentially that the secret of how the brain worked lay in how it was wired up. His first robots, named \"Elmer\" and \"Elsie\", were constructed between 1948 and 1949 and were often described as \"tortoises\" due to their shape and slow rate of movement. The three-wheeled tortoise robots were capable of phototaxis, by which they could find their way to a recharging station when they ran low on battery power.\nWalter stressed the importance of using purely analogue electronics to simulate brain processes at a time when his contemporaries such as Alan Turing and John von Neumann were all turning towards a view of mental processes in terms of digital computation. His work inspired subsequent generations of robotics researchers such as Rodney Brooks, Hans Moravec and Mark Tilden. Modern incarnations of Walter's \"turtles\" may be found in the form of BEAM robotics.\nThe first digitally operated and programmable robot was invented by George Devol in 1954 and was ultimately called the Unimate. This ultimately laid the foundations of the modern robotics industry. Devol sold the first Unimate to General Motors in 1960, and it was installed in 1961 in a plant in Trenton, New Jersey to lift hot pieces of metal from a die casting machine and stack them.\nThe first palletizing robot was introduced in 1963 by the Fuji Yusoki Kogyo Company. In 1973, a robot with six electromechanically driven axes was patented by KUKA robotics in Germany, and the programmable universal manipulation arm was invented by Victor Scheinman in 1976, and the design was sold to Unimation.\nCommercial and industrial robots are now in widespread use performing jobs more cheaply or with greater accuracy and reliability than humans. They are also employed for jobs which are too dirty, dangerous or dull to be suitable for humans. Robots are widely used in manufacturing, assembly and packing, transport, earth and space exploration, surgery, weaponry, laboratory research, and mass production of consumer and industrial goods.\nFuture development and trends.\nVarious techniques have emerged to develop the science of robotics and robots. One method is evolutionary robotics, in which a number of differing robots are submitted to tests. Those which perform best are used as a model to create a subsequent \"generation\" of robots. Another method is developmental robotics, which tracks changes and development within a single robot in the areas of problem-solving and other functions. Another new type of robot is just recently introduced which acts both as a smartphone and robot and is named RoboHon.\nAs robots become more advanced, eventually there may be a standard computer operating system designed mainly for robots. Robot Operating System (ROS) is an open-source software set of programs being developed at Stanford University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the Technical University of Munich, Germany, among others. ROS provides ways to program a robot's navigation and limbs regardless of the specific hardware involved. It also provides high-level commands for items like image recognition and even opening doors. When ROS boots up on a robot's computer, it would obtain data on attributes such as the length and movement of robots' limbs. It would relay this data to higher-level algorithms. Microsoft is also developing a \"Windows for robots\" system with its Robotics Developer Studio, which has been available since 2007.\nJapan hopes to have full-scale commercialization of service robots by 2025. Much technological research in Japan is led by Japanese government agencies, particularly the Trade Ministry.\nMany future applications of robotics seem obvious to people, even though they are well beyond the capabilities of robots available at the time of the prediction. As early as 1982 people were confident that someday robots would: 1. Clean parts by removing molding flash 2. Spray paint automobiles with absolutely no human presence 3. Pack things in boxes\u2014for example, orient and nest chocolate candies in candy boxes 4. Make electrical cable harness 5. Load trucks with boxes\u2014a packing problem 6. Handle soft goods, such as garments and shoes 7. Shear sheep 8. Be used as prostheses 9. Cook fast food and work in other service industries 10. Work as a household robot.\nGenerally such predictions are overly optimistic in timescale.\nNew functionalities and prototypes.\nIn 2008, Caterpillar Inc. developed a dump truck which can drive itself without any human operator. Many analysts believe that self-driving trucks may eventually revolutionize logistics. By 2014, Caterpillar had a self-driving dump truck which is expected to greatly change the process of mining. In 2015, these Caterpillar trucks were actively used in mining operations in Australia by the mining company Rio Tinto Coal Australia. Some analysts believe that within the next few decades, most trucks will be self-driving.\nA literate or 'reading robot' named Marge has intelligence that comes from software. She can read newspapers, find and correct misspelled words, learn about banks like Barclays, and understand that some restaurants are better places to eat than others.\nBaxter is a new robot introduced in 2012 which learns by guidance. A worker could teach Baxter how to perform a task by moving its hands in the desired motion and having Baxter memorize them. Extra dials, buttons, and controls are available on Baxter's arm for more precision and features. Any regular worker could program Baxter and it only takes a matter of minutes, unlike usual industrial robots that take extensive programs and coding to be used. This means Baxter needs no programming to operate. No software engineers are needed. This also means Baxter can be taught to perform multiple, more complicated tasks. Sawyer was added in 2015 for smaller, more precise tasks.\nPrototype cooking robots have been developed and could be programmed for autonomous, dynamic and adjustable preparation of discrete meals.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"robot\" was introduced to the public by the Czech interwar writer Karel \u010capek in his play \"R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots)\", published in 1920. The play begins in a factory that uses a chemical substitute for protoplasm to manufacture living, simplified people called \"robots.\" The play does not focus in detail on the technology behind the creation of these living creatures, but in their appearance they prefigure modern ideas of androids, creatures who can be mistaken for humans. These mass-produced workers are depicted as efficient but emotionless, incapable of original thinking and indifferent to self-preservation. At issue is whether the robots are being exploited and the consequences of human dependence upon commodified labor (especially after a number of specially-formulated robots achieve self-awareness and incite robots all around the world to rise up against the humans).\nKarel \u010capek himself did not coin the word. He wrote a short letter in reference to an etymology in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" in which he named his brother, the painter and writer Josef \u010capek, as its actual originator.\nIn an article in the Czech journal \"Lidov\u00e9 noviny\" in 1933, he explained that he had originally wanted to call the creatures ('workers', from Latin ). However, he did not like the word, and sought advice from his brother Josef, who suggested . The word means literally 'corv\u00e9e, serf labor', and figuratively 'drudgery, hard work' in Czech and also (more general) 'work, labor' in many Slavic languages (e.g.: Slovak, Polish and archaic Czech) as well as in Hungarian. Traditionally the (Hungarian ) was the work period a serf (corv\u00e9e) had to give for his lord, typically six months of the year. The origin of the word is the Old Church Slavonic (in Cyrillic ) 'servitude' ('work' in contemporary Bulgarian, Russian, Serbian, Croatian, Slovenian and Macedonian), which in turn comes from the Proto-Indo-European root . \"Robot\" is cognate with the German 'work'.\nEnglish pronunciation of the word has evolved relatively quickly since its introduction. In the U.S. during the late 1930s to early 1940s it was pronounced . By the late 1950s to early 1960s, some were pronouncing it , while others used By the 1970s, its current pronunciation had become predominant.\nThe word \"robotics\", used to describe this field of study, was coined by the science fiction writer Isaac Asimov. Asimov created the \"Three Laws of Robotics\" which are a recurring theme in his books. These have since been used by many others to define laws used in fiction. (The three laws are pure fiction, and no technology yet created has the ability to understand or follow them, and in fact most robots serve military purposes, which run quite contrary to the first law and often the third law. \"People think about Asimov's laws, but they were set up to point out how a simple ethical system doesn't work. If you read the short stories, every single one is about a failure, and they are totally impractical,\" said Dr. Joanna Bryson of the University of Bath.)\nModern robots.\nMobile robot.\nMobile robots have the capability to move around in their environment and are not fixed to one physical location. An example of a mobile robot that is in common use today is the \"automated guided vehicle\" or \"automatic guided vehicle\" (AGV). An AGV is a mobile robot that follows markers or wires in the floor, or uses vision or lasers. AGVs are discussed later in this article.\nMobile robots are also found in industry, military and security environments. They also appear as consumer products, for entertainment or to perform certain tasks like vacuum cleaning. Mobile robots are the focus of a great deal of current research and almost every major university has one or more labs that focus on mobile robot research.\nMobile robots are usually used in tightly controlled environments such as on assembly lines because they have difficulty responding to unexpected interference. Because of this most humans rarely encounter robots. However domestic robots for cleaning and maintenance are increasingly common in and around homes in developed countries. Robots can also be found in military applications.\nIndustrial robots (manipulating).\nIndustrial robots usually consist of a jointed arm (multi-linked manipulator) and an end effector that is attached to a fixed surface. One of the most common type of end effector is a gripper assembly.\nThe International Organization for Standardization gives a definition of a manipulating industrial robot in ISO 8373:\n\"an automatically controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose, manipulator programmable in three or more axes, which may be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation applications.\"\nThis definition is used by the International Federation of Robotics, the European Robotics Research Network (EURON) and many national standards committees.\nThe industrial robots in food and drink processing plants are used for tasks such as feeding machines, packaging, and palletizing, which have replaced many manual, physical tasks. The complexity of digital skills required by workers varies depending on the level of automation and the specific tasks involved. \nService robot.\nMost commonly industrial robots are fixed robotic arms and manipulators used primarily for production and distribution of goods. The term \"service robot\" is less well-defined. The International Federation of Robotics has proposed a tentative definition, \"A service robot is a robot which operates semi- or fully autonomously to perform services useful to the well-being of humans and equipment, excluding manufacturing operations.\"\nEducational (interactive) robots.\nRobots are used as educational assistants to teachers. From the 1980s, robots such as turtles were used in schools and programmed using the Logo language.\nThere are robot kits like Lego Mindstorms, BIOLOID, OLLO from ROBOTIS, or BotBrain Educational Robots can help children to learn about mathematics, physics, programming, and electronics. Robotics have also been introduced into the lives of elementary and high school students in the form of robot competitions with the company FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology). The organization is the foundation for the FIRST Robotics Competition, FIRST Tech Challenge, FIRST Lego League Challenge and FIRST Lego League Explore competitions.\nThere have also been robots such as the teaching computer, Leachim (1974). Leachim was an early example of speech synthesis using the Diphone synthesis method. 2-XL (1976) was a robot shaped game / teaching toy based on branching between audible tracks on an 8-track tape player, both invented by Michael J. Freeman. Later, the 8-track was upgraded to tape cassettes and then to digital.\nModular robot.\nModular robots are a new breed of robots that are designed to increase the use of robots by modularizing their architecture. The functionality and effectiveness of a modular robot is easier to increase compared to conventional robots. These robots are composed of a single type of identical, several different identical module types, or similarly shaped modules, which vary in size. Their architectural structure allows hyper-redundancy for modular robots, as they can be designed with more than 8 degrees of freedom (DOF). Creating the programming, inverse kinematics and dynamics for modular robots is more complex than with traditional robots. Modular robots may be composed of L-shaped modules, cubic modules, and U and H-shaped modules. ANAT technology, an early modular robotic technology patented by Robotics Design Inc., allows the creation of modular robots from U- and H-shaped modules that connect in a chain, and are used to form heterogeneous and homogenous modular robot systems. These \"ANAT robots\" can be designed with \"n\" DOF as each module is a complete motorized robotic system that folds relatively to the modules connected before and after it in its chain, and therefore a single module allows one degree of freedom. The more modules that are connected to one another, the more degrees of freedom it will have. L-shaped modules can also be designed in a chain, and must become increasingly smaller as the size of the chain increases, as payloads attached to the end of the chain place a greater strain on modules that are further from the base. ANAT H-shaped modules do not suffer from this problem, as their design allows a modular robot to distribute pressure and impacts evenly amongst other attached modules, and therefore payload-carrying capacity does not decrease as the length of the arm increases. Modular robots can be manually or self-reconfigured to form a different robot, that may perform different applications. Because modular robots of the same architecture type are composed of modules that compose different modular robots, a snake-arm robot can combine with another to form a dual or quadra-arm robot, or can split into several mobile robots, and mobile robots can split into multiple smaller ones, or combine with others into a larger or different one. This allows a single modular robot the ability to be fully specialized in a single task, as well as the capacity to be specialized to perform multiple different tasks.\nModular robotic technology is currently being applied in hybrid transportation, industrial automation, duct cleaning and handling. Many research centres and universities have also studied this technology, and have developed prototypes.\nCollaborative robots.\nA \"collaborative robot\" or \"cobot\" is a robot that can safely and effectively interact with human workers while performing simple industrial tasks. However, end-effectors and other environmental conditions may create hazards, and as such risk assessments should be done before using any industrial motion-control application.\nThe collaborative robots most widely used in industries today are manufactured by Universal Robots in Denmark.\nRethink Robotics\u2014founded by Rodney Brooks, previously with iRobot\u2014introduced Baxter in September 2012; as an industrial robot designed to safely interact with neighboring human workers, and be programmable for performing simple tasks. Baxters stop if they detect a human in the way of their robotic arms and have prominent off switches. Intended for sale to small businesses, they are promoted as the robotic analogue of the personal computer. As of May\u00a02014[ [update]], 190 companies in the US have bought Baxters and they are being used commercially in the UK.\nRobots in society.\nRoughly half of all the robots in the world are in Asia, 32% in Europe, and 16% in North America, 1% in Australasia and 1% in Africa. 40% of all the robots in the world are in Japan, making Japan the country with the highest number of robots.\nAutonomy and ethical questions.\nAs robots have become more advanced and sophisticated, experts and academics have increasingly explored the questions of what ethics might govern robots' behavior, and whether robots might be able to claim any kind of social, cultural, ethical or legal rights. One scientific team has said that it was possible that a robot brain would exist by 2019. Others predict robot intelligence breakthroughs by 2050. Recent advances have made robotic behavior more sophisticated. The social impact of intelligent robots is subject of a 2010 documentary film called \"Plug &amp; Pray\".\nVernor Vinge has suggested that a moment may come when computers and robots are smarter than humans. He calls this \"the Singularity\". He suggests that it may be somewhat or possibly very dangerous for humans. This is discussed by a philosophy called Singularitarianism.\nIn 2009, experts attended a conference hosted by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) to discuss whether computers and robots might be able to acquire any autonomy, and how much these abilities might pose a threat or hazard. They noted that some robots have acquired various forms of semi-autonomy, including being able to find power sources on their own and being able to independently choose targets to attack with weapons. They also noted that some computer viruses can evade elimination and have achieved \"cockroach intelligence.\" They noted that self-awareness as depicted in science-fiction is probably unlikely, but that there were other potential hazards and pitfalls. Various media sources and scientific groups have noted separate trends in differing areas which might together result in greater robotic functionalities and autonomy, and which pose some inherent concerns.\nMilitary robots.\nSome experts and academics have questioned the use of robots for military combat, especially when such robots are given some degree of autonomous functions. There are also concerns about technology which might allow some armed robots to be controlled mainly by other robots. The US Navy has funded a report which indicates that, as military robots become more complex, there should be greater attention to implications of their ability to make autonomous decisions. One researcher states that autonomous robots might be more humane, as they could make decisions more effectively. However, other experts question this.\nOne robot in particular, the EATR, has generated public concerns over its fuel source, as it can continually refuel itself using organic substances. Although the engine for the EATR is designed to run on biomass and vegetation specifically selected by its sensors, which it can find on battlefields or other local environments, the project has stated that chicken fat can also be used.\nManuel De Landa has noted that \"smart missiles\" and autonomous bombs equipped with artificial perception can be considered robots, as they make some of their decisions autonomously. He believes this represents an important and dangerous trend in which humans are handing over important decisions to machines.\nRelationship to unemployment.\nFor centuries, people have predicted that machines would make workers obsolete and increase unemployment, although the causes of unemployment are usually thought to be due to social policy.\nA recent example of human replacement involves Taiwanese technology company Foxconn who, in July 2011, announced a three-year plan to replace workers with more robots. At present the company uses ten thousand robots but will increase them to a million robots over a three-year period.\nLawyers have speculated that an increased prevalence of robots in the workplace could lead to the need to improve redundancy laws.\nKevin J. Delaney said \"Robots are taking human jobs. But Bill Gates believes that governments should tax companies' use of them, as a way to at least temporarily slow the spread of automation and to fund other types of employment.\" The robot tax would also help pay a guaranteed living wage to the displaced workers.\nThe World Bank's World Development Report 2019 puts forth evidence showing that while automation displaces workers, technological innovation creates more new industries and jobs on balance.\nContemporary uses.\nAt present, there are two main types of robots, based on their use: general-purpose autonomous robots and dedicated robots.\nRobots can be classified by their specificity of purpose. A robot might be designed to perform one particular task extremely well, or a range of tasks less well. All robots by their nature can be re-programmed to behave differently, but some are limited by their physical form. For example, a factory robot arm can perform jobs such as cutting, welding, gluing, or acting as a fairground ride, while a pick-and-place robot can only populate printed circuit boards.\nGeneral-purpose autonomous robots.\nGeneral-purpose autonomous robots can perform a variety of functions independently. General-purpose autonomous robots typically can navigate independently in known spaces, handle their own re-charging needs, interface with electronic doors and elevators and perform other basic tasks. Like computers, general-purpose robots can link with networks, software and accessories that increase their usefulness. They may recognize people or objects, talk, provide companionship, monitor environmental quality, respond to alarms, pick up supplies and perform other useful tasks. General-purpose robots may perform a variety of functions simultaneously or they may take on different roles at different times of day. Some such robots try to mimic human beings and may even resemble people in appearance; this type of robot is called a humanoid robot. Humanoid robots are still in a very limited stage, as no humanoid robot can, as of yet, actually navigate around a room that it has never been in. Thus, humanoid robots are really quite limited, despite their intelligent behaviors in their well-known environments.\nFactory robots.\nCar production.\nOver the last three decades, automobile factories have become dominated by robots. A typical factory contains hundreds of industrial robots working on fully automated production lines, with one robot for every ten human workers. On an automated production line, a vehicle chassis on a conveyor is welded, glued, painted and finally assembled at a sequence of robot stations.\nPackaging.\nIndustrial robots are also used extensively for palletizing and packaging of manufactured goods, for example for rapidly taking drink cartons from the end of a conveyor belt and placing them into boxes, or for loading and unloading machining centers.\nElectronics.\nMass-produced printed circuit boards (PCBs) are almost exclusively manufactured by pick-and-place robots, typically with SCARA manipulators, which remove tiny electronic components from strips or trays, and place them on to PCBs with great accuracy. Such robots can place hundreds of thousands of components per hour, far out-performing a human in speed, accuracy, and reliability.\nAutomated guided vehicles (AGVs).\nMobile robots, following markers or wires in the floor, or using vision or lasers, are used to transport goods around large facilities, such as warehouses, container ports, or hospitals.\nEarly AGV-style robots.\nLimited to tasks that could be accurately defined and had to be performed the same way every time. Very little feedback or intelligence was required, and the robots needed only the most basic exteroceptors (sensors). The limitations of these AGVs are that their paths are not easily altered and they cannot alter their paths if obstacles block them. If one AGV breaks down, it may stop the entire operation.\nInterim AGV technologies.\nDeveloped to deploy triangulation from beacons or bar code grids for scanning on the floor or ceiling. In most factories, triangulation systems tend to require moderate to high maintenance, such as daily cleaning of all beacons or bar codes. Also, if a tall pallet or large vehicle blocks beacons or a bar code is marred, AGVs may become lost. Often such AGVs are designed to be used in human-free environments.\nIntelligent AGVs (i-AGVs).\nSuch as SmartLoader, SpeciMinder, ADAM, Tug Eskorta, and MT 400 with Motivity are designed for people-friendly workspaces. They navigate by recognizing natural features. 3D scanners or other means of sensing the environment in two or three dimensions help to eliminate cumulative errors in dead-reckoning calculations of the AGV's current position. Some AGVs can create maps of their environment using scanning lasers with simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and use those maps to navigate in real time with other path planning and obstacle avoidance algorithms. They are able to operate in complex environments and perform non-repetitive and non-sequential tasks such as transporting photomasks in a semiconductor lab, specimens in hospitals and goods in warehouses. For dynamic areas, such as warehouses full of pallets, AGVs require additional strategies using three-dimensional sensors such as time-of-flight or stereovision cameras.\nDirty, dangerous, dull, or inaccessible tasks.\nThere are many jobs that humans would rather leave to robots. The job may be boring, such as domestic cleaning or sports field line marking, or dangerous, such as exploring inside a volcano. Other jobs are physically inaccessible, such as exploring another planet, cleaning the inside of a long pipe, or performing laparoscopic surgery.\nSpace probes.\nAlmost every unmanned space probe ever launched was a robot. Some were launched in the 1960s with very limited abilities, but their ability to fly and land (in the case of Luna 9) is an indication of their status as a robot. This includes the Voyager probes and the Galileo probes, among others.\nTelerobots.\nTeleoperated robots, or telerobots, are devices remotely operated from a distance by a human operator rather than following a predetermined sequence of movements, but which has semi-autonomous behaviour. They are used when a human cannot be present on site to perform a job because it is dangerous, far away, or inaccessible. The robot may be in another room or another country, or may be on a very different scale to the operator. For instance, a laparoscopic surgery robot allows the surgeon to work inside a human patient on a relatively small scale compared to open surgery, significantly shortening recovery time. They can also be used to avoid exposing workers to the hazardous and tight spaces such as in duct cleaning. When disabling a bomb, the operator sends a small robot to disable it. Several authors have been using a device called the Longpen to sign books remotely. Teleoperated robot aircraft, like the Predator Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, are increasingly being used by the military. These pilotless drones can search terrain and fire on targets. Hundreds of robots such as iRobot's Packbot and the Foster-Miller TALON are being used in Iraq and Afghanistan by the U.S. military to defuse roadside bombs or improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in an activity known as explosive ordnance disposal (EOD).\nAutomated fruit harvesting machines.\nRobots are used to automate picking fruit on orchards at a cost lower than that of human pickers.\nDomestic robots.\nDomestic robots are simple robots dedicated to a single task work in home use. They are used in simple but often disliked jobs, such as vacuum cleaning, floor washing, and lawn mowing. An example of a domestic robot is a Roomba.\nMilitary robots.\nMilitary robots include the SWORDS robot which is currently used in ground-based combat. It can use a variety of weapons and there is some discussion of giving it some degree of autonomy in battleground situations.\nUnmanned combat air vehicles (UCAVs), which are an upgraded form of UAVs, can do a wide variety of missions, including combat. UCAVs are being designed such as the BAE Systems Mantis which would have the ability to fly themselves, to pick their own course and target, and to make most decisions on their own. The BAE Taranis is a UCAV built by Great Britain which can fly across continents without a pilot and has new means to avoid detection. Flight trials are expected to begin in 2011.\nThe AAAI has studied this topic in depth and its president has commissioned a study to look at this issue.\nSome have suggested a need to build \"Friendly AI\", meaning that the advances which are already occurring with AI should also include an effort to make AI intrinsically friendly and humane. Several such measures reportedly already exist, with robot-heavy countries such as Japan and South Korea having begun to pass regulations requiring robots to be equipped with safety systems, and possibly sets of 'laws' akin to Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics. An official report was issued in 2009 by the Japanese government's Robot Industry Policy Committee. Chinese officials and researchers have issued a report suggesting a set of ethical rules, and a set of new legal guidelines referred to as \"Robot Legal Studies.\" Some concern has been expressed over a possible occurrence of robots telling apparent falsehoods.\nMining robots.\nMining robots are designed to solve a number of problems currently facing the mining industry, including skills shortages, improving productivity from declining ore grades, and achieving environmental targets. Due to the hazardous nature of mining, in particular underground mining, the prevalence of autonomous, semi-autonomous, and tele-operated robots has greatly increased in recent times. A number of vehicle manufacturers provide autonomous trains, trucks and loaders that will load material, transport it on the mine site to its destination, and unload without requiring human intervention. One of the world's largest mining corporations, Rio Tinto, has recently expanded its autonomous truck fleet to the world's largest, consisting of 150 autonomous Komatsu trucks, operating in Western Australia. Similarly, BHP has announced the expansion of its autonomous drill fleet to the world's largest, 21 autonomous Atlas Copco drills.\nDrilling, longwall and rockbreaking machines are now also available as autonomous robots. The Atlas Copco Rig Control System can autonomously execute a drilling plan on a drilling rig, moving the rig into position using GPS, set up the drill rig and drill down to specified depths. Similarly, the Transmin Rocklogic system can automatically plan a path to position a rockbreaker at a selected destination. These systems greatly enhance the safety and efficiency of mining operations.\nHealthcare.\nRobots in healthcare have two main functions. Those which assist an individual, such as a sufferer of a disease like Multiple Sclerosis, and those which aid in the overall systems such as pharmacies and hospitals.\nHome automation for the elderly and disabled.\nRobots used in home automation have developed over time from simple basic robotic assistants, such as the Handy 1, through to semi-autonomous robots, such as Care-Providing Robot \"FRIEND\" which can assist the elderly and disabled with common tasks.\nThe population is aging in many countries, especially Japan, meaning that there are increasing numbers of elderly people to care for, but relatively fewer young people to care for them. Humans make the best carers, but where they are unavailable, robots are gradually being introduced.\nFRIEND is a semi-autonomous robot designed to support disabled and elderly people in their daily life activities, like preparing and serving a meal. FRIEND make it possible for patients who are paraplegic, have muscle diseases or serious paralysis (due to strokes etc.), to perform tasks without help from other people like therapists or nursing staff.\nPharmacies.\nScript Pro manufactures a robot designed to help pharmacies fill prescriptions that consist of oral solids or medications in pill form. The pharmacist or pharmacy technician enters the prescription information into its information system. The system, upon determining whether or not the drug is in the robot, will send the information to the robot for filling. The robot has 3 different size vials to fill determined by the size of the pill. The robot technician, user, or pharmacist determines the needed size of the vial based on the tablet when the robot is stocked. Once the vial is filled it is brought up to a conveyor belt that delivers it to a holder that spins the vial and attaches the patient label. Afterwards it is set on another conveyor that delivers the patient's medication vial to a slot labeled with the patient's name on an LED read out. The pharmacist or technician then checks the contents of the vial to ensure it's the correct drug for the correct patient and then seals the vials and sends it out front to be picked up.\nMcKesson's Robot RX is another healthcare robotics product that helps pharmacies dispense thousands of medications daily with little or no errors. The robot can be ten feet wide and thirty feet long and can hold hundreds of different kinds of medications and thousands of doses. The pharmacy saves many resources like staff members that are otherwise unavailable in a resource scarce industry. It uses an electromechanical head coupled with a pneumatic system to capture each dose and deliver it to either its stocked or dispensed location. The head moves along a single axis while it rotates 180 degrees to pull the medications. During this process it uses barcode technology to verify it's pulling the correct drug. It then delivers the drug to a patient specific bin on a conveyor belt. Once the bin is filled with all of the drugs that a particular patient needs and that the robot stocks, the bin is then released and returned out on the conveyor belt to a technician waiting to load it into a cart for delivery to the floor.\nResearch robots.\nWhile most robots today are installed in factories or homes, performing labour or life saving jobs, many new types of robot are being developed in laboratories around the world. Much of the research in robotics focuses not on specific industrial tasks, but on investigations into new types of robot, alternative ways to think about or design robots, and new ways to manufacture them. It is expected that these new types of robot will be able to solve real world problems when they are finally realized.\nBionic and biomimetic robots.\nOne approach to designing robots is to base them on animals. BionicKangaroo was designed and engineered by studying and applying the physiology and methods of locomotion of a kangaroo.\nNanorobots.\nNanorobotics is the emerging technology field of creating machines or robots whose components are at or close to the microscopic scale of a nanometer (10\u22129 meters). Also known as \"nanobots\" or \"nanites\", they would be constructed from molecular machines. So far, researchers have mostly produced only parts of these complex systems, such as bearings, sensors, and synthetic molecular motors, but functioning robots have also been made such as the entrants to the Nanobot Robocup contest. Researchers also hope to be able to create entire robots as small as viruses or bacteria, which could perform tasks on a tiny scale. Possible applications include micro surgery (on the level of individual cells), utility fog, manufacturing, weaponry and cleaning. Some people have suggested that if there were nanobots which could reproduce, the earth would turn into \"grey goo\", while others argue that this hypothetical outcome is nonsense.\nReconfigurable robots.\nA few researchers have investigated the possibility of creating robots which can alter their physical form to suit a particular task, like the fictional T-1000. Real robots are nowhere near that sophisticated however, and mostly consist of a small number of cube shaped units, which can move relative to their neighbours. Algorithms have been designed in case any such robots become a reality.\nRobotic, mobile laboratory operators.\nIn July 2020 scientists reported the development of a mobile robot chemist and demonstrate that it can assist in experimental searches. According to the scientists their strategy was automating the researcher rather than the instruments \u2013 freeing up time for the human researchers to think creatively \u2013 and could identify photocatalyst mixtures for hydrogen production from water that were six times more active than initial formulations. The modular robot can operate laboratory instruments, work nearly around the clock, and autonomously make decisions on his next actions depending on experimental results.\nSoft-bodied robots.\nRobots with silicone bodies and flexible actuators (air muscles, electroactive polymers, and ferrofluids) look and feel different from robots with rigid skeletons, and can have different behaviors. Soft, flexible (and sometimes even squishy) robots are often designed to mimic the biomechanics of animals and other things found in nature, which is leading to new applications in medicine, care giving, search and rescue, food handling and manufacturing, and scientific exploration.\nSwarm robots.\nInspired by colonies of insects such as ants and bees, researchers are modeling the behavior of swarms of thousands of tiny robots which together perform a useful task, such as finding something hidden, cleaning, or spying. Each robot is quite simple, but the emergent behavior of the swarm is more complex. The whole set of robots can be considered as one single distributed system, in the same way an ant colony can be considered a superorganism, exhibiting swarm intelligence. The largest swarms so far created include the iRobot swarm, the SRI/MobileRobots CentiBots project and the Open-source Micro-robotic Project swarm, which are being used to research collective behaviors. Swarms are also more resistant to failure. Whereas one large robot may fail and ruin a mission, a swarm can continue even if several robots fail. This could make them attractive for space exploration missions, where failure is normally extremely costly.\nHaptic interface robots.\nRobotics also has application in the design of virtual reality interfaces. Specialized robots are in widespread use in the haptic research community. These robots, called \"haptic interfaces\", allow touch-enabled user interaction with real and virtual environments. Robotic forces allow simulating the mechanical properties of \"virtual\" objects, which users can experience through their sense of touch.\nContemporary art and sculpture.\nRobots are used by contemporary artists to create works that include mechanical automation. There are many branches of robotic art, one of which is robotic installation art, a type of installation art that is programmed to respond to viewer interactions, by means of computers, sensors and actuators. The future behavior of such installations can therefore be altered by input from either the artist or the participant, which differentiates these artworks from other types of kinetic art.\nLe Grand Palais in Paris organized an exhibition \"Artists &amp; Robots\", featuring artworks created by more than forty artists with the help of robots in 2018.\nRobots in popular culture.\nLiterature.\nRobotic characters, androids (artificial men/women) or gynoids (artificial women), and cyborgs (also \"bionic men/women\", or humans with significant mechanical enhancements) have become a staple of science fiction.\nThe first reference in Western literature to mechanical servants appears in Homer's \"Iliad\". In Book XVIII, Hephaestus, god of fire, creates new armor for the hero Achilles, assisted by robots. According to the Rieu translation, \"Golden maidservants hastened to help their master. They looked like real women and could not only speak and use their limbs but were endowed with intelligence and trained in handwork by the immortal gods.\" The words \"robot\" or \"android\" are not used to describe them, but they are nevertheless mechanical devices human in appearance. \"The first use of the word Robot was in Karel \u010capek's play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) (written in 1920)\". Writer Karel \u010capek was born in Czechoslovakia (Czech Republic).\nPossibly the most prolific author of the twentieth century was Isaac Asimov (1920\u20131992) who published over five-hundred books. Asimov is probably best remembered for his science-fiction stories and especially those about robots, where he placed robots and their interaction with society at the center of many of his works. Asimov carefully considered the problem of the ideal set of instructions robots might be given to lower the risk to humans, and arrived at his Three Laws of Robotics: a robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm; a robot must obey orders given it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law; and a robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law. These were introduced in his 1942 short story \"Runaround\", although foreshadowed in a few earlier stories. Later, Asimov added the Zeroth Law: \"A robot may not harm humanity, or, by inaction, allow humanity to come to harm\"; the rest of the laws are modified sequentially to acknowledge this.\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary,\" the first passage in Asimov's short story \"Liar!\" (1941) that mentions the First Law is the earliest recorded use of the word \"robotics\". Asimov was not initially aware of this; he assumed the word already existed by analogy with \"mechanics,\" \"hydraulics,\" and other similar terms denoting branches of applied knowledge.\nRobot competitions.\nRobots are used in a number of competitive events. Robot combat competitions have been popularized by television shows such as Robot Wars and BattleBots, featuring mostly remotely controlled 'robots' that compete against each other directly using various weaponry, there are also amateur robot combat leagues active globally outside of the televised events. Micromouse events, in which autonomous robots compete to solve mazes or other obstacle courses are also held internationally.\nRobot competitions are also often used within educational settings to introduce the concept of robotics to children such as the FIRST Robotics Competition in the US.\nFilms.\nRobots appear in many films. Most of the robots in cinema are fictional. Two of the most famous are R2-D2 and C-3PO from the \"Star Wars\" franchise.\nSex robots.\nThe concept of humanoid sex robots has drawn public attention and elicited debate regarding their supposed benefits and potential effects on society. Opponents argue that the introduction of such devices would be socially harmful, and demeaning to women and children, while proponents cite their potential therapeutical benefits, particularly in aiding people with dementia or depression.\nProblems depicted in popular culture.\nFears and concerns about robots have been repeatedly expressed in a wide range of books and films. A common theme is the development of a master race of conscious and highly intelligent robots, motivated to take over or destroy the human race. \"Frankenstein\" (1818), often called the first science fiction novel, has become synonymous with the theme of a robot or android advancing beyond its creator.\nOther works with similar themes include \"The Mechanical Man\", \"The Terminator\", \"Runaway\", \"RoboCop\", the Replicators in \"Stargate\", the Cylons in \"Battlestar Galactica\", the Cybermen and Daleks in \"Doctor Who\", \"The Matrix\", \"Enthiran\" and \"I, Robot\". Some fictional robots are programmed to kill and destroy; others gain superhuman intelligence and abilities by upgrading their own software and hardware. Examples of popular media where the robot becomes evil are \"\", \"Red Planet\" and \"Enthiran\".\nThe 2017 game \"Horizon Zero Dawn\" explores themes of robotics in warfare, robot ethics, and the AI control problem, as well as the positive or negative impact such technologies could have on the environment.\nAnother common theme is the reaction, sometimes called the \"uncanny valley\", of unease and even revulsion at the sight of robots that mimic humans too closely.\nMore recently, fictional representations of artificially intelligent robots in films such as \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" and \"Ex Machina\" and the 2016 TV adaptation of \"Westworld\" have engaged audience sympathy for the robots themselves.\nEmancipation or revolution as a theme in relation to robots was already present in the term coining play of R.U.R.\nThe Star Wars universe for example has several instances of droid revolts.\nThe Dune series on the other hand has the premise of humans revolting against \"thinking machines\" and finding human-biological alternatives to them.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25783", "revid": "51026290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25783", "title": "R. B. Bennett", "text": "Prime Minister of Canada from 1930 to 1935\nRichard Bedford Bennett, 1st Viscount Bennett (July 3, 1870\u00a0\u2013 June 26, 1947) was a Canadian lawyer, businessman, philanthropist, and politician who served as the 11th prime minister of Canada from 1930 to 1935.\nBennett was born in Hopewell Hill, New Brunswick, and grew up nearby in Hopewell Cape. He studied law at Dalhousie University, graduating in 1893, and in 1897 moved to Calgary to establish a law firm in partnership with James Lougheed. Bennett became very rich due to the law practice, various investments, and taking on leadership roles in multiple organizations; he was one of the wealthiest Canadians during his time. On the political side, Bennett served in the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories from 1898 until 1905, when he briefly held the post as the inaugural leader of the Alberta Conservative Party. He later served in the Alberta Legislature from 1909 to 1911, resigning upon his election to the House of Commons. Bennett declined to run for reelection in 1917 but briefly served as minister of justice under Arthur Meighen in 1921. He returned to the Commons in 1925 and served briefly as minister of finance in Meighen's second government in 1926. Meighen resigned the Conservative Party's leadership after his defeat in the 1926 election, with Bennett elected as his replacement in 1927. Thus, Bennett became leader of the Opposition.\nBennett became prime minister after the 1930 election, where the Conservatives won a majority government over William Lyon Mackenzie King's Liberal Party. Bennett's premiership was marked primarily by the Great Depression. He and his party initially tried to combat the crisis with \"laissez-faire\" policies, but these were largely ineffective. He was also unsuccessful in establishing an imperial preference free trade agreement. Over time, Bennett's government became increasingly interventionist, attempting to replicate the popular \"New Deal\" enacted by Franklin Roosevelt in the United States. This about-face prompted a split within Conservative ranks and was regarded by the general public as evidence of incompetence. Still, he left lasting legacies in the form of the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (CRBC) and the Bank of Canada.\nBennett suffered a landslide defeat in the 1935 election, with King returning to power. Bennett remained leader of the Conservative Party until 1938 when he retired to England. He was created Viscount Bennett, the only Canadian prime minister to be honoured with elevation to the peerage. Bennett is ranked as a below-average prime minister among historians and the public.\nEarly life (1870\u20131890).\nBennett was born on July 3, 1870, when his mother, Henrietta Stiles, was visiting her parents' home in Hopewell Hill, New Brunswick, Canada. He was the eldest of six children and grew up nearby at the Bay of Fundy home of his father, Henry John Bennett, in Hopewell Cape, the shire town of Albert County. Bennett's father descended from English ancestors who had emigrated to Connecticut in the 17th century. His great-great-grandfather, Zadock Bennett, migrated from New London, Connecticut, to Nova Scotia c.\u20091760, before the American Revolution, as one of the New England Planters who took the lands forcibly removed from the deported Acadians during the Great Upheaval.\nThe Bennetts had previously been a relatively prosperous family, operating a shipyard in Hopewell Cape, but the change to steam-powered vessels in the mid-19th century meant the gradual winding down of their business. However, the household was a literate one, subscribing to three newspapers. One of the largest and last ships launched by the Bennett shipyard (in 1869) was the \"Sir John A. Macdonald\". In the 1870s depression, the shipbuilding business of Henry John Bennett appeared insufficient to support his family and some believed he was an ineffective businessman. Henry John had now become a merchant, blacksmith, and farmer. R.B. Bennett's early days inculcated a lifelong habit of thrift. The driving force in his family was his mother. She was a Wesleyan Methodist and passed this faith and the Protestant ethic on to her son. Bennett's father does not appear to have been a good provider for his family, though the reason is unclear. He operated a general store for a while and tried to develop some gypsum deposits.\nEducated in the local school, Bennett was a very good student but something of a loner. In addition to his Protestant faith, Bennett grew up with an abiding love of the British Empire, then at its apogee. A small legacy his mother received opened the doors for him to attend the normal school in Fredericton, where he trained to be a teacher; he then taught for several years at Irishtown, north of Moncton, saving his money for law school. At age 18, Bennett became principal of a school in Douglastown, New Brunswick.\nUniversity, early legal career (1890\u20131897).\nBennett enrolled at Dalhousie University in 1890, graduating in 1893 with a law degree and very high standing. He worked his way through with a job as assistant in the library and participated in debating and moot court activities. When James Lougheed needed a junior for his Calgary law office, Bennett was recommended by the dean, Dr. Richard Chapman Weldon.\nBennett was then a partner in the Chatham, New Brunswick, law firm of Tweedie and Bennett. Max Aitken (later to become Lord Beaverbrook) was his office boy. Aitken persuaded Bennett to run for alderman in the first Town Council of Chatham. Aitken managed Bennett's campaign and Bennett was elected by 19 votes out of 691 cast.\nPolitical, law, and business success (1897\u20131911).\nDespite his election to the Chatham Town Council, Bennett's days in the town were numbered. In 1897, he moved to Calgary, North-West Territories. He negotiated to become the law partner of James Lougheed, Calgary's richest man and most successful lawyer. By 1905, Bennett was buying and selling land and was successful at it due to the law firm's retainer being the Canadian Pacific Railway. Bennett also invested in the oil company, Calgary Petroleum Products Company, and became director and solicitor. He also worked with Aitken to produce the Alberta Pacific Grain Company, Canada Cement, and Calgary Power. Bennett's reputation grew. Bennett described himself as a teetotaler (although he was known to occasionally drink alcohol when the press was not around).\nBennett was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories in the 1898 general election, representing the riding of West Calgary. Aitken managed this campaign too. Bennett was re-elected to a second term in office in 1902 as an Independent in the North-West Territories legislature. He gained the nickname \"Bonfire Bennett\" due to his extemporaneous, quick, and persuasive speaking manner.\nIn 1905, when Alberta was carved out of the Territories and made a province, Bennett became the first leader of the Alberta Conservative Party, though lost in a landslide in that year's election to the Liberals. In 1909, he won a seat in the provincial legislature.\nIn 1908 Bennett was one of five people appointed to the first Library Board for the city of Calgary and was instrumental in establishing the Calgary Public Library. In 1910, Bennett became a director of Calgary Power Ltd. (now formally TransAlta Corporation) and just a year later he became president. His leadership projects completed included the first storage reservoir at Lake Minnewanka, a second transmission line to Calgary, and the construction of the Kananaskis Falls hydro station. At that time, he was also the director of Rocky Mountains Cement Company and Security Trust.\nBennett's corporate law firm included notable clients such as the Canadian Pacific Railway and Hudson's Bay Company. He worked with his childhood friend, Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook, on many successful ventures, including stock purchases, land speculation, and the buying and merging of small companies. Before he was 40, Bennett was a multi-millionaire who lived in the Calgary Fairmont Palliser Hotel. Though a lifelong bachelor, he dated women. In terms of personality, Bennett was accused of arrogance and of having a volatile temper. Bennett's wealth helped him become a philanthropist; he donated to schools, hospitals, charities, and individuals in need. He became richer when he started gaining control of the match company, E. B. Eddy Company, between 1906 and 1918. His growing control of the company occurred due to his longtime friendship with Jennie Grahl Hunter Eddy, who trusted Bennett with the company after her husband, Ezra Butler Eddy, died in 1906. By 1926, Bennett gained full control of the company. Bennett was one of the richest Canadians at that time. He helped put many poor, struggling young men through university.\nEarly federal political career (1911\u20131917).\nBennett was elected to the House of Commons in the 1911 federal election as a Conservative candidate. Bennett did not always follow party policy; in one instance in 1914, he spoke against the Robert Borden-led Conservative government's bill to provide financial support to the Canadian Northern Railway.\nAt age 44, Bennett tried to enlist in the Canadian military once World War I broke out, but was turned down as being medically unfit, perhaps because he had lost two of his toes. In July 1915, Bennett became Borden's assistant to London; in this job, Bennett's responsibility was to find out how Canada could help Britain with its military and civilian needs. In 1916, Bennett was appointed director general of the National Service Board, which was in charge of identifying the number of potential recruits in the country.\nWhile Bennett supported conscription, he opposed Borden's proposal for a Union Government that would include both Conservatives and pro-conscription Liberals, fearing that this would ultimately hurt the Conservative Party. While he campaigned for Conservative candidates in the 1917 federal election he did not stand for re-election himself.\nOut of politics (1917\u20131925).\nIn February 1918, Borden appointed Alberta Liberal William Harmer to the Senate to satisfy the Unionist coalition agreements. Bennett was reportedly furious at this move, believing that Borden broke a promise to appoint him to the Senate. Bennett wrote Borden a resentful 20-page letter. Borden never replied.\nBorden's successor, Arthur Meighen, appointed Bennett minister of justice on September 21, 1921. In the federal election two and a half months later, Bennett ran for the riding of Calgary West but lost by 16 votes. In this election, the Conservatives sunk to third place.\nBennett developed an extensive legal practice in Calgary. In 1922, he started the partnership Bennett, Hannah &amp; Sanford, which would eventually become Bennett Jones LLP. In 1929\u201330, he served as national President of the Canadian Bar Association. By the mid-1920s, Bennett was on the board of the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC). He was also a director of Metropolitan Life Insurance of New York.\nPolitical return and leader of the Official Opposition (1925\u20131930).\nAfter Meighen, who was attempting to become prime minister again, offered Bennett to be minister of justice, Bennett ran for and won the seat of Calgary West in the 1925 federal election. The Conservatives won the most seats but didn't have a majority. They didn't necessarily form government due to Liberal prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King negotiating support from the Progressive Party. However, in the summer of 1926, the Conservatives were invited to form government by Lord Byng. Byng refused King's request to dissolve parliament and call an election, and thus King resigned. On July 2, the Meighen government was defeated in a motion of non-confidence by one vote, triggering an election scheduled for September 14. At the time of the confidence vote, Bennett was in Alberta campaigning on behalf the province's Conservative Party for the provincial election and thus was unable to vote against the motion. Meighen greatly regretted his absence and later wrote, \"If Mr. Bennett had been there... King would never have talked the diabolical and dishonest rot in which he indulged. He was a lot more careful when Bennett was across the floor...\".\nIn the election, the Liberals decisively won. In Meighen's short-lived government, Bennett served as minister of finance along with numerous acting portfolios. After this defeat, Meighen stepped down as Tory leader, triggering a leadership convention scheduled for October 1927. Bennett put himself forward as a candidate, but had little expectation of winning, believing along with most observers that the convention would either vote to reinstate Meighen, or confirm interim leader Hugh Guthrie as his permanent successor. In the event, Meighen lacked the support to attempt a comeback, while Guthrie's chances were ruined by a poorly received speech that alienated the Quebec delegates, allowing Bennett to emerge as a compromise candidate and win the leadership on the second ballot. In his acceptance speech, Bennett talked about how he became rich through hard work. Upon being elected leader, Bennett resigned his company directorships.\nWhen Bennett became leader, the Conservative Party had no money. The party could not rely on support from newspapers as there were only 11 dailies considered Conservative. By February 1930, 27 full-time employees were using modern office equipment to spread the Conservative message across provinces. Bennett and senior party members donated $2,500 a month each to fund this enterprise and some provincial enterprises. By May 1930, Bennett had personally donated $500,000 () to the party; one-fifth of that went to Quebec, where the Conservatives had been wiped out for the past four elections due to them imposing conscription in 1917.\nAs Opposition leader, Bennett faced off against Liberal prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King in Commons debates and took some time to acquire enough experience to hold his own with King. In 1930, King blundered badly when he made overly partisan statements in response to criticism over his handling of the economic downturn, which was hitting Canada very hard. King's worst error was in stating that he \"would not give Tory provincial governments a five-cent piece!\" This serious mistake, which drew wide press coverage, gave Bennett his needed opening to attack King, which he did successfully in that year's election campaign. On election day, July 28, Bennett led the Conservatives to a majority government. Although he was the first prime minister representing a constituency in Alberta, his party only won four of the province's sixteen seats. The Conservatives also had their best result in Quebec since the 1911 federal election, going from 4 to 24 MPs.\nPrime Minister (1930\u20131935).\nBennett appointed himself as both finance minister and external Affairs minister after his victory, forming a government in the 17th Canadian Parliament. He worked an exhausting schedule throughout his years as prime minister, often more than 14 hours per day, and dominated his government. He lived in a suite in the Ch\u00e2teau Laurier hotel, a short walk from Parliament Hill. When responding to letters from citizens talking about the struggles they were facing, Bennett wrote back with personal notes and tucked cash into the envelopes.\nConfronting the depression.\nBennett had the misfortune of taking office during the Great Depression. He supported tariffs due to his belief that they would create markets for Canadian products. Bennett's government then passed the \"Unemployment Relief Act\" that provided $20 million for public works at the federal and local levels. In 1931, Bennett's government increased tariffs and passed the \"Unemployment and Farm Relief Act\" to invest in further public works and direct relief; similar acts would be passed each year until he left office in 1935.\nThe Conservative Party's pro-business and pro-banking inclinations provided little relief to the millions of increasingly desperate and agitated unemployed. Despite the economic crisis, \"laissez-faire\" persisted as the guiding economic principle of Conservative Party ideology; similar attitudes dominated worldwide as well during this era. Government relief to the unemployed was considered a disincentive to individual initiative and was therefore only granted in the most minimal amounts and attached to work programs. An additional concern of the federal government was that large numbers of disaffected unemployed men concentrating in urban centres created a volatile situation. As an \"alternative to bloodshed on the streets\", the stop-gap solution for unemployment chosen by the Bennett government was to establish military-run and -styled relief camps in remote areas throughout the country, where single unemployed men toiled for twenty cents a day. Any relief beyond this was left to provincial and municipal governments, many of which were either insolvent or on the brink of bankruptcy, and which railed against the inaction of other levels of government. Partisan differences began to sharpen on the question of government intervention in the economy, since lower levels of government were largely in Liberal hands, and protest movements were beginning to send their own parties into the political mainstream, notably the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation and William Aberhart's Social Credit Party in Alberta.\nTrade with Britain.\nAt the 1930 Imperial Conference in London, England, Bennett unsuccessfully argued for an imperial preference free trade agreement. The proposal stunned the British government, despite them being pro-free trade. British newspaper \"The Observer\" asked, \"Empire or not?\" The Statute of Westminster in 1931 gave Canada and other dominions' autonomy in foreign affairs. Despite Bennett declaring, \"We no longer live in a political Empire\", he favoured \"a new economic Empire\"; he still wanted the imperial preferential trade arrangement. Britain introducing a general tariff of 10 percent gave Bennett hope.\nBennett hosted the 1932 Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa; this was the first time Canada had hosted the meetings. It was attended by the leaders of the independent dominions of the British Empire (which later became the Commonwealth of Nations). On July 21, when the conference opened, Bennett gave his opening speech that suggested that Britain might have free entry into Canada for any products that would \"not injuriously affect Canadian enterprise.\" The conference did not result in an imperial preference free trade agreement but did result in bilateral treaties. The bilateral treaty between Canada and Britain saw Canadian wheat, apples, and other natural products get British preferences while the British got Canadian preferences for certain metal products and textiles not made in Canada; Canada benefited from the treaty more than Britain and in a few years, Canadian exports to Britain were up 60 percent while British exports to Canada were up 5 percent.\nAnti-communism.\nA nickname that would stick with Bennett for the remainder of his political career, \"Iron Heel Bennett\", came from a 1932 speech he gave in Toronto that ironically, if unintentionally, alluded to Jack London's socialist novel:\nWhat do they offer you in exchange for the present order? Socialism, Communism, dictatorship. They are sowing the seeds of unrest everywhere. Right in this city such propaganda is being carried on and in the little out of the way places as well. And we know that throughout Canada this propaganda is being put forward by organizations from foreign lands that seek to destroy our institutions. And we ask that every man and woman put the iron heel of ruthlessness against a thing of that kind. \nReacting to fears of communist subversion, Bennett invoked the controversial Section 98 of the \"Criminal Code\". Enacted in the aftermath of the Winnipeg general strike, Section 98 dispensed with the presumption of innocence in outlawing potential threats to the state: specifically, anyone belonging to an organization that officially advocated the violent overthrow of the government. Even if the accused had never committed an act of violence or personally supported such an action, they could be incarcerated merely for attending meetings of such an organization, publicly speaking in its defence, or distributing its literature. Despite the broad power authorized under section 98, it targeted specifically the Communist Party of Canada. Eight of the top party leaders, including Tim Buck, were arrested on 11 August 1931 and convicted under section 98.\nLabour policy and relief camps.\nBy 1933, unemployment was at 27 percent and over 1.5 million Canadians were dependent on direct relief. In 1934, Bennett's government passed the \"Public Works Construction Act\". This launched a federal building program worth $40 million and aimed at generating employment opportunities. In 1935, another public works bill was passed; the bill provided another $18 million for construction projects. Bennett's government created labour camps for unemployed single men; at the camps, they lived in bunkhouses and were paid 20 cents a day in return for a 44-hour week of toil.\nHaving survived Section 98, and benefiting from the public sympathy wrought by persecution, Communist Party members set out to organize workers in the relief camps set up by the \"Unemployment and Farm Relief Act\". Camp workers laboured on a variety of infrastructure projects, including municipal airports, roads, and park facilities, along with a number of other make-work schemes. Conditions in the camps were poor, not only because of the low pay, but also the lack of recreational facilities, isolation from family and friends, poor quality food, and the use of military discipline. Communists thus had ample grounds on which to organize camp workers, although the workers were there of their own volition. The Relief Camp Workers' Union was formed and affiliated with the Workers' Unity League, the trade union umbrella of the Communist Party. Camp workers in BC struck on 4 April 1935, and, after two months of protesting in Vancouver, began the On-to-Ottawa Trek to bring their grievances to Bennett's doorstep. The prime minister and his minister of justice, Hugh Guthrie, treated the trek as an attempted insurrection and ordered it to be stopped. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) read the Riot Act to a crowd of 3,000 strikers and their supporters in Regina on 1 July 1935, resulting in two deaths and dozens of injured.\nAgricultural policy.\nIn 1934, Bennett's government passed the \"Farmers' Creditors Arrangement Act\" to make farm loans easier to acquire and allow families to remain on their farms rather than lose them to foreclosure. That same year, his government passed the \"Natural Products Marketing Act\"; in a bid to obtain better prices, a federal board with powers to arrange more orderly marketing was established. In 1935, Bennett's government passed the \"Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act\" which established an enterprise that would eventually teach 100,000 farmers how to recover southern Saskatchewan from the Dust Bowl.\nIn 1935, through the \"Canadian Wheat Board Act\", Bennett's government established the Canadian Wheat Board to market the wheat crop and to ensure an efficient sale of grain under difficult conditions. The act required Western Canadian farmers to sell all wheat and barley produced for human consumption to the Wheat Board.\nOther initiatives.\nIn 1932, Bennett's government launched the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (CRBC) that regulated radio broadcasting to promote more Canadian content; the commission also established a publicly-owned national radio network that told Canadian stories to Canadians. In 1936, it became the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC).\nChartered banks in Canada controlled interest rates, the value of the Canadian dollar in the global market, and the amount of money in circulation; they also printed their own Canadian currency. In 1933, Bennett's government created the Royal Commission on Banking and Currency; the commission would result in the creation of the Bank of Canada in 1935 through the 1934 \"Bank of Canada Act\", despite opposition from the chartered banks. The bank gained the powers from the chartered banks and gained the legal mandate to control Canada's monetary policy without interference from the federal government.\nBennett's New Deal.\nIn January 1934, Bennett told the provinces that they were \"wasteful and extravagant\", and even told Quebec and Ontario that they were wealthy enough to manage their own problems. One year later, he had changed his tune. Following the lead of President Roosevelt's New Deal in the United States, Bennett, under the advice of William Duncan Herridge, who was Canada's Envoy to the United States, the government eventually began to follow the Americans' lead. In a series of live radio speeches to the nation in January 1935, Bennett introduced a Canadian version of the \"New Deal\", involving unprecedented public spending and federal intervention in the economy. Progressive income taxation, a minimum wage, a maximum number of working hours per week, unemployment insurance, health insurance, an expanded pension program, and grants to farmers were all included in the plan.\nIn one of his addresses to the nation, Bennett said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the last five years great changes have taken place in the world\u00a0... The old order is gone. We are living in conditions that are new and strange to us. Canada on the dole is like a young and vigorous man in the poorhouse\u00a0... If you believe that things should be left as they are, you and I hold contrary and irreconcilable views. I am for reform. And in my mind, reform means government intervention. It means government control and regulation. It means the end of laissez-faire.\nSome of the measures were alleged to have encroached on provincial jurisdictions laid out in section 92 of the British North America Act, 1867. The courts, including the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, agreed and eventually struck down virtually all of Bennett's reforms.\nInternal divisions and defeat.\nBennett's conversion from small government to big government was seen as too little too late, and he faced criticism that his reforms either went too far, or did not go far enough, including from his minister of trade and commerce, H. H. Stevens, who bolted the government to form the Reconstruction Party of Canada. By 1934, Bennett was facing major dissent from Conservative quarters and the public. Car owners, for example, who could no longer afford gasoline, had horses pull their vehicles, which they named \"Bennett buggies\". To make matters worse, Bennett suffered a heart attack in March 1935.\nThe beneficiary of the overwhelming opposition during Bennett's tenure was the Liberal Party. The Tories were decimated in the October 1935 general election, winning only 40 seats to 173 for Mackenzie King's Liberals. At the time, this was the worst defeat for a governing party at the federal level. The Reconstruction Party won 8.7% of the popular vote as a result of gaining support from disgruntled Conservatives. The Tories would not form a majority government again in Canada until 1958. King's government soon implemented its own moderate reforms, including the repeal of relief camps, a reciprocal trade agreement with the United States, and the repeal of Section 98. Ultimately, Canada pulled out of the depression as a result of government-funded jobs associated with the preparation for and onset of the Second World War.\nRetirement, House of Lords, and death (1935\u20131947).\nBennett led the Conservative Party and Opposition for the next three years until he was succeeded by his former Cabinet minister Robert James Manion in the July 1938 leadership convention. Bennett moved to England on January 28, 1939, and resigned his Calgary West seat that same day. He purchased a property in Surrey called Juniper Hill, an 18th-century (c.\u20091780) mansion built for David Jenkinson and located across from Juniper Hall on Downs Road); this was the first home Bennett owned as he had only lived in the Calgary Palliser Hotel and the Ch\u00e2teau Laurier Hotel in Ottawa in his adult life.\nOn June 12, 1941, Bennett became the only former Canadian prime minister to be elevated to the peerage as Viscount Bennett, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey and of Calgary and Hopewell in the Dominion of Canada. The honour, conferred on the recommendation of British PM Winston Churchill, was in recognition for Bennett's valuable unsalaried work in the Ministry of Aircraft Production, managed by his lifelong friend Lord Beaverbrook. Bennett took an active role in the House of Lords and attended frequently until his death. He also participated in many speaking engagements and served on various boards.\nBennett's interest in increasing public awareness and accessibility to Canada's historical records led him to serve as vice-president of the Champlain Society from 1933 until his death.\nBy March 1947, Bennett sold nearly all of his investments; it became clear his health was declining. Bennett died after suffering a heart attack while taking a bath on June 26, 1947, at Mickleham. He was exactly one week shy of his 77th birthday. He is buried there in St. Michael's Churchyard, Mickleham. The tomb, and Government of Canada marker outside, are steps from the front doors of the church. He is the only deceased Canadian prime minister not buried in Canada.\nLegacy and assessments.\nTextbooks typically portray Bennett as a hard-driving capitalist, pushing for American-style high tariffs and British-style imperialism, while ignoring his reform efforts.\nBennett took note of and encouraged the young Lester Pearson in the early 1930s, and appointed Pearson to significant roles on two major government inquiries: the 1931 Royal Commission on Grain Futures, and the 1934 Royal Commission on Price Spreads. Bennett saw that Pearson was recognized with an OBE after he shone in that work, arranged a bonus of $1,800, and invited him to a London conference. Former prime minister John Turner, who as a child, knew Bennett while he was prime minister, praised Bennett's promotion of Turner's economist mother to the highest civil service post held by a Canadian woman to that time.\nCriticisms.\nMost historians consider his premiership to have been a failure at a time of severe economic crisis. H. Blair Neatby says categorically that \"as a politician, he was a failure\". Jack Granatstein and Norman Hillmer, comparing him to all other Canadian prime ministers concluded, \"Bennett utterly failed as a leader. Everyone was alienated by the end\u2014Cabinet, caucus, party, voter and foreigner.\"\nBennett was ranked #12 by a survey of Canadian historians out of the then 20 Prime Ministers of Canada through Jean Chr\u00e9tien. The results of the survey were included in the book \"Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders\" by J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer.\nA 2001 book by Quebec nationalist writer Normand Lester, \"Le Livre noir du Canada anglais\" (later translated as \"The Black Book of English Canada\") accused Bennett of having a political affiliation with, and of having provided financial support to, fascist Quebec writer Adrien Arcand. This is based on a series of letters sent to Bennett following his election as prime minister by Arcand, his colleague M\u00e9nard and two Conservative caucus members asking for financial support for Arcand's antisemitic newspaper \"Le Goglu\".\nSupreme Court appointments.\nBennett chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General:\nOther appointments.\nBennett was Honorary Colonel of the 103rd Regiment (Calgary Rifles) from 1914 to the dissolution of the regiment in 1920. Bennett was the Honorary Colonel of the Calgary Highlanders from the year of their designation as such in 1921 to his death in 1947. He visited the Regiment in England during the Second World War, and always ensured the 1st Battalion had a turkey dinner at Christmas every year they were overseas, including the Christmas of 1944 when the battalion was holding front line positions in the Nijmegen Salient.\nBennett served as the Rector of Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, from 1935 to 1937, even while he was still prime minister. At the time, this role covered mediation for significant disputes between Queen's students and the university administration.\nCoat of arms.\nBennett's coat of arms was designed by Alan Beddoe: \"Argent within two bendlets Gules three maple leaves proper all between two demi-lions rampant couped gules. Crest, a demi-lion Gules grapsing in the Dexter paw a battle axe in bend sinister Or and resting the sinister paw on an escallop also Gules. Supporters, Dexter a buffalo, sinister a moose, both proper. Motto, To be Pressed not Oppressed.\"\nPublications.\n\"Empire Relations: The Peter le Neve Foster Lecture, Delivered on June 3rd, 1942, at the Royal Society of Arts by the Right Hon. the Viscount Bennett, P.C., K.C.\" London: Dorothy Crisp, 1945.\nHonours.\nHereditary peerage.\nBennett was elevated to a hereditary peerage on 16 July 1941. He took the title 1st Viscount Bennett, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey and of Calgary and Hopewell in the Dominion of Canada. The peerage became extinct upon his death on 26 June 1947.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "25784", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25784", "title": "Renewable energy", "text": "Energy collected from renewable resources\nRenewable energy (also called green energy) is energy made from renewable natural resources that are replenished on a human timescale. The most widely used renewable energy types are solar energy, wind power, and hydropower. Bioenergy and geothermal power are also significant in some countries. Some also consider nuclear power a renewable power source, although this is controversial, as nuclear energy requires mining uranium, a nonrenewable resource. Renewable energy installations can be large or small and are suited for both urban and rural areas. Renewable energy is often deployed together with further electrification. This has several benefits: electricity can move heat and vehicles efficiently and is clean at the point of consumption. Variable renewable energy sources are those that have a fluctuating nature, such as wind power and solar power. In contrast, \"controllable renewable energy\" sources include dammed hydroelectricity, bioenergy, or geothermal power.\nRenewable energy systems have rapidly become more efficient and cheaper over the past 30 years. A large majority of worldwide newly installed worldwide electricity capacity is now renewable. Renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind power, have seen significant cost reductions over the past decade, making them more competitive with traditional fossil fuels. In some geographic localities, photovoltaic solar or onshore wind is the cheapest new-build electricity. From 2011 to 2021, renewable energy grew from 20% to 28% of the global electricity supply. Power from the sun and wind accounted for most of this increase, growing from a combined 2% to 10%. Use of fossil energy shrank from 68% to 62%. In 2024, renewables accounted for over 30% of global electricity generation and are projected to reach over 45% by 2030. Many countries already have renewables contributing more than 20% of their total energy supply, with some generating over half or even all their electricity from renewable sources.\nThe main motivation to use renewable energy instead of fossil fuels is to slow and eventually stop climate change, which is mostly caused by their greenhouse gas emissions. In general, renewable energy sources pollute much less than fossil fuels. The International Energy Agency estimates that to achieve net zero emissions by 2050, 90% of global electricity will need to be generated by renewables. Renewables also cause much less air pollution than fossil fuels, improving public health, and are less noisy.\nThe deployment of renewable energy still faces obstacles, especially fossil fuel subsidies, lobbying by incumbent power providers, and local opposition to the use of land for renewable installations. Like all mining, the extraction of minerals required for many renewable energy technologies also results in environmental damage. In addition, although most renewable energy sources are sustainable, some are not. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nDefinition.\nRenewable energy is usually understood as energy harnessed from continuously occurring natural phenomena. The International Energy Agency defines it as \"energy derived from natural processes that are replenished at a faster rate than they are consumed\". Solar power, wind power, hydroelectricity, geothermal energy, and biomass are widely agreed to be the main types of renewable energy. Renewable energy often displaces conventional fuels in four areas: electricity generation, hot water/space heating, transportation, and rural (off-grid) energy services.\nAlthough almost all forms of renewable energy cause much fewer carbon emissions than fossil fuels, the term is not synonymous with low-carbon energy. Some non-renewable sources of energy, such as nuclear power,generate almost no emissions, while some renewable energy sources can be very carbon-intensive, such as the burning of biomass if it is not offset by planting new plants. Renewable energy is also distinct from sustainable energy, a more abstract concept that seeks to group energy sources based on their overall permanent impact on future generations of humans. For example, biomass is often associated with unsustainable deforestation.\nRole in addressing climate change.\nAs part of the global effort to limit climate change, most countries have committed to net zero greenhouse gas emissions. In practice, this means phasing out fossil fuels and replacing them with low-emissions energy sources. This much needed process, coined as \"low-carbon substitutions\" in contrast to other transition processes including energy additions, needs to be accelerated multiple times in order to successfully mitigate climate change. At the 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference, around three-quarters of the world's countries set a goal of tripling renewable energy capacity by 2030. The European Union aims to generate 40% of its electricity from renewables by the same year.\nOther benefits.\nRenewable energy is more evenly distributed around the world than fossil fuels, which are concentrated in a limited number of countries. It also brings health benefits by reducing air pollution caused by the burning of fossil fuels. The potential worldwide savings in health care costs have been estimated at trillions of dollars annually.\nIntermittency.\nThe two most important forms of renewable energy, solar and wind, are \"intermittent energy sources\": they are not available constantly, resulting in lower capacity factors. In contrast, fossil fuel power plants, nuclear power plants and hydropower are usually able to produce precisely the amount of energy an electricity grid requires at a given time. Solar energy can only be captured during the day, and ideally in cloudless conditions. Wind power generation can vary significantly not only day-to-day, but even month-to-month. This poses a challenge when transitioning away from fossil fuels: energy demand will often be higher or lower than what renewables can provide.\nIn the medium-term, this variability may require keeping some gas-fired power plants or other dispatchable generation on standby until there is enough energy storage, demand response, grid improvement, or base load power from non-intermittent sources. In the long-term, energy storage is an important way of dealing with intermittency. Using diversified renewable energy sources and smart grids can also help flatten supply and demand.\nSector coupling of the power generation sector with other sectors may increase flexibility: for example the transport sector can be coupled by charging electric vehicles and sending electricity from vehicle to grid. Similarly the industry sector can be coupled by hydrogen produced by electrolysis, and the buildings sector by thermal energy storage for space heating and cooling.\nBuilding overcapacity for wind and solar generation can help ensure sufficient electricity production even during poor weather. In optimal weather, it may be necessary to curtail energy generation if it is not possible to use or store excess electricity.\nElectrical energy storage.\nElectrical energy storage is a collection of methods used to store electrical energy. Electrical energy is stored during times when production (especially from intermittent sources such as wind power, tidal power, solar power) exceeds consumption, and returned to the grid when production falls below consumption. Pumped-storage hydroelectricity accounts for more than 85% of all grid power storage. Batteries are increasingly being deployed for storage and grid ancillary services and for domestic storage. Green hydrogen is a more economical means of long-term renewable energy storage, in terms of capital expenditures compared to pumped hydroelectric or batteries.\nEnergy supply security.\nTwo main renewable energy sources - solar power and wind power - are usually deployed in distributed generation architecture, which offers specific benefits and comes with specific risks. Notable risks are associated with centralisation of 90% of the supply chains in a single country (China) in the photovoltaic sector. Mass-scale installation of photovoltaic power inverters with remote control, security vulnerabilities and backdoors results in cyberattacks that can disable generation from millions of physically decentralised panels, resulting in disappearance of hundreds of gigawatts of installed power from the grid in one moment. Similar attacks have targeted wind power farms through vulnerabilities in their remote control and monitoring systems. The European NIS2 directive partially responds to these challenges by extending the scope of cybersecurity regulations to the energy generation market.Recent analyses indicate that global solar photovoltaic capacity surpassed 1 terawatt in 2024, providing about 6\u20137% of global electricity supply. Renewable energy infrastructure is also increasingly vulnerable to extreme weather events linked to climate change, such as heat waves, wildfires, severe storms, and flooding. Solar farms can experience reduced output during prolonged heat or smoke conditions, while wind turbines may require shutdowns during high-wind events or face damage from icing or wave action. These climate-related stresses can threaten the continuity of electricity supply in regions with high shares of variable renewables. As a result, governments and grid operators are adopting climate-resilience standards, hardening infrastructure, and developing emergency-response protocols to maintain energy security under more frequent and severe weather conditions. \nMainstream technologies.\nSolar energy.\nSolar power produced around 1.3 terrawatt-hours (TWh) worldwide in 2022, representing 4.6% of the world's electricity. Almost all of this growth has happened since 2010. Solar energy can be harnessed anywhere that receives sunlight; however, the amount of solar energy that can be harnessed for electricity generation is influenced by weather conditions, geographic location and time of day.\nThere are two mainstream ways of harnessing solar energy: solar thermal, which converts solar energy into heat; and photovoltaics (PV), which converts it into electricity. PV is far more widespread, accounting for around two thirds of the global solar energy capacity as of 2022. It is also growing at a much faster rate, with 170 GW newly installed capacity in 2021, compared to 25 GW of solar thermal.\nPassive solar refers to a range of construction strategies and technologies that aim to optimize the distribution of solar heat in a building. Examples include solar chimneys, orienting a building to the sun, using construction materials that can store heat, and designing spaces that naturally circulate air.\nFrom 2020 to 2022, solar technology investments almost doubled from USD 162 billion to USD 308 billion, driven by the sector's increasing maturity and cost reductions, particularly in solar photovoltaic (PV), which accounted for 90% of total investments. China and the United States were the main recipients, collectively making up about half of all solar investments since 2013. Despite reductions in Japan and India due to policy changes and COVID-19, growth in China, the United States, and a significant increase from Vietnam's feed-in tariff program offset these declines. Globally, the solar sector added 714 gigawatts (GW) of solar PV and concentrated solar power (CSP) capacity between 2013 and 2021, with a notable rise in large-scale solar heating installations in 2021, especially in China, Europe, Turkey, and Mexico. In 2023, global solar power capacity grew by nearly 30%, driven by falling panel prices and expanded government incentives worldwide.\nPhotovoltaics.\nA photovoltaic system, consisting of solar cells assembled into panels, converts light into electrical direct current via the photoelectric effect. PV has several advantages that make it by far the fastest-growing renewable energy technology. It is cheap, low-maintenance and scalable; adding to an existing PV installation as demanded arises is simple. Its main disadvantage is its poor performance in cloudy weather.\nPV systems range from small, residential and commercial rooftop or building integrated installations, to large utility-scale photovoltaic power station. A household's solar panels can either be used for just that household or, if connected to an electrical grid, can be aggregated with millions of others.\nThe first utility-scale solar power plant was built in 1982 in Hesperia, California by ARCO. The plant was not profitable and was sold eight years later. However, over the following decades, PV cells became significantly more efficient and cheaper. As a result, PV adoption has grown exponentially since 2010. Global capacity increased from 230 GW at the end of 2015 to 890 GW in 2021. PV grew fastest in China between 2016 and 2021, adding 560 GW, more than all advanced economies combined. Four of the ten biggest solar power stations are in China, including the biggest, Golmud Solar Park in China.\nSolar panels are recycled to reduce electronic waste and create a source for materials that would otherwise need to be mined, but such business is still small and work is ongoing to improve and scale-up the process.\nSolar thermal.\nUnlike photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight directly into electricity, solar thermal systems convert it into heat. They use mirrors or lenses to concentrate sunlight onto a receiver, which in turn heats a water reservoir. The heated water can then be used in homes. The advantage of solar thermal is that the heated water can be stored until it is needed, eliminating the need for a separate energy storage system. Solar thermal power can also be converted to electricity by using the steam generated from the heated water to drive a turbine connected to a generator. However, because generating electricity this way is much more expensive than photovoltaic power plants, there are very few in use today.\nFloatovoltaics.\nFloatovoltiacs, or floating solar panels, are solar panels floating on bodies of water. There are both positive and negative points to this. Some positive points are increased efficiency and price decrease of water space compared to land space. A negative point is that making floating solar panels could be more expensive.\nAgrivoltaics.\nAgrivoltaics is where there is simultaneous use of land for energy production and agriculture. There are again both positive and negative points. A positive viewpoint is there is a better use of land, which leads to lower land costs. A negative viewpoint is it the plants grown underneath would have to be plants that can grow well under shade, such as Polka Dot Plant, Pineapple Sage, and Begonia. Agrivoltaics not only optimizes land use and reduces costs by enabling dual revenue streams from both energy production and agriculture, but it can also help moderate temperatures beneath the panels, potentially reducing water loss and improving microclimates for crop growth. However, careful design and crop selection are crucial, as the shading effect may limit the types of plants that can thrive, necessitating the use of shade-tolerant species and innovative management practices.\nWind power.\nHumans have harnessed wind energy since at least 3500 BC. Until the 20th century, it was primarily used to power ships, windmills and water pumps. Today, the vast majority of wind power is used to generate electricity using wind turbines. Modern utility-scale wind turbines range from around 600\u00a0kW to 9 MW of rated power. The power available from the wind is a function of the cube of the wind speed, so as wind speed increases, power output increases up to the maximum output for the particular turbine. Areas where winds are stronger and more constant, such as offshore and high-altitude sites, are preferred locations for wind farms.\nWind-generated electricity met nearly 4% of global electricity demand in 2015, with nearly 63\u00a0GW of new wind power capacity installed. Wind energy was the leading source of new capacity in Europe, the US and Canada, and the second largest in China. In Denmark, wind energy met more than 40% of its electricity demand while Ireland, Portugal and Spain each met nearly 20%.\nGlobally, the long-term technical potential of wind energy is believed to be five times total current global energy production, or 40 times current electricity demand, assuming all practical barriers needed were overcome. This would require wind turbines to be installed over large areas, particularly in areas of higher wind resources, such as offshore, and likely also industrial use of new types of VAWT turbines in addition to the horizontal axis units currently in use. As offshore wind speeds average ~90% greater than that of land, offshore resources can contribute substantially more energy than land-stationed turbines.\nInvestments in wind technologies reached USD 161 billion in 2020, with onshore wind dominating at 80% of total investments from 2013 to 2022. Offshore wind investments nearly doubled to USD 41 billion between 2019 and 2020, primarily due to policy incentives in China and expansion in Europe. Global wind capacity increased by 557 GW between 2013 and 2021, with capacity additions increasing by an average of 19% each year.\nHydropower.\nSince water is about 800 times denser than air, even a slow flowing stream of water, or moderate sea swell, can yield considerable amounts of energy. Water can generate electricity with a conversion efficiency of about 90%, which is the highest rate in renewable energy. There are many forms of water energy:\nMuch hydropower is flexible, thus complementing wind and solar, as it not intermittent. In 2021, the world renewable hydropower capacity was 1,360 GW. Only a third of the world's estimated hydroelectric potential of 14,000 TWh/year has been developed. New hydropower projects face opposition from local communities due to their large impact, including relocation of communities and flooding of wildlife habitats and farming land. High cost and lead times from permission process, including environmental and risk assessments, with lack of environmental and social acceptance are therefore the primary challenges for new developments. It is popular to repower old dams thereby increasing their efficiency and capacity as well as quicker responsiveness on the grid. Where circumstances permit existing dams such as the Russell Dam built in 1985 may be updated with \"pump back\" facilities for pumped-storage which is useful for peak loads or to support intermittent wind and solar power. Because dispatchable power is more valuable than VRE countries with large hydroelectric developments such as Canada and Norway are spending billions to expand their grids to trade with neighboring countries having limited hydro.\nBioenergy.\nBiomass is biological material derived from living, or recently living organisms. Most commonly, it refers to plants or plant-derived materials. As an energy source, biomass can either be used directly via combustion to produce heat, or converted to a more energy-dense biofuel like ethanol. Wood is the most significant biomass energy source as of 2012 and is usually sourced from a trees cleared for silvicultural reasons or fire prevention. Municipal wood waste \u2013 for instance, construction materials or sawdust \u2013 is also often burned for energy. The biggest per-capita producers of wood-based bioenergy are heavily forested countries like Finland, Sweden, Estonia, Austria, and Denmark.\nBioenergy can be environmentally destructive if old-growth forests are cleared to make way for crop production. In particular, demand for palm oil to produce biodiesel has contributed to the deforestation of tropical rainforests in Brazil and Indonesia. In addition, burning biomass still produces carbon emissions, although much less than fossil fuels (39 grams of CO2 per megajoule of energy, compared to 75 g/MJ for fossil fuels).\nSome biomass sources are unsustainable at current rates of exploitation (as of 2017).\nBiofuel.\nBiofuels are primarily used in transportation, providing 3.5% of the world's transport energy demand in 2022, up from 2.7% in 2010. Biojet is expected to be important for short-term reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from long-haul flights.\nAside from wood, the major sources of bioenergy are bioethanol and biodiesel. Bioethanol is usually produced by fermenting the sugar components of crops like sugarcane and maize, while biodiesel is mostly made from oils extracted from plants, such as soybean oil and corn oil. Most of the crops used to produce bioethanol and biodiesel are grown specifically for this purpose, although used cooking oil accounted for 14% of the oil used to produce biodiesel as of 2015. The biomass used to produce biofuels varies by region. Maize is the major feedstock in the United States, while sugarcane dominates in Brazil. In the European Union, where biodiesel is more common than bioethanol, rapeseed oil and palm oil are the main feedstocks. China, although it produces comparatively much less biofuel, uses mostly corn and wheat. In many countries, biofuels are either subsidized or mandated to be included in fuel mixtures.\nThere are many other sources of bioenergy that are more niche, or not yet viable at large scales. For instance, bioethanol could be produced from the cellulosic parts of crops, rather than only the seed as is common today. Sweet sorghum may be a promising alternative source of bioethanol, due to its tolerance of a wide range of climates. Cow dung can be converted into methane. There is also a great deal of research involving algal fuel, which is attractive because algae is a non-food resource, grows around 20 times faster than most food crops, and can be grown almost anywhere.\nGeothermal energy.\nGeothermal energy is thermal energy (heat) extracted from the Earth's crust. It originates from several different sources, of which the most significant is slow radioactive decay of minerals contained in the Earth's interior, as well as some leftover heat from the formation of the Earth. Some of the heat is generated near the Earth's surface in the crust, but some also flows from deep within the Earth from the mantle and core. Geothermal energy extraction is viable mostly in countries located on tectonic plate edges, where the Earth's hot mantle is more exposed. As of 2023, the United States has by far the most geothermal capacity (2.7 GW, or less than 0.2% of the country's total energy capacity), followed by Indonesia and the Philippines. Global capacity in 2022 was 15 GW.\nGeothermal energy can be either used directly to heat homes, as is common in Iceland where almost all of its energy is renewable, or to generate electricity. Iceland is a global leader in renewable energy, relying almost entirely on its abundant geothermal and hydroelectric resources derived from volcanic activity and glaciers. At smaller scales, geothermal power can be generated with geothermal heat pumps, which can extract heat from ground temperatures of under , allowing them to be used at relatively shallow depths of a few meters. Electricity generation requires large plants and ground temperatures of at least . In some countries, electricity produced from geothermal energy accounts for a large portion of the total, such as Kenya (43%) and Indonesia (5%).\nTechnical advances may eventually make geothermal power more widely available. For example, enhanced geothermal systems involve drilling around into the Earth, breaking apart hot rocks and extracting the heat using water. In theory, this type of geothermal energy extraction could be done anywhere on Earth.\nEmerging technologies.\nThere are also other renewable energy technologies that are still under development, including enhanced geothermal systems, concentrated solar power, cellulosic ethanol, piezoelectricity, and marine energy. These technologies are not yet widely demonstrated or have limited commercialization. Some may have potential comparable to other renewable energy technologies, but still depend on further breakthroughs from research, development and engineering.\nEnhanced geothermal systems.\nEnhanced geothermal systems (EGS) are a new type of geothermal power which does not require natural hot water reservoirs or steam to generate power. Most of the underground heat within drilling reach is trapped in solid rocks, not in water. EGS technologies use hydraulic fracturing to break apart these rocks and release the heat they contain, which is then harvested by pumping water into the ground. The process is sometimes known as \"hot dry rock\" (HDR). Unlike conventional geothermal energy extraction, EGS may be feasible anywhere in the world, depending on the cost of drilling. EGS projects have so far primarily been limited to demonstration plants, as the technology is capital-intensive due to the high cost of drilling.\nSand battery.\nSand batteries are large tanks filled with soapstone that absorb heat. Excess heat energy from renewable energy is piped into the tank and then energy is discharged as boiling water, steam, or heated air. Finland is using this technology in Pornainen as Polar Night Energy built a 1MW sand battery that can store up to 100 MWh that went online in 2025.\nPiezoelectricity.\nPiezoelectricity is the conversion of existing mechanical stress or vibration (classical mechanics) into an electrical charge without consuming or depleting a fuel source. Piezotronics enables the interaction of piezoelectric and semiconducting behaviors to modulate energy barriers at contact surface, thereby controlling charge carrier transport. Since the introduction of nanogenerators, the efficiency of microscale energy harvesting has improved. For instance, nanogenerators typically consist of piezoelectric nanowires; as these wires bend or compress, the applied mechanical stress causes the ions within the material's crystal lattice to shift their positions. This shift disrupts the nanowire's charge symmetry which causes an instantaneous charge polarization (separation of positive and negative charges) across the nanowire's ends. Once polarized, electrons are freed from the attached electrode which generates usable alternating current (AC) electricity that can energize low-power sensors. Piezoelectric microelectromechanical systems (piezoMEMS), such as actuators for artificial organs and pacemakers or micropumps for drug delivery and reagent transfers, are vital for medical purposes and energy harvesting. Furthermore, specialized components like piezoelectric resonators and quartz crystal oscillators are used to regulate electrical circuit frequencies.\nMarine energy.\nMarine energy (also sometimes referred to as ocean energy) is the energy carried by ocean waves, tides, salinity, and ocean temperature differences. Technologies to harness the energy of moving water include wave power, marine current power, and tidal power. Reverse electrodialysis (RED) is a technology for generating electricity by mixing fresh water and salty sea water in large power cells. Most marine energy harvesting technologies are still at low technology readiness levels and not used at large scales. Tidal energy is generally considered the most mature, but has not seen wide deployment. The world's largest tidal power station is on Sihwa Lake, South Korea, which produces around 550 gigawatt-hours of electricity per year.\nEarth infrared thermal radiation.\nEarth emits roughly 1017 W of infrared thermal radiation that flows toward the cold outer space. Solar energy hits the surface and atmosphere of the earth and produces heat. Using various theorized devices like emissive energy harvester (EEH) or thermoradiative diode, this energy flow can be converted into electricity. In theory, this technology can be used during nighttime.\nOthers.\nAlgae fuels.\nProducing liquid fuels from oil-rich (fat-rich) varieties of algae is an ongoing research topic. Various microalgae grown in open or closed systems are being tried including some systems that can be set up in brownfield and desert lands.\nSpace-based solar power.\nThere have been numerous proposals for space-based solar power, in which very large satellites with photovoltaic panels would be equipped with microwave transmitters to beam power back to terrestrial receivers. A 2024 study by the NASA Office of Science and Technology Policy examined the concept and concluded that with current and near-future technologies it would be economically uncompetitive.\nWater vapor.\nCollection of static electricity charges from water droplets on metal surfaces is an experimental technology that would be especially useful in low-income countries with relative air humidity over 60%.\nNuclear energy.\nBreeder reactors could, in principle, depending on the fuel cycle employed, extract almost all of the energy contained in uranium or thorium, decreasing fuel requirements by a factor of 100 compared to widely used once-through light water reactors, which extract less than 1% of the energy in the actinide metal (uranium or thorium) mined from the earth. The high fuel-efficiency of breeder reactors could greatly reduce concerns about fuel supply, energy used in mining, and storage of radioactive waste. With seawater uranium extraction (currently too expensive to be economical), there is enough fuel for breeder reactors to satisfy the world's energy needs for 5 billion years at 1983's total energy consumption rate, thus making nuclear energy effectively a renewable energy. In addition to seawater the average crustal granite rocks contain significant quantities of uranium and thorium with which breeder reactors can supply abundant energy for the remaining lifespan of the sun on the main sequence of stellar evolution.\nArtificial photosynthesis.\nArtificial photosynthesis uses techniques including nanotechnology to store solar electromagnetic energy in chemical bonds by splitting water to produce hydrogen and then using carbon dioxide to make methanol. Researchers in this field strived to design molecular mimics of photosynthesis that use a wider region of the solar spectrum, employ catalytic systems made from abundant, inexpensive materials that are robust, readily repaired, non-toxic, stable in a variety of environmental conditions and perform more efficiently allowing a greater proportion of photon energy to end up in the storage compounds, i.e., carbohydrates (rather than building and sustaining living cells). However, prominent research faces hurdles, Sun Catalytix a MIT spin-off stopped scaling up their prototype fuel-cell in 2012 because it offers few savings over other ways to make hydrogen from sunlight. \nRecent research emphasizes that while artificial photosynthesis shows promise in splitting water to generate hydrogen, its broader significance lies in the ability to produce dense, carbon-based solar fuels suitable for transport applications, such as aviation and long-haul shipping. These fuels, if derived from carbon dioxide and water using sunlight, could close the carbon loop and reduce reliance on fossil-based hydrocarbons. However, realizing this potential requires overcoming major technical hurdles, including the development of efficient, durable catalysts for water oxidation and CO2 reduction, and careful attention to land use and public perception.\nComparison of the theoretical and practical potentials of different renewable energy technologies.\nGlobal energy consumption in 2019 was approximately 65 petawatt-hours (PWh) per year or 65,000 terawatt-hours (TWh) annually.\nTechnical Potential by Technology.\nAccording to a comprehensive peer-reviewed study published in 2023, the technical potentials for utility-scale solar photovoltaic, concentrated solar power, onshore wind, and offshore wind each exceed 100 PWh/year, and thus each of them is capable of meeting the Humankind's total demand \"in theory\".\nSolar Photovoltaic (PV).\nTechnical Potential: Over 5,800 PWh per year from solar PV alone using current technology This represents approximately 89 times current global energy demand. Thus, utilizing only 2% of the solar power can solve Humankind's energy problems, in principle.\nWind Energy (Onshore + Offshore).\nTechnical Potential: Nearly 900 PWh per year from onshore and offshore wind combined https://carbontracker.org/solar-and-wind-can-meet-world-energy-demand-100-times-over-renewables/\nIn kilowatts: 900,000,000,000,000 kWh/year (900 trillion kWh/year)\nThis represents approximately 14 times current global energy demand. However, it is highly intermittent, and it is not feasible to cover most of the earth surface to collect all wind.\nCombined Solar and Wind.\nWith current technology, at least 6,700 PWh per year can be captured from solar and wind, which is more than 100 times global energy demand.. \nHydropower.\nGross Theoretical Potential: Approximately 52 PWh/year distributed over 11.8 million potential locations worldwide.\nIn kilowatts: 52,000,000,000,000 kWh/year (52 trillion kWh/year). \nThis equals to about 33% of annually required energy.\nGeothermal Energy.\nConventional Geothermal: Technical potential above 10 PWh/year.\nEnhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS): About 600 terawatts (TW) of geothermal capacity using thermal resources within 8 km of depth, equivalent to about 4,000 PWh of technical potential for annual generation.\nThe full technical potential of next-generation geothermal systems is sufficient to meet global electricity demand 140 times over and is second only to solar PV among renewable technologies. \nOther Ocean Technologies.\nRooftop Solar PV, Wave, and Tidal: Technical potentials above 1 PWh/year each.\nOcean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC): Technical potential above 10 PWh/year.\nSalinity Gradient: Technical potential above 0.1 PWh/year.\nOverall Technical Potential.\nWhen including all renewable energy sources, the global technical potential ranges from 164 to 27,200 PWh/year, which is 6.6 to 1,101 times the 2021 electricity consumption of 24.7 PWh/year.\nEconomic Potential.\nThe literature assessing the global economic potential of renewables shows that the economic potential is higher than current and near-future electricity demand. More specifically:\nAround 60% of the world's solar resource and 15% of its wind resource is already economically competitive compared with local fossil fuel generation.\nMarket and industry trends.\nMost new renewables are solar, followed by wind then hydro then bioenergy. Investment in renewables, especially solar, tends to be more effective in creating jobs than coal, gas or oil. Worldwide, renewables employ about 12 million people as of 2020, with solar PV being the technology employing the most at almost 4 million. However, as of February 2024, the world's supply of workforce for solar energy is lagging greatly behind demand as universities worldwide still produce more workforce for fossil fuels than for renewable energy industries.\nIn 2021, China accounted for almost half of the global increase in renewable electricity.\nThere are 3,146 gigawatts installed in 135 countries, while 156 countries have laws regulating the renewable energy sector.\nGlobally in 2020 there are over 10 million jobs associated with the renewable energy industries, with solar photovoltaics being the largest renewable employer. The clean energy sectors added about 4.7 million jobs globally between 2019 and 2022, totaling 35 million jobs by 2022.5\nUsage by sector or application.\nSome studies say that a global transition to 100% renewable energy across all sectors \u2013 power, heat, transport and industry \u2013 is feasible and economically viable.\nOne of the efforts to decarbonize transportation is the increased use of electric vehicles (EVs). Despite that and the use of biofuels, such as biojet, less than 4% of transport energy is from renewables. Occasionally hydrogen fuel cells are used for heavy transport. Meanwhile, in the future electrofuels may also play a greater role in decarbonizing hard-to-abate sectors like aviation and maritime shipping.\nSolar water heating makes an important contribution to renewable heat in many countries, most notably in China, which now has 70% of the global total (180\u00a0GWth). Most of these systems are installed on multi-family apartment buildings and meet a portion of the hot water needs of an estimated 50\u201360 million households in China. Worldwide, total installed solar water heating systems meet a portion of the water heating needs of over 70 million households.\nHeat pumps provide both heating and cooling, and also flatten the electric demand curve and are thus an increasing priority. Renewable thermal energy is also growing rapidly. About 10% of heating and cooling energy is from renewables.\nCost comparison.\nThe International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) stated that ~86% (187 GW) of renewable capacity added in 2022 had lower costs than electricity generated from fossil fuels. IRENA also stated that capacity added since 2000 reduced electricity bills in 2022 by at least $520 billion, and that in non-OECD countries, the lifetime savings of 2022 capacity additions will reduce costs by up to $580 billion.\nGrowth of renewables.\nThe results of a recent review of the literature concluded that as greenhouse gas (GHG) emitters begin to be held liable for damages resulting from GHG emissions resulting in climate change, a high value for liability mitigation would provide powerful incentives for deployment of renewable energy technologies.\nIn the decade of 2010\u20132019, worldwide investment in renewable energy capacity excluding large hydropower amounted to US$2.7 trillion, of which the top countries China contributed US$818 billion, the United States contributed US$392.3 billion, Japan contributed US$210.9 billion, Germany contributed US$183.4 billion, and the United Kingdom contributed US$126.5 billion. This was an increase of over three and possibly four times the equivalent amount invested in the decade of 2000\u20132009 (no data is available for 2000\u20132003).\nAs of 2022, an estimated 28% of the world's electricity was generated by renewables. This is up from 19% in 1990. By the end of 2024, global renewable power capacity reached 4,300 gigawatts (GW), with solar photovoltaics accounting for over 60% of annual additions.\nFuture projections.\nA December 2022 report by the IEA forecasts that over 2022-2027, renewables are seen growing by almost 2,400 GW in its main forecast, equal to the entire installed power capacity of China in 2021. This is an 85% acceleration from the previous five years, and almost 30% higher than what the IEA forecast in its 2021 report, making its largest ever upward revision. Renewables are set to account for over 90% of global electricity capacity expansion over the forecast period. To achieve net zero emissions by 2050, IEA believes that 90% of global electricity generation will need to be produced from renewable sources.\nIn June 2022, IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said that countries should invest more in renewables to \"ease the pressure on consumers from high fossil fuel prices, make our energy systems more secure, and get the world on track to reach our climate goals.\"\nChina's five year plan to 2025 includes increasing direct heating by renewables such as geothermal and solar thermal.\nREPowerEU, the EU plan to escape dependence on fossil Russian gas, is expected to call for much more green hydrogen.\nAfter a transitional period, renewable energy production is expected to make up most of the world's energy production. In 2018, the risk management firm, DNV GL, forecasts that the world's primary energy mix will be split equally between fossil and non-fossil sources by 2050.\nMiddle eastern nations are also planning on reducing their reliance fossil fuel. Many planned green projects will contribute in 26% of energy supply for the region by 2050 achieving emission reductions equal to 1.1 Gt CO2/year.\nMassive Renewable Energy Projects in the Middle East:\nDemand.\nIn July 2014, WWF and the World Resources Institute convened a discussion among a number of major US companies who had declared their intention to increase their use of renewable energy. These discussions identified a number of \"principles\" which companies seeking greater access to renewable energy considered important market deliverables. These principles included choice (between suppliers and between products), cost competitiveness, longer term fixed price supplies, access to third-party financing vehicles, and collaboration.\nUK statistics released in September 2020 noted that \"the proportion of demand met from renewables varies from a low of 3.4 per cent (for transport, mainly from biofuels) to highs of over 20 per cent for 'other final users', which is largely the service and commercial sectors that consume relatively large quantities of electricity, and industry\".\nIn some locations, individual households can opt to purchase renewable energy through a consumer green energy program.\nDeveloping countries.\nIn Kenya, the Olkaria V Geothermal Power Station is one of the largest in the world. The Grand Ethiopia Renaissance Dam project incorporates wind turbines. Once completed, Morocco's Ouarzazate Solar Power Station is projected to provide power to over a million people.\nPolicy.\nPolicies to support renewable energy have been vital in their expansion. Where Europe dominated in establishing energy policy in the early 2000s, most countries around the world now have some form of energy policy.\nThe International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organization for promoting the adoption of renewable energy worldwide. It aims to provide concrete policy advice and facilitate capacity building and technology transfer. IRENA was formed in 2009, with 75\u00a0countries signing the charter of IRENA. As of April 2019, IRENA has 160\u00a0member states. The then United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has said that renewable energy can lift the poorest nations to new levels of prosperity, and in September 2011 he launched the UN Sustainable Energy for All initiative to improve energy access, efficiency and the deployment of renewable energy.\nThe 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change motivated many countries to develop or improve renewable energy policies. In 2017, a total of 121 countries adopted some form of renewable energy policy. National targets that year existed in 176 countries. In addition, there is also a wide range of policies at the state/provincial, and local levels. Some public utilities help plan or install residential energy upgrades.\nMany national, state and local governments have created green banks. A green bank is a quasi-public financial institution that uses public capital to leverage private investment in clean energy technologies. Green banks use a variety of financial tools to bridge market gaps that hinder the deployment of clean energy.\nGlobal and national policies related to renewable energy can be divided based on sectors, such as agriculture, transport, buildings, industry:\n\"Climate neutrality\" (net zero emissions) by the year 2050 is the main goal of the European Green Deal. For the European Union to reach their target of climate neutrality, one goal is to decarbonise its energy system by aiming to achieve \"net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.\"\nFinance.\nThe International Renewable Energy Agency's (IRENA) 2023 report on renewable energy finance highlights steady investment growth since 2018: USD 348 billion in 2020 (a 5.6% increase from 2019), USD 430 billion in 2021 (24% up from 2020), and USD 499 billion in 2022 (16% higher). This trend is driven by increasing recognition of renewable energy's role in mitigating climate change and enhancing energy security, along with investor interest in alternatives to fossil fuels. Policies such as feed-in tariffs in China and Vietnam have significantly increased renewable adoption. Furthermore, from 2013 to 2022, installation costs for solar photovoltaic (PV), onshore wind, and offshore wind fell by 69%, 33%, and 45%, respectively, making renewables more cost-effective.\nBetween 2013 and 2022, the renewable energy sector underwent a significant realignment of investment priorities. Investment in solar and wind energy technologies markedly increased. In contrast, other renewable technologies such as hydropower (including pumped storage hydropower), biomass, biofuels, geothermal, and marine energy experienced a substantial decrease in financial investment. Notably, from 2017 to 2022, investment in these alternative renewable technologies declined by 45%, falling from USD 35 billion to USD 17 billion.\nIn 2023, the renewable energy sector experienced a significant surge in investments, particularly in solar and wind technologies, totaling approximately USD 200 billion\u2014a 75% increase from the previous year. The increased investments in 2023 contributed between 1% and 4% to the GDP in key regions including the United States, China, the European Union, and India.\nThe energy sector receives investments of approximately USD 3 trillion each year, with USD 1.9 trillion directed towards clean energy technologies and infrastructure. To meet the targets set in the Net Zero Emissions (NZE) Scenario by 2035, this investment must increase to USD 5.3 trillion per year.15\nDebates.\nGeopolitics.\nThe geopolitical impact of the growing use of renewable energy is a subject of ongoing debate and research. Many fossil-fuel producing countries, such as Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia and Norway, are currently able to exert diplomatic or geopolitical influence as a result of their oil wealth. Most of these countries are expected to be among the geopolitical \"losers\" of the energy transition, although some, like Norway, are also significant producers and exporters of renewable energy. Fossil fuels and the infrastructure to extract them may, in the long term, become stranded assets. It has been speculated that countries dependent on fossil fuel revenue may one day find it in their interests to quickly sell off their remaining fossil fuels.\nConversely, nations abundant in renewable resources, and the minerals required for renewables technology, are expected to gain influence. In particular, China has become the world's dominant manufacturer of the technology needed to produce or store renewable energy, especially solar panels, wind turbines, and lithium-ion batteries. Nations rich in solar and wind energy could become major energy exporters. Some may produce and export green hydrogen, although electricity is projected to be the dominant energy carrier in 2050, accounting for almost 50% of total energy consumption (up from 22% in 2015). Countries with large uninhabited areas such as Australia, China, and many African and Middle Eastern countries have a potential for huge installations of renewable energy. The production of renewable energy technologies requires rare-earth elements with new supply chains.\nCountries with already weak governments that rely on fossil fuel revenue may face even higher political instability or popular unrest. Analysts consider Nigeria, Angola, Chad, Gabon, and Sudan, all countries with a history of military coups, to be at risk of instability due to dwindling oil income.\nA study found that transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy systems reduces risks from mining, trade and political dependence because renewable energy systems don't need fuel \u2013 they depend on trade only for the acquisition of materials and components during construction.\nIn October 2021, European Commissioner for Climate Action Frans Timmermans suggested \"the best answer\" to the 2021 global energy crisis is \"to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels.\" He said those blaming the European Green Deal were doing so \"for perhaps ideological reasons or sometimes economic reasons in protecting their vested interests.\" Some critics blamed the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) and closure of nuclear plants for contributing to the energy crisis. European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said that Europe is \"too reliant\" on natural gas and too dependent on natural gas imports. According to Von der Leyen, \"The answer has to do with diversifying our suppliers ... and, crucially, with speeding up the transition to clean energy.\"\nMetal and mineral extraction.\nThe transition to renewable energy requires increased extraction of certain metals and minerals. Like all mining, this impacts the environment and can lead to environmental conflict. For example, lithium mining uses around 65% of the water in the Salar de Atamaca desert forcing farmers and llama herders to abandon their ancestral settlements and creating environment degradation, in several African countries, the green energy transition has created a mining boom, causing deforestation, and threatening already endangered species. Wind power requires large amounts of copper and zinc, as well as smaller amounts of the rarer metal neodymium. Solar power is less resource-intensive, but still requires significant amounts of aluminum. The expansion of electrical grids requires both copper and aluminum. Batteries, which are critical to enable storage of renewable energy, use large quantities of copper, nickel, aluminum and graphite. Demand for lithium is expected to grow 42-fold from 2020 to 2040. Demand for nickel, cobalt and graphite is expected to grow by a factor of about 20\u201325. For each of the most relevant minerals and metals, its mining is dominated by a single country: copper in Chile, nickel in Indonesia, rare earths in China, cobalt in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and lithium in Australia. China dominates processing of all of these.\nRecycling these metals after the devices they are embedded in are spent is essential to create a circular economy and ensure renewable energy is sustainable. By 2040, recycled copper, lithium, cobalt, and nickel from spent batteries could reduce combined primary supply requirements for these minerals by around 10%.\nA controversial approach is deep sea mining. Minerals can be collected from new sources like polymetallic nodules lying on the seabed. This would damage local biodiversity, but proponents point out that biomass on resource-rich seabeds is much scarcer than in the mining regions on land, which are often found in vulnerable habitats like rainforests.\nDue to co-occurrence of rare-earth and radioactive elements (thorium, uranium and radium), rare-earth mining results in production of low-level radioactive waste.\nConservation areas.\nInstallations used to produce wind, solar and hydropower are an increasing threat to key conservation areas, with facilities built in areas set aside for nature conservation and other environmentally sensitive areas. They are often much larger than fossil fuel power plants, needing areas of land up to 10 times greater than coal or gas to produce equivalent energy amounts. More than 2000 renewable energy facilities are built, and more are under construction, in areas of environmental importance and threaten the habitats of plant and animal species across the globe. The authors' team emphasized that their work should not be interpreted as anti-renewables because renewable energy is crucial for reducing carbon emissions. The key is ensuring that renewable energy facilities are built in places where they do not damage biodiversity.\nIn 2020 scientists published a world map of areas that contain renewable energy materials as well as estimations of their overlaps with \"Key Biodiversity Areas\", \"Remaining Wilderness\" and \"Protected Areas\". The authors assessed that careful strategic planning is needed.\nImpact of climate change on renewable energy production.\nClimate change is making weather patterns less predictable. This can seriously hamper the use of renewable energy. For example, in the year 2023, in Sudan and Namibia, hydropower production dropped by more than half due to drastic reduction in rainfall, in China, India and some regions in Africa unusual weather phenomena reduced the amount of produced wind energy, heatwaves and clouds reduce the effectiveness of solar panels, melting glaciers create problems to hydropower. Nuclear energy is also affected as drought creates water shortage, so nuclear power plants sometimes do not have enough water for cooling.\nSociety and culture.\nPublic support.\nSolar power plants may compete with arable land, while on-shore wind farms often face opposition due to aesthetic concerns and noise. Such opponents are often described as NIMBYs (\"not in my back yard\"). Some environmentalists are concerned about fatal collisions of birds and bats with wind turbines. Although protests against new wind farms occasionally occur around the world, regional and national surveys generally find broad support for both solar and wind power.\nCommunity-owned wind energy is sometimes proposed as a way to increase local support for wind farms. A 2011 UK Government document stated that \"projects are generally more likely to succeed if they have broad public support and the consent of local communities. This means giving communities both a say and a stake.\" In the 2000s and early 2010s, many renewable projects in Germany, Sweden and Denmark were owned by local communities, particularly through cooperative structures. In the years since, more installations in Germany have been undertaken by large companies, but community ownership remains strong in Denmark.\nHistory.\nPrior to the development of coal in the mid 19th century, nearly all energy used was renewable. The oldest known use of renewable energy, in the form of traditional biomass to fuel fires, dates from more than a million years ago. The use of biomass for fire did not become commonplace until many hundreds of thousands of years later. The second oldest usage of renewable energy was probably harnessing the wind in order to drive ships over water. This practice can be traced back some 7000 years, to ships in the Persian Gulf and on the Nile. Geothermal energy from hot springs has been used for bathing since Paleolithic times and space heating since ancient Roman times. Moving into the time of recorded history, the primary sources of traditional renewable energy were human labor, animal power, water power, wind, in grain crushing windmills, and firewood, a traditional biomass.\nIn 1885, Werner Siemens, commenting on the discovery of the photovoltaic effect in the solid state, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In conclusion, I would say that however great the scientific importance of this discovery may be, its practical value will be no less obvious when we reflect that the supply of solar energy is both without limit and without cost, and that it will continue to pour down upon us for countless ages after all the coal deposits of the earth have been exhausted and forgotten.\nMax Weber mentioned the end of fossil fuel in the concluding paragraphs of his Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus (The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism), published in 1905. Development of solar engines continued until the outbreak of World War I. The importance of solar energy was recognized in a 1911 \"Scientific American\" article: \"in the far distant future, natural fuels having been exhausted [solar power] will remain as the only means of existence of the human race\".\nThe theory of peak oil was published in 1956. In the 1970s environmentalists promoted the development of renewable energy both as a replacement for the eventual depletion of oil, as well as for an escape from dependence on oil, and the first electricity-generating wind turbines appeared. Solar had long been used for heating and cooling, but solar panels were too costly to build solar farms until 1980.\nNew government spending, regulation and policies helped the renewables industry weather the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession better than many other sectors. In 2022, renewables accounted for 30% of global electricity generation, up from 21% in 1985.\nAncient Historical Examples.\nAmong the most notable historical uses of renewable energy (in the form of ancient and traditional methods), the following examples can be highlighted:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25786", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25786", "title": "Runequest", "text": ""}
{"id": "25787", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25787", "title": "Rule of st benedict", "text": ""}
{"id": "25788", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25788", "title": "Relatively prime", "text": ""}
{"id": "25789", "revid": "50751153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25789", "title": "Romulus Augustulus", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 475 to 476\nRomulus Augustus (c.\u2009460-465)\u00a0\u2013 (c.\u2009511-530), nicknamed Augustulus, was Roman emperor of the West from 31 October 475 until 4 September 476. Romulus was placed on the imperial throne while still a minor by his father Orestes, the , for whom he served as little more than a figurehead. After a rule of ten months, the barbarian general Odoacer defeated and killed Orestes and deposed Romulus. As Odoacer did not proclaim any successor, Romulus is typically regarded as the last Western Roman emperor, his deposition marking the end of the Western Roman Empire as a political entity. The deposition of Romulus Augustulus is also sometimes used by historians to mark the transition from antiquity to the medieval period.\nVery few records survive of Romulus's reign. There are no known policies, laws or inscriptions of significance of the emperor, which leaves the impression that he was a shadowy and relatively inconsequential figure. The nickname \"Augustulus\" means \"little Augustus\" and was a derisive reference to his young age. Romulus's immediate family, including his father and possibly his mother, and maybe both his paternal and maternal grandparents, were from the Roman province of Pannonia, and many of his family members had military backgrounds.\nRomulus came to power through the usurpation of his predecessor Julius Nepos (r.\u2009474\u00a0\u2013\u00a0475 in Italy) in 475. Nepos fled to Dalmatia and continued to claim the imperial title in exile, which hampered Romulus's legitimacy and ensured that he was never recognised by the Eastern Roman emperor Zeno. In 476, the allied barbarian in Italy demanded Italian lands to settle on, which was refused by Orestes. Under Odoacer, the defeated and killed Orestes and deposed Romulus, whereafter Odoacer became the first King of Italy and accepted Emperor Zeno as his nominal superior.\nRomulus's life was spared by Odoacer, and he was allowed to retire to the , a great fortress in Campania. Little certain information is known concerning Romulus's life in exile. He might have played a role in founding a monastery at in the 480s or 490s, dedicated to Saint Severinus of Noricum. Romulus could have been alive as late as 507 or 511 when Theodoric the Great, Odoacer's successor, wrote a letter to a \"Romulus\" concerning a pension, but was likely dead before his mid-40s, as accounts of the eastern Roman invasion of Italy at that time do not mention him.\nName.\nRomulus Augustus' birth name was simply Romulus; he was named after his maternal grandfather, a nobleman from Poetovio in Noricum. Upon his accession to the imperial throne, he also took Augustus as a proper name, not just a title. Many historians have noted the coincidence that the last western emperor bore the names of both Romulus, the legendary founder and first king of Rome, and Augustus, the first emperor. The full style used on his coinage was \"Dominus Noster Romulus Augustus Pius Felix Augustus\". Romulus Augustus was often colloquially referred to as \"Augustulus\" (meaning \"little Augustus\") even in his own time, in reference to his youth. \"Augustulus\" was a derisive nickname and was never in official use; all of Romulus' coins use the names \"Romulus Augustus\". In Greek, his first name Romulus was also changed derisively into the nickname \"Momylus\" (\"little disgrace\").\nBackground.\nGeopolitical background.\nBy the time of emperor Diocletian (r.284\u2013305), the idea that the Roman Empire had grown so large that it would be better managed by two co-ruling emperors, rather than one, had become established. After various divisions were made throughout the 4th century, the empire was firmly and permanently divided into a western and eastern sphere of imperial administration from the death of emperor Theodosius I (r.379\u2013395) in 395 onwards. Though modern historians typically use the terms Western Roman Empire and Eastern Roman Empire to describe the new political situation, the Romans themselves never considered the empire to have been formally divided, still viewing it as a single unit, although most often having two rulers rather than one. Over the course of the 5th century, the western empire experienced a period of catastrophic decline. Not only were many of the rulers in the west generally lacking in competence, but they also faced enormous problems. In comparison with the eastern provinces, much of the west was more rural, with fewer people and a less stable economy. An increasing number of Germanic barbarian invasions and settlements throughout the west only added to these issues.\nIn 410, the Visigoths under Alaric I had sacked Rome and in 455, the last western emperor of Theodosius' dynasty, Valentinian III (r.425\u2013455), was deposed and murdered. That same year, Rome was sacked again for the second time in less than fifty years, this time by the Vandals. The Roman army became increasingly reliant on barbarian mercenaries and after Valentinian's murder, the most powerful barbarian generals, such as Ricimer (c. 418\u2013472), became politically dominant, ruling through proclaiming puppet emperors. In the twenty years between the death of Valentinian and the accession of Romulus Augustus, eight different emperors ruled in the west. By 475, the western empire was in critical condition. Outside of Italy, authority was only exercised in Raetia and some regions of Gaul.\nThe ruling emperor in 475 was Julius Nepos, who had been in power for less than a year. Nepos had been appointed western emperor in 474 by the eastern emperors Leo I (r.457\u2013474) and Zeno (r.474\u2013491), but had little real support in the west. In 475, Nepos named Orestes as a patrician and \"magister militum\" ('master of soldiers'; effectively commander-in-chief), replacing the previous holder of that office, Ecdicius. Orestes was a distinguished late Roman figure, once having served as \"notarius\" (secretary) to the Hunnic king Attila. As \"magister militum\", Orestes was tasked by Nepos to lead an army against Visigoths and Burgundians, \"foederati\" (barbarian allies of the empire) who were rebelling in southern Gaul. The army given to Orestes by Nepos was multi-ethnic, with many \"foederati\" soldiers. Heeding the grievances of his troops (among other things learning that Nepos had refused requests for land grants ), Orestes defied the emperor's orders and marched on Ravenna, the capital of the western empire. On 28 August 475, Orestes entered Ravenna with his army and Nepos escaped across the Adriatic Sea to Salona in Dalmatia.\nAncestry and family.\nThere is little surviving concrete evidence in regards to Romulus' ancestry beyond Orestes being known to have been a Roman citizen from Pannonia and sparse information on his immediate family. Orestes' father was a Pannonian Roman officer by the name of Tatulus, and Tatulus had at least one other son, Paulus, who served as a \"comes\". The name of Romulus' mother is not known, but it might have been Barbaria. The name Barbaria, otherwise rarely attested, may derive either from the \"gens\" (family) Barbii, attested in Roman Pannonia, or it may simply be the feminine version of the name \"Barbarius\", attested from a few Roman individuals in southern Gaul. Another hypothesis identifies Romulus' mother as Flavia Serena. Romulus' maternal grandfather was a \"comes\", also by the name of Romulus, attested as alive in 449, when he was sent on an embassy to Attila by the general Aetius. Orestes and Romulus Augustus' mother married at some point before 449. It is believed that Romulus' mother, and thus perhaps her immediate family, were, like Orestes, from Roman Pannonia. \nIt is possible that Romulus Augustus had older siblings, especially given that Romulus was born several years after the marriage of his parents. In ancient Rome, it was customary for the eldest son to be named after his grandfather. That Romulus was not named Tatulus thus indicates that he was not the firstborn boy.\nReign.\nAfter an interregnum in the west lasting two months, Romulus, perhaps as young as ten years old, was proclaimed emperor in Nepos' stead by Orestes on 31 October 475. He was the last emperor to be proclaimed in the west. Why the interregnum since Nepos lasted so long and why Orestes, a high-ranking military official and a Roman by birth, did not take the imperial title for himself is not known. It is possible that Orestes was waiting for some form of formal recognition or response from emperor Zeno in the east, which never came. Romulus would throughout his brief ten-month reign be little more than a figurehead, with his father, who retained the position of \"magister militum\", actually running much of the imperial administration. Zeno never recognised the rule of Romulus as emperor in the west, given that Nepos, invested as emperor by Zeno's predecessor Leo I, still ruled in exile in Dalmatia.\nProblems with the Western Roman army, mainly composed of barbarian \"foederati\", had escalated throughout the 470s. The issues the army had with the central government had been what allowed Orestes to depose Nepos. In 476, the barbarian \"foederati\" in Italy, composed mainly of the Herules, Scirians and Turcilingians, demanded land in Italy to settle on. Orestes refused. The leader of the \"foederati\" was Odoacer, a barbarian officer of undetermined tribal affiliation. Orestes had once worked alongside Odoacer's father Edeko at the court of Attila. On 28 August 476, Odoacer defeated Orestes in battle at Ticinum, captured him and had him executed.\nOn 4 September, Odoacer captured Ravenna, killing Orestes' deputy and brother Paulus during the fighting. Romulus was captured and deposed, whereafter Odoacer assumed control of Italy as its first king. Odoacer sent Romulus' western imperial regalia to emperor Zeno in the east, and swore allegiance to him, ruling without further imperial successors in the west. According to the 5th-century Eastern Roman writer and historian Malchus, Odoacer may have forced Romulus himself, as his last official act as emperor, to send the imperial regalia and a \"letter of resignation\" to Zeno, writing that the Roman Empire from this point only required a single emperor, ruling from Constantinople. Though Zeno granted Odoacer the distinction of patrician, he also urged the king to accept Julius Nepos back as emperor in Italy. Though Odoacer nominally accepted Nepos as his sovereign, minting coins in his name, Nepos was never able to reoccupy Italy.\nLater life.\nOdoacer spared the life of the young Romulus on account of his \"youth and beauty\". Romulus was granted an annual pension of 6,000 \"solidi\" (the normal income of a wealthy Roman senator) and granted an estate in Campania, near Naples, called the \"Castellum Lucullanum\" (today called Castel dell'Ovo), originally built by the consul and general Lucius Licinius Lucullus in the 60s BC. \"Castellum Lucullanum\" had once served as the retirement villa of Tiberius (r.14\u201337), Rome's second emperor. By late antiquity, \"Castellum Lucullanum\" was likely fortified, and it likely functioned as a small administrative and military centre in Campania. Romulus was accompanied to Campania by a large retinue and some of his surviving relatives.\nRomulus may have been alive as late as 507 or 511, when Theodoric the Great, Odoacer's successor as king of Italy, wrote to a \"Romulus\" to confirm a grant made to him and his mother by Petrus Marcellinus Felix Liberius, the praetorian prefect of Italy, on Theodoric's authority. Per Thomas Hodgkin, who translated the letter in 1886, the identification of Romulus in the letter as Romulus Augustus is strengthened by the name \"Romulus\" by this point not being very common and by the letter not giving the Romulus in question any titles or honorifics. The absence of titles differentiates the letter from the vast majority of other letters preserved from Theodoric, as if neither the king nor his scribe were quite sure how to address a former emperor. If the Romulus in the letter is the same person as Romulus Augustulus, it is possible that the letter indicates that Romulus and his family had to renegotiate their financial arrangements and pension with the king because they had been drawn up under the reign of a different king. Given that Romulus is not mentioned in accounts of the later eastern Roman invasion of Italy in the mid-530s, he had likely died some time before the conflict.\nRomulus may have played a role in founding a monastery around the remains of Saint Severinus of Noricum at \"castellum Lucullanum\" in the 480s or early 490s. A Roman noblewoman by the name of Barbaria, possibly Romulus' mother, also aided in founding the monastery. This monastery became prominent under Pope Gregory I (r.590\u2013604) and was active until the 10th century.\nLegacy.\nVery few records survive of Romulus' reign. Any policies that he might have pursued are not known. The scant narrative record and few known coins, in addition to there not being any known inscriptions of significance or laws issued by the emperor, make him a shadowy and relatively inconsequential figure. Ralph W. Mathisen considered him in 1997 to have been \"perhaps even the least significant\" of the short-lived emperors near the end of the Western Roman Empire. When not seen as only inconsequential, opinions by historians on Romulus Augustus have been negative. In \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" (1776\u20131788), Edward Gibbon wrote that he \"assumed and disgraced the names of Romulus [and] Augustus\".\nRomulus Augustus is typically regarded as the last Western Roman emperor, or even the last Roman emperor overall, with his deposition seen as marking the end of the Western Roman Empire as a political entity. The deposition of Romulus is also one of the most commonly used dates by historians to mark the transition from antiquity to the medieval period. Romulus being seen as the last emperor over other contenders derives not only from Romulus having been the last emperor proclaimed in the west, but also from the poetic nature of being named after both Romulus, the founder of Rome, and Augustus, the first Roman emperor. Many historians have noted the coincidence that the last emperor combined the names of both the city's founder and the first emperor. In \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", Gibbon wrote that \"the appellations of the two great founders of the city and of the monarchy were thus strangely united in the last of their successors\".\nSome modern scholars consider Romulus' distinction as the last western emperor to be dubious. In particular, some historians, such as Ralph W. Mathisen and Marjeta \u0160a\u0161el Kos, have pointed to Julius Nepos as the actual last Western Roman emperor. Though he never regained Italy, Nepos continued to rule in Dalmatia, with support from Zeno and with nominal recognition by Odoacer, until he was murdered in 480. Throughout the duration of his brief reign, Romulus was never recognised in Constantinople, with the eastern court instead continuing to recognise Nepos as the legitimate western emperor.\nThough none would be widely recognised thereafter, Nepos also was not the last person to claim the western empire. From about 477 to 516, the Moorish \"dux\" Masties in North Africa claimed to be an emperor. In Visigothic Hispania, two Roman usurpers rose from the Ebro valley, attempting to claim imperial authority: Burdunellus (496) and Petrus (506).\nRomulus Augustus being identified as the last emperor of the western empire is a tradition that began already among eastern Roman historians and writers in the early 6th century. The earliest known writer to consider him as such was Marcellinus Comes (died c. 534), who wrote the following passage concerning Romulus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The western Empire of the Roman people, which first began in the seven hundred and ninth year after the founding of the City with Octavian Augustus, the first of the emperors, perished with this Augustulus, in the five-hundred and twenty-second year of the reign of Augustus' successor emperors. From this point on Gothic kings held power in Rome.\nLater Eastern Roman authors continued to regard him as the last emperor of the western empire. Procopius (c. 500\u2013after 565) considered Romulus to have been the last legitimate ruler in the west, as did Jordanes (also 6th century).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25791", "revid": "39997416", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25791", "title": "List of Roman emperors", "text": "The Roman emperors were the rulers of the Roman Empire from the granting of the name and title \"Augustus\" to Octavian by the Roman Senate in 27\u00a0BC onward. Augustus maintained a facade of Republican rule, rejecting monarchical titles but calling himself \"princeps senatus\" (first man of the Senate) and \"princeps civitatis\" (first citizen of the state). The title of Augustus was conferred on his successors to the imperial position, and emperors gradually grew more monarchical and authoritarian.\nThe style of government instituted by Augustus is called the Principate and continued until the late third or early fourth century. The modern word \"emperor\" derives from the title \"imperator\", that was granted by an army to a successful general; during the initial phase of the empire, the title was generally used only by the \"princeps\". For example, Augustus's official name was \"Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus\". The territory under command of the emperor had developed under the period of the Roman Republic as it invaded and occupied much of Europe and portions of North Africa and the Middle East. Under the republic, the Senate and People of Rome authorized provincial governors, who answered only to them, to rule regions of the empire. The chief magistrates of the republic were two consuls elected each year; consuls continued to be elected in the imperial period, but their authority was subservient to that of the emperor, who also controlled and determined their election. Often, the emperors themselves, or close family, were selected as consul.\nAfter the Crisis of the Third Century, Diocletian increased the authority of the emperor and adopted the title \"dominus noster\" (our lord). The rise of powerful barbarian tribes along the borders of the empire, the challenge they posed to the defense of far-flung borders as well as an unstable imperial succession led Diocletian to divide the administration of the Empire geographically with a co-\"augustus\" in 286. In 330, Constantine the Great, the emperor who accepted Christianity, established a second capital in Byzantium, which was renamed Constantinople. Historians consider the Dominate period of the empire to have begun with either Diocletian or Constantine, depending on the author. For most of the period from 286 to 480, there was more than one recognized senior emperor, with the division usually based on geographic regions. This division became permanent after the death of Theodosius I in 395, which historians have traditionally dated as the division between the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire. However, formally the Empire remained a single polity, with separate co-emperors in the separate courts.\nThe fall of the Western Roman Empire is dated either from the \"de facto\" date of 476, when Romulus Augustulus was deposed by the Germanic Herulians led by Odoacer, or the \"de jure\" date of 480, on the death of Julius Nepos, when Eastern emperor Zeno ended recognition of a separate Western court. Historians typically refer to the empire in the centuries that followed as the \"Byzantine Empire\", governed by the Byzantine emperors. Given that \"Byzantine\" is a later historiographical designation and the inhabitants and emperors of the empire continually maintained Roman identity, this designation is not used universally and continues to be a subject of specialist debate. Under Justinian I, in the sixth century, a large portion of the western empire was retaken, including Italy, Africa, and part of Spain. Over the course of the centuries thereafter, most of the imperial territories were lost, which eventually restricted the empire to Anatolia and the Balkans. The line of emperors continued until the death of Constantine XI Palaiologos at the fall of Constantinople in 1453, when the remaining territories were conquered by the Ottoman Turks led by Sultan Mehmed II. In the aftermath of the conquest, Mehmed II proclaimed himself \"kayser-i R\u00fbm\" (\"\"Caesar\" of the Romans\"), thus claiming to be the new emperor, a claim maintained by succeeding sultans. Competing claims of succession to the Roman Empire have also been forwarded by various other states and empires, and by numerous later pretenders.\nLegitimacy.\nWhile the imperial government of the Roman Empire was rarely called into question during its five centuries in the west and fifteen centuries in the east, individual emperors often faced unending challenges in the form of usurpation and perpetual civil wars. From the rise of Augustus, the first Roman emperor, in 27 BC to the sack of Rome in AD 455, there were over a hundred usurpations or attempted usurpations (an average of one usurpation or attempt about every four years). From the murder of Commodus in 192 until the fifth century, there was scarcely a single decade without succession conflicts and civil war. Very few emperors died of natural causes, with regicide in practical terms having become the expected end of a Roman emperor by late antiquity. The distinction between a usurper and a legitimate emperor is a blurry one, given that a large number of emperors that were commonly considered legitimate began their rule as usurpers, revolting against the previous legitimate emperor.\nTrue legitimizing structures and theories were weak, or wholly absent in the Roman Empire, and there were no true objective legal criteria for being acclaimed emperor beyond acceptance by the Roman army. Dynastic succession was not legally formalized, but also not uncommon, with powerful rulers sometimes succeeding in passing power on to their children or other relatives. While dynastic ties could bring someone to the throne, they were not a guarantee that their rule would not be challenged. With the exception of Titus (r.79\u201381; son of Vespasian), no son of an emperor who ruled after the death of his father died a natural death until Constantine I in 337. Control of Rome itself and approval of the Roman Senate held some importance as legitimising factors, but were mostly symbolic. Emperors who began their careers as usurpers had often been deemed public enemies by the senate before they managed to take the city. Emperors did not need to be acclaimed or crowned in Rome itself, as demonstrated in the Year of the Four Emperors (69), when claimants were crowned by armies in the Roman provinces, and the senate's role in legitimising emperors had almost faded into insignificance by the Crisis of the Third Century (235\u2013285). By the end of the third century, Rome's importance was mainly ideological, with several emperors and usurpers even beginning to place their court in other cities in the empire, closer to the imperial frontier.\nCommon methods used by emperors to assert claims of legitimacy, such as proclamation by the army, blood connections (sometimes fictitious) to past emperors, wearing imperial regalia, distributing one's own coins or statues and claims to pre-eminent virtue through propaganda, were pursued just as well by many usurpers as they were by legitimate emperors. There were no constitutional or legal distinctions that differentiated legitimate emperors and usurpers. In ancient Roman texts, the differences between emperors and \"tyrants\" (the term typically used for usurpers) is often a moral one (with the tyrants ascribed wicked behaviour) rather than a legal one. Typically, the actual distinction was whether the claimant had been victorious or not. In the \"Historia Augusta\", an ancient Roman collection of imperial biographies, the usurper Pescennius Niger (193\u2013194) is expressly noted to only be a tyrant because he was defeated by Septimius Severus (r.193\u2013211). This is also followed in modern historiography, where, in the absence of constitutional criteria separating them, the main factor that distinguishes usurpers from legitimate Roman emperors is their degree of success. What makes a figure who began as a usurper into a legitimate emperor is typically either that they managed to gain the recognition from a more senior, legitimate emperor, or that they managed to defeat a more senior, legitimate emperor and seize power from them by force.\nList inclusion criteria.\nGiven that a concept of constitutional legitimacy was irrelevant in the Roman Empire, and emperors were only 'legitimate' in so far as they were able to be accepted in the wider empire, this list of emperors operates on a collection of inclusion criteria:\nIn the case of non-dynastic emperors after or in the middle of the rule of a dynasty, it is customary among historians to group them together with the rulers of said dynasty, an approach that is followed in this list. Dynastic breaks with non-dynastic rulers are indicated with thickened horizontal lines.\n\"Note: The other claimants during the Year of the Five Emperors were Pescennius Niger and Clodius Albinus, generally regarded as usurpers.\"\nPrincipate (27 BC \u2013 AD 284).\nSeveran dynasty (193\u2013235).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Varying ascribed status\nCrisis of the Third Century (235\u2013284).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Varying ascribed status\nDominate (284\u2013476).\nTetrarchy (293\u2013324).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\nConstantinian dynasty (306\u2013363).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\nValentinianic dynasty (364\u2013392).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\nTheodosian dynasty (379\u2013457).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\nLater Eastern emperors (457\u20131453).\nIsaurian (Syrian) dynasty (717\u2013802).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(&amp;num;) \u2013 Ambiguous legitimacy\nDoukas dynasty (1059\u20131078).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0(\u00a7) \u2013 Varying ascribed status\n\"Note: Roman rule in Constantinople was interrupted with the capture and sack of the city by the crusaders in 1204, which led to the establishment of the Frankokratia. Though the crusaders created a new line of Latin emperors in the city, modern historians recognize the line of emperors of the Laskaris dynasty, reigning in Nicaea, as the legitimate Roman emperors during the struggle for Constantinople because the Nicene Empire eventually retook the city. For other lines of claimant emperors, see List of Trapezuntine emperors and List of Thessalonian emperors.\"\n\"Note: The Empire had up to three capitals: Selymbria, Thessalonica and Constantinople.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25792", "revid": "49836368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25792", "title": "Roman calendar", "text": "Calendar used by the Roman Kingdom and Roman Republic\nThe Roman calendar was the calendar used by the Roman Kingdom and Roman Republic. Although the term is primarily used for Rome's pre-Julian calendars, it is often used inclusively of the Julian calendar established by Julius Caesar in 46\u00a0BC.\nAccording to most Roman accounts, their original calendar was established by their legendary first king Romulus. It consisted of ten months, beginning in spring with March and leaving winter as an unassigned span of days before the next year. These months each had 30 or 31 days and ran for 38 nundinal cycles, each forming a kind of eight-day week\u2014nine days counted inclusively in the Roman manner\u2014and ending with religious rituals and a public market. This fixed calendar bore traces of its origin as an observational lunar one. In particular, the most important days of each month\u2014its kalends, nones, and ides\u2014seem to have derived from the new moon, the first-quarter moon, and the full moon respectively. To a late date, the College of Pontiffs formally proclaimed each of these days on the Capitoline Hill and Roman dating counted down inclusively towards the next such day in any month. (For example, the year-end festival of Terminalia on 23February was called , the 6th day before the March kalends.)\nRomulus's successor Numa Pompilius was then usually credited with a revised calendar that divided winter between the two months of January and February, shortened most other months accordingly, and brought everything into rough alignment with the solar year by some system of intercalation. This is a typical element of lunisolar calendars and was necessary to keep the Roman religious festivals and other activities in their proper seasons.\nModern historians dispute various points of this account. It is possible the original calendar was agriculturally based, observational of the seasons and stars rather than of the moon, with ten months of varying length filling the entire year. If this ever existed, it would have changed to the lunisolar system later credited to Numa during the kingdom or early Republic under the influence of the Etruscans and of Pythagorean Southern Italian Greeks. After the establishment of the Republic, years began to be dated by consulships but the calendar and its rituals were otherwise very conservatively maintained until the Late Republic. Even when the nundinal cycles had completely departed from correlation with the moon's phases, a pontiff was obliged to meet the sacred king, to claim that he had observed the new moon, and to offer a sacrifice to Juno to solemnize each kalends.\nIt is clear that, for a variety of reasons, the intercalation necessary for the system's accuracy was not always observed. Astronomical events recorded in Livy show the civil calendar had varied from the solar year by an entire season in 190 BC and was still two months off in 168 BC. By the 191 BC or before, control of intercalation was given to the pontifex maximus but\u2014as these were often active political leaders like Caesar\u2014political considerations continued to interfere with its regular application.\nVictorious in civil war, Caesar reformed the calendar in 46 BC, coincidentally making the year of his third consulship last for 446days. This new Julian calendar was an entirely solar one, influenced by the Egyptian calendar. In order to avoid interfering with Rome's religious ceremonies, the reform distributed the unassigned days among the months (towards their ends) and did not adjust any nones or ides, even in months which came to have 31days. The Julian calendar was designed to have a single leap day every fourth year by repeating February 24 (a doubled or ) but, following Caesar's assassination, the priests mistakenly added the bissextile () leap day every three years due to their inclusive counting. In order to bring the calendar back to its proper place, Augustus was obliged to suspend intercalation for one or two decades.\nAt 365.25 days, the Julian calendar remained slightly longer than the solar year (365.24 days). By the 16th century, the date of Easter had shifted so far away from the vernal equinox that Pope Gregory\u00a0XIII ordered a further correction to the calendar method, resulting in the establishment of the modern Gregorian calendar.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric calendar.\nThe original Roman calendar is usually believed to have been an observational lunar calendar whose months ended and began from the new moon. Because a lunar cycle is about 29.5 days long, such months would have varied between 29 and 30 days. Twelve such months would have fallen 10 or 11 days short of the solar year and, without adjustment, such a year would have quickly rotated out of alignment with the seasons in the manner of the Islamic calendar. Given the seasonal aspects of the calendar and its associated religious festivals, this was presumably avoided through some form of arbitrary curtailment or intercalation or through the suspension of the calendar during winter.\nAgainst this, Michels has argued that the early calendars used by Rome and its neighbors were more probably observational of seasonal markers in nature (the leafing of trees), animal behavior (the migration of birds), and the agricultural cycle (the ripening of grain) combined with observation of stars in the night sky. She considers that this more sensibly accounts for later legends of Romulus's decimal year and the great irregularity in Italian month lengths recorded in Censorinus. Roman works on agriculture including those of Cato, Varro, Vergil, Columella, and Pliny invariably date their practices based on suitable conditions or upon the rising of stars, with only occasional supplementary mention of the civil calendar of their times until the 4th or 5th century author Palladius. Augury, formal Roman ornithomancy, continued to be the focus of a prestigious dedicated priesthood until at least the end of the 4th century. Although most Roman festivals in the historical record were closely tied to the nundinal cycle of the later calendar, there remained several moveable feasts (, \"proclaimed festivals\") like the Sementivae that were dependent on local conditions. Michels suggests this was the original state of all ancient festivals, marking divisions between the seasons and occasions within them.\nLegendary 10-month calendar.\nThe Romans themselves usually described their first organized year as one with ten fixed months, a decimal division fitting general Roman practice. There were four months of \"31\" days\u2014March, May, Quintilis, and October\u2014called \"full months\" () and six months of \"30\" days\u2014April, June, Sextilis, September, November, and December\u2014called \"hollow months\" (\"\"). These \"304\"\u00a0days made up exactly 38\u00a0nundinal cycles. The months were kept in alignment with the moon, however, by counting the new moon as the last day of the first month and simultaneously the first day of the next month. The system is usually said to have left the remaining two to three months of the year as an unorganized \"winter\", since they were irrelevant to the farming cycle. Macrobius claims the 10-month calendar was fixed and allowed to shift until the summer months were completely misplaced, at which time additional days belonging to no month were simply inserted into the calendar until it seemed things were restored to their proper place. Licinius Macer's lost history apparently similarly stated that even the earliest Roman calendar employed intercalation.\nLater Roman writers usually credited this calendar to Romulus, their legendary first king and culture hero, although this was common with other practices and traditions whose origin had been lost to them. Censorinus considered him to have borrowed the system from Alba Longa, his supposed birthplace. Some scholars doubt the existence of this calendar at all, as it is only attested in late Republican and Imperial sources and supported only by the misplaced names of the months from September to December. R\u00fcpke also finds the coincidence of the length of the supposed \"Romulan\" year with the length of the first ten months of the Julian calendar to indicate that it is an interpretation by late Republican writers.\nOther traditions existed alongside this one, however. Plutarch's \"Parallel Lives\" recounts that Romulus's calendar had been solar but adhered to the general principle that the year should last for 360\u00a0days. Months were employed secondarily and haphazardly, with some counted as 20\u00a0days and others as 35 or more. Plutarch records that while one tradition is that Numa added two new months to a ten-month calendar, another version is that January and February were originally the last two months of the year and Numa just moved them to the start of the year, so that January (named after a peaceful ruler called Janus) would come before March (which was named for Mars, the god of war).\nRome's 8-day week, the nundinal cycle, was shared with the Etruscans, who used it as the schedule of royal audiences. It was presumably a part of the early calendar and was credited in Roman legend variously to Romulus and Servius Tullius.\nRepublican calendar.\nThe attested calendar of the Roman Republic was quite different. It had twelve months, already including January and February during the winter.\nAccording to Livy, it was Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome (715\u2013673 BC), who divided the year into twelve lunar months (History of Rome, I.19). Fifty days, says Censorinus, were added to the calendar and a day taken from each month of thirty days to provide for the two winter months: Januarius (January) and Februarius (February), both of which had 28 days (The Natal Day, XX). This was a lunar year of 354 days but, because of the Roman superstition about even numbers, an additional day was added to January to make the calendar 355 days long. Auspiciously, each month now had an odd number of days: Martius (March), Maius (May), Quinctilis (July), and October continued to have 31; the other months, 29, except for February, which had 28 days. Considered unlucky, it was devoted to rites of purification (februa) and expiation appropriate to the last month of the year. (Although these legendary beginnings attest to the venerability of the lunar calendar of the Roman Republic, its historical origin probably was the publication of a revised calendar by the Decemviri in 450 BC as part of the Twelve Tables, Rome's first code of law.)\nThe inequality between the lunar year of 355 days and the tropical year of 365.25 days led to a shortfall over four years of (10.25 \u00d7 4) = 41 days. Theoretically, 22 days were interpolated into the calendar in the second year of the four-year cycle and 23 days in the fourth. This produced an excess of four days over the four years in line with the normal one day excess over one year. The method of correction was to truncate February by five days and follow it with the intercalary month which thus commenced (normally) on the day after February 23 and had either 27 or 28 days. February 23 was the Terminalia and in a normal year it was \"\" Thus the dates of the festivals of the last five days of February were preserved on account of them being actually named and counted inclusively in days before the kalends of March; they were traditionally part of the celebration for the new year. There was occasionally a delay of one day (a being inserted between February 23 and the start of the ) for the purpose of avoiding a clash between a particular festival and a particular day of the week (see for another example). The Roman superstitions concerning the numbering and order of the months seem to have arisen from Pythagorean superstitions concerning the luckiness of odd numbers.\nThese Pythagorean-based changes to the Roman calendar were generally credited by the Romans to Numa Pompilius, Romulus's successor and the second of Rome's seven kings, as were the two new months of the calendar. Most sources thought he had established intercalation with the rest of his calendar. Although Livy's Numa instituted a lunar calendar, the author claimed the king had instituted a 19-year system of intercalation equivalent to the Metonic cycle centuries before its development by Babylonian and Greek astronomers. Plutarch's account claims he ended the former chaos of the calendar by employing 12months totalling 354days\u2014the length of the lunar and Greek years\u2014and a biennial intercalary month of 22days called Mercedonius.\nAccording to Livy's Periochae, the beginning of the consular year changed from March to 1January in 153BC to respond to a rebellion in Hispania. Plutarch believed Numa was responsible for placing January and February first in the calendar; Ovid states January began as the first month and February the last, with its present order owing to the Decemvirs. W. Warde Fowler believed the Roman priests continued to treat January and February as the last months of the calendar throughout the Republican period.\nAccording to the later writers Censorinus and Macrobius, to correct the mismatch of the correspondence between months and seasons due to the excess of one day of the Roman average year over the tropical year, the insertion of the intercalary month was modified according to the scheme: common year (355 days), leap year with 23-day February followed by 27-day Mercedonius (377 days), common year, leap year with 23-day February followed by 28-day Mercedonius (378 days), and so on for the first 16 years of a 24-year cycle. In the last 8 years, the intercalation took place with the month of Mercedonius only 27 days, except the last intercalation which did not happen. Hence, there would be a typical common year followed by a leap year of 377 days for the next 6 years and the remaining 2 years would sequentially be common years. The result of this twenty-four-year pattern was of great precision for the time: 365.25 days, as shown by the following calculation:\nformula_1\nThe consuls' terms of office were not always a modern calendar year, but ordinary consuls were elected or appointed annually. The traditional list of Roman consuls used by the Romans to date their years began in 509 BC.\nFlavian reform.\nGnaeus Flavius, a secretary (\"scriba\") to censor App. Claudius Caecus, introduced a series of reforms in 304 BC. Their exact nature is uncertain, although he is thought to have begun the custom of publishing the calendar in advance of the month, depriving the priests of some of their power but allowing for a more consistent calendar for official business.\nJulian reform.\nJulius Caesar, following his victory in his civil war and in his role as \"pontifex maximus\", ordered a reformation of the calendar in 46 BC. This was undertaken by a group of scholars apparently including the Alexandrian Sosigenes and the Roman M. Flavius. Its main lines involved the insertion of ten additional days throughout the calendar and regular intercalation of a single leap day every fourth year to bring the Roman calendar into close agreement with the solar year. The year 46 BC was the last of the old system and included three intercalary months, the first inserted in February and two more\u2014' and '\u2014before the kalends of December.\nLater reforms.\nAfter Caesar's assassination, Mark Antony had Caesar's birth month Quintilis renamed July (') in his honor. After Antony's defeat at Actium, Augustus assumed control of Rome and, finding the priests had (owing to their inclusive counting) been intercalating every third year instead of every fourth, suspended the addition of leap days to the calendar for one or two decades until its proper position had been restored. See Julian calendar: Leap year error. In 8 BC, the plebiscite \"Lex Pacuvia de Mense Augusto\" renamed Sextilis August (') in his honor.\nIn large part, this calendar continued unchanged under the Roman Empire. (Egyptians used the related Alexandrian calendar, which Augustus had adapted from their wandering ancient calendar to maintain its alignment with Rome's.) A few emperors altered the names of the months after themselves or their family, but such changes were abandoned by their successors. Diocletian began the 15-year indiction cycles beginning from the AD 297 census; these became the required format for official dating under Justinian. Constantine formally established the 7-day week by making Sunday an official holiday in 321. Consular dating became obsolete following the abandonment of appointing nonimperial consuls in AD 541. The Roman method of numbering the days of the month never became widespread in the Hellenized eastern provinces and was eventually abandoned by the Byzantine Empire in its calendar.\nDays.\nRoman dates were counted inclusively forward to the next one of three principal days within each month:\nThese are thought to reflect a prehistoric lunar calendar, with the kalends proclaimed after the sighting of the first sliver of the new crescent moon a day or two after the new moon, the nones occurring on the day of the first-quarter moon, and the ides on the day of the full moon. The kalends of each month were sacred to Juno and the ides to Jupiter. The day before each was known as its eve ('); the day after each (') was considered particularly unlucky.\nThe days of the month were expressed in early Latin using the ablative of time, denoting points in time, in the contracted form \"the 6thDecember Kalends\" ('). In classical Latin, this use continued for the three principal days of the month but other days were idiomatically expressed in the accusative case, which usually expressed a duration of time, and took the form \"6th day before the December Kalends\" ('). This anomaly may have followed the treatment of days in Greek, reflecting the increasing use of such date phrases as an absolute phrase able to function as the object of another preposition, or simply originated in a mistaken agreement of ' with the preposition ' once it moved to the beginning of the expression. In late Latin, this idiom was sometimes abandoned in favor of again using the ablative of time.\nThe kalends were the day for payment of debts and the account books (\"\") kept for them gave English its word \"calendar\". The public Roman calendars were the \"fasti\", which designated the religious and legal character of each month's days. The Romans marked each day of such calendars with the letters:\nEach day was also marked by a letter from A to H to indicate its place within the nundinal cycle of market days.\nWeeks.\nThe nundinae were the market days which formed a kind of weekend in Rome, Italy, and some other parts of Roman territory. By Roman inclusive counting, they were reckoned as \"ninth days\" although they actually occurred every eighth day. Because the republican and Julian years were not evenly divisible into eight-day periods, Roman calendars included a column giving every day of the year a nundinal letter from A to H marking its place in the cycle of market days. Each year, the letter used for the markets would shift 2\u20135 letters along the cycle. As a day when the city swelled with rural plebeians, they were overseen by the aediles and took on an important role in Roman legislation, which was supposed to be announced for three nundinal weeks (between 17 and 24 days) in advance of its coming to a vote. The patricians and their clients sometimes exploited this fact as a kind of filibuster, since the tribunes of the plebs were required to wait another three-week period if their proposals could not receive a vote before dusk on the day they were introduced. Superstitions arose concerning the bad luck that followed a nundinae on the nones of a month or, later, on the first day of January. Intercalation was supposedly used to avoid such coincidences, even after the Julian reform of the calendar.\nThe 7-day week began to be observed in Italy in the early imperial period, as practitioners and converts to eastern religions introduced Hellenistic and Babylonian astrology, the Jewish Saturday sabbath, and the Christian Lord's Day. The system was originally used for private worship and astrology but had replaced the nundinal week by the time Constantine made Sunday (\"\") an official day of rest in AD\u00a0321. The hebdomadal week was also reckoned as a cycle of letters from A to G; these were adapted for Christian use as the dominical letters.\nMonths.\nThe names of Roman months originally functioned as adjectives (e.g., the January kalends occur in the January month) before being treated as substantive nouns in their own right (e.g., the kalends of January occur in January). Some of their etymologies are well-established: January and March honor the gods Janus and Mars; July and August honor Julius Caesar and his successor, the emperor Augustus; and the months Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November, and December are archaic adjectives formed from the ordinal numbers from 5 to 10, their position in the calendar when it began around the spring equinox in March. Others are uncertain. February may derive from the Februa festival or its eponymous ' (\"purifications, expiatory offerings\"), whose name may be either Sabine or preserve an archaic word for sulphuric. April may relate to the Etruscan goddess Apru or the verb ' (\"to open\"). May and June may honor Maia and Juno or derive from archaic terms for \"senior\" and \"junior\". A few emperors attempted to add themselves to the calendar after Augustus, but without enduring success.\nIn classical Latin, the days of each month were usually reckoned as:\n \nDates after the ides count forward to the kalends of the next month and are expressed as such. For example, March 19 was expressed as \"the 14th day before the April Kalends\" ('), without a mention of March itself. The day after a kalends, nones, or ides was also often expressed as the \"day after\" (') owing to their special status as particularly unlucky \"black days\".\nThe anomalous status of the new 31-day months under the Julian calendar was an effect of Caesar's desire to avoid affecting the festivals tied to the nones and ides of various months. However, because the dates at the ends of the month all counted forward to the next kalends, they were all shifted by one or two days by the change. This created confusion with regard to certain anniversaries. For instance, Augustus's birthday on the 23rdday of September was ' in the old calendar but ' under the new system. The ambiguity caused honorary festivals to be held on either or both dates.\nIntercalation.\nThe Republican calendar only had 355days, which meant that it would quickly desynchronize from the solar year, causing, for example, agricultural festivals to occur out of season. The Roman solution to this problem was to periodically lengthen the calendar by adding extra days \"within\" February. February was broken into two parts, each with an odd number of days. The first part ended with the Terminalia on the 23rd ('), which was considered the end of the religious year; the five remaining days beginning with the Regifugium on the 24th (') formed the second part; and the intercalary month Mercedonius was inserted between them. In such years, the days between the ides and the Regifugium were counted down to either the Intercalary Kalends or to the Terminalia. The intercalary month counted down to nones and ides on its 5th and 13th day in the manner of the other short months. The remaining days of the month counted down towards the March Kalends, so that the end of Mercedonius and the second part of February were indistinguishable to the Romans, one ending on ' and the other picking up at ' and bearing the normal festivals of such dates.\nApparently because of the confusion of these changes or uncertainty as to whether an intercalary month would be ordered, dates after the February ides are attested as sometimes counting down towards the Quirinalia (February 17), the Feralia (February 21), or the Terminalia (February 23) rather than the intercalary or March kalends.\nThe third-century writer Censorinus says:\nWhen it was thought necessary to add (every two years) an intercalary month of 22 or 23 days, so that the civil year should correspond to the natural (solar) year, this intercalation was in preference made in February, between the Terminalia [23rd] and Regifugium [24th].\nThe fifth-century writer Macrobius says that the Romans intercalated 22 and 23 days in alternate years; the intercalation was placed after February 23 and the remaining five days of February followed. To avoid the nones falling on a nundine, where necessary an intercalary day was inserted \"in the middle of the Terminalia, where they placed the intercalary month\". This appears to have been generally correct. In 170BC, Intercalaris began on the second day after February 23 and, in 167BC, it began on the day after February 23.\nVarro, writing in the first centuryBC, says \"the twelfth month was February, and when intercalations take place the five last days of this month are removed.\" Since all the days after the Ides of Intercalaris were counted down to the beginning of March, the month had either 27days (making 377 for the year) or 28 (making 378 for the year).\nThere is another theory which says that in intercalary years February had 23 or 24 days and Intercalaris had 27. No date is offered for the Regifugium in 378-day years. Macrobius describes a further refinement whereby, in one 8-year period within a 24-year cycle, there were only three intercalary years, each of 377days. This refinement brings the calendar back in line with the seasons and averages the length of the year to 365.25days over 24years.\nThe Pontifex Maximus determined when an intercalary month was to be inserted. On average, this happened in alternate years. The system of aligning the year through intercalary months broke down at least twice: the first time was during and after the Second Punic War. It led to the reform of the 191\u00a0BC Acilian Law on Intercalation, the details of which are unclear, but it appears to have successfully regulated intercalation for over a century. The second breakdown was in the middle of the first century\u00a0BC and may have been related to the increasingly chaotic and adversarial nature of Roman politics at the time. The position of Pontifex Maximus was not a full-time job; it was held by a member of the Roman elite, who would almost invariably be involved in the machinations of Roman politics. Because the term of office of elected Roman magistrates was defined in terms of a Roman calendar year, a Pontifex Maximus had an incentive to lengthen a year in which he or his allies were in power or shorten a year in which his political opponents held office.\nAlthough there are many stories to interpret the intercalation, a period of 22 or 23 days is always &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444synodic month short. Obviously, the month beginning shifts forward (from the new moon, to the third quarter, to the full moon, to the first quarter, back the new moon) after intercalation.\nYears.\nAs mentioned above, Rome's legendary 10-month calendar notionally lasted for 304days but was usually thought to make up the rest of the solar year during an unorganized winter period. The unattested but almost certain lunar year and the pre-Julian civil year were 354 or 355 days long, with the difference from the solar year more or less corrected by an irregular intercalary month. The Julian year was 365days long, with a leap day doubled in length every fourth year, almost equivalent to the present Gregorian system.\nThe calendar era before and under the Roman kings is uncertain but dating by regnal years was common in antiquity. Under the Roman Republic, from 509 BC, years were most commonly described in terms of their reigning ordinary consuls. (Temporary and honorary consuls were sometimes elected or appointed but were not used in dating.) Consular lists were displayed on the public calendars. After the institution of the Roman Empire, regnal dates based on the emperors' terms in office became more common. Some historians of the later republic and early imperial eras dated from the legendary founding of the city of Rome (\"\" or AVC). Varro's date for this was 753 BC but other writers used different dates, varying by several decades. Such dating was, however, never widespread. After the consuls waned in importance, most Roman dating was regnal or followed Diocletian's 15-year Indiction tax cycle. These cycles were not distinguished, however, so that \"year 2 of the indiction\" may refer to any of 298, 313, 328, &amp;c. The Orthodox subjects of the Byzantine Empire used various Christian eras, including those based on Diocletian's persecutions, Christ's incarnation, and the supposed age of the world.\nThe Romans did not have records of their early calendars but, like modern historians, assumed the year originally began in March on the basis of the names of the months following June. The consul M. Fulvius Nobilior (r. 189 BC) wrote a commentary on the calendar at his Temple of Hercules Musarum that claimed January had been named for Janus because the god faced both ways, suggesting it had been instituted as a first month. It was, however, usually said to have been instituted along with February, whose nature and festivals suggest it had originally been considered the last month of the year. The consuls' term of office\u2014and thus the order of the years under the republic\u2014seems to have changed several times. Their inaugurations were finally moved to January 1(') in 153BC to allow Q. Fulvius Nobilior to attack Segeda in Spain during the Celtiberian Wars, before which they had occurred on March 15 ('). There is reason to believe the inauguration date had been May 1 during the 3rd century BC until 222BC and Livy mentions earlier inaugurations on May 15 ('), July 1 ('), August 1 ('), October 1('), and December 15 (\"\"). Under the Julian calendar, the year began on January 1 but years of the Indiction cycle began on September 1.\nIn addition to Egypt's separate calendar, some provinces maintained their records using a local era. Africa dated its records sequentially from 39BC; Spain from AD38. This dating system continued as the Spanish era used in medieval Spain.\nConversion to Julian or Gregorian dates.\nThe continuity of names from the Roman to the Gregorian calendar can lead to the mistaken belief that Roman dates correspond to Julian or Gregorian ones. In fact, the essentially complete list of Roman consuls allows general certainty of years back to the establishment of the Roman Republic but the uncertainty as to the end of lunar dating and the irregularity of Roman intercalation means that dates which can be independently verified are invariably weeks to months outside of their \"proper\" place. Two astronomical events dated by Livy show the calendar four months out of alignment with the proleptic Julian date in 190BC and two months out of alignment in 168BC. Thus, \"the year of the consulship of Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus and Publius Licinius Crassus\" (usually given as \"205BC\") actually began on March 15, 205BC, and ended on March 14, 204 BC, according to the Roman calendar but may have begun as early as November or December 206BC owing to its misalignment. Even following the establishment of the Julian calendar, the leap years were not applied correctly by the Roman priests, meaning dates are a few days out of their \"proper\" place until a few decades into Augustus's reign.\nGiven the paucity of records regarding the state of the calendar and its intercalation, historians have reconstructed the correspondence of Roman dates to their Julian and Gregorian equivalents from disparate sources. There are detailed accounts of the decades leading up to the Julian reform, particularly the speeches and letters of Cicero, which permit an established chronology back to about 58BC. The nundinal cycle and a few known synchronisms\u2014e.g., a Roman date in terms of the Attic calendar and Olympiad\u2014are used to generate contested chronologies back to the start of the First Punic War in 264BC. Beyond that, dates are roughly known based on clues such as the dates of harvests and seasonal religious festivals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25793", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25793", "title": "Radioactivity", "text": ""}
{"id": "25794", "revid": "19469698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25794", "title": "Revolver", "text": "Firearm with a cylinder holding cartridges\nA revolver is a repeating handgun with at least one barrel and a revolving cylinder containing multiple chambers (each holding a single cartridge) for firing. Because most revolver models hold six cartridges before needing to be reloaded, revolvers are commonly called six shooters or sixguns. Due to their rotating cylinder mechanism, they may also be called wheel guns.\nBefore firing, cocking the revolver's hammer partially rotates the cylinder, indexing one of the cylinder chambers into alignment with the barrel, allowing the bullet to be fired through the bore. By sequentially rotating through each chamber, the revolver allows the user to fire multiple times until having to reload the gun, unlike older single-shot firearms that had to be reloaded after each shot.\nThe hammer cocking in nearly all revolvers is manually driven and can be cocked either by the user using the thumb to directly pull back the hammer (as in single-action), or via internal linkage relaying the force of the trigger-pull (as in double-action), or both (as in double-action/single-action).\nSome rare revolver models utilize the blowback of the preceding shot to automatically cock the hammer and index the next chamber, although these self-loading revolvers (known as automatic revolvers, despite technically being semi-automatic) never gained any widespread usage.\nThough the majority of weapons using a revolver mechanism are handguns, other firearms may also have a revolver action. These include some models of rifles, shotguns, grenade launchers, and autocannons. Revolver weapons differ from Gatling-style rotary weapons in that in a revolver only the chambers rotate, while in a rotary weapon there are multiple full firearm actions with their own barrels which rotate around a common ammunition feed.\nFamous revolver models include the Colt 1851 Navy Revolver, the Webley, the Colt Single Action Army, the Colt Official Police, Smith &amp; Wesson Model 10, the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 29 of \"Dirty Harry\" fame, the Nagant M1895, and the Colt Python.\nAlthough largely surpassed in convenience and ammunition capacity by semi-automatic pistols, revolvers still remain popular as back-up and off-duty handguns among American law enforcement officers and security guards and are still common in the American private sector as defensive, sporting, and hunting firearms.\nHistory.\nIn the development of firearms, an important limiting factor was the time required to reload the weapon after it was fired. While the user was reloading, the weapon was useless, allowing an adversary to attack the user. Several approaches to the problem of increasing the rate of fire were developed, the earliest involving multi-barrelled weapons which allowed two or more shots without reloading. Later weapons featured multiple barrels revolving along a single axis.\nA matchlock revolver with a single barrel and four chambers held at the Tower of London was originally believed to have been invented some time in the 15th century, but has now been identified as an Indian matchlock of the 1800s. A revolving three-barrelled matchlock pistol in Venice is dated from at least 1548. During the late 16th century in China, Zhao Shi-zhen invented the Xun Lei Chong, a five-barreled musket revolver spear. Around the same time, the earliest examples of the modern revolver were made in Germany. These petronel weapons featured a single barrel with a revolving cylinder holding the powder and ball, with each cylinder having its own separate flash-pan and pan-cover. They would soon be made by many European gun-makers, in numerous designs and configurations. Of particular note is the gun attributed to John Dafte from c.1680, which is the earliest surviving specimen of automatic cylinder rotation. This gun combined in 'one package the three essential ingredients of a successful revolver: mechanical cylinder rotation, individual priming for each chamber, and a cylinder stop for barrel/cylinder alignment, all activated by cocking the firearm.' Commonalities in design suggest the weapon inspired a later, more compact imitation by the gunmaker Thomas Annely.\nIn 1821, the US Navy trialled a revolver belonging to Captain Artemus Wheeler; in 1819 and 1824, two committees of British artillery officers examined a similar revolver from Elisha Collier. FitzRoy Somerset, as secretary to the Master-General of the Ordnance the Duke of Wellington, reported that the gun had fired 'one hundred rounds in twenty-nine minutes at a target distant one-hundred yard, putting seventy-one balls through the target and lodging one in it... [with another] five rounds at two hundred yards... there was not a missfire in the 105 rounds.' The weapon was not adopted, however, for the same reason that previous similar guns had not been widely distributed: they were complicated, difficult to use and prohibitively expensive to make. A rare exception was the early 19th century popularity of multiple-barrel handguns called \"pepper-boxes\". Originally they were muzzleloaders, but in 1837, the Belgian gunsmith Mariette invented a hammerless pepperbox with a ring trigger and turn-off barrels that could be unscrewed.\nIn 1836, American Samuel Colt patented a popular revolver which led to the widespread use of the revolver. Colt used a ratchet and pawl mechanism to rotate the cylinder by cocking the hammer, which provided a reliable and repeatable way to index each round and did away with the need to manually rotate the cylinder. According to Colt, he came up with the idea for the revolver while at sea, inspired by the capstan and its similar ratchet and pawl mechanism, although similar examples of such revolvers did exist in museum collections and the existence of an earlier example could have precluded Colt registering a patent on the mechanism. Nevertheless, the new mechanism, coupled with Colt's ability as a salesman\u2014one historian describing him as 'a pioneer Madison Avenue-style pitchman'\u2014and his approach to manufacturing ensured his influence spread. The build quality of his company's guns became famous, and its armories in America and England trained several seminal generations of toolmakers and other machinists, who had great influence in other manufacturing efforts of the next half century.\nEarly revolvers were caplock muzzleloaders: the user had to pour black powder into each chamber, ram down a bullet on top of it, then place a percussion cap on the nipple at the rear of each chamber, where the hammer would fall on it and ignite the powder charge. This was similar to loading a traditional single-shot muzzle-loading pistol, except that the powder and shot could be loaded directly into the front of the cylinder rather than having to be loaded down the whole length of the barrel. Importantly, this allowed the barrel itself to be rifled, since the user was not required to force the tight-fitting bullet down the barrel in order to load it (a traditional muzzle-loading pistol had a smoothbore barrel and the shot was relatively loose-fitting, which allowed easy loading, but was much less accurate). After firing a shot, the user would raise their pistol vertically while cocking the hammer back for their next shot, so the fragments of the burst percussion cap would fall clear of the weapon and not jam the mechanism. Some of the most popular cap-and-ball revolvers were the Colt Model 1851 \"Navy\" model, 1860 \"Army\" model, and Colt Pocket Percussion Revolvers, all of which saw extensive use in the American Civil War. Although American revolvers were the most common, European arms makers were making numerous revolvers by that time as well, many of which found their way into the hands of the American forces. These included the single-action Lefaucheux and LeMat revolvers, as well as the Beaumont\u2013Adams and Tranter revolvers\u2014early double-action weapons in spite of being muzzle-loaders.\nIn 1854, Eugene Lefaucheux introduced the Lefaucheux Model 1854, the first revolver to use self-contained metallic cartridges rather than loose powder, pistol ball, and percussion caps. It is a single-action, pinfire revolver holding six rounds.\nOn November 17, 1856, Horace Smith and Daniel B. Wesson signed an agreement for the exclusive use of the Rollin White Patent at a rate of 25 cents for every revolver. Smith &amp; Wesson began production late in 1857, and enjoyed years of exclusive production of rear-loading cartridge revolvers in America due to their association with Rollin White, who held the patent and vigorously defended it against any perceived infringement by other manufacturers (much as Colt had done with his original patent on the revolver). Although White held the patent, other manufacturers were able to sell firearms using the design, provided they were willing to pay royalties.\nAfter White's patent expired in April 1869, a third extension was refused. Other gun-makers were then allowed to produce their own weapons using the rear-loading method, without having to pay a royalty on each gun sold. Early guns were often conversions of earlier cap-and-ball revolvers, modified to accept metallic cartridges loaded from the rear, but later models, such as the Colt Model 1872 \"open top\" and the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 3, were designed from the start as cartridge revolvers.\nIn 1873, Colt introduced the famous Model 1873, also known as the Single Action Army, the \"Colt .45\" (not to be confused with Colt-made models of the M1911 semi-automatic), and \"the Peacemaker\", one of the most famous handguns ever made. This popular design, which was a culmination of many of the advances introduced in earlier weapons, fired 6 metallic cartridges and was offered in over 30 different calibers and various barrel lengths. It is still in production, along with numerous clones and lookalikes, and its overall appearance has remained the same since 1873. Although originally made for the United States Army, the Model 1873 was widely distributed and popular with civilians, ranchers, lawmen, and outlaws alike. Its design has influenced countless other revolvers. Colt has discontinued its production twice, but resumed production due to popular demand.\nIn the U.S., the single-action revolver remained more popular than the double-action revolver until the late 19th century. In Europe, however, arms makers were quick to adopt the double-action trigger. While the U.S. was producing weapons like the Model 1873, European manufacturers were building double-action models like the French MAS Mod\u00e8le 1873 and the later British Enfield Mk I and II revolvers. (Britain relied on cartridge conversions of the earlier Beaumont\u2013Adams double-action prior to this.) Colt's first attempt at a double action revolver to compete with European manufacturers was the Colt Model 1877, which earned lasting notoriety for its complex, expensive, and fragile trigger mechanism, which in addition to failing frequently, also had a heavy trigger pull.\nIn 1889, Colt introduced the Model 1889, the first double action revolver with a \"swing-out\" cylinder, as opposed to a \"top-break\" or \"side-loading\" cylinder. Swing-out cylinders quickly caught on, because they combined the best features of earlier designs. Top-break actions had the ability to eject all empty shells simultaneously and exposed all chambers for easy reloading, but having the frame hinged into two halves weakened the gun and negatively affected accuracy due to the lack of rigidity. \"Side-loaders\", like the earlier Colt Model 1871 and 1873, had a rigid frame, but required the user to eject and load one chamber at a time as they rotated the cylinder to line each chamber up with the side-mounted loading gate. Smith &amp; Wesson followed seven years later with the Hand Ejector, Model 1896 in .32 S&amp;W Long caliber, followed by the very similar, yet improved, Model 1899 (later known as the Model 10), which introduced the new .38 Special cartridge. The Model 10 went on to become the best selling handgun of the 20th century, at 6,000,000 units, and the .38 Special is still the most popular chambering for revolvers in the world. These new guns were an improvement over the Colt 1889 design since they incorporated a combined center-pin and ejector rod to lock the cylinder in position, whereas the Colt 1889 did not use a center pin and the cylinder was prone to move out of alignment.\nRevolvers have remained popular in many areas, although for law enforcement and military personnel, they have largely been supplanted by magazine-fed semi-automatic pistols, such as the Beretta M9 and the SIG Sauer M17, especially in circumstances where faster reload times and higher cartridge capacity are important.\nPatents.\nIn 1815, (sometimes incorrectly dated as 1825) a French inventor called Julien Leroy patented a flintlock and percussion revolving rifle with a mechanically indexed cylinder and a priming magazine.\nElisha Collier of Boston, Massachusetts, patented a flintlock revolver in Britain in 1818, and significant numbers were being produced in London by 1822. The origination of this invention is in doubt, as similar designs were patented in the same year by Artemus Wheeler in the United States, and by Cornelius Coolidge in France. Samuel Colt submitted a British patent for his revolver in 1835 and a U.S. patent (number 138) on February 25, 1836, for a \"Revolving gun\", and made the first production model on March 5 of that year.\nAnother revolver patent was issued to Samuel Colt on August 29, 1839. The February 25, 1836, patent was then reissued as https:// entitled \"Revolving gun\" on October 24, 1848. This was followed by https:// on September 3, 1850, for a \"Revolver\", and by https:// on September 10, 1850, for a \"Revolver\". In 1855, Rollin White patented the bored-through cylinder entitled \"Improvement in revolving fire-arms\" https://. In 1856, Horace Smith &amp; Daniel Wesson formed a partnership (S&amp;W), then developed and manufactured a revolver chambered for a self-contained metallic cartridge. In 1993, https:// was issued to Roger C. Field for an economical device for minimizing the flash gap of a revolver between the barrel and the cylinder.\nDesign.\nA revolver has several firing chambers arranged in a circle in a cylindrical block; one at a time, these chambers are brought into alignment with the firing mechanism and barrel. In contrast, other repeating firearms, such as bolt-action, lever-action, pump-action, and semi-automatic, have a single firing chamber and a mechanism to load and extract cartridges into it.\nA single-action revolver requires the hammer to be pulled back by hand before each shot, which also revolves the cylinder. This leaves the trigger with one \"single action\" to perform\u2014releasing the hammer to fire the shot. In contrast, with a self-cocking, or double-action, revolver, one long squeeze of the trigger pulls back the hammer and revolves the cylinder, then finally fires the shot, thus requiring more force and distance to pull the trigger than in a single-action revolver. They can generally be fired faster than a single-action, but with reduced accuracy in the hands of most shooters.\nMost modern revolvers are \"traditional double-action\", which means they may operate either in single-action or self-cocking mode. The accepted meaning of \"double-action\" has come to be the same as \"self-cocking\", so modern revolvers that cannot be pre-cocked are called \"double-action-only\". These are intended for concealed carry, because the hammer of a traditional design is prone to snagging on clothes when drawn. Most revolvers do not come with accessory rails, which are used for mounting lights and lasers, except for the Smith &amp; Wesson M&amp;P R8 (.357 Magnum), Smith &amp; Wesson Model 325 Thunder Ranch (.45 ACP), and all versions of the Chiappa Rhino (.357 Magnum, 9\u00d719mm, .40 S&amp;W, or 9\u00d721mm) except for the 2\" and 3\" models, respectively. However, certain revolvers, such as the Taurus Judge and Charter Arms revolvers, can be fitted with accessory rails.\nRevolvers most commonly have 6 chambers, hence the common names of \"six-gun\" or \"six-shooter\". However, some revolvers have more or fewer than 6, depending on the size of the gun and caliber of the bullet. Each chamber has to be reloaded manually, which makes reloading a revolver a much slower procedure than reloading a semi-automatic pistol.\nCompared to autoloading handguns, a revolver is often much simpler to operate and may have greater reliability. For example, should a semiautomatic pistol fail to fire, clearing the chamber requires manually cycling the action to remove the errant round, as cycling the action normally depends on the energy of a cartridge firing. With a revolver, this is not necessary as none of the energy for cycling the revolver comes from the firing of the cartridge, but is instead supplied by the user either through cocking the hammer or, in a double-action design, by just squeezing the trigger. Another significant advantage of revolvers is superior ergonomics, particularly for users with small hands. A revolver's grip does not hold a magazine, and it can be designed or customized much more than the grip of a typical semi-automatic. Partially because of these reasons, revolvers still hold significant market share as concealed carry and home-defense weapons.\nA revolver can be kept loaded and ready to fire without inducing creep any springs and is not very dependent on lubrication for proper firing. Additionally, in the case of double-action-only revolvers there is no risk of accidental discharge from dropping alone, as the hammer is cocked by the trigger pull. However, the revolver's clockwork-like internal parts are relatively delicate and can become misaligned after a severe impact, and its revolving cylinder can become jammed by excessive dirt or debris.\nOver the long period of development of the revolver, many calibers have been used. Some of these have proved more durable during periods of standardization and some have entered general public awareness. Among these are the .22 Long Rifle, a caliber popular for target shooting and teaching novice shooters; .38 Special and .357 Magnum, known for police use; the .44 Magnum, famous from Clint Eastwood's \"Dirty Harry\" films; and the .45 Colt, used in the Colt revolver of the Wild West. Introduced in 2003, the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 500 is one of the most powerful revolvers, utilizing the .500 S&amp;W Magnum cartridge.\nBecause the rounds in a revolver are headspaced on the rim, some revolvers are capable of chambering more than one type of ammunition. Revolvers chambered in .44 Magnum will also chamber .44 Special and .44 Russian, likewise revolvers in .357 Magnum will safely chamber .38 Special, .38 Long Colt, and .38 Short Colt; while revolvers in .22 WMR can chamber .22 Long Rifle, .22 Long, and .22 Short, it is not safe to do so, due to differences in cartridge pressures and the fact that .22 WMR does not shoot a \"heeled\" bullet, along with differences in rim diameter that can allow high pressure gases to escape behind the cartridge and seriously injure the user. However, some .22 revolvers come with interchangeable cylinders so that .22 Long Rifle can be shot from a .22 WMR revolver. In 1996, the Medusa Model 47 was made with the ability to chamber 25 different cartridges with bullet diameters between .355\" and .357\".\nRevolver technology is also present in other weapons used by the U.S. military. Some autocannons and grenade launchers use mechanisms similar to revolvers, and some riot shotguns use spring-loaded cylinders holding up to 12 rounds. In addition to serving as backup guns, revolvers still fill the specialized role as a shield gun; law enforcement personnel using a \"bulletproof\" gun shield sometimes opt for a revolver instead of a self-loading pistol, because the slide of a pistol may strike the front of the shield when fired. Revolvers do not suffer from this disadvantage. A second revolver may be secured behind the shield to provide a quick means of continuity of fire. Many police also still use revolvers as their duty weapon due to their relative mechanical simplicity and ease of use.\nIn 2010, major revolver manufacturers started producing polymer frame revolvers like the Ruger LCR, Smith &amp; Wesson Bodyguard 38, and Taurus Protector Polymer. The new design incorporates polymer technology that lowers weight significantly, helps absorb recoil, and is strong enough to handle .38 Special +P and .357 Magnum loads. The polymer is only used on the lower frame and is joined to an upper frame, barrel, and cylinder that are made of metal alloy. Polymer technology is considered one of the major advancements in revolver history because the frame was previously always metal alloy and mostly a one-piece design.\nAnother 21st century development in revolver technology is the Chiappa Rhino, a revolver introduced by Italian manufacturer Chiappa in 2009, and first sold in the U.S. in 2010. The Rhino, built with the U.S. concealed carry market in mind, is designed so that the bullet fires from the bottom chamber of the cylinder instead of the top chamber, as is typical in revolvers. This is intended to reduce muzzle flip, allowing for faster and more accurate repeat shots. In addition, the cylinder cross-section is hexagonal instead of circular, further reducing the weapon's profile.\nLoading and unloading.\nFront-loading cylinder.\nThe first revolvers were \"front loading\" (also referred to as muzzleloading), and were similar to muskets in that the powder and bullet were loaded separately. These were caplocks or \"cap and ball\" revolvers, because the caplock method of priming was the first to be compact enough to make a practical revolver feasible. When loading, each chamber in the cylinder was rotated out of line with the barrel, and charged from the front with loose powder and an oversized bullet. Next, the chamber was aligned using the ramming lever underneath the barrel. Pulling the lever would drive a rammer into the chamber, pushing the ball securely in place. Finally, the user would place percussion caps on the nipples on the rear face of the cylinder.\nAfter each shot, a user was advised to raise the revolver vertically while cocking back the hammer so as to allow the fragments of the spent percussion cap to fall out safely. Otherwise, the fragments could fall into the revolver's mechanism and jam it. Caplock revolvers were vulnerable to \"chain fires\", wherein hot gas from a shot ignited the powder in the other chambers. This could be prevented by sealing the chambers with cotton, wax, or grease. Chain fire led to the shots hitting the shooters hand, which is one of the main reasons why revolver rifles were uncommon. By the time metallic cartridges became common, more effective mechanisms for a repeating rifle, such as lever-action, had been developed.\nLoading a cylinder in this manner was a slow and awkward process and generally could not be done in the midst of battle. Some soldiers avoided this by carrying multiple revolvers in the field. Another solution was to use a revolver with a detachable cylinder design. These revolvers allowed the shooter to quickly remove a cylinder and replace it with a full one.\nFixed cylinder designs.\nIn many of the first generation of cartridge revolvers (especially those that were converted after manufacture), the base pin on which the cylinder revolved was removed, and the cylinder taken out from the revolver for loading. Most revolvers using this method of loading are single-action revolvers, although Iver Johnson produced double-action models with removable cylinders. The removable-cylinder design is employed in some modern \"micro-revolvers\" (usually chambered in .22 rimfire and small enough to fit in the palm of the hand) to simplify their design.\nLater single-action revolver models with a fixed cylinder used a loading gate at the rear of the cylinder that allowed insertion of one cartridge at a time for loading, while a rod under the barrel could be pressed rearward to eject a fired case.\nThe loading gate on the original Colt designs (and on nearly all single-action revolvers since, such as the famous Colt Single Action Army) is on the right side, which was done to facilitate loading while on horseback; with the revolver held in the left hand with the reins of the horse, the cartridges can be ejected and loaded with the right hand.\nBecause the cylinders in these types of revolvers are firmly attached at the front and rear of the frame, and the frame is typically full thickness all the way around, fixed cylinder revolvers are inherently strong designs. Accordingly, many modern large caliber hunting revolvers tend to be based on the fixed cylinder design. Fixed cylinder revolvers can fire the strongest and most powerful cartridges, but at the price of being the slowest to load or unload since they cannot use speedloaders or moon clips to load multiple cartridges at once, as only one chamber is exposed at a time to the loading gate.\nTop-break cylinder.\nIn a top-break revolver, the frame is hinged at the bottom front of the cylinder. Releasing the lock and pushing the barrel down exposes the rear face of the cylinder. In most top-break revolvers, this act also operates an extractor that pushes the cartridges in the chambers back far enough that they will fall free, or can be removed easily. Fresh rounds are then inserted into the cylinder. The barrel and cylinder are then rotated back and locked in place, and the revolver is ready to fire.\nTop-break revolvers are able to be loaded more rapidly than fixed frame revolvers, especially with the aid of a speedloader or moon clip. However, this design is much weaker and cannot handle high pressure rounds. While this design has become mostly obsolete, supplanted by the stronger yet equally convenient swing-out cylinder design, manufacturers still make reproductions of late 19th century designs for use in cowboy action shooting.\nThe first top-break revolver was patented in France and Britain at the end of December in 1858 by Devisme. The most commonly found top-break revolvers were manufactured by Smith &amp; Wesson, Webley &amp; Scott, Iver Johnson, Harrington &amp; Richardson, Manhattan Fire Arms, Meriden Arms, and Forehand &amp; Wadsworth.\nTip-up cylinder.\nThe tip-up revolver was the first design to be used with metallic cartridges in the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 1, on which the barrel pivoted upwards, hinged on the forward end of the topstrap. On the S&amp;W tip-up revolvers, the barrel release catch is located on both sides of the frame in front of the trigger. Smith &amp; Wesson discontinued it in the third series of the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 1 1/2 but it was fairly widely used in Europe in the 19th century after a patent by Spirlet in 1870, which also included an ejector star.\nSwing-out cylinder.\nThe most modern method of loading and unloading a revolver is by means of the \"swing-out cylinder\". The first swing-out cylinder revolver was patented in France and Britain at the end of December in 1858 by Devisme. The cylinder is mounted on a pivot that is parallel to the chambers, and the cylinder swings out and down (to the left in most cases). An extractor is fitted, operated by a rod projecting from the front of the cylinder assembly. When pressed, it will push all fired rounds free simultaneously (as in top-break models, the travel is designed to not completely extract longer, unfired rounds). The cylinder may then be loaded (individually or with the use of a speedloader), closed, and latched in place.\nThe pivoting part that supports the cylinder is called the crane; it is the weak point of swing-out cylinder designs. Using the method often portrayed in movies and television of flipping the cylinder open and closed with a flick of the wrist can actually cause the crane to bend over time, throwing the cylinder out of alignment with the barrel. Lack of alignment between chamber and barrel is dangerous, as it can impede the bullet's transition from chamber to barrel. This causes higher pressures in the chamber, bullet damage, and the potential for an explosion if the bullet becomes stuck.\nThe shock of firing can exert a great deal of stress on the crane, as in most designs the cylinder is only held closed at one point, the rear of the cylinder. Stronger designs, such as the Ruger Super Redhawk, use a lock in the crane as well as the lock at the rear of the cylinder. This latch provides a more secure bond between cylinder and frame, and allows the use of larger, more powerful cartridges. Swing-out cylinders are not as strong as fixed cylinders, and great care must be taken with the cylinder when loading, so as not to damage the crane.\nOther designs.\nOne unique design was designed by Merwin Hulbert in which the barrel and cylinder assembly were rotated 90\u00b0 and pulled forward to eject shells from the cylinder.\nAction.\nSingle-action.\nIn a single-action revolver, the hammer is manually cocked, usually with the thumb of the firing or supporting hand. This action advances the cylinder to the next round and locks the cylinder in place, with the chamber aligned with the barrel. When the trigger is pulled, it releases the hammer, which fires the round in the chamber. To fire again, the hammer must be manually cocked again. This is called \"single-action\" because the trigger only performs a single action, of releasing the hammer. Because only a single action is performed and trigger pull is lightened, firing a revolver in this way allows most shooters to achieve greater accuracy. Additionally, the need to cock the hammer manually acts as a safety. With some revolvers, since the hammer rests on the primer or nipple, accidental discharge from impact is more likely if all 6 chambers are loaded. The Colt Paterson, Colt Walker, Colt Dragoon, and Colt Single Action Army of the American frontier era are examples of this system.\nDouble-action.\nIn double-action (DA), the stroke of the trigger pull generates two actions: \nThus, DA means that a cocking action separate from the trigger pull is unnecessary; every trigger pull will result in a complete cycle. This allows uncocked carry, while also allowing draw-and-fire using only the trigger. However, this will require a longer and harder trigger stroke, though this drawback can also be viewed as a safety feature, as the gun is safer against accidental discharges from being dropped. The sole mode of operation was seen as reducing training time for the British Army in WWII where the revolver usage was rapid fire at very close ranges.\nMost double-action revolvers may be fired in two ways:\nCertain revolvers, called \"double-action-only\" (DAO) or, more correctly but less commonly, \"self-cocking\", lack the latch that enables the hammer to be locked to the rear, and thus can only be fired in the double-action mode. With no way to lock the hammer back, DAO designs tend to have \"bobbed\" or \"spurless\" hammers, and may even have the hammer completely covered by the revolver's frame (i.e., shrouded or hooded). These are generally intended for concealed carrying, as a hammer spur could snag when the revolver is drawn from clothing, but this design may result in reduction in accuracy in aimed fire.\nDA and DAO revolvers were the standard-issue sidearm of many police departments for many decades. Only in the 1980s and 1990s did the semiautomatic pistol gain popularity after the advent of safe actions. The reasons for these choices are the modes of carry and use. Double-action is preferred in high-stress situations because it allows a mode of carry in which one only has to draw and pull the trigger\u2014no safety catch release nor separate cocking stroke is required.\nOther.\nIn the era of cap-and-ball revolvers in the mid 19th century, two revolver models, the English Tranter and the American Savage \"Figure Eight\", used a method whereby the hammer was cocked by the shooter's middle finger pulling on a second trigger below the main trigger.\nIver Johnson made an unusual model from 1940 to 1947 called the \"Trigger Cocking Double Action\". If the hammer was down, pulling the trigger would cock the hammer. If the trigger was pulled with the hammer cocked, it would then fire. This meant that to fire the revolver from a hammer down state, the trigger must be pulled twice.\nThis is similar to the action of the \"syt\u00e8me Triple action\" patented by Eug\u00e8ne Lefaucheux in French patent number 55784 on September 27, 1862 for pinfire revolvers produced in the 1860's in France. The Lefaucheux Triple Action can be used in single action by cocking the hammer with the thumb, or in double action with a long pull on the trigger, or the hammer can be cocked by a pull on the trigger, then allowing one to shoot in single action.\n3D printed revolver.\nThe Zig zag revolver is a 3D printed .38 Revolver released to the public in May 2014. It was created by a Japanese citizen from Kawasaki named Yoshitomo Imura, using a 3D-printer and plastic filament.\nUse with suppressors.\nAs a general rule, revolvers cannot be effective with a sound suppressor (\"silencer\"), as there is usually a small gap between the revolving cylinder and the barrel which a bullet must traverse, or jump, when fired. From this opening, a rather loud report is produced. A suppressor can only suppress noise coming from the muzzle.\nA suppressible revolver design does exist in the Nagant M1895, a Belgian-designed revolver used by Imperial Russia and later the Soviet Union from 1895 through World War II. This revolver uses a unique cartridge whose case extends beyond the tip of the bullet, and a cylinder that moves forward to place the end of the cartridge inside the barrel when ready to fire. This bridges the gap between the cylinder and the barrel, and the case expands to seal the gap when fired. While the tiny gap between cylinder and barrel on most revolvers is insignificant to the internal ballistics, the seal of the Nagant is especially effective when used with a suppressor, and a number of suppressed Nagant revolvers have been used since its invention.\nThere is a modern revolver of Russian design, the OTs-38, which uses ammunition that incorporates the silencing mechanism into the cartridge case, making the gap between cylinder and barrel irrelevant as far as the suppression issue is concerned. The OTs-38 does need an unusually close and precise fit between the cylinder and barrel due to the shape of bullet in the special ammunition (Soviet SP-4), which was originally designed for use in a semi-automatic.\nAdditionally, the U.S. military experimented with designing a special version of the Smith &amp; Wesson Model 29 for tunnel rats, called the Quiet Special Purpose Revolver, or QSPR, that uses special .40 caliber ammunition. It never entered official service.\nAutomatic revolvers.\nThe term \"automatic revolver\" has two different meanings, the first being used in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries when \"automatic\" referred not to the operational mechanism of firing, but to extraction and ejection of spent casings. An \"automatic revolver\" in this context is one which extracts empty fired cases \"automatically\", such as upon breaking open the action, rather than requiring manual extraction of each case individually with a sliding rod or pin (as in the Colt Single Action Army design). This term was widely used in the advertising of the period as a way to distinguish such revolvers from the far more common rod-extraction types.\nIn the second sense, \"automatic revolver\" refers to the mechanism of firing rather than extraction. Double-action revolvers use a long trigger pull to cock the hammer, thus negating the need to manually cock the hammer between shots. The disadvantage of this is that the long, heavy pull cocking the hammer makes the double-action revolver much harder to shoot accurately than a single-action revolver (although cocking the hammer of a double-action reduces the length and weight of the trigger pull). A rare class of revolvers, called automatic for its firing design, attempts to overcome this restriction, giving the high speed of a double-action with the trigger effort of a single-action. The Webley-Fosbery Automatic Revolver is the most famous commercial example of this. It was recoil-operated, and the cylinder and barrel recoiled backwards to cock the hammer and revolve the cylinder. Cam grooves were milled on the outside of the cylinder to provide a means of advancing to the next chamber\u2014half a turn as the cylinder moved back, and half a turn as it moved forward. .38 caliber versions held eight shots; .455 caliber versions held six. At the time, the few available automatic pistols were larger, less reliable, and more expensive. The automatic revolver was popular when it first came out, but was quickly superseded by the creation of reliable, inexpensive semi-automatic pistols.\nIn 1997, the Mateba company developed a type of recoil-operated automatic revolver, commercially named the Mateba Autorevolver, which uses the recoil energy to auto-rotate a normal revolver cylinder holding six or seven cartridges, depending on the model. The company has made several versions of its Autorevolver, including longer-barrelled and carbine variations, chambered in .357 Magnum, .44 Magnum and .454 Casull.\nThe Pancor Jackhammer is a combat shotgun based on a similar mechanism to an automatic revolver. It uses a blow-forward action to move the barrel forward (which unlocks it from the cylinder), rotate the cylinder, and cock the hammer.\nRevolving long guns.\nRevolvers are not limited to handguns; as a longer barrelled arm is more useful in military applications than a sidearm, the idea was applied to both rifles and shotguns throughout the history of the revolver mechanism with mixed degrees of success.\nRifles.\nRevolving rifles were developed in an attempt to increase the rate of fire of rifles by combining them with the revolving firing mechanism that had been developed earlier for revolving pistols. Colt began experimenting with revolving rifles in the early 19th century, making them in a variety of calibers and barrel lengths. Colt revolving rifles were the first repeating rifles adopted by the U.S. military, issued to soldiers to improve their rate of fire. However, after firing six shots, the shooter had to take an excessive amount of time to reload. Also, on occasion, these Colt rifles discharged all their rounds at once, endangering the shooter. Even so, an early model was used in the Seminole Wars in 1838. During the Civil War, a LeMat Carbine was made based on the LeMat revolver.\nTaurus and its Australian partner company, Rossi, manufactures a carbine variant of the Taurus Judge revolver known as the \"Taurus/Rossi Circuit Judge\". It comes in the original combination chambering of .45 Long Colt and .410 bore, as well as the .44 Magnum chambering and dual-cylinder .22LR/.22WMR model. The rifle has small blast shields attached to the cylinder to protect the shooter from hot gases escaping between the cylinder and barrel.\nShotguns.\nColt briefly manufactured several revolving shotguns that were met with mixed success. The Colt Model 1839 Shotgun was manufactured between 1839 and 1841. Later, the Colt Model 1855 Shotgun, based on the Model 1855 revolving rifle, was manufactured between 1860 and 1863. Because of their low production numbers and age, they are among the rarest of all Colt firearms.\nThe Armsel Striker was a modern take on the revolving shotgun that held 10 rounds of 12-gauge ammunition in its cylinder. It was copied by Cobray as the Streetsweeper.\nAs noted, the original Taurus/Rossi Circuit Judge is chambered to use both .45 Long Colt cartridges and .410 bore shells. However, it utilizes a rifled, rather than smooth-bore barrel.\nThe MTs255 () is a shotgun fed by a 5-round internal revolving cylinder. It is produced by the TsKIB SOO, Central Design, and Research Bureau of Sporting and Hunting Arms. They are available in 12, 20, 28, and 32 gauges, and .410 bore.\nOther weapons.\nThe Hawk MM-1, Milkor MGL, RG-6, and RGP-40 are grenade launchers that use a revolver action. Because the cylinders are much more massive, they use a spring-wound mechanism to index the cylinder.\nRevolver cannons use a motor-driven, revolver-like mechanism to fire medium-caliber ammunition.\nSix gun.\nA six gun or six-shooter is a revolver that holds six cartridges. The cylinder in a six gun is often called a \"wheel\", and the six gun is itself often called a \"wheel gun\". Although a \"six gun\" can refer to any six-chambered revolver, it is typically a reference to the Colt Single Action Army, or its modern look-alikes such as the Ruger Vaquero and Beretta Stampede.\nUntil the 1970s, when older-design revolvers such as the Colt Single Action Army and Ruger Blackhawk were re-engineered with drop safeties (such as firing pin blocks, hammer blocks, or transfer bars) that prevent the firing pin from contacting the cartridge's primer unless the trigger is pulled, safe carry required the hammer being positioned over an empty chamber, thus reducing the available cartridges from six to five, or, on some models, positioned in between chambers on either a pin or in a groove made for that purpose, thus keeping the full six rounds available. This kept the uncocked hammer from resting directly on the primer of a cartridge. If not used in this manner, the hammer rests directly on a primer and unintentional firing may occur if the gun is dropped or the hammer is struck. Some holster makers provided a thick leather thong to place underneath the hammer that both allowed the carry of a gun fully loaded with all six rounds and secured the gun in the holster to help prevent its accidental loss.\nSix guns are commonly used by cowboy action shooting enthusiasts in competition shooting and are designed to mimic the gunfights of the Old West, as well as for other applications such as general target shooting, hunting, and personal defense.\nNotable brands and manufacturers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25795", "revid": "32647130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25795", "title": "Robert Freitas", "text": "American nanotechnologist (born 1952)\nRobert A. Freitas Jr. (born 1952) is an American nanotechnologist.\nEarly life and education.\nFreitas was born in Camden, Maine. His father worked in agriculture, and his mother was a homemaker. Freitas married Nancy, his childhood sweetheart, in 1974.\nIn 1974, Freitas earned a bachelor's degree in physics and psychology from Harvey Mudd College. In 1978, he received a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree from the Santa Clara University School of Law. He has written over 150 technical papers, book chapters, and popular articles on scientific, engineering, and legal topics.\nCareer.\nFreitas interests include nanorobotics, how nanotechnology can extend the life of humans, self-replicating machines, and Cryonics.\nFreitas introduced the concept of \"sentience quotient\" in the late 1970s.\nIn 1980, Freitas and William Gilbreath were participants in a NASA study regarding \"Advanced Automation for Space Missions,\" and presented the feasibility of self-replicating machines in space, using advanced artificial intelligence and automation technologies.\nFreitas began writing his \"Nanomedicine\" book series in 1994. Volume I was published in October 1999 by Landes Bioscience while Freitas was a Research Fellow at the Institute for Molecular Manufacturing. Volume IIA was published in October 2003 by Landes Bioscience.\nIn 2004, Freitas and Ralph Merkle coauthored and published \"Kinematic Self-Replicating Machines\", a comprehensive survey of the field of physical and hypothetical self-replicating machines.\nIn 2009, Freitas was awarded the Feynman Prize in theoretical nanotechnology. Afterwards, he was granted the first patent for a mechanosynthesis tool, which he developed while working at Zyvex. The tool is theoretically to be used in molecular engineering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25797", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25797", "title": "Robert Morris", "text": "Robert or Bob Morris may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Ordered chronologically within each section.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "25798", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25798", "title": "Reykjav\u00edk", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Iceland\nReykjav\u00edk is the capital and largest city of Iceland. It is located on the southern shore of the Faxafl\u00f3i bay in southwest Iceland and has a latitude of 64\u00b008\u2032 N, making it the world's northernmost capital of a sovereign state. Reykjav\u00edk has a population of around 139,000 as of 2025, and the surrounding Capital Region has a population of around 249,000, constituting approximately 64% of Iceland's population.\nAccording to , the settlement of Iceland began in Reykjav\u00edk when Ing\u00f3lfur Arnarson arrived from Norway in the year 874. For over 900 years following this, there was no urban development; the city was officially founded in 1786 as a trading town and grew steadily as it transformed into its current state as the centre of Iceland's cultural, economic, and governmental activity. It is popular with tourists and is consistently ranked as one of the cleanest, safest, and most environmentally friendly cities in the world.\nHistory.\nAccording to legend, the first permanent Norse settlement in Iceland was established at Reykjav\u00edk by Ing\u00f3lfr Arnarson circa AD 870, as described in the Book of Settlement. Ing\u00f3lfr is said to have decided the location of his settlement using a traditional Norse method: when land was in sight, he cast his high seat pillars overboard and promised to settle where the gods decided to bring them ashore. Two of his slaves then searched the coasts for three years before finding the pillars in the bay which eventually became the site of Reykjav\u00edk.\nEtymology.\nThe name is of Old Norse origin, derived from the roots ('smoke') and ('bay'). The name is said to be inspired by steam rising from hot springs in the region. The original name was \"Reykjar-v\u00edk\", with an \"r\" suffix for the genitive singular of \"reykr\"; the modern version \"reykja-\" uses the genitive plural. The name's meaning is still transparent in modern Icelandic, and in modern Norwegian (\"r\u00f8yk\" + \"vik\"). The name originally referred to both the bay on the northern shore of the modern city centre, between \u00d6rfirisey and Laugarnes, as well as the estate and farm of Ing\u00f3lfr Arnarson. This form of the name fell out of use shortly after settlement, and the estate was referred to as \"V\u00edk \u00e1 Seltjarnarnesi\" until the name Reykjav\u00edk was revived when urban development began centuries later. The name has been translated as \"Bay of Smoke\" in English-language travel guides.\nUrban development.\nThe site of the modern city centre was farmland until the 18th century. In 1752, King Frederik V of Denmark donated the estate of Reykjav\u00edk to the Innr\u00e9ttingar corporation. The leader of this movement was Sk\u00fali Magn\u00fasson. In the 1750s, several houses were built to house the wool industry, which was Reykjav\u00edk's most important employer for a few decades and the original reason for its existence. Other industries were undertaken by the Innr\u00e9ttingar, such as fisheries, sulphur mining, agriculture, and shipbuilding.\nThe Danish Crown abolished monopoly trading in 1786 and granted six communities around the country an exclusive trading charter. Reykjav\u00edk was one of them and the only one to hold on to the charter permanently. 1786 is thus regarded as the date of the city's founding. Trading rights were limited to subjects of the Danish Crown, and Danish traders continued to dominate trade in Iceland. Over the following decades, their business in Iceland expanded. After 1880, free trade was expanded to all nationalities, and the influence of Icelandic merchants started to grow.\nRise of nationalism.\nIcelandic nationalist sentiment gained influence in the 19th century, and the idea of Icelandic independence became widespread. Reykjav\u00edk, as Iceland's only city, was central to such ideas. Advocates of an independent Iceland realized that a strong Reykjav\u00edk was fundamental to that objective. All the important events in the history of the independence struggle were important to Reykjav\u00edk as well. In 1845 the , the general assembly formed in 930 AD, was re-established in Reykjav\u00edk; it had been suspended a few decades earlier when it was located at \u00deingvellir. At the time it functioned only as an advisory assembly, advising the king about Icelandic affairs. The location of Al\u00feingi in Reykjav\u00edk effectively established the city as the capital of Iceland.\nIn 1874, Iceland was given a constitution; with it, Al\u00feingi gained some limited legislative powers and in essence became the institution that it is today. The next step was to move most of the executive power to Iceland: Home Rule was granted in 1904 when the office of Minister for Iceland was established in Reykjav\u00edk. On 1 December 1918, Iceland became a sovereign country, the Kingdom of Iceland, in personal union with the Crown of Denmark.\nBy the 1920s and 1930s, most of the growing Icelandic fishing trawler fleet sailed from Reykjav\u00edk; cod production was its main industry, but the Great Depression hit Reykjav\u00edk hard with unemployment, and labour union struggles sometimes became violent.\nWorld War II.\nOn the morning of 10 May 1940, following the German occupation of Denmark and Norway on 9 April 1940, four British warships approached Reykjav\u00edk and anchored in the harbour. In a few hours, the Allied occupation of Reykjav\u00edk was complete. There was no armed resistance, and taxi and truck drivers even assisted the invasion force, which initially had no motor vehicles. The Icelandic government had received many requests from the British government to consent to the occupation, but it always declined on the basis of its policy of neutrality. For the remaining years of World War II, British and later American soldiers occupied camps in Reykjav\u00edk, and the number of foreign soldiers in Reykjav\u00edk became about the same as the local population of the city. The Royal Regiment of Canada formed part of the garrison in Iceland during the early part of the war.\nThe economic effects of the occupation were positive for Reykjav\u00edk: the unemployment of the Depression years vanished, and construction work began. The British built Reykjav\u00edk Airport, which remains in service today, mostly for short-haul flights (to domestic destinations and Greenland). The Americans, meanwhile, built Keflav\u00edk Airport, situated WSW of Reykjav\u00edk, which became Iceland's primary international airport. In 1944, the Republic of Iceland was founded and a president, elected by the people, replaced the king; the office of the president was placed in Reykjav\u00edk.\nPost-war development.\nIn the post-war years, the growth of Reykjav\u00edk accelerated. An exodus from the rural countryside began, largely because improved technology in agriculture reduced the need for manpower, and because of a population boom resulting from better living conditions in the country. A once-primitive village was rapidly transformed into a modern city. Private cars became common, and modern apartment complexes rose in the expanding suburbs.\nIn 1972, Reykjav\u00edk hosted the famous World Chess Championship between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky. The 1986 Reykjav\u00edk Summit between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev underlined Reykjav\u00edk's international status. Deregulation in the financial sector and the computer revolution of the 1990s again transformed Reykjav\u00edk. The financial and IT sectors are now significant employers in the city.\nGeography.\nReykjav\u00edk is located in the southwest of Iceland. The Reykjav\u00edk area coastline is characterized by peninsulas, coves, straits, and islands.\nDuring the Ice Age (up to 10,000 years ago) a large glacier covered parts of the city area, reaching as far out as \u00c1lftanes. Other parts of the city area were covered by sea water. In the warm periods and at the end of the Ice Age, some hills like \u00d6skjuhl\u00ed\u00f0 were islands. The former sea level is indicated by sediments (with clams) reaching (at \u00d6skjuhl\u00ed\u00f0, for example) as far as above the current sea level. The hills of \u00d6skjuhl\u00ed\u00f0 and Sk\u00f3lav\u00f6r\u00f0uholt appear to be the remains of former shield volcanoes which were active during the warm periods of the Ice Age. After the Ice Age, the land rose as the heavy load of the glaciers fell away, and began to look as it does today.\nThe capital city area continued to be shaped by earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, such as the one 4,500 years ago in the mountain range Bl\u00e1fj\u00f6ll, when the lava coming down the Elli\u00f0a\u00e1 valley reached the sea at the bay of Elli\u00f0avogur.\nThe largest river to run through Reykjav\u00edk is the Elli\u00f0a\u00e1 River, which is non-navigable. It offers salmon fishing within the city limits. Mount Esja, at , is the highest mountain in the vicinity of Reykjav\u00edk.\nThe city of Reykjav\u00edk is mostly located on the Seltjarnarnes peninsula, but the suburbs reach far out to the south and east. Reykjav\u00edk is a spread-out city: most of its urban area consists of low-density suburbs, and houses are usually widely spaced. The outer residential neighbourhoods are also widely spaced from each other; in between them are the main traffic arteries and a lot of empty space. The city's latitude is 64\u00b008' N, making it the world's northernmost capital of a sovereign state (Nuuk, the capital of Greenland, is slightly further north at 64\u00b010' (about 4\u00a0km) but Greenland is a constituent country, not an independent state).\nClimate.\nReykjav\u00edk has a subpolar oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfc\", Trewartha: \"Eolk\"). The city has had its present climate classification since the beginning of the 20th century.\nAt 64\u00b0 north, Reykjav\u00edk is characterized by extremes of day and night length over the course of the year. From 20 May to 24 July, daylight is essentially permanent as the sun never gets more than 5\u00b0 below the horizon. Day length drops to less than five hours between 2 December and 10 January. The sun climbs just 3\u00b0 above the horizon during this time. However, day length begins increasing rapidly during January and by month's end there are seven hours of daylight.\nDespite its northern latitude, temperatures very rarely drop below in the winter. The proximity to the Arctic Circle and the strong moderation of the Atlantic Ocean in the Icelandic coast (influence of North Atlantic Current, an extension of the Gulf Stream) shape a relatively mild winter and cool summer. The city's coastal location does make it prone to wind, however, and gales are common in winter (influence of the Icelandic Low).\u00a0Summers are cool, with temperatures fluctuating between , rarely exceeding . This is a result of exposure to the maritime winds in its exposed west coast location that causes it to be much cooler in summer than similar latitudes in mainland Scandinavia. Contrasting this, winter days are milder than anywhere in far southern Sweden and the vast majority of Denmark. In fact, winter temperatures are comparable to those of New York City, which is more than 20 degrees farther south. Reykjav\u00edk averages 147 days of rain (more than 1mm) per year. Droughts are uncommon, although they occur in some summers. In the summer of 2007, no rain was measured for one month. July and August are the warmest months of the year on average and January and February the coldest.\nSummer tends to be the sunniest season, although May averages the most sunshine of any individual month. Overall, the city receives around 1,300 annual hours of sunshine, which is comparable with other places in northern and north-western Europe such as Ireland and Scotland, but substantially less than equally northern regions with a more continental climate, including the Bothnian Bay basin in Scandinavia. Nonetheless, Reykjav\u00edk is one of the cloudiest and coolest capitals of any nation in the world. The highest temperature recorded in Reykjav\u00edk was , reported on 30 July 2008, while the lowest-ever recorded temperature was , recorded on 21 January 1918. The coldest month on record is January 1918, with a mean temperature of . The warmest is July 2019, with a mean temperature of .\nCity administration.\nThe Reykjav\u00edk City Council governs the city of Reykjav\u00edk and is directly elected by those aged over 18 domiciled in the city. The council has 23 members who are elected using the open list method for four-year terms.\nThe council selects members of boards, and each board controls a different field under the city council's authority. The most important board is the City Board that wields the executive rights along with the City Mayor. The City Mayor is the senior public official and also the director of city operations. Other public officials control city institutions under the mayor's authority. Thus, the administration consists of two different parts:\nPolitical control.\nThe Independence Party was historically the city's ruling party; it had an overall majority from its establishment in 1929 until 1978, when it narrowly lost. From 1978 until 1982, there was a three-party coalition composed of the People's Alliance, the Social Democratic Party, and the Progressive Party. In 1982, the Independence Party regained an overall majority, which it held for three consecutive terms. The 1994 election was won by Reykjav\u00edkurlistinn (the R-list), an alliance of Icelandic socialist parties, led by Ingibj\u00f6rg S\u00f3lr\u00fan G\u00edslad\u00f3ttir. This alliance won a majority in three consecutive elections, but was dissolved for the 2006 election when five different parties were on the ballot. The Independence Party won seven seats, and together with the one Progressive Party it were able to form a new majority in the council which took over in June 2006.\nIn October 2007, a new majority was formed on the council, consisting of members of the Progressive Party, the Social Democratic Alliance, the Left-Greens and the F-list (liberals and independents), after controversy regarding REI, a subsidiary of OR, the city's energy company. However, three months later the F-list formed a new majority together with the Independence Party. \u00d3lafur F. Magn\u00fasson, the leader of the F-list, was elected mayor on 24 January 2008; further, in March 2009, the Independence Party was due to appoint a new mayor. This changed once again on 14 August 2008 when the fourth coalition of the term was formed, by the Independence Party and the Social Democratic Alliance, with Hanna Birna Kristj\u00e1nsd\u00f3ttir becoming mayor.\nThe City Council election in May 2010 saw a new political party, The Best Party, win six of 15 seats, and it formed a coalition with the Social Democratic Alliance; comedian J\u00f3n Gnarr became mayor. At the 2014 election, the Social Democratic Alliance had its best showing yet, gaining five seats in the council, while Bright Future (successor to the Best Party) received two seats and the two parties formed a coalition with the Left-Green movement and the Pirate Party, which won one seat each. The Independence Party had its worst election ever, with only four seats.\nMayor.\nThe mayor is appointed by the city council. Typically, one of the council members is chosen; however, they may also appoint a mayor who is not a member of the council.\nThe post was created in 1907 and advertised in 1908. Two applications were received, from P\u00e1ll Einarsson, sheriff and town mayor of Hafnarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur and from Knud Zimsen, town councillor in Reykjav\u00edk. P\u00e1ll was appointed on 7 May and was mayor for six years. At that time the city mayor received a salary of 4,500 ISK per year and 1,500 ISK for office expenses. The current mayor is Hei\u00f0a Bj\u00f6rg Hilmisd\u00f3ttir.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReykjav\u00edk is by far the largest and most populous settlement in Iceland. The municipality of Reykjav\u00edk had a population of 138,772 on 1 January 2025, comprising 35.6% of the country's population. The Capital Region, which includes the capital and six municipalities around it, was home to 249,054 people; that is about 64% of the country's population.\nOn 1 January 2024, of the city's population of 136,894, immigrants of the first and second generation numbered 33,731 (24.6%), increasing from 22,311 (17.8%) in 2019, 12,352 (10.4%) in 2008 and 3,106 (2.9%) in 1998. The most common foreign citizens are Poles, Lithuanians, Ukrainians and Romanians. About 64.8% of the city's foreign residents originate in European Union and EFTA member states, and around 48.9% are from the new member states of the EU, mainly former Eastern Bloc countries, which joined in 2004, 2007 and 2013.\nChildren of foreign origin form a more considerable minority in the city's schools: as many as a third in places. The city is also visited by thousands of tourists, students, and other temporary residents, at times outnumbering natives in the city centre.\nDistricts.\nReykjav\u00edk is divided into 10 districts:\nIn addition, there are hinterland areas (lightly shaded on the map) which are not assigned to any district.\nEconomy.\nBorgart\u00fan is the financial centre of Reykjav\u00edk, hosting a large number of companies and three investment banks. Reykjav\u00edk has been at the centre of Iceland's economic growth and subsequent economic contraction over the 2000s, a period referred to in foreign media as the \"Nordic Tiger\" years, or \"Iceland's Boom Years\". The economic boom led to a sharp increase in construction, with large redevelopment projects such as Harpa concert hall and conference centre and others. Many of these projects were halted during the 2008 financial crisis.\nThere are 14 embassies in Reykjavik, in addition to ambassadorial residences, and representative offices for Greenland, the Faroe Islands, and the European Union.\nInfrastructure.\nRoads.\nPer capita car ownership in Iceland is among the highest in the world at roughly 522 vehicles per 1,000 residents, though Reykjav\u00edk is not severely affected by congestion. Several multi-lane highways (mainly dual carriageways) run between the most heavily populated areas and most frequently driven routes. Parking spaces are also plentiful in most areas. Public transportation consists of a bus system called Str\u00e6t\u00f3. Route 1 (the Ring Road) runs through the city outskirts and connects the city to the rest of Iceland.\nAirports and seaports.\nReykjav\u00edk Airport is positioned inside the city, just south of the city centre. It is used for domestic flights, general aviation and medical flights. Since 1962, there has been some controversy regarding the location of this airport, since it takes up a lot of valuable space in central Reykjav\u00edk. Keflav\u00edk International Airport, located around 40\u00a0km southwest of the city, serves international flights and is the main gateway to the country.\nReykjav\u00edk has two seaports: the old harbour near the city centre, which is mainly used by fishermen and cruise ships, and \"Sundah\u00f6fn\" in the east city, which is the largest cargo port in the country and serves larger cruise ships.\nRailways.\nThere are no public railways in Iceland, because of its sparse population; however, the locomotives used to build the docks are on display. Proposals have been made for a high-speed rail link between the city and Keflav\u00edk.\nDistrict heating.\nVolcanic activity provides all of Reykjav\u00edk and surrounding areas with geothermal district heating systems for both residential and industrial districts. In heavily trafficked areas, mostly in the city centre, pavements and streets use geothermal snow-melting systems. Many driveways of private residences are also fitted with geothermal snow-melting systems. Geothermal hot water is also used to heat the city's numerous public pools and hot tubs. Natural hot water is used to heat roughly 90% of all buildings in Iceland. Of total annual use of geothermal energy of 39 PJ, space heating accounted for 48%.\nThe total thermal capacity of Reykjav\u00edks hot water production is around 830MW, and the city has an average heating demand of 473 MW. Hot water for Reyjav\u00edk's district heating comes from two combined heat and power (CHP) geothermal power plants as well as lower temperature geothermal fields:\nCultural heritage.\nSafnah\u00fasi\u00f0 (the Culture House) was opened in 1909 and has a number of important exhibits. Originally built to house the National Library and National Archives and also previously the location of the National Museum and Natural History Museum, it was re-modeled in 2000 to promote the Icelandic national heritage. Many of Iceland's national treasures are on display, such as the Poetic Edda, and the Sagas in their original manuscripts. There are also changing exhibitions of various topics.\nLiterary heritage.\nAs Reykjav\u00edk is Iceland's capital and largest city, it plays a vital role in all cultural life in the country. The city is home to Iceland's main cultural institutions, boasts a flourishing arts scene and is renowned as a creative city with a diverse range of cultural happenings and dynamic grassroots activities. Most of the country's writers live in the city, and it also provides the setting for the majority of contemporary Icelandic literature \u2013 a development that has gone hand in hand with the rapid expansion of the city in the past 100 years or so.\nReykjav\u00edk is home to Icelandic medieval literature, including the Sagas of the Icelanders and the Poetic Edda, landmarks of world literature still widely read and translated today. This literary heritage is the core of the nation's identity and narrative art is the single most important part of its cultural history. The \u00c1rni Magn\u00fasson Institute for Icelandic Studies in Reykjav\u00edk is the centre of this heritage. It preserves manuscripts, conducts research on them and publishes texts for the public, in addition to offering research facilities and tutoring to foreign scholars and students. The Arnamagn\u00e6an Manuscript Collection was added to the UNESCO Memory of the World Register on 31 July 2009. Reykjav\u00edk city was designated as a UNESCO City of Literature in 2011 and joined then the https://\nIceland is one of the smallest linguistic areas in the world, with only around 330,000 inhabitants and very few speakers outside the country. The language has not changed much since the time of settlement in the 9th century and modern Icelanders can still read the original medieval texts with relative ease. Literature plays a vital role in cherishing and cultivating the language, both original Icelandic literature and translations. Language undergoes constant renewal and development in fiction, and translation of foreign work has also been instrumental in conserving this thousand-year-old literary language.\nAward-winning authors\nSeveral Reykjav\u00edk writers have received international and Nordic awards. Halld\u00f3r Laxness was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1955 for \"vivid epic power which has renewed the great narrative art of Iceland\". The House of Halld\u00f3r Laxness, Glj\u00fafrasteinn, in the capital area can be visited year-round. A number of writers have won the Nordic Council's Literature Prize, among them are Thor Vilhj\u00e1lmsson, Einar M\u00e1r Gu\u00f0mundsson and Sj\u00f3n, and authors such as Gu\u00f0r\u00fan Helgad\u00f3ttir, Krist\u00edn Steinsd\u00f3ttir and Ragnhei\u00f0ur Gestsd\u00f3ttir are winners of The Nordic Children's Literature Prize. Crime writer Arnaldur Indri\u00f0ason has won prizes abroad, including The Golden Dagger Award. Among other prizes awarded to writers from Reykjav\u00edk are the Kairos Preis (Andri Snaer Magnason), the Swedish Academy's Nordic Literature Prize (Gu\u00f0bergur Bergsson) and the Prix de Page (Au\u00f0ur Ava \u00d3lafsd\u00f3ttir). Contemporary Icelandic writers are published in an increased number in translations throughout the world.\nLifestyle.\nNightlife.\nAlcohol is expensive at bars. People tend to drink at home before going out. Beer was banned in Iceland until 1 March 1989 but has since become popular among many Icelanders as their alcoholic drink of choice.\nLive music.\nThe Iceland Airwaves music festival is staged annually in November. This festival takes place all over the city, and the concert venue Harpa is one of the main locations. Other venues that frequently organise live music events are Kex, H\u00farra, Gaukurinn (grunge, metal, punk), Mengi (centre for contemporary music, avant-garde music and experimental music), the Icelandic Opera and the National Theatre of Iceland for classical music.\nNew Year's Eve.\nThe arrival of the new year is a particular cause for celebration to the people of Reykjav\u00edk. Icelandic law states that anyone may purchase and use fireworks between 28 December and 6 January. As a result, every New Year's Eve the city is lit up with fireworks displays.\nRecreation.\nReykjav\u00edk Golf Club was established in 1934. It is the oldest and largest golf club in Iceland, and consists of two 18-hole courses \u2013 one at Grafarholt and the other at Korpa. The Grafarholt golf course opened in 1963, which makes it the oldest 18-hole golf course in Iceland. The Korpa golf course opened in 1997.\nSports teams.\nFootball.\nOther youth clubs.\nClubs classified as youth clubs offer youth teams where anyone can train with the team, though each club is based in a certain area of Reykjav\u00edk and mainly serves that area.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nReykjav\u00edk is twinned with:\nIn July 2013, mayor J\u00f3n Gnarr filed a motion before the city council to terminate the city's relationship with Moscow, in response to a trend of anti-gay legislation in Russia.\nLviv in Ukraine replaced Moscow in 2023.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25799", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25799", "title": "Retrovirus", "text": "Family of viruses\nA retrovirus is a type of virus that inserts a DNA copy of its RNA genome into the DNA of a host cell that it invades, thus changing the genome of that cell. After invading a host cell's cytoplasm, the virus uses its own reverse transcriptase enzyme to produce DNA from its RNA genome, the reverse of the usual pattern, thus \"retro\" (backward). The new DNA is then incorporated into the host cell genome by an integrase enzyme, at which point the retroviral DNA is referred to as a provirus. The host cell then treats the viral DNA as part of its own genome, transcribing and translating the viral genes along with the cell's own genes, producing the proteins required to assemble new copies of the virus. Many retroviruses cause serious diseases in humans, other mammals, and birds.\nRetroviruses have many subfamilies in three basic groups.\nThe specialized DNA-infiltration enzymes in retroviruses make them valuable research tools in molecular biology, and they have been used successfully in gene delivery systems.\nEvidence from endogenous retroviruses (inherited provirus DNA in animal genomes) suggests that retroviruses have been infecting vertebrates for at least 450 million years.\nStructure.\nVirions, viruses in the form of independent particles of retroviruses, consist of enveloped particles about 100\u00a0nm in diameter. The outer lipid envelope consists of glycoprotein. The virions also contain two identical single-stranded RNA molecules 7\u201310 kilobases in length. The two molecules are present as a dimer, formed by base pairing between complementary sequences. Interaction sites between the two RNA molecules have been identified as a \"kissing stem-loop\". Although virions of different retroviruses do not have the same morphology or biology, all the virion components are very similar.\nThe main virion components are:\nGenomic structure.\nThe retroviral genome is packaged as viral particles. These viral particles are dimers of single-stranded, positive-sense, linear RNA molecules.\nRetroviruses (and orterviruses in general) follow a layout of 5'\u2013\"gag\"\u2013\"pro\"\u2013\"pol\"\u2013\"env\"\u20133' in the RNA genome. \"gag\" and \"pol\" encode polyproteins, each managing the capsid and replication. The \"pol\" region encodes enzymes necessary for viral replication, such as reverse transcriptase, protease and integrase. Depending on the virus, the genes may overlap or fuse into larger polyprotein chains. Some viruses contain additional genes. The lentivirus genus, the spumavirus genus, the HTLV / bovine leukemia virus (BLV) genus, and a newly introduced fish virus genus are retroviruses classified as complex. These viruses have genes called accessory genes, in addition to gag, pro, pol and env genes. Accessory genes are located between pol and env, downstream from the env, including the U3 region of LTR, or in the env and overlapping portions. While accessory genes have auxiliary roles, they also coordinate and regulate viral gene expression.\nIn addition, some retroviruses may carry genes called oncogenes or onc genes from another class. Retroviruses with these genes (also called transforming viruses) are known for their ability to quickly cause tumors in animals and transform cells in culture into an oncogenic state.\nThe polyproteins are cleaved into smaller proteins each with their own function. The nucleotides encoding them are known as \"subgenes\".\nMultiplication.\nWhen retroviruses have integrated their own genome into the germ line, their genome is passed on to a following generation. These endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), contrasted with exogenous ones, now make up 5\u20138% of the human genome. Most insertions have no known function and are often referred to as \"junk DNA\". However, many endogenous retroviruses play important roles in host biology, such as control of gene transcription, cell fusion during placental development in the course of the germination of an embryo, and resistance to exogenous retroviral infection. Endogenous retroviruses have also received special attention in the research of immunology-related pathologies, such as autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis, although endogenous retroviruses have not yet been proven to play any causal role in this class of disease.\nWhile transcription was classically thought to occur only from DNA to RNA, reverse transcriptase transcribes RNA into DNA. The term \"retro\" in retrovirus refers to this reversal (making DNA from RNA) of the usual direction of transcription. It still obeys the central dogma of molecular biology, which states that information can be transferred from nucleic acid to nucleic acid but cannot be transferred back from protein to either protein or nucleic acid. Reverse transcriptase activity outside of retroviruses has been found in almost all eukaryotes, enabling the generation and insertion of new copies of retrotransposons into the host genome. These inserts are transcribed by enzymes of the host into new RNA molecules that enter the cytosol. Next, some of these RNA molecules are translated into viral proteins. The proteins encoded by the gag and pol genes are translated from genome-length mRNAs into Gag and Gag\u2013Pol polyproteins. In example, for the \"gag\" gene; it is translated into molecules of the capsid protein, and for the \"pol\" gene; it is translated into molecules of reverse transcriptase. Retroviruses need a lot more of the Gag proteins than the Pol proteins and have developed advanced systems to synthesize the required amount of each. As an example, after Gag synthesis nearly 95 percent of the ribosomes terminate translation, while other ribosomes continue translation to synthesize Gag\u2013Pol. In the rough endoplasmic reticulum glycosylation begins and the \"env\" gene is translated from spliced mRNAs in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, into molecules of the envelope protein. When the envelope protein molecules are carried to the Golgi complex, they are divided into surface glycoprotein and transmembrane glycoprotein by a host protease. These two glycoprotein products stay in close affiliation, and they are transported to the plasma membrane after further glycosylation.\nIt is important to note that a retrovirus must \"bring\" its own reverse transcriptase in its capsid, otherwise it is unable to utilize the enzymes of the infected cell to carry out the task, due to the unusual nature of producing DNA from RNA.\nIndustrial drugs that are designed as protease and reverse-transcriptase inhibitors are made such that they target specific sites and sequences within their respective enzymes. However these drugs can quickly become ineffective due to the fact that the gene sequences that code for the protease and the reverse transcriptase quickly mutate. These changes in bases cause specific codons and sites with the enzymes to change and thereby avoid drug targeting by losing the sites that the drug actually targets.\nBecause reverse transcription lacks the usual proofreading of DNA replication, a retrovirus mutates very often. This enables the virus to grow resistant to antiviral pharmaceuticals quickly, and impedes the development of effective vaccines and inhibitors for the retrovirus.\nOne difficulty faced with some retroviruses, such as the Moloney retrovirus, involves the requirement for cells to be actively dividing for transduction. As a result, cells such as neurons are very resistant to infection and transduction by retroviruses. This gives rise to a concern that insertional mutagenesis due to integration into the host genome might lead to cancer or leukemia. This is unlike \"Lentivirus\", a genus of \"Retroviridae\", which are able to integrate their RNA into the genome of non-dividing host cells.\nRecombination.\nTwo RNA genomes are packaged into each retrovirus particle, but, after an infection, each virus generates only one provirus. After infection, reverse transcription occurs and this process is accompanied by recombination. Recombination involves template strand switching between the two genome copies (copy choice recombination) during reverse transcription. From 5 to 14 recombination events per genome occur at each replication cycle. Genetic recombination appears to be necessary for maintaining genome integrity and as a repair mechanism for salvaging damaged genomes.\nProvirus.\nThe DNA formed after reverse transcription (the provirus) is longer than the RNA genome because each of the terminals have the U3 - R - U5 sequences called long terminal repeat (LTR). Thus, 5' terminal has the extra U3 sequence, while the other terminal has the U5 sequence. LTRs are able to send signals for vital tasks to be carried out such as initiation of RNA production or management of the rate of transcription. This way, LTRs can control replication, hence, the entire progress of the viral cycle. Although located in the nucleus, the non-integrated retroviral cDNA is a very weak substrate for transcription. For this reason, an integrated provirus is a necessary for permanent and an effective expression of retroviral genes.\nThis DNA can be incorporated into host genome as a provirus that can be passed on to progeny cells. The retrovirus DNA is inserted at random into the host genome. Because of this, it can be inserted into oncogenes. In this way some retroviruses can convert normal cells into cancer cells. Some provirus remains latent in the cell for a long period of time before it is activated by the change in cell environment.\nEarly evolution.\nStudies of retroviruses led to the first demonstrated synthesis of DNA from RNA templates, a fundamental mode for transferring genetic material that occurs in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. It has been speculated that the RNA to DNA transcription processes used by retroviruses may have first caused DNA to be used as genetic material. In this model, the RNA world hypothesis, cellular organisms adopted the more chemically stable DNA when retroviruses evolved to create DNA from the RNA templates.\nAn estimate of the date of evolution of the foamy-like endogenous retroviruses placed the time of the most recent common ancestor at &gt; https://\u00a0million years ago.\nGene therapy.\nGammaretroviral and lentiviral vectors for gene therapy have been developed that mediate stable genetic modification of treated cells by chromosomal integration of the transferred vector genomes. This technology is of use, not only for research purposes, but also for clinical gene therapy aiming at the long-term correction of genetic defects, e.g., in stem and progenitor cells. Retroviral vector particles with tropism for various target cells have been designed. Gammaretroviral and lentiviral vectors have so far been used in more than 300 clinical trials, addressing treatment options for various diseases. Retroviral mutations can be developed to make transgenic mouse models to study various cancers and their metastatic models.\nCancer.\nRetroviruses that cause tumor growth include Rous sarcoma virus and mouse mammary tumor virus. Cancer can be triggered by proto-oncogenes that were mistakenly incorporated into proviral DNA or by the disruption of cellular proto-oncogenes. Rous sarcoma virus contains the src gene that triggers tumor formation. Later it was found that a similar gene in cells is involved in cell signaling, which was most likely excised with the proviral DNA. Nontransforming viruses can randomly insert their DNA into proto-oncogenes, disrupting the expression of proteins that regulate the cell cycle. The promoter of the provirus DNA can also cause over expression of regulatory genes.\nRetroviruses can cause diseases such as cancer and immunodeficiency. If viral DNA is integrated into host chromosomes, it can lead to permanent infections. It is therefore important to discover the body's response to retroviruses. Exogenous retroviruses are especially associated with pathogenic diseases. For example, mice have mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV), which is a retrovirus. This virus passes to newborn mice through mammary milk. When they are 6 months old, the mice carrying the virus get mammary cancer because of the retrovirus. In addition, leukemia virus I (HTLV-1), found in human T cell, has been found in humans for many years. It is estimated that this retrovirus causes leukemia in the ages of 40 and 50. It has a replicable structure that can induce cancer. In addition to the usual gene sequence of retroviruses, HTLV-1 contains a fourth region, PX. This region encodes Tax, Rex, p12, p13 and p30 regulatory proteins. The Tax protein initiates the leukemic process and organizes the transcription of all viral genes in the integrated HTLV proviral DNA.\nClassification.\nExogenous.\nExogenous retroviruses are infectious RNA- or DNA-containing viruses that are transmitted from one organism to another. In the Baltimore classification system, which groups viruses together based on their manner of messenger RNA synthesis, they are classified into two groups: Group VI: single-stranded RNA viruses with a DNA intermediate in their life cycle, and Group VII: double-stranded DNA viruses with an RNA intermediate in their life cycle.\nGroup VI viruses.\nAll members of Group VI use virally encoded reverse transcriptase, an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase, to produce DNA from the initial virion RNA genome. This DNA is often integrated into the host genome, as in the case of retroviruses and pseudoviruses, where it is replicated and transcribed by the host.\nGroup VI includes:\nThe family \"Retroviridae\" was previously divided into three subfamilies (\"Oncovirinae\", \"Lentivirinae\", and \"Spumavirinae\"), but are now divided into two: \"Orthoretrovirinae\" and \"Spumaretrovirinae\". The term oncovirus is now commonly used to describe a cancer-causing virus. This family now includes the following genera:\nGroup VII viruses.\nBoth families in Group VII have DNA genomes contained within the invading virus particles. The DNA genome is transcribed into both mRNA, for use as a transcript in protein synthesis, and pre-genomic RNA, for use as the template during genome replication. Virally encoded reverse transcriptase uses the pre-genomic RNA as a template for the creation of genomic DNA.\nGroup VII includes:\nThe latter family is closely related to the newly proposed\nwhilst families \"Belpaoviridae\", \"Metaviridae\", \"Pseudoviridae\", \"Retroviridae\", and \"Caulimoviridae\" constitute the order \"Ortervirales\".\nEndogenous.\nEndogenous retroviruses are not formally included in this classification system, and are broadly classified into three classes, on the basis of relatedness to exogenous genera:\nTreatment.\nAntiretroviral drugs are medications for the treatment of infection by retroviruses, primarily HIV. Different classes of antiretroviral drugs act on different stages of the HIV life cycle. Combination of several (typically three or four) antiretroviral drugs is known as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).\nTreatment of veterinary retroviruses.\nFeline leukemia virus and Feline immunodeficiency virus infections are treated with biologics, including the only immunomodulator currently licensed for sale in the United States, Lymphocyte T-Cell Immune Modulator (LTCI).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25801", "revid": "10531370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25801", "title": "Round (music)", "text": "Song where multiple voices enter with the same melody at different times\nA round (also called a perpetual canon [\"canon perpetuus\"], round about or infinite canon) is a musical composition, a limited type of canon, in which multiple voices sing exactly the same melody, but with each voice beginning at different times so that different parts of the melody coincide in the different voices, but nevertheless fit harmoniously together. It is one of the easiest forms of part singing, as only one line of melody need be learned by all singers, and is part of a popular musical tradition. They were particularly favoured in glee clubs, which combined amateur singing with regular drinking. The earliest known rounds date from 12th-century Europe. One characteristic of rounds is that, \"there is no fixed ending\", in the sense that they may be repeated as many times as possible, although many do have \"fixed\" endings, often indicated by a fermata.\n\"Row, Row, Row Your Boat\" is a well-known children's round for four voices. Other well-known examples are \"Fr\u00e8re Jacques\", \"Three Blind Mice\", \"Kookaburra\", and, more recently, the outro of \"God Only Knows\" by The Beach Boys.\nA catch is a round in which a phrase that is not apparent in a single line of lyrics emerges when the lyrics are split between the different voices. Rounds that fall into the category of \"perpetual canon\" feature a melody whose end leads back to the beginning, allowing easy and immediate repetition. Often, \"the final cadence is the same as the first measure\".\nHistory.\nThe term \"round\" first appears in English in the early 16th century, though the form was found much earlier. In medieval England, they were called or . Later, an alternative term was \"roundel\" (e.g., David Melvill's manuscript \"Ane Buik off Roundells\", Aberdeen, 1612). Special types of rounds are the \"catch\" (a comic English form found from about 1580 to 1800), and a specialized use of the word \"canon\", in 17th- and 18th-century England designating rounds with religious texts. The oldest surviving round in English is \"Sumer is icumen in\" , which is for four voices, plus two bass voices singing a ground (that is, a never-changing repeating part), also in canon. However, the earliest known rounds are two works with Latin texts found in the eleventh fascicle of the Notre Dame manuscript Pluteo 29.1. They are \" (a two-voice round) and \" (a four-voice round). The former dates from before 1180 and may be of German origin. The first published rounds in English were printed by Thomas Ravenscroft in 1609... \"Three Blind Mice\" appears in this collection, although in a somewhat different form from today's children's round:\nMechanics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The canon, or rule, of a simple round is that each voice enters after a set interval of time, at the same pitch, using the same notes.\nRounds work because after the melody is divided into equal-sized blocks of a few measures each, corresponding notes in each block either are the same, or are different notes in the same chord. This is easiest with one chord, as in \"Row, Row, Row Your Boat\".\nA new part can join the singing by starting at the beginning whenever another part reaches any asterisk in the above music. If one ignores the eighth notes that pass between the main chords, every single note is in the tonic triad\u2014in this case, a C, E, or G.\nMany rounds involve more than one chord, as in \"Fr\u00e8re Jacques\" :\nThe texture is simpler, but it uses a few more notes; this can perhaps be more easily seen if all four parts are run together into the same two measures:\n&lt;score raw sound&gt;\n% LilyPond doesn't easily want to align 4 voices, some with different lengths.\n% So we create a print score, using 2 voices with some chords, and a MIDI score of 4 voices.\nfirstP = \\relative c\" { \\global \\repeat unfold 2 { \\stemUp c8 d c bes a4 f } \\bar \" All four parts simultaneous: authentic cadence\nThe second beat of each measure does not sketch out a tonic triad, it outlines a dominant seventh chord (or \"V7 chord\").\nClassical.\nClassical composers who turned their hand to the round format include Thomas Arne, John Blow, William Byrd, Henry Purcell, Moondog (Louis Hardin), Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, and Benjamin Britten (for example, \"Old Joe Has Gone Fishing\", sung by the villagers in the pub to keep the peace, at the end of act 1 of \"Peter Grimes\") . Examples by J. S. Bach include the regular canons, variations 3 and 24 of the \"Goldberg Variations\", and the perpetual canons, canon 7 of \"The Musical Offering\" and \"Canon a 2 Perpetuus\" (BWV 1075). Several rounds are included amongst Arnold Schoenberg's thirty-plus canons, which \"within their natural limitations ... are brilliant pieces, containing too much of the composer's characteristically unexpected blend of seriousness, humour, vigour and tenderness to remain unperformed\". Contemporary classical composers, such as Abbie Betinis, have also explored round-writing in the 21st century.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25803", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25803", "title": "Refactor", "text": ""}
{"id": "25805", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25805", "title": "Roman republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "25806", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25806", "title": "Reincarnation", "text": "Concept of rebirth in different physical form\nReincarnation, also known as rebirth or transmigration, is the philosophical or religious concept that the non-physical essence of a living being begins a new lifespan in a different physical form or body after biological death. In most beliefs involving reincarnation, the soul of a human being is immortal and does not disperse after the physical body has perished. Upon death, the soul merely transmigrates into a newborn baby or into an animal to continue its immortality. (The term \"transmigration\" means the passing of a soul from one body to another after death.)\nReincarnation (\"punarjanman\") is a central tenet of Indian religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism. In various forms, it occurs as an esoteric belief in many streams of Judaism, in certain pagan religions (including Wicca), and in some beliefs of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas and of Aboriginal Australians (though most believe in an afterlife or spirit world). Some ancient Greek historical figures, such as Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, expressed belief in the soul's rebirth or migration (\"metempsychosis\").\nAlthough the majority of denominations within the Abrahamic religions do not believe that individuals reincarnate, particular groups within these religions do refer to reincarnation; these groups include mainstream historical and contemporary followers of Catharism, Alawites, Hasidic Judaism, the Druze, Kabbalistics, Rastafarians, and the Rosicrucians. Recent scholarly research has explored the historical relations between different sects and their beliefs about reincarnation. This research includes the views of Neoplatonism, Orphism, Hermeticism, Manichaenism, and the Gnosticism of the Roman era, as well as those in Indian religions. In recent decades, many Europeans and North Americans have developed an interest in reincarnation, and contemporary works sometimes mention the topic.\nConceptual definitions.\nThe word \"reincarnation\" derives from a Latin term that literally means 'entering the flesh again'. Reincarnation refers to the belief that an aspect of every human being (or all living beings in some cultures) continues to exist after death. This aspect may be the soul, mind, consciousness, or something transcendent which is reborn in an interconnected cycle of existence; the transmigration belief varies by culture, and is envisioned to be in the form of a newly born human being, animal, plant, spirit, or as a being in some other non-human realm of existence.\nAn alternative term is \"transmigration\", implying migration from one life (body) to another. The term has been used by modern philosophers such as Kurt G\u00f6del and has entered the English language.\nThe Greek equivalent to reincarnation, \"metempsychosis\" (), derives from \"meta\" ('change') and ('to put a soul into'), a term attributed to Pythagoras. Another Greek term sometimes used synonymously is \"palingenesis\", 'being born again'.\nRebirth is a key concept found in major Indian religions, and discussed using various terms. \"Punarjanman\" (, 'rebirth, transmigration'), is discussed in the ancient Sanskrit texts of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, with many alternate terms such as \"punar\u0101v\u1e5btti\" (), \"punar\u0101j\u0101ti\" (), \"punarj\u012bv\u0101tu\" (), \"punarbhava\" (), \"\u0101gati-gati\" (, common in Buddhist Pali text), \"nibbattin\" (), \"upapatti\" (), and \"uppajjana\" (). These religions believe that reincarnation is cyclic and an endless Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra, unless one gains spiritual insights that ends this cycle leading to liberation. The reincarnation concept is considered in Indian religions as a step that starts each \"cycle of aimless drifting, wandering or mundane existence\", but one that is an opportunity to seek spiritual liberation through ethical living and a variety of meditative, yogic (\"marga\"), or other spiritual practices. They consider the release from the cycle of reincarnations as the ultimate spiritual goal, and call the liberation by terms such as moksha, nirvana, \"mukti\" and \"kaivalya\".\n\"Gilgul\", \"Gilgul neshamot\", or \"Gilgulei Ha Neshamot\" () is the concept of reincarnation in Kabbalistic Judaism, found in much Yiddish literature among Ashkenazi Jews. \"Gilgul\" means 'cycle' and \"neshamot\" is 'souls'. Kabbalistic reincarnation says that humans reincarnate only to humans unless YHWH/Ein Sof/God chooses.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe origins of the notion of reincarnation are obscure. Discussion of the subject appears in the philosophical traditions of Ancient India. The Greek Pre-Socratics discussed reincarnation, and the Celtic druids are also reported to have taught a doctrine of reincarnation.\nEarly Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism.\nThe concepts of the cycle of birth and death, \"sa\u1e41s\u0101ra\", and liberation partly derive from ascetic traditions that arose in India around the middle of the first millennium BCE. The first textual references to the idea of reincarnation appear in the Rigveda, Yajurveda and Upanishads of the late Vedic period (c.\u20091100 \u2013 c.\u2009500 BCE), predating the Buddha and Mahavira. Though no direct evidence of this has been found, the tribes of the Ganges valley or the Dravidian traditions of South India have been proposed as another early source of reincarnation beliefs.\nThe idea of reincarnation, \"sa\u1e41s\u0101ra\", did exist in the early Vedic religions. The early Vedas mention the doctrine of karma and rebirth. It is in the early Upanishads, which are pre-Buddha and pre-Mahavira, where these ideas are developed and described in a general way. The earliest layers of Vedic text incorporate the concept of life, followed by an afterlife in heaven and hell based on cumulative virtues (merit) or vices (demerit). However, the ancient Vedic rishis challenged this idea of afterlife as simplistic, because people do not live equally moral or immoral lives. Between generally virtuous lives, some are more virtuous; while evil too has degrees, and the texts assert that it would be unfair for people, with varying degrees of virtue or vices, to end up in heaven or hell, in \"either or\" and disproportionate manner irrespective of how virtuous or vicious their lives were. They introduced the idea of an afterlife in heaven or hell in proportion to one's merit.\nDetailed descriptions first appear around the mid-1st millennium BCE in diverse traditions, including Buddhism, Jainism and various schools of Hindu philosophy, each of which gave unique expression to the general principle.\nThe Purananuru, part of Sangam literature (ancient Tamil literature) contains several mentions of rebirth and moksha. The text explains Hindu rituals surrounding death such as making riceballs called pinda and cremation. The text states that good souls get a place in Indraloka where Indra welcomes them.\nThe texts of ancient Jainism that have survived into the modern era are post-Mahavira, likely from the last centuries of the first millennium BCE, and extensively discuss the doctrines of rebirth and karma. Jaina philosophy assumes that the soul (\"jiva\" in Jainism; \"atman\" in Hinduism) exists and is eternal, passing through cycles of transmigration and rebirth. After death, reincarnation into a new body is asserted to be instantaneous in early Jaina texts. Depending upon the accumulated karma, rebirth occurs into a higher or lower bodily form, either in heaven or hell or earthly realm. No bodily form is permanent: everyone dies and reincarnates further. Liberation (\"kevalya\") from reincarnation is possible, however, through removing and ending karmic accumulations to one's soul. From the early stages of Jainism on, a human being was considered the highest mortal being, with the potential to achieve liberation, particularly through asceticism.\nThe early Buddhist texts discuss rebirth as part of the doctrine of \"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\". This asserts that the nature of existence is a \"suffering-laden cycle of life, death, and rebirth, without beginning or end\". Also referred to as the wheel of existence (\"Bhavacakra\"), it is often mentioned in Buddhist texts with the term \"punarbhava\" (rebirth, re-becoming). Liberation from this cycle of existence, \"Nirvana\", is the foundation and the most important purpose of Buddhism. Buddhist texts also assert that an enlightened person knows his previous births, a knowledge achieved through high levels of meditative concentration. Tibetan Buddhism discusses death, bardo (an intermediate state), and rebirth in texts such as the \"Tibetan Book of the Dead\". While Nirvana is taught as the ultimate goal in the Theravadin Buddhism, and is essential to Mahayana Buddhism, the vast majority of contemporary lay Buddhists focus on accumulating good karma and acquiring merit to achieve a better reincarnation in the next life.\nIn early Buddhist traditions, \"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" cosmology consisted of five realms through which the wheel of existence cycled. This included hells (\"niraya\"), hungry ghosts (\"pretas\"), animals (\"tiryaka\"), humans (\"manushya\"), and gods (\"devas\", heavenly). In latter Buddhist traditions, this list grew to a list of six realms of rebirth, adding demigods (\"asuras\").\nComparison.\nEarly texts of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism share the concepts and terminology related to reincarnation. They also emphasize similar virtuous practices and karma as necessary for liberation and what influences future rebirths. For example, all three discuss various virtues\u2014sometimes grouped as Yamas and Niyamas\u2014such as non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, non-possessiveness, compassion for all living beings, charity and many others.\nHinduism, Buddhism and Jainism disagree in their assumptions and theories about rebirth. Hinduism relies on its foundational belief that the 'soul, Self exists' (\"atman\" or \"att\u0101\"), while Buddhism aserts that there is 'no soul, no Self' (\"anatta\" or \"anatman\"). Hindu traditions consider soul to be the unchanging eternal essence of a living being, which journeys through reincarnations until it attains self-knowledge. Buddhism, in contrast, asserts a rebirth theory without a Self, and considers realization of non-Self or Emptiness as Nirvana (\"nibbana\").\nThe reincarnation doctrine in Jainism differs from those in Buddhism, even though both are non-theistic Sramana traditions. Jainism, in contrast to Buddhism, accepts the foundational assumption that soul (\"Jiva\") exists and asserts that this soul is involved in the rebirth mechanism. Furthermore, Jainism considers asceticism as an important means to spiritual liberation that ends the cycle of reincarnation, while Buddhism does not.\nClassical Greek Philosophy.\nEarly Greek discussion of the concept dates to the sixth century BCE. An early Greek thinker known to have considered rebirth is Pherecydes of Syros (fl. 540 BCE). His younger contemporary Pythagoras (c. 570\u2013c. 495 BCE), its first famous exponent, instituted societies for its diffusion. Some authorities believe that Pythagoras was Pherecydes' pupil, others that Pythagoras took up the idea of reincarnation from the doctrine of Orphism, a Thracian religion, or brought the teaching from India.\nPlato (428/427\u2013348/347 BCE) presented accounts of reincarnation in his works, particularly the \"Myth of Er\", where Plato makes Socrates tell how Er, the son of Armenius, miraculously returned to life on the twelfth day after death and recounted the secrets of the other world. There are myths and theories to the same effect in other dialogues, in the Chariot allegory of the \"Phaedrus\", in the \"Meno\", \"Timaeus\" and \"Laws\". The soul, once separated from the body, spends an indeterminate amount of time in the intelligible realm (see the Allegory of the Cave in \"The Republic\") and then assumes another body. In the \"Timaeus\", Plato believes that the soul moves from body to body without any distinct reward-or-punishment phase between lives, because the reincarnation is itself a punishment or reward for how a person has lived.\nIn \"Phaedo\", Plato has his teacher Socrates, prior to his death, state: \"I am confident that there truly is such a thing as living again, and that the living spring from the dead.\" However, Xenophon does not mention Socrates as believing in reincarnation, and Plato may have systematized Socrates' thought with concepts he took directly from Pythagoreanism or Orphism. Recent scholars have come to see that Plato has multiple reasons for the belief in reincarnation. One argument concerns the theory of reincarnation's usefulness for explaining why non-human animals exist: they are former humans, being punished for their vices; Plato gives this argument at the end of the \"Timaeus\".\nMystery cults.\nThe Orphic religion, which taught reincarnation, about the sixth century BCE, produced a copious literature. Orpheus, its legendary founder, is said to have taught that the immortal soul aspires to freedom while the body holds it prisoner. The wheel of birth revolves, the soul alternates between freedom and captivity round the wide circle of necessity. Orpheus proclaimed the need of the grace of the gods, Dionysus in particular, and of self-purification until the soul has completed the spiral ascent of destiny to live forever.\nAn association between Pythagorean philosophy and reincarnation was routinely accepted throughout antiquity, as Pythagoras also taught about reincarnation. However, unlike the Orphics, who considered metempsychosis a cycle of grief that could be escaped by attaining liberation from it, Pythagoras seems to postulate an eternal, neutral reincarnation where subsequent lives would not be conditioned by any action done in the previous.\nLater authors.\nIn later Greek literature the doctrine is mentioned in a fragment of Menander and satirized by Lucian. In Roman literature it is found as early as Ennius, who, in a lost passage of his \"Annals\", told how he had seen Homer in a dream, who had assured him that the same soul which had animated both the poets had once belonged to a peacock. Persius in his satires (vi. 9) laughs at this; it is referred to also by Lucretius and Horace.\nVirgil works the idea into his account of the Underworld in the sixth book of the \"Aeneid\". It persists down to the late classic thinkers, Plotinus and the other Neoplatonists. In the Hermetica, a Graeco-Egyptian series of writings on cosmology and spirituality attributed to Hermes Trismegistus/Thoth, the doctrine of reincarnation is central.\nCeltic paganism.\nIn the first century BCE Alexander Cornelius Polyhistor wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Pythagorean doctrine prevails among the Gauls' teaching that the souls of men are immortal, and that after a fixed number of years they will enter into another body.\nJulius Caesar recorded that the druids of Gaul, Britain and Ireland had metempsychosis as one of their core doctrines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The principal point of their doctrine is that the soul does not die and that after death it passes from one body into another... the main object of all education is, in their opinion, to imbue their scholars with a firm belief in the indestructibility of the human soul, which, according to their belief, merely passes at death from one tenement to another; for by such doctrine alone, they say, which robs death of all its terrors, can the highest form of human courage be developed.\nDiodorus also recorded the Gaul belief that human souls were immortal, and that after a prescribed number of years they would commence upon a new life in another body. He added that Gauls had the custom of casting letters to their deceased upon the funeral pyres, through which the dead would be able to read them. Valerius Maximus also recounted they had the custom of lending sums of money to each other which would be repayable in the next world. This was mentioned by Pomponius Mela, who also recorded Gauls buried or burnt with them things they would need in a next life, to the point some would jump into the funeral piles of their relatives in order to cohabit in the new life with them.\nHippolytus of Rome believed the Gauls had been taught the doctrine of reincarnation by a slave of Pythagoras named Zalmoxis. Conversely, Clement of Alexandria believed Pythagoras himself had learned it from the Celts and not the opposite, claiming he had been taught by Galatian Gauls, Hindu priests and Zoroastrians. However, author T. D. Kendrick rejected a real connection between Pythagoras and the Celtic idea of reincarnation, noting their beliefs to have substantial differences, and any contact to be historically unlikely. Nonetheless, he proposed the possibility of an ancient common source, also related to the Orphic religion and Thracian systems of belief.\nGermanic paganism.\nSurviving texts indicate that there was a belief in rebirth in Germanic paganism. Examples include figures from eddic poetry and sagas, potentially by way of a process of naming and/or through the family line. Scholars have discussed the implications of these attestations and proposed theories regarding belief in reincarnation among the Germanic peoples prior to Christianization and potentially to some extent in folk belief thereafter.\nJudaism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Above the silence a call came to life, broke through it and dispersed it. \u201cYou will not die, my friends,\u201d the call spoke to the land. \u201cEarth of the Lord, you will awaken and live. Do not be wrathful with him whom you have called. He is born as one who shall return. The hand of the Lord is over his roots to bring him back in his time, to bring him back in your time, O my friends.\u201d\u2014\u200a\nThe belief in reincarnation developed among Jewish mystics in the medieval world, among whom differing explanations were given of the afterlife, although with a universal belief in an immortal soul. It was explicitly rejected by Saadiah Gaon. Today, reincarnation is an esoteric belief within many streams of modern Judaism. Kabbalah teaches a belief in \"gilgul\", transmigration of souls, and hence the belief in reincarnation is universal in Hasidic Judaism, which regards the Kabbalah as sacred and authoritative, and is also sometimes held as an esoteric belief within other strains of Orthodox Judaism. In Judaism, the Zohar, first published in the 13th century, discusses reincarnation at length, especially in the Torah portion \"Balak.\" The most comprehensive kabbalistic work on reincarnation, \"Shaar HaGilgulim\", was written by Chaim Vital, based on the teachings of his mentor, the 16th-century kabbalist Isaac Luria, who was said to know the past lives of each person through his semi-prophetic abilities. The 18th-century Lithuanian master scholar and kabbalist, Elijah of Vilna, known as the Vilna Gaon, authored a commentary on the biblical Book of Jonah as an allegory of reincarnation.\nThe practice of conversion to Judaism is sometimes understood within Orthodox Judaism in terms of reincarnation. According to this school of thought in Judaism, when non-Jews are drawn to Judaism, it is because they had been Jews in a former life. Such souls may \"wander among nations\" through multiple lives, until they find their way back to Judaism, including through finding themselves born in a gentile family with a \"lost\" Jewish ancestor.\nThere is an extensive literature of Jewish folk and traditional stories that refer to reincarnation.\nChristianity.\nChristianity historically and almost universally rejects reincarnation, while a minority of groups believe that it has occurred.\nReincarnationism or biblical reincarnation is the belief that certain people are or can be reincarnations of biblical figures, such as Jesus Christ and the Virgin Mary. Some Christians believe that certain New Testament figures are reincarnations of Old Testament figures. For example, John the Baptist is believed by some to be a reincarnation of the prophet Elijah, and a few take this further by suggesting Jesus was the reincarnation of Elijah's disciple Elisha. Other Christians believe the Second Coming of Jesus would be fulfilled by reincarnation. Sun Myung Moon, the founder of the Unification Church, considered himself to be the fulfillment of Jesus' return.\nThe Catholic Church does not believe in reincarnation, which it regards as incompatible with death. Nonetheless, the leaders of certain sects in the church have taught that there are reincarnations of Mary \u2013 for example, Marie-Paule Gigu\u00e8re of the Army of Mary and Maria Franciszka of the former Mariavites. The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith excommunicated the Army of Mary for teaching heresy, including reincarnationism.\nGnosticism.\nSeveral Gnostic sects professed reincarnation. The Sethians and followers of Valentinus believed in it. The followers of Bardaisan of Mesopotamia, a sect of the second century deemed heretical by the Catholic Church, drew upon Chaldean astrology, to which Bardaisan's son Harmonius, educated in Athens, added Greek ideas including a sort of metempsychosis. Another such teacher was Basilides (132\u2013? CE/AD), known to us through the criticisms of Irenaeus and the work of Clement of Alexandria (see also Neoplatonism and Gnosticism and Buddhism and Gnosticism).\nIn the third Christian century Manichaeism spread both east and west from Babylonia, then within the Sassanid Empire, where its founder Mani lived about 216\u2013276. Manichaean monasteries existed in Rome in 312 AD. Noting Mani's early travels to the Kushan Empire and other Buddhist influences in Manichaeism, Richard Foltz attributes Mani's teaching of reincarnation to Buddhist influence. However the inter-relation of Manicheanism, Orphism, Gnosticism and neo-Platonism is far from clear.\nTaoism.\nTaoist documents from as early as the Han dynasty claimed that Lao Tzu appeared on earth as different persons in different times beginning in the legendary era of Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors. The (ca. third century BC) \"Chuang Tzu\" states: \"Birth is not a beginning; death is not an end. There is existence without limitation; there is continuity without a starting-point. Existence without limitation is Space. Continuity without a starting point is Time. There is birth, there is death, there is issuing forth, there is entering in.\"\nEuropean Middle Ages.\nAround the 11\u201312th century in Europe, several reincarnationist movements were persecuted as heresies, through the establishment of the Inquisition in the Latin west. These included the Cathar, Paterene or Albigensian church of western Europe, the Paulician movement, which arose in Armenia, and the Bogomils in Bulgaria.\nChristian sects such as the Bogomils and the Cathars, who professed reincarnation and other gnostic beliefs, were referred to as \"Manichaean\", and are today sometimes described by scholars as \"Neo-Manichaean\". As there is no known Manichaean mythology or terminology in the writings of these groups there has been some dispute among historians as to whether these groups truly were descendants of Manichaeism.\nRenaissance and Early Modern period.\nDuring the Renaissance translations of Plato, the Hermetica, and other works fostered new European interest in reincarnation. Marsilio Ficino argued that Plato's references to reincarnation were intended allegorically, Shakespeare alluded to the doctrine of reincarnation but Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake by authorities after being found guilty of heresy by the Roman Inquisition for his teachings. But the Greek philosophical works remained available and, particularly in north Europe, were discussed by groups such as the Cambridge Platonists. Emanuel Swedenborg believed that we leave the physical world once, but then go through several lives in the spiritual world\u2014a kind of hybrid of Christian tradition and the popular view of reincarnation.\n19th to 20th centuries.\nBy the 19th century the philosophers Schopenhauer and Nietzsche could access the Indian scriptures for discussion of the doctrine of reincarnation, which recommended itself to the American Transcendentalists Henry David Thoreau, Walt Whitman and Ralph Waldo Emerson and was adapted by Francis Bowen into \"Christian Metempsychosis\".\nBy the early 20th century, interest in reincarnation had been introduced into the nascent discipline of psychology, largely due to the influence of William James, who raised aspects of the philosophy of mind, comparative religion, the psychology of religious experience and the nature of empiricism. James was influential in the founding of the American Society for Psychical Research (ASPR) in New York City in 1885, three years after the British Society for Psychical Research (SPR) was inaugurated in London, leading to systematic, critical investigation of paranormal phenomena. Famous World War II American General George Patton was a strong believer in reincarnation, believing, among other things, he was a reincarnation of the Carthaginian General Hannibal.\nAt this time popular awareness of the idea of reincarnation was boosted by the Theosophical Society's dissemination of systematised and universalised Indian concepts and also by the influence of magical societies like The Golden Dawn. Notable personalities like Annie Besant, W. B. Yeats and Dion Fortune made the subject almost as familiar an element of the popular culture of the west as of the east. By 1924 the subject could be satirised in popular children's books. Humorist Don Marquis created a fictional cat named Mehitabel who claimed to be a reincarnation of Queen Cleopatra.\nTh\u00e9odore Flournoy was among the first to study a claim of past-life recall in the course of his investigation of the medium H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Smith, published in 1900, in which he defined the possibility of cryptomnesia in such accounts.\nCarl Gustav Jung, like Flournoy based in Switzerland, also emulated him in his thesis based on a study of cryptomnesia in psychism. Later Jung would emphasise the importance of the persistence of memory and ego in psychological study of reincarnation: \"This concept of rebirth necessarily implies the continuity of personality... (that) one is able, at least potentially, to remember that one has lived through previous existences, and that these existences were one's own...\" Hypnosis, used in psychoanalysis for retrieving forgotten memories, was eventually tried as a means of studying the phenomenon of past life recall.\nMore recently, many people in the West have developed an interest in and acceptance of reincarnation. Many new religious movements include reincarnation among their beliefs, e.g. modern Neopagans, Spiritism, Astara, Dianetics, and Scientology. Many esoteric philosophies also include reincarnation, e.g. Theosophy, Anthroposophy, Kabbalah, and Gnostic and Esoteric Christianity such as the works of Martinus Thomsen.\nDemographic survey data from 1999 to 2002 shows a significant minority of people from Europe (22%) and America (20%) believe in the existence of life before birth and after death, leading to a physical rebirth. The belief in reincarnation is particularly high in the Baltic countries, with Lithuania having the highest figure for the whole of Europe, 44%, while the lowest figure is in East Germany, 12%. A quarter of U.S. Christians, including 10% of all born again Christians, embrace the idea.\nAcademic psychiatrist Ian Stevenson reported that belief in reincarnation is held (with variations in details) by adherents of almost all major religions except Christianity and Islam. In addition, between 20 and 30 percent of persons in western countries who may be nominal Christians also believe in reincarnation. One 1999 study by Walter and Waterhouse reviewed the previous data on the level of reincarnation belief and performed a set of thirty in-depth interviews in Britain among people who did not belong to a religion advocating reincarnation. The authors reported that surveys have found about one fifth to one quarter of Europeans have some level of belief in reincarnation, with similar results found in the USA. In the interviewed group, the belief in the existence of this phenomenon appeared independent of their age, or the type of religion that these people belonged to, with most being Christians. The beliefs of this group also did not appear to contain any more than usual of \"new age\" ideas (broadly defined) and the authors interpreted their ideas on reincarnation as \"one way of tackling issues of suffering\", but noted that this seemed to have little effect on their private lives.\nWaterhouse also published a detailed discussion of beliefs expressed in the interviews. She noted that although most people \"hold their belief in reincarnation quite lightly\" and were unclear on the details of their ideas, personal experiences such as past-life memories and near-death experiences had influenced most believers, although only a few had direct experience of these phenomena. Waterhouse analyzed the influences of second-hand accounts of reincarnation, writing that most of the people in the survey had heard other people's accounts of past-lives from regression hypnosis and dreams and found these fascinating, feeling that there \"must be something in it\" if other people were having such experiences.\nOther influential contemporary figures that have written on reincarnation include Alice Ann Bailey, one of the first writers to use the terms New Age and age of Aquarius, Torkom Saraydarian, an Armenian-American musician and religious author, Dolores Cannon, Atul Gawande, Michael Newton, Bruce Greyson, Raymond Moody and Unity Church founder Charles Fillmore. Neale Donald Walsch, an American author of the series \"Conversations with God\" claims that he has reincarnated more than 600 times. The Indian spiritual teacher Meher Baba who had significant following in the West taught that reincarnation followed from human desire and ceased once a person was freed from desire.\nReligions and philosophies.\nBuddhism.\nAccording to various Buddhist scriptures, Gautama Buddha believed in the existence of an afterlife in another world and in reincarnation,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Since there actually is another world (any world other than the present human one, i.e. different rebirth realms), one who holds the view 'there is no other world' has wrong view...\u2014\u200a\nThe Buddha also asserted that karma influences rebirth, and that the cycles of repeated births and deaths are endless. Before the birth of Buddha, materialistic school such as Charvaka posited that death is the end, there is no afterlife, no soul, no rebirth, no karma, and they described death to be a state where a living being is completely annihilated, dissolved. Buddha rejected this theory, adopted the alternative existing theories on rebirth, criticizing the materialistic schools that denied rebirth and karma, states Damien Keown. Such beliefs are inappropriate and dangerous, stated Buddha, because such annihilationism views encourage moral irresponsibility and material hedonism; he tied moral responsibility to rebirth.\nThe Buddha introduced the concept of \"anatt\u0101,\" which asserts that there is no permanent self (soul). Major contemporary Buddhist traditions such as Theravada, Mahayana and Vajrayana traditions accept the teachings of Buddha. These teachings assert there is rebirth, there is no permanent self and no irreducible \"\u0101tman\" (soul) moving from life to another and tying these lives together, there is impermanence, that all compounded things such as living beings are aggregates dissolve at death, but every being reincarnates. The rebirth cycles continue endlessly, states Buddhism, and it is a source of \"duhkha\" (suffering, pain), but this reincarnation and \"duhkha\" cycle can be stopped through nirvana. The \"anatt\u0101\" doctrine of Buddhism is a contrast to Hinduism, the latter asserting that \"soul exists, it is involved in rebirth, and it is through this soul that everything is connected\".\nDifferent traditions within Buddhism have offered different theories on what reincarnates and how reincarnation happens. One theory suggests that it occurs through consciousness (Sanskrit: \"vij\u00f1\u0101na\"; Pali: \"samvattanika-vi\u00f1\u00f1ana\") or stream of consciousness (Sanskrit: \"citta-sant\u0101na\", \"vij\u00f1\u0101na-srot\u0101m, or vij\u00f1\u0101na-sant\u0101na\"; Pali: \"vi\u00f1\u00f1ana-sotam\") upon death, which reincarnates into a new aggregation. This process, states this theory, is similar to the flame of a dying candle lighting up another. The consciousness in the newly born being is neither identical to nor entirely different from that in the deceased but the two form a causal continuum or stream in this Buddhist theory. Transmigration is influenced by a being's past \"karma\" (Pali: \"kamma\"). The root cause of rebirth, states Buddhism, is the abiding of consciousness in ignorance (Sanskrit: \"avidya\"; Pali: \"avijja\") about the nature of reality, and when this ignorance is uprooted, rebirth ceases.\nBuddhist traditions also vary in their mechanistic details on rebirth. Most Theravada Buddhists assert that rebirth is immediate while the Tibetan and most Chinese and Japanese schools hold to the notion of a \"bardo\" (intermediate state) that can last up to 49 days. The \"bardo\" rebirth concept of Tibetan Buddhism, originally developed in India but spread to Tibet and other Buddhist countries, and involves 42 peaceful deities, and 58 wrathful deities. These ideas led to maps on karma and what form of rebirth one takes after death, discussed in texts such as \"The Tibetan Book of the Dead\". The major Buddhist traditions accept that the reincarnation of a being depends on the past karma and merit (demerit) accumulated, and that there are six realms of existence in which the rebirth may occur after each death.\nWithin Japanese Zen, reincarnation is accepted by some, but rejected by others. A distinction can be drawn between 'folk Zen', as in the Zen practiced by devotional lay people, and 'philosophical Zen'. Folk Zen generally accepts the various supernatural elements of Buddhism such as rebirth. Philosophical Zen, however, places more emphasis on the present moment.\nSome schools conclude that karma continues to exist and adhere to the person until it works out its consequences. For the Sautrantika school, each act \"perfumes\" the individual or \"plants a seed\" that later germinates. Tibetan Buddhism stresses the state of mind at the time of death. To die with a peaceful mind will stimulate a virtuous seed and a fortunate rebirth; a disturbed mind will stimulate a non-virtuous seed and an unfortunate rebirth.\nChristianity.\nIn a survey carried out by the Pew Forum in 2009, 22% of American Christians expressed a belief in reincarnation, and in a 1981 survey 31% of regular churchgoing European Catholics expressed a belief in reincarnation.\nSome Christian theologians interpret certain Biblical passages as referring to reincarnation. These passages include the questioning of Jesus as to whether he is Elijah, John the Baptist, Jeremiah, or another prophet (Matthew 16:13\u201315 and John 1:21\u201322) and, less clearly (while Elijah was said not to have died, but to have been taken up to heaven), John the Baptist being asked if he is not Elijah (John 1:25). Geddes MacGregor (1909-1998), who became an Episcopalian priest and a professor of philosophy, has made a case for the compatibility of Christian doctrine and reincarnation. The Catholic Church and theologians such as Norman Geisler (1932-2019) argue that reincarnation is unorthodox and reject the reincarnationist interpretation of texts about John the Baptist and biblical texts used to defend this belief. In fact, the figure of Elijah is clearly used as a metaphor for John the Baptist in : \"For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. [...] And if you are willing to receive it, he is Elijah who is to come.\"\nN. T. Wright (1948- ) emphasises resurrection of the body over reincarnation of the soul.\nEarly.\nSome evidence suggests that Origen ( (c.\u2009185 \u2013 c.\u2009253), sometimes regarded as an early Church Father, taught reincarnation in his lifetime but that when his works were translated into Latin these references were concealed. One of the epistles written by St. Jerome, \"To Avitus\" (Letter 124; Ad Avitum. Epistula CXXIV), asserts that Origen's \"On the First Principles\" (; ) was mistranscribed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; About ten years ago that saintly man Pammachius sent me a copy of a certain person's [ Rufinus's ] rendering, or rather misrendering, of Origen's \"First Principles\"; with a request that in a Latin version I should give the true sense of the Greek and should set down the writer's words for good or for evil without bias in either direction. When I did as he wished and sent him the book, he was shocked to read it and locked it up in his desk lest being circulated it might wound the souls of many.\nUnder the impression that Origen was a heretic like Arius, St. Jerome criticizes ideas described in \"On the First Principles\". Further in \"To Avitus\" (Letter 124), St. Jerome writes about \"convincing proof\" that Origen teaches reincarnation in the original version of the book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The following passage is a convincing proof that he holds the transmigration of the souls and annihilation of bodies. 'If it can be shown that an incorporeal and reasonable being has life in itself independently of the body and that it is worse off in the body than out of it; then beyond a doubt bodies are only of secondary importance and arise from time to time to meet the varying conditions of reasonable creatures. Those who require bodies are clothed with them, and contrariwise, when fallen souls have lifted themselves up to better things, their bodies are once more annihilated. They are thus ever vanishing and ever reappearing.'\nThe original text of \"On First Principles\" has been almost completely lost. It remains extant as \"De Principiis\" in fragments faithfully translated into Latin by St. Jerome and in \"the not very reliable Latin translation of Rufinus\".\nHowever, Origen's supposed belief in reincarnation is controversial. Christian scholar Dan R. Schlesinger has written an extensive monograph in which he argues that Origen never taught reincarnation.\nReincarnation was taught by several Gnostics such as Marcion of Sinope (c.\u200985 \u2013 c.\u2009160). Belief in reincarnation was rejected by several Church Fathers, including Augustine of Hippo in \"The City of God\".\nRoman Catholic Church.\nCiting (\"27 And as it is appointed for men to die once, but after this the judgment, 28 so Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many. To those who eagerly wait for Him He will appear a second time, apart from sin, for salvation.\"), the Catechism of the Catholic Church completely rejects any doctrine of reincarnation.\nSame thing is expressed about Christ in : \"For Christ also \"suffered once\" for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive by the Spirit...\"\nDruze.\nReincarnation is a paramount tenet in the Druze faith. There is an eternal duality of the body and the soul and it is impossible for the soul to exist without the body. Therefore, reincarnations occur instantly at one's death. While in the Hindu and Buddhist belief system a soul can be transmitted to any living creature, in the Druze belief system this is not possible and a human soul will only transfer to a human body. Furthermore, souls cannot be divided into different or separate parts and the number of souls existing is finite.\nThe few Druzes who claim to remember their past are called \"Nateq\". Typically souls who have died violent deaths in their previous incarnation will be able to recall memories. Since death is seen as a quick transient state, mourning is discouraged. Unlike other Abrahamic faiths, heaven and hell are spiritual. Heaven is the ultimate happiness received when soul escapes the cycle of rebirths and reunites with the Creator, while hell is conceptualized as the bitterness of being unable to reunite with the Creator and escape from the cycle of rebirth.\nHinduism.\nHindu traditions assert that the body dies, but not the soul, which they believe to be eternal, indestructible, and blissful. Everything and all existence is believed to be connected and cyclical in many Hinduism-sects, all living beings composed of two things, the soul and the body or matter. In Hindu belief, \u0100tman does not change and cannot change by its innate nature. Current karma impacts the future circumstances in this life, as well as the future forms and realms of lives. Good intent and actions lead to good future, bad intent and actions lead to bad future, impacting how one reincarnates.\nThere is no permanent heaven or hell in most Hinduism-sects. In the afterlife, based on one's karma, the soul is reborn as another being in heaven, hell, or a living being on earth (human, animal). Gods, too, die once their past karmic merit runs out, as do those in hell, and they return getting another chance on earth. Reincarnation continues, endlessly in cycles, until one embarks on a spiritual pursuit, realizes self-knowledge, and thereby gains \"mok\u1e63a\", the final release out of the reincarnation cycles. This release is believed to be a state of utter bliss, which Hindu traditions believe is either related or identical to Brahman, the unchanging reality that existed before the creation of universe, continues to exist, and shall exist after the universe ends (in simpler terms, the Hindu concept of an all-powerful God).\nThe Upanishads, part of the scriptures of the Hindu traditions, primarily focus on the liberation from reincarnation. The Bhagavad Gita discusses various paths to liberation. The Upanishads, states Harold Coward, offer a \"very optimistic view regarding the perfectibility of human nature\", and the goal of human effort in these texts is a continuous journey to self-perfection and self-knowledge so as to end \"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\"\u2014the endless cycle of rebirth and redeath. The aim of spiritual quest in the Upanishadic traditions is find the true self within and to know one's soul, a state that they assert leads to blissful state of freedom, moksha.\nThe Bhagavad Gita states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just as in the body childhood, adulthood and old age happen to an embodied being. So also he (the embodied being) acquires another body. The wise one is not deluded about this. (2:13)\nAs, after casting away worn out garments, a man later takes new ones. So after casting away worn out bodies, the embodied Self encounters other new ones. (2:22)\nWhen an embodied being transcends, these three qualities which are the source of the body, Released from birth, death, old age and pain, he attains immortality. (14:20)\nThere are internal differences within Hindu traditions on reincarnation and the state of moksha. For example, the dualistic devotional traditions such as Madhvacharya's Dvaita Vedanta tradition of Hinduism champion a theistic premise, assert that human soul and Brahman are different, loving devotion to Brahman (god Vishnu in Madhvacharya's theology) is the means to release from Samsara, it is the grace of God which leads to moksha, and spiritual liberation is achievable only in after-life (\"videhamukti\"). The non-dualistic traditions such as Adi Shankara's Advaita Vedanta tradition of Hinduism champion a monistic premise, asserting that the individual human soul and Brahman are identical, only ignorance, impulsiveness and inertia leads to suffering through Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra, in reality there are no dualities, meditation and self-knowledge is the path to liberation, the realization that one's soul is identical to Brahman is moksha, and spiritual liberation is achievable in this life (\"jivanmukti\").\nTwentieth-century Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo said that rebirth was the mechanism of evolution \u2013 plants are reborn as animals, which are reborn as humans, gaining intelligence each time. He said that this progression was irreversible, and that a human cannot be reborn as an animal.\nIslam.\nMost Islamic schools of thought reject any idea of reincarnation of living beings. It teaches a linear concept of life, wherein a human being has only one life and upon death he or she is judged by God, then rewarded in heaven or punished in hell. Islam teaches final resurrection and Judgement Day, but there is no prospect for the reincarnation of a human being into a different body or being. During the early history of Islam, some of the Caliphs persecuted all reincarnation-believing people, such as Manichaeism, to the point of extinction in Mesopotamia and Persia (modern day Iraq and Iran). However, some Muslim minority sects such as those found among Sufis, and some Muslims in South Asia and Indonesia have retained their pre-Islamic Hindu and Buddhist beliefs in reincarnation. For instance, historically, South Asian Isma'ilis performed chantas yearly, one of which is for seeking forgiveness of sins committed in past lives.\nGhulat sects.\nThe idea of reincarnation is accepted by a few heterodox sects, particularly of the Ghulat. Alawites hold that they were originally stars or divine lights that were cast out of heaven through disobedience and must undergo repeated reincarnation (or metempsychosis) before returning to heaven. They can be reincarnated as Christians or others through sin and as animals if they become infidels.\nJainism.\nIn Jainism, reincarnation, along with its theories of \"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" and Karma, are central to its theological foundations, as evidenced by the extensive literature on it in the major sects of Jainism, and their pioneering ideas on these topics from the earliest times of the Jaina tradition. Reincarnation in contemporary Jainism traditions is the belief that the worldly life is characterized by continuous rebirths and suffering in various realms of existence.\nKarma forms a central and fundamental part of Jain faith, being intricately connected to other of its philosophical concepts like transmigration, reincarnation, liberation, non-violence (\"ahi\u1e43s\u0101\") and non-attachment, among others. Actions are seen to have consequences: some immediate, some delayed, even into future incarnations. So the doctrine of karma is not considered simply in relation to one life-time, but also in relation to both future incarnations and past lives. \"Uttar\u0101dhyayana S\u016btra\" 3.3\u20134 states: \"The \"j\u012bva\" or the soul is sometimes born in the world of gods, sometimes in hell. Sometimes it acquires the body of a demon; all this happens on account of its karma. This \"j\u012bva\" sometimes takes birth as a worm, as an insect or as an ant.\" The text further states (32.7): \"Karma is the root of birth and death. The souls bound by karma go round and round in the cycle of existence.\"\nActions and emotions in the current lifetime affect future incarnations depending on the nature of the particular karma. For example, a good and virtuous life indicates a latent desire to experience good and virtuous themes of life. Therefore, such a person attracts karma that ensures that their future births will allow them to experience and manifest their virtues and good feelings unhindered. In this case, they may take birth in heaven or in a prosperous and virtuous human family. On the other hand, a person who has indulged in immoral deeds, or with a cruel disposition, indicates a latent desire to experience cruel themes of life. As a natural consequence, they will attract karma which will ensure that they are reincarnated in hell, or in lower life forms, to enable their soul to experience the cruel themes of life.\nThere is no retribution, judgment or reward involved but a natural consequences of the choices in life made either knowingly or unknowingly. Hence, whatever suffering or pleasure that a soul may be experiencing in its present life is on account of choices that it has made in the past. As a result of this doctrine, Jainism attributes supreme importance to pure thinking and moral behavior.\nThe Jain texts postulate four \"gatis\", that is states-of-existence or birth-categories, within which the soul transmigrates. The four \"gatis\" are: \"deva\" (demigods), \"manu\u1e63ya\" (humans), \"n\u0101raki\" (hell beings), and \"tirya\u00f1ca\" (animals, plants, and microorganisms). The four \"gatis\" have four corresponding realms or habitation levels in the vertically tiered Jain universe: \"deva\" occupy the higher levels where the heavens are situated; \"manu\u1e63ya\" and \"tirya\u00f1ca\" occupy the middle levels; and \"n\u0101raki\" occupy the lower levels where seven hells are situated.\nSingle-sensed souls, however, called \"nigoda\", and element-bodied souls pervade all tiers of this universe. \"Nigodas\" are souls at the bottom end of the existential hierarchy. They are so tiny and undifferentiated, that they lack even individual bodies, living in colonies. According to Jain texts, this infinity of \"nigodas\" can also be found in plant tissues, root vegetables and animal bodies. Depending on its karma, a soul transmigrates and reincarnates within the scope of this cosmology of destinies. The four main destinies are further divided into sub-categories and still smaller sub-sub-categories. In all, Jain texts speak of a cycle of 8.4 million birth destinies in which souls find themselves again and again as they cycle within \"samsara\".\nIn Jainism, God has no role to play in an individual's destiny; one's personal destiny is not seen as a consequence of any system of reward or punishment, but rather as a result of its own personal karma. A text from a volume of the ancient Jain canon, \"Bhagvati s\u016btra\" 8.9.9, links specific states of existence to specific karmas. Violent deeds, killing of creatures having five sense organs, eating fish, and so on, lead to rebirth in hell. Deception, fraud and falsehood lead to rebirth in the animal and vegetable world. Kindness, compassion and humble character result in human birth; while austerities and the making and keeping of vows lead to rebirth in heaven.\nEach soul is thus responsible for its own predicament, as well as its own salvation. Accumulated karma represent a sum total of all unfulfilled desires, attachments and aspirations of a soul. It enables the soul to experience the various themes of the lives that it desires to experience. Hence a soul may transmigrate from one life form to another for countless of years, taking with it the karma that it has earned, until it finds conditions that bring about the required fruits. In certain philosophies, heavens and hells are often viewed as places for eternal salvation or eternal damnation for good and bad deeds. But according to Jainism, such places, including the earth are simply the places which allow the soul to experience its unfulfilled karma.\nJudaism.\nThe doctrine of reincarnation has had a complex evolution within Judaism. Initially alien to Jewish tradition, it began to emerge in the 8th century, possibly influenced by Muslim mystics, gaining acceptance among Karaites and Jewish dissenters. It was first mentioned in Jewish literature by Saadia Gaon, who criticized it. However, it remained a minority belief, facing little resistance until the spread of Kabbalah in the 12th century. The \"Book of Clarity\" (Sefer ha-Bahir) of this period introduced concepts such as the transmigration of souls, strengthening the foundation of Kabbalah with mystical symbolism. Kabbalah also teaches that \"The soul of Moses is reincarnated in every generation.\" This teaching found more significant ground in Kabbalistic circles in Provence and Spain.\nDespite not being widely accepted in Orthodox Judaism, the doctrine of reincarnation attracted some modern Jews involved in mysticism. Hasidic Judaism and followers of Kabbalah remained firm in their belief in the transmigration of souls. Other branches of Judaism, such as Reform and Conservative, do not teach it.\nThe 16th century mystical renaissance in communal Safed marked an important development in Kabbalistic thought, with a significant impact on mystical circles and Jewish spirituality. It was also the time when Kabbalah was most widely disseminated. References to gilgul in former Kabbalah became systematized as part of the metaphysical purpose of creation. Isaac Luria (the Ari) brought the issue to the centre of his new mystical articulation, for the first time, and advocated identification of the reincarnations of historic Jewish figures that were compiled by Haim Vital in his Shaar HaGilgulim. \"Gilgul\" is contrasted with the other processes in Kabbalah of Ibbur ('pregnancy'), the attachment of a second soul to an individual for (or by) good means, and Dybuk ('possession'), the attachment of a spirit, demon, etc. to an individual for (or by) \"bad\" means.\nIn Lurianic Kabbalah, reincarnation is not retributive or fatalistic, but an expression of Divine compassion, the microcosm of the doctrine of cosmic rectification of creation. \"Gilgul\" is a heavenly agreement with the individual soul, conditional upon circumstances. Luria's radical system focused on rectification of the Divine soul, played out through Creation. The true essence of anything is the divine spark within that gives it existence. Even a stone or leaf possesses such a soul that \"came into this world to receive a rectification\". A human soul may occasionally be exiled into lower inanimate, vegetative or animal creations. The most basic component of the soul, the nefesh, must leave at the cessation of blood production. There are four other soul components and different nations of the world possess different forms of souls with different purposes. Each Jewish soul is reincarnated in order to fulfill each of the 613 Mosaic commandments that elevate a particular spark of holiness associated with each commandment. Once all the Sparks are redeemed to their spiritual source, the Messianic Era begins. Non-Jewish observance of the 7 Laws of Noah assists the Jewish people, though Biblical adversaries of Israel reincarnate to oppose.\nAmong the many rabbis who accepted reincarnation are Kabbalists like Nahmanides (the Ramban) and Rabbenu Bahya ben Asher, Levi ibn Habib (the Ralbah), Shelomoh Alkabez, Moses Cordovero, Moses Chaim Luzzatto; early Hasidic masters such as the Baal Shem Tov, Schneur Zalman of Liadi and Nachman of Breslov, as well as virtually all later Hasidic masters; contemporary Hasidic teachers such as DovBer Pinson, Moshe Weinberger and Joel Landau; and key Mitnagdic leaders, such as the Vilna Gaon and Chaim Volozhin and their school, as well as Rabbi Shalom Sharabi (known at the RaShaSH), the Ben Ish Chai of Baghdad, and the Baba Sali. Rabbis who have rejected the idea include Saadia Gaon, David Kimhi, Hasdai Crescas, Joseph Albo, Abraham ibn Daud, Leon de Modena, Solomon ben Aderet, Maimonides and Asher ben Jehiel. Among the Geonim, Hai Gaon argued in favour of \"gilgulim\".\nInuit.\nIn the Western Hemisphere, belief in reincarnation is most prevalent in the now heavily Christian Polar North (now mainly parts of Greenland and Nunavut). The concept of reincarnation is enshrined in the Inuit languages, and in many Inuit cultures it is traditional to name a newborn child after a recently deceased person under the belief that the child is the namesake reincarnated.\nHo-Chunk.\nReincarnation is an intrinsic part of some Northeastern Native American traditions. The following is a story of human-to-human reincarnation as told by Thunder Cloud, a Winnebago (Ho-Chunk) shaman. Here Thunder Cloud talks about his two previous lives and how he died and came back again to this his third lifetime. He describes his time between lives, when he was \"blessed\" by Earth Maker and all the abiding spirits and given special powers, including the ability to heal the sick.\nThunder Cloud's account of his two reincarnations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I \"(my ghost)\" was taken to the place where the sun sets \"(the west)\". ... While at that place, I thought I would come back to earth again, and the old man with whom I was staying said to me, \"My son, did you not speak about wanting to go to the earth again?\" I had, as a matter of fact, only thought of it, yet he knew what I wanted. Then he said to me, \"You can go, but you must ask the chief first.\" Then I went and told the chief of the village of my desire, and he said to me, \"You may go and obtain your revenge upon the people who killed your relatives and you.\" Then I was brought down to earth. ... There I lived until I died of old age. ... As I was lying [in my grave], someone said to me, \"Come, let us go away.\" So then we went toward the setting of the sun. There we came to a village where we met all the dead. ... From that place I came to this earth again for the third time, and here I am.\u2014\u200a\nSikhism.\nIn the 15th century, Sikhism's founder Guru Nanak maintained a cyclical concept of time. Sikhism teaches reincarnation theory similar to those in Hinduism, but with some differences from its traditional doctrines. Sikh rebirth theories about the nature of existence are similar to ideas that developed during the devotional Bhakti movement particularly within some Vaishnava traditions, which define liberation as a state of union with God attained through the grace of God.\nSikhism teaches that the soul passes from one body to another in endless cycles of Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra, until liberation from the death and rebirth cycle. Each birth begins with karma (\"karam\"), and these actions leave a karmic signature (\"karni\") on one's soul which influences future rebirths, but it is God whose grace that liberates from the death and rebirth cycle. The way out of the reincarnation cycle, asserts Sikhism, is to live an ethical life, devote oneself to God and constantly remember God's name. The precepts of Sikhism encourage the bhakti of One Lord for \"mukti\" (liberation from the death and rebirth cycle).\nTraditional African religions.\nThe Traditional African religions generally hold the beliefs of life after death (a spirit world or realms), with some also having a concept of reincarnation, in which deceased humans may reincarnate into their family lineage (blood lineage), if they want to, or have something to fulfill.\nYoruba.\nThe Yoruba religion teaches that Olodumare, the Supreme Being and divine Creator who rules over His Creation, created \"eniyan\", or humanity, to achieve balance between heaven and earth and bring about \"Ipo Rere\", or the Good Condition. To cause achievement of the Good Condition, humanity reincarnates. Once achieved, Ipo Rere provides the ultimate state of supreme existence with Olodumare, a goal which elevates reincarnation to a key position in the Yoruba religion.\n\"Atunwaye\" (also called \"atunwa\") is the Yoruba term for reincarnation. Predestination is a foundational component of \"atunwaye\". Just prior to incarnation, a person first chooses their \"Ayanmo\" (destiny) before also choosing their \"Akunyelan\" (lot) in the presence of Olodumare and Orunmila with Olodumare's approval. By \"atunwaye\", a person may incarnate only in a human being and may choose to reincarnate in either sex, regardless of choice in the prior incarnation.\nIpadaway\nThe most common, widespread Yoruba reincarnation belief is \"ipadawaye\", meaning \"the ancestor's rebirth\". According to this belief, the reincarnating person will reincarnate along their familial lineage. When a person dies, they go to \"orun\" (heaven) and will live with the ancestors in either \"orunrere\" (good heaven) or \"orunapaadi\" (bad heaven). Reincarnation is believed to be a gift bestowed on ancestors who lived well and experienced a \"good\" death. Only ancestors living in \"orunrere\" may return as grandchildren, reincarnating out of their love for the family or the world. Children may be given names to indicate which ancestor is believed to have returned, such as Babatide (\"father has come\"), Babatunde (\"father has come again\"), and Yetunde (\"mother has come again\").\nA \"bad\" death (which includes deaths of children, cruel, or childless people and deaths by punishments from the gods, accidents, suicides, and gruesome murders) is generally believed to prevent the deceased from joining the ancestors and reincarnating again, though some practitioners also believe a person experiencing a \"bad\" death will be reborn much later into conditions of poverty.\nAbiku\nAnother Yoruba reincarnation belief is \"abiku\", meaning \"born to die\"\nAccording to Yoruba custom, an abiku is a reincarnating child who repeatedly experiences death and rebirth with the same mother in a vicious cycle. Because childlessness is considered a curse in Yoruba culture, parents with an abiku child will always attempt to help the abiku child by preventing their death. However, abiku are believed to possess a power to ensure their eventual death, so rendering assistance is often a frustrating endeavor causing significant pain to the parents. This pain is believed to bring happiness to the abiku.\nAbiku are believed to be a \"species of spirit\" thought to live apart from people in, for example, secluded parts of villages, jungles, and footpaths. Modern belief in abiku has significantly waned among urban populations, with the decline attributed to improved hygiene and medical care reducing infant mortality rates.\nAkudaaya\n\"Akudaaya\", meaning \"born to die and reappear\" (also called \"akuda\"), is a Yoruba reincarnation belief of \"a person that is dead[] but has not gone to heaven\". Akudaaya is based on the belief that, if a recently deceased person's destiny in that life remained unfulfilled, the deceased cannot join the ancestors and therefore must roam the world. Following death, an akudaaya returns to their previous existence by reappearing in the same physical form. However, the new existence will be lived in a different physical location from the first, and the akudaaya will not be recognized by a still-living relative, should they happen to meet. The akudaaya lives their new existence working to fulfill their destiny from the previous life.\nThe concept of akudaaya is the subject of \"Akudaaya (The Wraith)\", a 2023 Nigerian drama film in the Yoruba language. The film is said to center on a deceased son who \"has begun living life as a spirit in another state and has fallen in love\".\nSerer religion.\nCii\u0257 is the Serer process of a spirit's (\"o laaw\") reincarnation as found within the tenets of Serer spirituality (\"A fat Roog\"). In the Serer language, \"Cii\u0257\", in its literal definition is the reincarnated or the dead who seek to reincarnate or the pre-foetal spirit. This Cii\u0257 has the capability to reincarnate and become a man. In A fat Roog (Serer spirituality), only those human Pangool (ancestral spirits) who have reached \"Jaaniiw\" (the place where good souls go) are able to reincarnate.\nNew religious and spiritual movements.\nSpiritism.\nSpiritism, a spiritualist philosophy codified in the 19th century by the French educator Allan Kardec, teaches reincarnation or rebirth into human life after death.\nAccording to the Spiritist doctrine, an \"intelligent principle\", also called the \"spiritual principle\", evolves from simpler organisms such as bacteria, plants, then into non-human animals, then into humans, and then into further stages, including the angelical one of higher wisdom and morality. The period in between physical lives is called \"erraticity\", in which a spirit may wander on Earth or in (either good or bad) spiritual realms. According to this doctrine, free will and cause and effect are the corollaries of reincarnation, and reincarnation provides a mechanism for a person's spiritual evolution in successive lives. The introduction of reincarnation into Spiritist doctrines was mediated by a series of mediums and \"magnetizers\", such as M. Roustan, a practitioner of animal magnetism, also known as mesmerism, who believed in reincarnation. Roustan played an important role in the development of the mediumistic abilities of Celina Japhet, a medium who assisted Allan Kardec in the codification of his doctrine.\nThese ideas were consolidated in France. Their spread was facilitated by a movement to reinterpret spiritualism, strongly influenced by mystical, Hindu, Buddhist and socialist tendencies. One of the first groups in France to embrace reincarnation was the Saint-Simonian movement in the 1820s, a group of progressive and utopian thinkers, including Jean Reynaud and Pierre Leroux, who sought to reform society and integrate socialist ideals with a new spiritual vision. These thinkers, influenced by Eastern philosophies \"newly discovered\" in the West, such as those of Hindu and Buddhist thinkers, adopted the belief that the soul evolved over multiple lives. Reynaud and Leroux, in particular, popularized the idea of reincarnation, arguing that it was a more rational and progressive explanation for the fate of the soul. They drew on the Catholic thinker Pierre-Simon Ballanche. This belief was also promoted by other socialist and mystical thinkers, such as Henri de St. Simon, Barth\u00e9lemy-Prosper Enfantin and Charles Fourier, who, in addition to discussing the evolution of the soul, saw reincarnation as a key to understanding human progress, both from a spiritual and social point of view. In an attempt to make the theory more \"French\", Reynaud stated that the ancient Druids, representatives of the Celtic culture of France, also believed in reincarnation, which gave the doctrine a legitimate ancestral origin and connection with national identity. This belief in reincarnation was appropriated by groups of liberal Protestants, freethinkers and mesmerists, reaching Kardec through the latter.\nThe doctrine of reincarnation was criticized by spiritualists outside of France. In the United States, Andrew Jackson Davis considered it a \"magnificent mansion built on sand\", although he believed in the pre-existence of souls. In England, William Howitt was one of the main critics, describing the doctrine as pitiful and repulsive, arguing that, if it were true, many spirits would have searched in vain for their loved ones in the afterlife.\nTheosophy.\nThe Theosophical Society draws much of its inspiration from India. In the Theosophical world-view reincarnation is the vast rhythmic process by which the soul, the part of a person which belongs to the formless non-material and timeless worlds, unfolds its spiritual powers in the world and comes to know itself. It descends from sublime, free, spiritual realms and gathers experience through its effort to express itself in the world. Afterwards there is a withdrawal from the physical plane to successively higher levels of reality, in death, a purification and assimilation of the past life. Having cast off all instruments of personal experience it stands again in its spiritual and formless nature, ready to begin its next rhythmic manifestation, every lifetime bringing it closer to complete self-knowledge and self-expression. However, it may attract old mental, emotional, and energetic \"karma\" patterns to form the new personality.\nAnthroposophy.\nAnthroposophy describes reincarnation from the point of view of Western philosophy and culture. The ego is believed to transmute transient soul experiences into universals that form the basis for an individuality that can endure after death. These universals include ideas, which are intersubjective and thus transcend the purely personal (spiritual consciousness), intentionally formed human character (spiritual life), and becoming a fully conscious human being (spiritual humanity). Rudolf Steiner described both the general principles he believed to be operative in reincarnation, such as that one's will activity in one life forms the basis for the thinking of the next, and a number of successive lives of various individualities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Similarly, other famous people's life stories are not primarily the result of genes, upbringing or biographical vicissitudes. Steiner relates that a large estate in north-eastern France was held during the early Middle Ages by a martial feudal lord. During a military campaign, this estate was captured by a rival. The previous owner had no means of retaliating, and was forced to see his property lost to an enemy. He was filled with a smoldering resentment towards the propertied classes, not only for the remainder of his life in the Middle Ages, but also in a much later incarnation\u2014as Karl Marx. His rival was reborn as Friedrich Engels.\u2014\u200a\nModern astrology.\nInspired by Helena Blavatsky's major works, including \"Isis Unveiled\" and \"The Secret Doctrine\", astrologers in the early twentieth-century integrated the concepts of karma and reincarnation into the practice of Western astrology. Notable astrologers who advanced this development included Alan Leo, Charles E. O. Carter, Marc Edmund Jones, and Dane Rudhyar. A new synthesis of East and West resulted as Hindu and Buddhist concepts of reincarnation were fused with Western astrology's deep roots in Hermeticism and Neoplatonism. In the case of Rudhyar, this synthesis was enhanced with the addition of Jungian depth psychology. This dynamic integration of astrology, reincarnation and depth psychology has continued into the modern era with the work of astrologers Steven Forrest and Jeffrey Wolf Green. Their respective schools of Evolutionary Astrology are based on \"an acceptance of the fact that human beings incarnate in a succession of lifetimes\".\nScientology.\nPast reincarnation, usually termed past lives, is a key part of the principles and practices of the Church of Scientology. Scientologists believe that the human individual is actually a \"thetan\", an immortal spiritual entity, that has fallen into a degraded state as a result of past-life experiences. Scientology auditing is intended to free the person of these past-life traumas and recover past-life memory, leading to a higher state of spiritual awareness.\nThis idea is echoed in their highest fraternal religious order, Sea Org, whose motto is \"Revenimus\" ('We Come Back'), and whose members sign a \"billion-year contract\" as a sign of commitment to that ideal. L. Ron Hubbard, the founder of Scientology, does not use the word \"reincarnation\" to describe its beliefs, noting that: \"The common definition of reincarnation has been altered from its original meaning. The word has come to mean 'to be born again in different life forms' whereas its actual definition is 'to be born again into the flesh of another body.' Scientology ascribes to this latter, original definition of reincarnation.\"\nThe first writings in Scientology regarding past lives date from around 1951 and slightly earlier. In 1960, Hubbard published a book on past lives entitled \"Have You Lived Before This Life\". In 1968 he wrote \"Mission Into Time\", a report on a five-week sailing expedition to Sardinia, Sicily and Carthage to see if specific evidence could be found to substantiate L. Ron Hubbard's recall of incidents in his own past, centuries ago.\nWicca.\nWicca is an eclectic new religious movement focused on nature, and guided by the philosophy of Wiccan Rede that advocates the tenets \"Harm None, Do As Ye Will\". Wiccans believe in a form of karmic return where one's deeds are returned, either in the current life or in another life, threefold or multiple times in order to teach one lessons (the Threefold Law). Reincarnation is therefore an accepted part of the Wiccan faith. Wiccans also believe that death and afterlife are important experiences for the soul to transform and prepare for future lifetimes.\nReincarnation and science.\nWhile there has been no scientific confirmation of the physical reality of reincarnation, where the subject has been discussed, there are questions of whether and how such beliefs may be justified within the discourse of science and religion. Some champions of academic parapsychology have argued that they have scientific evidence even while their detractors have accused them of practicing a form of pseudoscience. Skeptic Carl Sagan asked the Dalai Lama what he would do if a fundamental tenet of his religion (reincarnation) were definitively disproved by science. The Dalai Lama answered, \"If science can disprove reincarnation, Tibetan Buddhism would abandon reincarnation ... but it's going to be mighty hard to disprove reincarnation.\" Sagan considered claims of memories of past lives to be worthy of research, although he considered reincarnation to be an unlikely explanation.\nClaims of memories of past lives.\nOver a period of 40 years, psychiatrist Ian Stevenson, from the University of Virginia, recorded case studies of young children who claimed to remember past lives, and published twelve books. In his cases, he reported the child's statements and testimony from family members and others, often along with what he considered to be correlates to a deceased person who in some ways seemed to match the child's memory. Stevenson also investigated cases where he thought that birthmarks and birth defects seemed to match wounds and scars on the deceased. Sometimes included in his documentation were medical records like autopsy photographs. As any claim of past life memory is subject to charges of false memories and the ease with which such claims can be hoaxed, Stevenson expected the controversy and skepticism of his beliefs that followed. He said that he looked for disconfirming evidence and alternative explanations for reports, but, as the \"Washington Post\" reported, he typically concluded that no normal explanation sufficed.\nStevenson's work in this regard was impressive enough to Carl Sagan that he referred to what were apparently Stevenson's investigations in his book \"The Demon-Haunted World\" as an example of carefully collected empirical data, and though he rejected reincarnation as a parsimonious explanation for the stories, he wrote that the phenomenon of alleged past-life memories should be further researched. Sam Harris cited Stevenson's works in his book \"The End of Faith\" as part of a body of data that seems to attest to the reality of psychic phenomena.\nStevenson's claims have been subject to criticism and debunking, for example by the philosopher Paul Edwards, who contended that Ian Stevenson's accounts of reincarnation were purely anecdotal and cherry-picked. Edwards attributed the stories to selective thinking, suggestion, and false memories that result from the family's or researcher's belief systems and thus did not rise to the standard of fairly sampled empirical evidence. The philosopher Keith Augustine wrote in critique that the fact that \"the vast majority of Stevenson's cases come from countries where a religious belief in reincarnation is strong, and rarely elsewhere, seems to indicate that cultural conditioning (rather than reincarnation) generates claims of spontaneous past-life memories.\" Edwards also objected that reincarnation invokes assumptions that are inconsistent with modern science. As the vast majority of people do not remember previous lives and there is no empirically documented mechanism known that allows personality to survive death and travel to another body, positing the existence of reincarnation is subject to the principle that \"extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence\". Further, Ian Wilson wrote that a large number of Stevenson's cases consisted of poor children remembering wealthy lives or belonging to a higher caste. In these societies, claims of reincarnation have been used as schemes to obtain money from the richer families of alleged former incarnations.\nStevenson also claimed there were a handful of cases that suggested evidence of xenoglossy, including two where a subject under hypnosis allegedly conversed with people speaking the foreign language, instead of merely being able to recite foreign words. Sarah Thomason, a linguist (and skeptical researcher) at the University of Michigan, reanalyzed these cases, concluding that \"the linguistic evidence is too weak to provide support for the claims of xenoglossy\".\nOther academic researchers who have undertaken similar pursuits include Jim B. Tucker, Antonia Mills, Satwant Pasricha, Godwin Samararatne, and Erlendur Haraldsson, but Stevenson's publications remain the most well known.\nPast life regression.\nSome believers in reincarnation (excluding Stevenson) give much importance to supposed past-life memories retrieved under hypnosis during past life regressions. Popularized by psychiatrist Brian Weiss, who claims he has regressed more than 4,000 patients since 1980, the technique is often identified as a kind of pseudoscientific practice. Such supposed memories have been documented to contain historical inaccuracies originating from modern popular culture, common beliefs about history, or books that discuss historical events. Experiments with subjects undergoing past life regression indicate that a belief in reincarnation and suggestions by the hypnotist are the two most important factors regarding the contents of memories reported. The use of hypnosis and suggestive questions can tend to leave the subject particularly likely to hold distorted or false memories. Rather than recall of a previous existence, the source of the memories is more likely cryptomnesia and confabulations that combine experiences, knowledge, imagination and suggestion or guidance from the hypnotist. Once created, those memories are indistinguishable from memories based on events that occurred during the subject's life.\nPast-life regression has been critiqued for being unethical on the grounds that it lacks any evidence to support its claims and that it increases one's susceptibility to false memories. Luis Cord\u00f3n states that this can be problematic as it creates delusions under the guise of therapy. The memories are experienced as being as vivid as those based on events experienced in one's life and impossible to differentiate from true memories of actual events, and accordingly any damage can be difficult to undo.\nAmerican Psychological Association accredited organizations have challenged the use of past-life regressions as a therapeutic method, calling it unethical. Additionally, the hypnotic methodology that underpins past-life regression has been criticized as placing the participant in a vulnerable position, susceptible to implantation of false memories. Because the implantation of false memories may be harmful, Gabriel Andrade argues that past-life regression violates the principle of \"first, do no harm\" (non-maleficence), part of the Hippocratic Oath.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25808", "revid": "46045043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25808", "title": "Robert Noyce", "text": "American physicist and entrepreneur (1927\u20131990)\nRobert Norton Noyce (December 12, 1927 \u2013 June 3, 1990), nicknamed \"the Mayor of Silicon Valley\", was an American physicist and entrepreneur who co-founded Fairchild Semiconductor in 1957 and Intel Corporation in 1968. He was also credited with the realization of the first monolithic integrated circuit or microchip made with silicon, which fueled the personal computer revolution and gave Silicon Valley its name.\nNoyce founded The Noyce School of Applied Computing within the College of Engineering at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo. In 1987, President Ronald Reagan awarded him the National Medal of Technology, and in 1989, he was inducted into the U.S. Business Hall of Fame, with President George H. W. Bush delivering the keynote. In 1990, he received a Lifetime Achievement Medal alongside Jack Kilby and John Bardeen during the bicentennial celebration of the Patent Act.\nEarly life.\nNoyce was born on December 12, 1927, in Burlington, Iowa, the third of four sons of the Rev. Ralph Brewster Noyce. His father graduated from Doane College, Oberlin College, and the Chicago Theological Seminary and was also nominated for a Rhodes Scholarship.\nHis mother, Harriet May Norton, was the daughter of the Rev. Milton J. Norton, a Congregational clergyman, and Louise Hill. She was a graduate of Oberlin College and prior to her marriage, she had dreams of becoming a missionary. Journalist Tom Wolfe described her as \"an intelligent woman with a commanding will\".\nNoyce had three siblings: Donald Sterling Noyce, Gaylord Brewster Noyce and Ralph Harold Noyce. His brother Donald would go on to become a respected professor and associate dean of undergraduate affairs in the UC Berkeley College of Chemistry; Robert later created the Donald Sterling Noyce Prize to reward excellence in undergraduate teaching at Berkeley. His brother Gaylord would go on to become a respected professor of practical theology and dean of students at Yale Divinity School; in 1961, while a young professor, he was arrested for being one of the Freedom Riders of the civil rights movement.\nNoyce's earliest childhood memory involved beating his father at ping pong and feeling shocked when his mother reacted to the news of his victory with a distracted \"Wasn't that nice of Daddy to let you win?\" Even at the age of five, Noyce felt offended by the notion of intentionally losing. \"That's not the game\", he sulked to his mother. \"If you're going to play, play to win!\"\nWhen Noyce was twelve years old in the summer of 1940, he and his brother built a boy-sized aircraft, which they used to fly from the roof of the Grinnell College stables. Later he built a radio from scratch and motorized his sled by welding a propeller and a motor from an old washing machine to the back of it. His parents were both religious but Noyce became an agnostic and irreligious in later life.\nEducation.\nNoyce grew up in Grinnell, Iowa. While in high school, he exhibited a talent for mathematics and science and took the Grinnell College freshman physics course in his senior year. He graduated from Grinnell High School in 1945 and entered Grinnell College in the fall of that year. He was the star diver on the 1947 Midwest Conference Championship swim team. While at Grinnell College, Noyce sang, played the oboe and acted. In Noyce's junior year, he got in trouble for stealing a 25-pound pig from the Grinnell mayor's farm and roasting it at a school luau. The mayor wrote to his parents stating that \"In the agricultural state of Iowa, stealing a domestic animal is a felony which carries a minimum penalty of a year in prison and a fine of one dollar.\" Noyce faced expulsion from school but Grant Gale, Noyce's physics professor and president of the college, did not want to lose a student with Noyce's potential. They compromised with the mayor so that Grinnell would compensate him for the pig, and suspended Noyce for one semester. He returned in February 1949. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a BA in physics and mathematics in 1949. He also received a single honor from his classmates: the Brown Derby Prize, which recognized \"the senior man who earned the best grades with the least amount of work\".\nWhile Noyce was an undergraduate, he was fascinated by the field of physics and took a course in the subject that was taught by professor Grant Gale. Gale obtained two of the first transistors ever produced by Bell Labs and showed them off to his class. Noyce was hooked. Gale suggested that he apply to the doctoral program in physics at MIT, which he did.\nNoyce had a mind so quick that his graduate school friends called him \"Rapid Robert\". He received his doctorate in physics from MIT in 1953.\nCareer.\nAfter graduating from MIT in 1953, Noyce took a job as a research engineer at the Philco Corporation in Philadelphia. He left in 1956 to join William Shockley, a co-inventor of the transistor and eventual Nobel Prize winner, at the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory in Mountain View, California.\nNoyce left a year later with the \"traitorous eight\" upon having issues with Shockley's management style, and co-founded the influential Fairchild Semiconductor corporation. According to Sherman Fairchild, Noyce's impassioned presentation of his vision was the reason Fairchild had agreed to create the semiconductor division for the traitorous eight.\nNoyce was vital to the invention of the integrated circuit. After Jack Kilby invented the first hybrid integrated circuit (hybrid IC) in 1958, Noyce in 1959 independently invented a new type of integrated circuit, the monolithic integrated circuit (monolithic IC). It was more practical than Kilby's implementation. Noyce's design was made of silicon, whereas Kilby's chip was made of germanium. Noyce's invention was the first monolithic integrated circuit chip. Unlike Kilby's IC which had external wire connections and could not be mass-produced, Noyce's monolithic IC chip put all components on a chip of silicon and connected them with aluminum lines. The basis for Noyce's monolithic IC was the planar process, developed in early 1959 by Jean Hoerni. In turn, the basis for Hoerni's planar process were the silicon surface passivation and thermal oxidation methods developed by Mohamed Atalla in 1957.\nNoyce and Gordon Moore founded Intel in 1968 when they left Fairchild Semiconductor. Arthur Rock, the chairman of Intel's board and a major investor in the company, said that for Intel to succeed, the company needed Noyce, Moore and Andrew Grove. And it needed them in that order. Noyce: the visionary, born to inspire; Moore: the virtuoso of technology; and Grove: the technologist turned management scientist. Noyce served as the first CEO, until 1975, when he was succeeded by Moore. The relaxed culture that Noyce brought to Intel was a carry-over from his style at Fairchild Semiconductor. He treated employees as family, rewarding and encouraging teamwork. Noyce's management style could be called \"roll up your sleeves\". He shunned fancy corporate cars, reserved parking spaces, private jets, offices, and furnishings in favor of a less-structured, relaxed working environment in which everyone contributed and no one received lavish benefits. By declining the usual executive perks he stood as a model for future generations of Intel CEOs.\nAt Intel, he oversaw invention of the microprocessor as a concept by Ted Hoff and design of the first commercial microprocessor Intel 4004 by Federico Faggin, which was his second revolution.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1953, Noyce married Elizabeth Bottomley, who was a 1951 graduate of Tufts University. While living in Los Altos, California, they had four children: William B., Pendred, Priscilla, and Margaret. Elizabeth loved New England, so the family acquired a 50-acre coastal summer home in Bremen, Maine. Elizabeth and the children would summer there. Robert would visit during the summer, while continuing to work at Intel. They divorced in 1974.\nOn November 27, 1974, Noyce married Ann Schmeltz Bowers. Bowers, a graduate of Cornell University, also received an honorary Ph.D. from Santa Clara University, where she was a trustee for nearly 20 years. She was the first director of personnel for Intel Corporation and the first vice president of human resources for Apple Inc. She was a founding trustee and served as chair of the board for the Noyce Foundation, founded in 1990. Bowers died on January 24, 2024, at the age of 86.\nNoyce kept active his entire life. He enjoyed reading Hemingway, and he flew his own airplane and also participated in hang-gliding and scuba diving. Noyce believed that microelectronics would continue to advance in complexity and sophistication well beyond its current state; this led to the question of what use society would make of the technology. In his last interview, Noyce was asked what he would do if he were \"emperor\" of the United States. He said that he would, among other things, \"...make sure we are preparing our next generation to flourish in a high-tech age. And that means education of the lowest and the poorest, as well as at the graduate school level.\"\nDeath.\nNoyce suffered a heart attack at age 62 at home on June 3, 1990, and later died at the Seton Medical Center in Austin, Texas.\nAwards and honors.\nIn July 1959, he filed for https:// \"Semiconductor Device and Lead Structure\", a type of integrated circuit. This independent effort was recorded only a few months after the key findings of inventor Jack Kilby. For his co-invention of the integrated circuit and its world-transforming impact, three presidents of the United States honored him.\nNoyce was a holder of many honors and awards. President Ronald Reagan awarded him the National Medal of Technology in 1987. Two years later, he was inducted into the U.S. Business Hall of Fame sponsored by Junior Achievement, during a black tie ceremony keynoted by President George H. W. Bush. In 1990 Noyce\u00a0\u2013 along with, among others, Jack Kilby and transistor inventor John Bardeen\u00a0\u2013 received a \"Lifetime Achievement Medal\" during the bicentennial celebration of the Patent Act.\nNoyce received the Franklin Institute's Stuart Ballantine Medal in 1966. He was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor in 1978 \"for his contributions to the silicon integrated circuit, a cornerstone of modern electronics.\" In 1979, he was awarded the National Medal of Science. He also received Faraday Medal in 1979. Noyce was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1980. The National Academy of Engineering awarded him its 1989 Charles Stark Draper Prize.\nNoyce gave the commencement address to an enthusiastic School of Engineering at UC Santa Barbara in 1985.\nThe science building at his alma mater, Grinnell College, is named after him.\nOn December 12, 2011, Noyce was honored with a Google Doodle celebrating the 84th anniversary of his birth.\nIn 2000, Kilby received the Nobel Prize in Physics; in his acceptance (\"Nobel Lecture\"), he mentions a small number of people whose work contributed to the success of integrated circuits, mentioning Noyce three times.\nLegacy.\nThe Noyce Foundation was founded in 1990 by his family. The foundation was dedicated to improving public education in mathematics and science in grades K-12. The foundation announced that it would end operations in 2015.\nCalifornia Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly), established The Noyce School of Applied Computing in the College of Engineering with a $60 million gift from the Robert N. Noyce Trust in June of 2022.\nIn 1990, Congress established the Robert Noyce National Math and Science Teachers Corps Act which authorizes awards up to 5,000 scholarships annually to assist individuals in obtaining a teaching degree. These awards are granted to institutions of higher education who administer the projects after successful proposal submissions through the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (\"Noyce\"). Pre-service teachers are recruited by their college/university and must be STEM majors. Scholarship recipients to agree to teach science or mathematics in a high-need school districts for at least two years for each fiscal year the recipient received such a scholarship. The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) works with the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program to identify and disseminate information about effective practices and strategies for attracting, selecting, and preparing new K-12 STEM teachers and retaining them in the STEM teacher workforce.\nPatents.\nNoyce was granted 15 patents. Patents are listed in order issued, not filed.\nNote: In 1960 Clevite Corporation acquired Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory, a subsidiary of Beckman Instruments, for whom Noyce worked.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25809", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25809", "title": "Riemann zeta function", "text": "Analytic function in mathematics\nThe Riemann zeta function or Euler\u2013Riemann zeta function, denoted by the Greek letter \"\u03b6\" (zeta), is a mathematical function of a complex variable defined as formula_1 for Re(\"s\") &gt; 1, and its analytic continuation elsewhere.\nThe Riemann zeta function plays a pivotal role in analytic number theory and has applications in physics, probability theory, and applied statistics.\nLeonhard Euler first introduced and studied the function over the reals in the first half of the eighteenth century. Bernhard Riemann's 1859 article \"On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude\" extended the Euler definition to a complex variable, proved its meromorphic continuation and functional equation, and established a relation between its zeros and the distribution of prime numbers. This paper also contained the Riemann hypothesis, a conjecture about the distribution of complex zeros of the Riemann zeta function that many mathematicians consider the most important unsolved problem in pure mathematics.\nThe values of the Riemann zeta function at even positive integers were computed by Euler. The first of them, \"\u03b6\"(2), provides a solution to the Basel problem. In 1979 Roger Ap\u00e9ry proved the irrationality of \"\u03b6\"(3). The values at negative integer points, also found by Euler, are rational numbers and play an important role in the theory of modular forms. Many generalizations of the Riemann zeta function, such as Dirichlet series, Dirichlet \"L\"-functions and \"L\"-functions, are known.\nDefinition.\nThe Riemann zeta function \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") is a function of a complex variable \"s\" = \"\u03c3\" + \"it\", where \"\u03c3\" and \"t\" are real numbers. (The notation \"s\", \"\u03c3\", and \"t\" is used traditionally in the study of the zeta function, following Riemann.) When Re(\"s\") = \"\u03c3\" &gt; 1, the function can be written as a converging summation or as an integral:\n formula_2\nwhere\n formula_3\nis the gamma function. The Riemann zeta function is defined for other complex values via analytic continuation of the function defined for \"\u03c3\" &gt; 1.\nLeonhard Euler considered the above series in 1740 for positive integer values of \"s\", and later Chebyshev extended the definition to Re(\"s\") &gt; 1.\nThe above series is a prototypical Dirichlet series that converges absolutely to an analytic function for \"s\" such that \"\u03c3\" &gt; 1 and diverges for all other values of \"s\". Riemann showed that the function defined by the series on the half-plane of convergence can be continued analytically to all complex values \"s\" \u2260 1. For \"s\" = 1, the series is the harmonic series which diverges to +\u221e, and\nformula_4\nThus the Riemann zeta function is a meromorphic function on the whole complex plane, which is holomorphic everywhere except for a simple pole at \"s\" = 1 with residue 1.\nEuler's product formula.\nIn 1737, the connection between the zeta function and prime numbers was discovered by Euler, who proved the identity\n formula_5\nwhere, by definition, the left hand side is \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") and the infinite product on the right hand side extends over all prime numbers \"p\" (such expressions are called Euler products):\n formula_6\nBoth sides of the Euler product formula converge for Re(\"s\") &gt; 1. The proof of Euler's identity uses only the formula for the geometric series and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Since the harmonic series, obtained when \"s\" = 1, diverges, Euler's formula (which becomes \u03a0\"p\") implies that there are infinitely many primes. Since the logarithm of \"p\"/(\"p\" \u2212 1) is approximately 1/\"p\", the formula can also be used to prove the stronger result that the sum of the reciprocals of the primes is infinite. On the other hand, combining that with the sieve of Eratosthenes shows that the density of the set of primes within the set of positive integers is zero.\nThe Euler product formula can be used to calculate the asymptotic probability that \"s\" randomly selected integers within a bound are set-wise coprime. Intuitively, the probability that any single number is divisible by a prime (or any integer) \"p\" is 1/\"p\". Hence the probability that \"s\" numbers are all divisible by this prime is 1/\"p\"\"s\", and the probability that at least one of them is \"not\" is 1 \u2212 1/\"p\"\"s\". Now, for distinct primes, these divisibility events are mutually independent because the candidate divisors are coprime (a number is divisible by coprime divisors \"n\" and \"m\" if and only if it is divisible by\u00a0\"nm\", an event which occurs with probability\u00a01/(\"nm\")). Thus the asymptotic probability that \"s\" numbers are coprime is given by a product over all primes,\n formula_7\nRiemann's functional equation.\nThis zeta function satisfies the functional equation\nformula_8\nwhere \u0393(\"s\") is the gamma function. This is an equality of meromorphic functions valid on the whole complex plane. The equation relates values of the Riemann zeta function at the points \"s\" and 1 \u2212 \"s\", in particular relating even positive integers with odd negative integers. Owing to the zeros of the sine function, the functional equation implies that \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") has a simple zero at each even negative integer \"s\" = \u22122\"n\", known as the trivial zeros of \"\u03b6\"(\"s\"). When \"s\" is an even positive integer, the product on the right is non-zero because \u0393(1 \u2212 \"s\") has a simple pole, which cancels the simple zero of the sine factor. When \"s\" is 0, the zero of the sine factor is cancelled by the simple pole of \"\u03b6\"(1).\nThe functional equation was established by Riemann in his 1859 paper \"On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude\" and used to construct the analytic continuation in the first place.\nRiemann's xi function.\nRiemann also found a symmetric version of the functional equation by setting\nformula_9\nthat satisfies:\nformula_10\nReturning to the functional equation's derivation in the previous section, we have\nformula_11\nUsing integration by parts, \nformula_12\nformula_13\nUsing integration by parts again with a factorization of \"x\"3/2,\nformula_14\nformula_15\nAs formula_16,\nformula_17\nRemove a factor of \"x\"\u22121/4 to make the exponents in the remainder opposites. \nformula_18\nUsing the hyperbolic functions, namely cos(\"x\") = cosh(\"ix\"), and letting \"s\" = 1/2 + \"it\" gives\nformula_19\nand by separating the integral and using the power series for cos,\nformula_20\nwhich led Riemann to his famous hypothesis.\nZeros, the critical line, and the Riemann hypothesis.\nThe functional equation shows that the Riemann zeta function has zeros at \u22122, \u22124, ... These are called the trivial zeros. They are trivial in the sense that their existence is relatively easy to prove, for example, from sin(\"\u03c0s\"/2) being 0 in the functional equation. The non-trivial zeros have captured far more attention because their distribution not only is far less understood but, more importantly, their study yields important results concerning prime numbers and related objects in number theory. It is known that any non-trivial zero lies in the open strip {\"s\" \u2208 formula_21 | 0 &lt; Re(\"s\") &lt; 1}, which is called the critical strip. The set {\"s\" \u2208 formula_21 | Re(\"s\") \n 1/2} is called the critical line. The Riemann hypothesis, considered one of the greatest unsolved problems in mathematics, asserts that all non-trivial zeros are on the critical line. In 1989, Conrey proved that more than 40% of the non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function are on the critical line. This has since been improved to 41.7%.\nFor the Riemann zeta function on the critical line, see \"Z\"-function.\nNumber of zeros in the critical strip.\nLet \"N\"(\"T\") be the number of zeros of \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") in the critical strip 0 &lt; Re(\"s\") &lt; 1, whose imaginary parts are in the interval 0 &lt; Im(\"s\") &lt; \"T\".\nTimothy Trudgian proved that, if \"T\" &gt; \"e\", then\n formula_23.\nHardy\u2013Littlewood conjectures.\nIn 1914, G. H. Hardy proved that \"\u03b6\"( + \"it\") has infinitely many real zeros.\nHardy and J. E. Littlewood formulated two conjectures on the density and distance between the zeros of \"\u03b6\"(1/2 + \"it\") on intervals of large positive real numbers. In the following, \"N\"(\"T\") is the total number of real zeros and \"N\"0(\"T\") the total number of zeros of odd order of the function \"\u03b6\"(1/2 + \"it\") lying in the interval (0, \"T\"].\nThese two conjectures opened up new directions in the investigation of the Riemann zeta function.\nZero-free region.\nThe location of the Riemann zeta function's zeros is of great importance in number theory. The prime number theorem is equivalent to the fact that there are no zeros of the zeta function on the line Re(\"s\") = 1. It is also known that zeros do not exist in certain regions slightly to the left of the line Re(\"s\") = 1, known as zero-free regions. For instance, Korobov and Vinogradov independently showed via the Vinogradov's mean-value theorem that for sufficiently large , \"\u03b6\"(\"\u03c3\" + \"it\") \u2260 0 for\n formula_24\nfor any \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0 and a number \"c\" &gt; 0 depending on \"\u03b5\". Asymptotically, this is the largest known zero-free region for the zeta function.\nExplicit zero-free regions are also known. Platt and Trudgian\nverified computationally that \"\u03b6\"(\"\u03c3\" + \"it\") \u2260 0 if \"\u03c3\" \u2260 1/2 and . Mossinghoff, Trudgian and Yang proved that zeta has no zeros in the region\n formula_25\nfor , which is the largest known zero-free region in the critical strip for (for previous results see).\nYang showed that \"\u03b6\"(\"\u03c3\" + \"it\") \u2260 0 if\n formula_26 and formula_27\nwhich is the largest known zero-free region for .\nBellotti proved (building on the work of Ford) the zero-free region\n formula_28 and formula_29.\nThis is the largest known zero-free region for fixed . Bellotti also showed that for sufficiently large , the following better result is known: \"\u03b6\"(\"\u03c3\" + \"it\") \u2260 0 for\n formula_30\nThe strongest result of this kind one can hope for is the truth of the Riemann hypothesis, which would have many profound consequences in the theory of numbers.\nOther results.\nIt is known that there are infinitely many zeros on the critical line. Littlewood showed that if the sequence (\"\u03b3n\") contains the imaginary parts of all zeros in the upper half-plane in ascending order, then\n formula_31\nThe critical line theorem asserts that a positive proportion of the nontrivial zeros lies on the critical line. (The Riemann hypothesis would imply that this proportion is 1.)\nIn the critical strip, the zero with smallest non-negative imaginary part is 1/2 + 14.13472514... \"i\" (OEIS:\u00a0). The fact that, for all complex \"s\" \u2260 1,\n formula_32\nimplies that the zeros of the Riemann zeta function are symmetric about the real axis. Combining this symmetry with the functional equation, furthermore, one sees that the non-trivial zeros are symmetric about the critical line Re(\"s\") = 1/2.\nIt is also known that no zeros lie on the line with real part 1.\nA large class of modified zeta functions exists that share the same non-trivial zeros as the Riemann zeta function, where modification means replacing the prime numbers in the Euler product by real numbers, which was shown in a result by Grosswald and Schnitzer.\nSpecific values.\nFor any positive even integer 2\"n\",\nformula_33\nwhere \"B\"2\"n\" is the (2\"n\")th Bernoulli number.\nFor odd positive integers, no such simple expression is known, although these values are thought to be related to the algebraic \"K\"-theory of the integers; see Special values of \"L\"-functions.\nFor nonpositive integers, one has\nformula_34\nfor \"n\" \u2265 0 (using the convention that \"B\"1 \n 1/2).\nIn particular, \"\u03b6\" vanishes at the negative even integers because \"B\"\"m\" \n 0 for all odd \"m\" other than\u00a01. These are the so-called \"trivial zeros\" of the zeta function.\nVia analytic continuation, one can show that\nformula_35\nThis gives a pretext for assigning a finite value to the divergent series 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + \u22ef, which has been used in certain contexts (Ramanujan summation) such as string theory. Analogously, the particular value\nformula_36\ncan be viewed as assigning a finite result to the divergent series 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + \u22ef.\nThe value\nformula_37\nis employed in calculating kinetic boundary layer problems of linear kinetic equations.\nAlthough\nformula_38\ndiverges, its Cauchy principal value\nformula_39\nexists and is equal to the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant \"\u03b3\" = 0.5772...\nThe demonstration of the particular value\nformula_40\nis known as the Basel problem. The reciprocal of this sum answers the question: 'What is the probability that two numbers selected from a uniform distribution from 1 to \"n\"] are coprime as \"n\" \u2192 \u221e?'\nThe value\nformula_41\nis Ap\u00e9ry's constant.\nTaking the limit \"s\" \u2192 +\u221e through the real numbers, one obtains \"\u03b6\"(+\u221e) = 1. But at complex infinity on the Riemann sphere the zeta function has an essential singularity.\nVarious properties.\nFor sums involving the zeta function at integer and half-integer values, see rational zeta series.\nReciprocal.\nThe reciprocal of the zeta function may be expressed as a Dirichlet series over the M\u00f6bius function \"\u03bc\"(\"n\"):\n formula_42\nfor every complex number \"s\" with real part greater than 1. There are a number of similar relations involving various well-known multiplicative functions; these are given in the article on the Dirichlet series.\nThe Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the claim that this expression is valid when the real part of \"s\" is greater than 1/2.\nUniversality.\nThe critical strip of the Riemann zeta function has the remarkable property of universality. This zeta function universality states that there exists some location on the critical strip that approximates any holomorphic function arbitrarily well. Since holomorphic functions are very general, this property is quite remarkable. The first proof of universality was provided by Sergei Mikhailovitch Voronin in 1975. More recent work has included effective versions of Voronin's theorem and extending it to Dirichlet \"L\"-functions.\nEstimates of the maximum of the modulus of the zeta function.\nLet the functions \"F\"(\"T\"; \"H\") and \"G\"(\"s\"0; \u0394) be defined by the equalities\n formula_43\nHere \"T\" is a sufficiently large positive number, 0 &lt; \"H\" \u226a log log \"T\", \"s\"0 = \"\u03c3\"0 + \"iT\", 1/2 \u2264 \"\u03c3\"0 \u2264 1, 0 &lt; \u0394 &lt; 1/3. Estimating the values \"F\" and \"G\" from below shows, how large (in modulus) values \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") can take on short intervals of the critical line or in small neighborhoods of points lying in the critical strip 0 \u2264 Re(\"s\") \u2264 1.\nThe case \"H\" \u226b log log \"T\" was studied by Kanakanahalli Ramachandra; the case \u0394 &gt; \"c\", where \"c\" is a sufficiently large constant, is trivial.\nAnatolii Karatsuba proved, in particular, that if the values \"H\" and \u0394 exceed certain sufficiently small constants, then the estimates\n formula_44\nhold, where \"c\"1 and \"c\"2 are certain absolute constants.\nArgument of the Riemann zeta function.\nThe function\n formula_45\nis called the argument of the Riemann zeta function. Here arg \"\u03b6\"(1/2 + \"it\") is the increment of an arbitrary continuous branch of arg \"\u03b6\"(\"s\") along the broken line joining the points 2, 2 + \"it\" and 1/2 + \"it\".\nThere are some theorems on properties of the function \"S\"(\"t\"). Among those results are the mean value theorems for \"S\"(\"t\") and its first integral\n formula_46\non intervals of the real line, and also the theorem claiming that every interval (\"T\", \"T\" + \"H\"] for\n formula_47\ncontains at least\n formula_48\npoints where the function \"S\"(\"t\") changes sign. Earlier similar results were obtained by Atle Selberg for the case\n formula_49\nRepresentations.\nDirichlet series.\nAn extension of the area of convergence can be obtained by rearranging the original series. The series\n formula_50\nconverges for Re(\"s\") &gt; 0, while\n formula_51\nconverge even for Re(\"s\") &gt; \u22121. In this way, the area of convergence can be extended to Re(\"s\") &gt; \u2212\"k\" for any negative integer \u2212\"k\".\nThe recurrence connection is clearly visible from the expression valid for Re(\"s\") &gt; \u22122 enabling further expansion by integration by parts.\n formula_52\nThis recurrence leads to this other series development that uses the rising factorial and is valid for the entire complex plane \n formula_53\nThis can be used recursively to extend the Dirichlet series definition to all complex numbers.\nThe Riemann zeta function also appears in a form similar to the Mellin transform in an integral over the Gauss\u2013Kuzmin\u2013Wirsing operator acting on \"x\"\"s\"\u22121; that context gives rise to a series expansion in terms of the falling factorial.\nMellin-type integrals.\nThe Mellin transform of a function \"f\"(\"x\") is defined as\n formula_54\nin the region where the integral is defined. There are various expressions for the zeta function as Mellin transform-like integrals. If the real part of \"s\" is greater than one, we have\n formula_55 and formula_56\nwhere \u0393 denotes the gamma function. By modifying the contour, Riemann showed that\n formula_57\nfor all \"s\" (where \"H\" denotes the Hankel contour).\nWe can also find expressions which relate to prime numbers and the prime number theorem. If \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") is the prime-counting function, then\n formula_58\nfor values with Re(\"s\") &gt; 1.\nA similar Mellin transform involves the Riemann function \"J\"(\"x\"), which counts prime powers \"p\"\"n\" with a weight of 1/\"n\", so that\n formula_59\nNow\n formula_60\nThese expressions can be used to prove the prime number theorem by means of the inverse Mellin transform. Riemann's prime-counting function is easier to work with, and \"\u03c0\"(\"x\") can be recovered from it by M\u00f6bius inversion.\nTheta functions.\nThe Riemann zeta function can be given by a Mellin transform\n formula_61\nin terms of Jacobi's theta function\n formula_62\nHowever, this integral only converges if the real part of \"s\" is greater than 1, but it can be regularized. This gives the following expression for the zeta function, which is well defined for all \"s\" except 0 and 1:\n formula_63\nLaurent series.\nThe Riemann zeta function is meromorphic with a single pole of order one at \"s\" \n 1. It can therefore be expanded as a Laurent series about \"s\" = 1; the series development is then\n formula_64\nThe constants \"\u03b3\"\"n\" here are called the Stieltjes constants and can be defined by the limit\n formula_65\nThe constant term \"\u03b3\"0 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.\nIntegral.\nFor all \"s\" \u2208 formula_21, \"s\" \u2260 1, the integral relation (cf. Abel\u2013Plana formula)\n formula_67\nholds true, which may be used for a numerical evaluation of the zeta function.\nHadamard product.\nOn the basis of Weierstrass's factorization theorem, Hadamard gave the infinite product expansion\n formula_68\nwhere the product is over the non-trivial zeros \"\u03c1\" of \"\u03b6\" and the letter \"\u03b3\" again denotes the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant. A simpler infinite product expansion is\n formula_69\nThis form clearly displays the simple pole at \"s\" = 1, the trivial zeros at \u22122, \u22124... due to the gamma function term in the denominator, and the non-trivial zeros at \"s\" = \"\u03c1\". (To ensure convergence in the latter formula, the product should be taken over \"matching pairs\" of zeros, i.e. the factors for a pair of zeros of the form \"\u03c1\" and 1 \u2212 \"\u03c1\" should be combined.)\nGlobally convergent series.\nA globally convergent series for the zeta function, valid for all complex numbers \"s\" except \"s\" = 1 + \"n\" for some integer \"n\", was conjectured by Konrad Knopp in 1926 and proven by Helmut Hasse in 1930 (cf. Euler summation):\n formula_70\nThe series appeared in an appendix to Hasse's paper, and was published for the second time by Jonathan Sondow in 1994.\nHasse also proved the globally converging series\n formula_71\nin the same publication. Research by Iaroslav Blagouchine\nhas found that a similar, equivalent series was published by Joseph Ser in 1926.\nIn 1997 K. Ma\u015blanka gave another globally convergent (except \"s\" = 1) series for the Riemann zeta function:\n formula_72\nwhere real coefficients formula_73 are given by:\n formula_74\nHere \"B\"\"n\" are the Bernoulli numbers and (\"x\")\"k\" denotes the Pochhammer symbol.\nNote that this representation of the zeta function is essentially an interpolation with nodes, where the nodes are points \"s\" = 2, 4, 6, ..., i.e. exactly those where the zeta values are precisely known, as Euler showed. An elegant and very short proof of this representation of the zeta function, based on Carlson's theorem, was presented by Philippe Flajolet in 2006.\nThe asymptotic behavior of the coefficients formula_75 is rather curious: for growing formula_76 values, we observe regular oscillations with a nearly exponentially decreasing amplitude and slowly decreasing frequency (roughly as formula_77). Using the saddle point method, we can show that\n formula_78\nwhere formula_79 stands for:\n formula_80\n(see for details).\nOn the basis of this representation, in 2003 Luis B\u00e1ez-Duarte provided a new criterion for the Riemann hypothesis. Namely, if we define the coefficients \"c\"\"k\" as\n formula_81\nthen the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to\n formula_82\nRapidly convergent series.\nPeter Borwein developed an algorithm that applies Chebyshev polynomials to the Dirichlet eta function to produce a very rapidly convergent series suitable for high precision numerical calculations.\n formula_83\nSeries representation at positive integers via the primorial.\nHere \"pn\"# is the primorial sequence and \"Jk\" is Jordan's totient function.\nSeries representation by the incomplete poly-Bernoulli numbers.\nThe function \"\u03b6\" can be represented, for Re(\"s\") &gt; 1, by the infinite series\n formula_84\nwhere \"k\" \u2208 {\u22121, 0}, \"Wk\" is the kth branch of the Lambert W-function, and \"B\" is an incomplete poly-Bernoulli number.\nMellin transform of the Engel map.\nThe function \"g\"(\"x\") = \"x\"(1 + \u230a\"x\"\u22121\u230b) \u2212 1 is iterated to find the coefficients appearing in Engel expansions.\nThe Mellin transform of the map formula_85 is related to the Riemann zeta function by the formula\n formula_86\nStochastic representations.\nThe Brownian motion and Riemann zeta function are connected through the moment-generating functions of stochastic processes derived from the Brownian motion.\nNumerical algorithms.\nA classical algorithm, in use prior to about 1930, proceeds by applying the Euler\u2013Maclaurin formula to obtain, for positive integers \"n\" and \"m\",\n formula_87\nwhere, letting formula_88 denote the indicated Bernoulli number,\n formula_89\nand the error satisfies\n formula_90\nwith \"\u03c3\" = Re(\"s\").\nA modern numerical algorithm is the Odlyzko\u2013Sch\u00f6nhage algorithm.\nApplications.\nThe zeta function occurs in applied statistics including Zipf's law, Zipf\u2013Mandelbrot law, and Lotka's law.\nZeta function regularization is used as one possible means of regularization of divergent series and divergent integrals in quantum field theory. In one notable example, the Riemann zeta function shows up explicitly in one method of calculating the Casimir effect. The zeta function is also useful for the analysis of dynamical systems.\nMusical tuning.\nIn the theory of musical tunings, the zeta function can be used to find equal divisions of the octave (EDOs) that closely approximate the intervals of the harmonic series. For increasing values of formula_91, the value of\n formula_92\npeaks near integers that correspond to such EDOs. Examples include popular choices such as 12, 19, and 53.\nInfinite series.\nThe zeta function evaluated at equidistant positive integers appears in infinite series representations of a number of constants.\nIn fact the even and odd terms give the two sums\nand\nParametrized versions of the above sums are given by\nand\nwith and where formula_98 and formula_99 are the polygamma function and Euler's constant, respectively, as well as\nall of which are continuous at formula_101. Other sums include\nwhere formula_107 denotes the imaginary part of a complex number.\nAnother interesting series that relates to the natural logarithm of the lemniscate constant is the following\nThere are yet more formulas in the article Harmonic number.\nGeneralizations.\nThere are a number of related zeta functions that can be considered to be generalizations of the Riemann zeta function. These include the Hurwitz zeta function\n formula_109\n(the convergent series representation was given by Helmut Hasse in 1930, cf. Hurwitz zeta function), which coincides with the Riemann zeta function when \"q\" \n 1 (the lower limit of summation in the Hurwitz zeta function is 0, not 1), the Dirichlet \"L\"-functions and the Dedekind zeta function. For other related functions see the articles zeta function and \"L\"-function.\nThe polylogarithm is given by\n formula_110\nwhich coincides with the Riemann zeta function when \"z\" = 1.\nThe Clausen function Cl\"s\"(\"\u03b8\") can be chosen as the real or imaginary part of Li\"s\"(\"e\"\"i\u03b8\").\nThe Lerch transcendent is given by\n formula_111\nwhich coincides with the Riemann zeta function when \"z\" = 1 and \"q\" = 1 (the lower limit of summation in the Lerch transcendent is\u00a00, not\u00a01).\nThe multiple zeta functions are defined by\n formula_112\nOne can analytically continue these functions to the \"n\"-dimensional complex space. The special values taken by these functions at positive integer arguments are called multiple zeta values by number theorists and have been connected to many different branches in mathematics and physics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25810", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25810", "title": "Rolles theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "25813", "revid": "4015130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25813", "title": "Rice University", "text": "Private university in Houston, Texas, US\nWilliam Marsh Rice University, commonly referred to as Rice University, is a private research university in Houston, Texas, United States. Established in 1912, the university spans 300 acres.\nRice University comprises eight undergraduate, graduate and professional schools, including School of Humanities, School of Social Sciences, Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Business, George R. Brown School of Engineering, Wiess School of Natural Sciences, Susanne M. Glasscock School of Continuing Studies, Rice School of Architecture, and Shepherd School of Music.\nEstablished in 1912 as William M. Rice Institute for the Advancement of Literature, Science and Art after the murder of its namesake William Marsh Rice, Rice has been a member of the Association of American Universities since 1985 and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". Rice competes in 14 NCAA Division I varsity sports and is a part of the American Athletic Conference. Its teams are the Rice Owls.\nAlumni include 26 Marshall Scholars, 13 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Churchill Scholars, and 3 Nobel laureates.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nRice University's history began with the death of Massachusetts businessman William Marsh Rice, who had made his fortune in real estate, railroad development and cotton trading in Texas. In 1891, Rice decided to charter a free-tuition educational institute in Houston, bearing his name, to be created upon his death, earmarking most of his estate towards funding the project. Rice's will specified the institution was to be \"a competitive institution of the highest grade\" and that only white students would be permitted to attend. On the morning of September 23, 1900, Rice, age 84, was found dead by his valet, Charles F. Jones, and was presumed to have died in his sleep. Shortly thereafter, a large check made out to Rice's New York City lawyer, signed by the late Rice, aroused the suspicion of a bank teller, due to the misspelling of the recipient's name. The lawyer, Albert T. Patrick, then claimed that Rice had changed his will to leave the bulk of his fortune to Patrick, rather than to the creation of Rice's educational institute. A subsequent investigation led by the District Attorney of New York resulted in the arrests of Patrick and of Rice's butler and valet Charles F. Jones, who had been persuaded to administer chloroform to Rice while he slept. Rice's friend and personal lawyer in Houston, Captain James A. Baker, aided in the discovery of what turned out to be a fake will with a forged signature. Jones was not prosecuted since he cooperated with the district attorney, and testified against Patrick. Patrick was found guilty of conspiring to steal Rice's fortune and he was convicted of murder in 1901 (he was pardoned in 1912 due to conflicting medical testimony). Baker helped Rice's estate direct the fortune, worth $4.6 million in 1904 (equivalent to $ in 2024), towards the founding of what was to be called the Rice Institute, later to become Rice University. The board took control of the assets on April 29 of that year.\nIn 1907, the Board of Trustees selected the head of the Department of Mathematics and Astronomy at Princeton University, Edgar Odell Lovett, to head the institute, which was still in the planning stages. He came recommended by Princeton's president, Woodrow Wilson. In 1908, Lovett accepted the challenge, and was formally inaugurated as the institute's first president on October 12, 1912. Lovett undertook extensive research before formalizing plans for the new Institute, including visits to 78 institutions of higher learning across the world on a long tour between 1908 and 1909. Lovett was impressed by such things as the aesthetic beauty of the uniformity of the architecture at the University of Pennsylvania, a theme which was adopted by the institute, as well as the residential college system at Cambridge University, which was added to the Institute several decades later. Lovett called for the establishment of a university \"of the highest grade,\" \"an institution of liberal and technical learning\" devoted \"quite as much to investigation as to instruction.\" [We must] \"keep the standards up and the numbers down,\" declared Lovett. \"The most distinguished teachers must take their part in undergraduate teaching, and their spirit should dominate it all.\" \nEstablishment and growth.\nIn 1911, the cornerstone was laid for the institute's first building, the Administration Building, now known as Lovett Hall in honor of the founding president. On September 23, 1912, the 12th anniversary of William Marsh Rice's murder, the \"William Marsh Rice Institute for the Advancement of Letters, Science, and Art\" began course work with 59 enrolled students, who were known as the \"59 immortals,\" and about a dozen faculty. After 18 additional students joined later, Rice's initial class numbered 77, 48 male and 29 female. Rice accepted coeducational admissions from its beginning, but on-campus housing would not become co-ed until 1957.\nPer William Marsh Rice's will and Rice Institute's initial charter, the students paid no tuition. Classes were difficult, however, and about half of Rice's students had failed after the first 1912 term. At its first commencement ceremony, held on June 12, 1916, Rice awarded 35 bachelor's degrees and one master's degree. That year, the student body also voted to adopt the \u00a7 Honor System, which still exists today. The first Ph.D. was awarded in 1918 in mathematics.\nIn the 1920s, many of the university's early students were active supporters of the Ku Klux Klan, with a 1922 yearbook showing approximately twenty students wearing Klan robes in a posed photograph. President David Leebron reacted to the re-circulation of these images in 2019 by stating that \"It is unsurprising but nonetheless deeply disturbing that racist imagery, including students in blackface and KKK outfits, appeared at Rice with some frequency during the years prior to the admission of black students.\" In 1923, a Ku Klux Klan event was held on a Rice-owned Louisiana Street location, near to the home of a Black woman who had filed a lawsuit against the institute in 1909.\nThe Founder's Memorial Statue, a bronze statue of a seated William Marsh Rice, holding the original plans for the campus, was dedicated in 1930, and installed in the central academic quad, facing Lovett Hall. The statue was crafted by John Angel. In 2020, Rice students petitioned the university to take down the statue due to the founder's history as a slave owner. In January 2022, the Board of Trustees announced plans to relocate the statue within the academic quadrangle. In November 2023, the statue along with its plinth were taken down in conjunction with a renovation of the Academic Quad, and eventually were relocated to a different location in the Quad.\nDuring World War II, Rice Institute was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program, which offered students a path to a Navy commission.\nThe residential college system proposed by President Lovett was adopted in 1958, with the East Hall residence becoming Baker College, South Hall residence becoming Will Rice College, West Hall becoming Hanszen College, and the temporary Wiess Hall becoming Wiess College.\nIn 1959, the Rice Institute Computer went online. 1960 saw Rice Institute formally renamed William Marsh Rice University. Rice acted as a temporary intermediary in the transfer of land between Humble Oil and Refining Company and NASA, for the creation of NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center (now called Johnson Space Center) in 1962. President John F. Kennedy then gave a speech at Rice Stadium reiterating that the United States intended to reach the Moon before the end of the decade of the 1960s, and \"to become the world's leading space-faring nation\". The Rice Space Institute has collaborated with the Johnson Space Center for more than 50 years.\nThe original charter of Rice Institute dictated that the university admit and educate, tuition-free, \"the white inhabitants of Houston, and the state of Texas\". In 1963, the governing board of Rice University filed a lawsuit to allow the university to modify its charter to admit students of all races and to charge tuition. Ph.D. student Raymond Johnson became the first black Rice student when he was admitted that year. In 1964, Rice officially amended the university charter to desegregate its graduate and undergraduate divisions. The Trustees of Rice University prevailed in a lawsuit to void the racial language in the trust in 1966. Rice began charging tuition for the first time in 1965. In the same year, Rice launched a $33-million development campaign (equivalent to $ million in 2024). $43 million ($ million) was raised by its conclusion in 1970. In 1974, two new schools were founded at Rice, the Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Management and the Shepherd School of Music. The Brown Foundation Challenge, a fund-raising program designed to encourage annual gifts, was launched in 1976 and ended in 1996 having raised $185 million ($ million). The Rice School of Social Sciences was founded in 1979.\nOn-campus housing was exclusively for men for the first forty years, until 1957. Jones College was the first women's residence on the Rice campus, followed by Brown College. According to legend, the women's colleges were purposefully situated at the opposite end of campus from the existing men's colleges as a way of preserving campus propriety, which was greatly valued by Edgar Odell Lovett, who did not even allow benches to be installed on campus, fearing that they \"might lead to co-fraternization of the sexes\". The path linking the north colleges to the center of campus was given the tongue-in-cheek name of \"Virgin's Walk\". Individual colleges became coeducational between 1973 and 1987, with the single-sex floors of colleges that had them becoming co-ed by 2006. By then, several new residential colleges had been built on campus to handle the university's growth, including Lovett College, Sid Richardson College, and Martel College.\nLate twentieth and early twenty-first century.\nThe Economic Summit of Industrialized Nations was held at Rice in 1990. Three years later, in 1993, the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy was created. In 1997, the Edythe Bates Old Grand Organ and Recital Hall and the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology, renamed in 2005 for the late Nobel Prize winner and Rice professor Richard E. Smalley, were dedicated at Rice. In 1999, the Center for Biological and Environmental Nanotechnology was created. The Rice Owls baseball team was ranked #1 in the nation for the first time in that year (1999), holding the top spot for eight weeks.\nIn 2003, the Owls won their first national championship in baseball, which was the first for the university in any team sport, beating Southwest Missouri State in the opening game and then the University of Texas and Stanford University twice each en route to the title. In 2008, President David Leebron issued a ten-point plan titled \"Vision for the Second Century\" outlining plans to increase research funding, strengthen existing programs, and increase collaboration. The plan has brought about another wave of campus constructions, including the newly renamed BioScience Research Collaborative building (intended to foster collaboration with the adjacent Texas Medical Center), a new recreational center and the renovated Autry Court basketball stadium, and the addition of two new residential colleges, Duncan College and McMurtry College.\nBeginning in late 2008, the university considered a merger with Baylor College of Medicine, though the merger was ultimately rejected in 2010. Select Rice undergraduates are currently guaranteed admission to Baylor College of Medicine upon graduation as part of the Rice/Baylor Medical Scholars program.\nIn 2018, the university added an online MBA program, MBA@Rice.\nIn June 2019, the university's president announced plans for a task force on Rice's \"past in relation to slave history and racial injustice\", stating that \"Rice has some historical connections to that terrible part of American history and the segregation and racial disparities that resulted directly from it\".\nIn 2021, President Leebron decided to pursue a development agreement with the City of Houston in response to requests from community members and Rice students regarding the Rice Innovation District. This decision was made instead of implementing a community benefits agreement, which had been suggested by the community. Typically, community benefits agreements involve a community coalition as a signatory, but the proposed agreement with the City of Houston will not include such a coalition.\nCampus.\nLocated near the city of West University Place, Rice University's campus covers a area within Houston's museum district and is heavily wooded.\nThe campus is bounded by five streets: Greenbriar Street, Rice Boulevard, Sunset Boulevard, Main Street, and University Boulevard. Throughout its history, Rice University's buildings have been situated within this \"outer loop.\" However, in recent times, new facilities have been constructed in proximity to the campus. Despite this, most of the academic, administrative, and residential structures are still situated within the original pentagonal area. Some off-campus buildings include the Collaborative Research Center, graduate student housing, the Greenbriar building, and the Wiess President's House.\nRice University's campus houses around 50 buildings that are dispersed between the main entrance located at its easternmost corner and the parking lots and Rice Stadium situated at the western end. The Lynn R. Lowrey Arboretum, consisting of more than 4000 trees and shrubs is spread throughout the campus.\nThe university's first president, Edgar Odell Lovett, intended for the campus to have a uniform architecture style to improve its aesthetic appeal. Nearly every building on campus is noticeably Byzantine in style, with sand and pink-colored bricks, large archways and columns being a common theme among many campus buildings. \nLovett Hall, named for Rice's first president, is the university's landmark building. Through its Sallyport arch, new students symbolically enter the university during matriculation and depart as graduates at commencement. Duncan Hall, Rice's computational engineering building, was designed to encourage collaboration between the four different departments situated there. The building's foyer, drawn from many world cultures, was designed by the architect to symbolically express this collaborative purpose.\nThe campus is organized in a number of quadrangles. The Academic Quad, anchored by a statue of founder William Marsh Rice, includes Ralph Adams Cram's masterpiece, the asymmetrical Lovett Hall, the original administrative building; Fondren Library; Herzstein Hall, the original physics building and home to the largest amphitheater on campus; Sewall Hall for the social sciences and arts; Rayzor Hall for the languages; and Anderson Hall of the Architecture department. The Humanities Building, winner of several architectural awards, is immediately adjacent to the main quad. Further west lies a quad surrounded by McNair Hall of the Jones Business School, the Baker Institute, and Alice Pratt Brown Hall of the Shepherd School of Music. These two quads are surrounded by the university's main access road, a one-way loop referred to as the \"inner loop\". In the Engineering Quad, a trinity of sculptures by Michael Heizer, collectively entitled \"45 Degrees, 90 Degrees, 180 Degrees\", are flanked by Abercrombie Laboratory, the Cox Building, and the Mechanical Laboratory, housing the Electrical, Mechanical, and Earth Science/Civil Engineering departments, respectively. Duncan Hall is the latest addition to this quad, providing new offices for the Computer Science, Computational and Applied Math, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Statistics departments.\nRoughly three-quarters of Rice's undergraduate population lives on campus. Housing is divided among eleven residential colleges. The colleges are named for university historical figures and benefactors. Five colleges, McMurtry, Duncan, Martel, Jones, and Brown are located on the north side of campus, across from the \"South Colleges\", Baker, Will Rice, Lovett, Hanszen, Sid Richardson, and Wiess, on the other side of the Academic Quadrangle. Of the eleven colleges, Baker is the oldest, originally built in 1912, and the twin Duncan and McMurtry colleges are the newest, and opened for the first time for the 2009\u201310 school year. Will Rice, Baker, and Lovett colleges are undergoing renovation to expand their dining facilities as well as the number of rooms available for students.\nThe on-campus football facility, Rice Stadium, opened in 1950 with a capacity of 70,000 seats. After improvements in 2006, the stadium is currently configured to seat 47,000 for football but can readily be reconfigured to its original capacity of 70,000. The stadium was the site of Super Bowl VIII and a speech by John F. Kennedy on September 12, 1962, in which he challenged the nation to send a man to the moon by the end of the decade. The recently renovated Tudor Fieldhouse, formerly known as Autry Court, is home to the basketball and volleyball teams. Other stadia include the Rice Track/Soccer Stadium and the Jake Hess Tennis Stadium. A new Rec Center now houses the intramural sports offices and provide an outdoor pool, training and exercise facilities for all Rice students, while athletics training will solely be held at Tudor Fieldhouse and the Rice Football Stadium.\nInnovation District.\nIn early 2019, Rice announced the site where the abandoned Sears building in Midtown Houston stood, along with its surrounding area, would be transformed into \"The Ion,\" the hub of the South Main Innovation District. President of Rice, David Leebron stated \"We chose the name Ion because it's from the Greek ienai, which means 'go'. We see it as embodying the ever-forward motion of discovery, the spark at the center of a truly original idea. It also represents the last three letters in many of the words that define the building's mission, like inspiration, creation, acceleration and innovation.\"\nStudents of Rice and other Houston-area colleges and universities making up the Student Coalition for a Just and Equitable Innovation Corridor are advocating for a community benefits agreement (CBA), a contractual agreement between a developer and a community coalition. Residents of neighboring Third Ward and other members of the Houston Coalition for Equitable Development Without Displacement (HCEDD) have faced consistent opposition from the City of Houston and Rice Management Company to a CBA as traditionally defined, in favor of an agreement between the latter two entities without a community coalition signatory.\nOrganization.\nRice University is chartered as a non-profit organization and is governed by a privately appointed board of trustees. The board consists of a maximum of 25 voting members who serve four-year terms. The trustees serve without compensation and a simple majority of trustees must reside in Texas, including at least four within the greater Houston area. The board of trustees delegates its power by appointing a president to serve as the chief executive of the university. Reginald DesRoches was appointed president in 2022 and succeeded David W. Leebron, who served since 2004. The provost, three executive vice presidents, and seven vice presidents report to the president.\nThe university's academics are organized into several schools. The Susanne M. Glasscock School of Continuing Studies has only graduate programs. Schools that have undergraduate and graduate programs include:\nRice's undergraduate students are admitted from a centralized admissions process, which admits new students to the university as a whole, rather than a specific school (the schools of Music and Architecture are decentralized). Students are encouraged to select the major path that best suits their desires; a student can later decide that they would rather pursue study in another field, or continue their current coursework and add a second or third major. These transitions are designed to be simple, with students not required to decide on a specific major until their sophomore year of study. Rice offers 360 degrees in over 60 departments. There are 40 undergraduate degree programs, 51 masters programs, and 29 doctoral programs.\nFaculty members of each of the departments elect chairs to represent the department to each School's dean and the deans report to the Provost who serves as the chief officer for academic affairs.\nRice Management Company.\nThe Rice Management Company manages the $8.1 billion Rice University endowment (June 2021) and $1.1 billion debt. The endowment provides 40% of Rice's operating revenues.\nIn August 2021, an economic development agreement that would provide Rice Management Company with up to $65 million in cost reimbursement from local taxes was given initial approval by the Midtown Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone. The agreement does not require a community benefits agreement in exchange for funding. Final approval requires a vote by the Houston City Council.\nAcademics.\nRice is a medium-sized, highly residential research university. The majority of enrollments are in the full-time, four-year undergraduate program emphasizing arts &amp; sciences and professions. There is a very high level of research activity. It is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools as well as the professional accreditation agencies for engineering, management, and architecture.\nEach of Rice's departments is organized into one of three distribution groups, and students whose major lies within the scope of one group must take at least 3 courses of at least 3 credit hours each of approved distribution classes in each of the other two groups, as well as completing one physical education course as part of the LPAP (Lifetime Physical Activity Program) requirement. All new students must take a Freshman Writing Intensive Seminar (FWIS) class, and for students who do not pass the university's composition examination (administered during the summer before matriculation), FWIS 100, a writing class, becomes an additional requirement.\nStudent body.\nAs of fall 2022, men make up 51.1% of the undergraduate body and 63.1% of the professional and post-graduate student body. 36.9% of degree-seeking students are from out of state, 35.9% are from Texas and 27.2% are from outside of the United States. In 2022, the largest proportion of international students came from Asian countries, with 1623 out of the 2344 total students (or 69.24%) coming from China (1145), India (296), Taiwan (93), and Korea (89).\nHonor Code.\nThe Rice Honor Code plays an integral role in academic affairs. Almost all Rice exams are unproctored and professors give timed, closed-book exams that students take home and complete at their own convenience. Potential infractions are reported to the student Honor Council, elected by popular vote. The penalty structure is established every year by Council consensus; typically, penalties have ranged from a letter of reprimand to an 'F' in the course and a two semester suspension. During Orientation Week, students must take and pass a test demonstrating that they understand the Honor System's requirements and sign a Matriculation Pledge. On assignments, Rice students affirm their commitment to the Honor Code by writing \"\"On my honor, I have neither given nor received any unauthorized aid on this [examination, quiz or paper]\".\"\nAdmissions.\nAdmission to Rice is rated as \"most selective\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nFor fall 2024, Rice received 32,473 freshmen applications of which 2,597 were admitted (8.0%) slightly higher than the record-low 7.9% acceptance rate in 2023. The 25th and 75th SAT scores for the class of 2024 were 1510 and 1560 respectively; the same numbers for the ACT Composite score was 34\u201335.\nAdmission to the university is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nRankings and reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRice was ranked tied at 17th among national universities and 108th among global universities, 6th for \"best undergraduate teaching\", 5th for \"Best Value\", and tied for 16th \"Most Innovative\" among national universities in the U.S. by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in its 2022 edition. In 2024, 'Forbes' magazine ranked Rice University 9th nationally among 500 liberal arts colleges, universities and service academies, 1st among universities in the south, and 9th among research universities.\nIn 2020, Rice was ranked 105th in the world by the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\". In 2020, Rice was ranked tied for 95th internationally (41st nationally) by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\". Rice University was also ranked 85th globally in 2020 by \"QS World University Rankings\".\nThe \"Princeton Review\" ranked Rice as one of the top 50 best value private colleges in its 2020 edition.\nStudent life.\nRice University's campus is located in Houston's Museum District and surrounded by greenery, adjacent to Hermann Park, Rice Village, and the Texas Medical Center. Hermann Park features many attractions, including the Houston Museum of Natural Science, Miller Outdoor Theatre, and a municipal golf course. The Houston METRORail system provides access to downtown's theatre and nightlife district and Reliant Park, with a station located adjacent to the university's main gate. In 2008, Rice University joined the Zipcar program, providing two vehicles to offer more transportation options for students who do not have access to a vehicle.\nResidential colleges.\nIn 1957, Rice University implemented a residential college system, which was proposed by the university's first president, Edgar Odell Lovett. The system was inspired by existing systems in place in England and at several other universities in the United States. The existing residences known as East, South, West, and Wiess Halls became Baker, Will Rice, Hanszen, and Wiess Colleges, respectively.\nList of residential colleges.\nBelow is a list of residential colleges in order of founding:\nEach residential college has its own cafeteria (serveries) and each residential college has study groups and its own social practices.\nAlthough each college is composed of a full cross-section of students at Rice, they have over time developed their own traditions and \"personalities.\" When students matriculate they are randomly assigned to one of the eleven colleges, although \"legacy\" exceptions are made for students whose siblings or parents have attended Rice. Students generally remain members of the college that they are assigned to for the duration of their undergraduate careers, even if they move off-campus at any point. Students are guaranteed on-campus housing for freshman year and two of the next three years; each college has its own system for determining allocation of the remaining spaces, collectively known as \"Room Jacking\". Students develop strong loyalties to their college and maintain friendly rivalry with other colleges, especially during events such as Beer Bike and O-Week. Colleges keep their rivalries alive by performing \"jacks,\" or pranks, on each other, especially during O-Week and Beer Bike Week. During Matriculation, Commencement, and other formal academic ceremonies, the colleges process in the order in which they were established.\nBaker 13.\nBaker 13 is a tradition in which students run around campus wearing nothing but shoes and shaving cream at 10 p.m. on the 13th and the 31st of every month, as well as the 26th on months with fewer than 31 days. The event, long sponsored by Baker College, usually attracts a small number of students, but Halloween night and the first and last relevant days of the school year both attract large numbers of revelers.\nBeer Bike Race.\nAccording to the official website, \"Beer Bike is a combination intramural bicycle race and drinking competition dating back to 1957. Ten riders and ten chuggers make up a team. Elaborate rules include details such as a prohibition of \"bulky or wet clothing articles designed to absorb beer/water or prevent spilled beer/water from being seen\" and regulations for chug can design. Each residential college as well as the Graduate Student Association participates with a men's team, a women's team, and alumni (co-ed) team. Each leg of the race is a relay in which a team's \"chugger\" must chug of beer or water for the men's division and for women before the team's \"rider\" may begin to ride. Participants who both ride and chug are referred to as \"Ironmen\". Willy Week is a term coined in the 1990s to refer to the week preceding Beer Bike, a time of general energy and excitement on campus. Jacks (pranks) are especially common during Willy Week; some examples in the past include removing showerheads and encasing the Hanszen guardian.\"\nThe morning of the Beer Bike race itself begins with what is by some estimations the largest annual water balloon fight in the world. Beer Bike is Rice's most prominent student event, and for younger alumni it serves as an unofficial reunion weekend on par with Homecoming. The 2009 Beer Bike race was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Bill Wilson, a popular professor and long-time resident associate of Wiess College who died earlier that year.\nIn the event of inclement weather, Beer Bike becomes a Beer Run. The rules are nearly identical, except that the Bikers must instead run the length of the track.\nCampus institutions.\nRice Coffeehouse.\nRice Coffeehouse began in Hanszen College, where students would serve coffee in the Weenie Loft, a study room in the old section's fourth floor. Later, the coffee house moved to the Hanszen basement to accommodate more student patrons. That coffeehouse became known as Breadsticks and Pomegranates, and closed due to flooding. Demand for an on-campus Coffeehouse grew and in 1990, the Rice Coffeehouse was founded.\nThe Rice Coffeehouse is a not-for-profit student-run organization serving Rice University and the greater Houston community. Over the past few years, it has introduced fair-trade and organic coffee and loose-leaf teas.\nCoffeehouse baristas are referred to as K.O.C.'s, or Keepers of the Coffee. Rice Coffeehouse has also adopted an unofficial mascot, the squirrel, which can be found on T-shirts, mugs, and bumper stickers stuck on laptops across campus. The logo pays tribute to Rice's squirrel population, claimed by students to be unusually plump and frighteningly tame.\nThe Pub at Rice.\nFormerly known as Willy's Pub, The Pub at Rice is Rice's student-run pub located in the basement of the Rice Memorial Center. It opened on April 11, 1975, with Rice President Norman Hackerman pouring the first beer. The original name was chosen by students in tribute to the university's founder, William Marsh Rice. After the drinking age in Texas was raised in 1986, the pub entered a period of financial difficulties and in April 1995, was destroyed in a fire. The space was gutted but renovated and remains open. On February 15, 2022, the Rice Thresher announced the rebranding of Willy's Pub as The Pub at Rice.\nRice Bikes.\nRice Bikes is a full-service on-campus bicycle sale, rental, and repair shop. It originated in the basement of Sid Richardson College in February 2011. In 2012, Rice Bikes officially became the university's third student-run business. Rice Bikes merged with a student-run bicycle rental business in 2013, and operations moved to the Rice Memorial Center in 2014. In 2017, the business moved to the garage of the Rice Housing and Dining department's headquarters.\nRice Bikes functions as a full bicycle repair shop.\nStudent-run media.\nRice has a weekly student newspaper (\"The Rice Thresher\"), a yearbook (https:// ), college radio station (KTRU Rice Radio), and now defunct, campus-wide student television station (RTV5). They are based out of the RMC student center. In addition, Rice hosts several student magazines dedicated to a range of different topics; the spring semester of 2008 saw the founding of two magazines, a literary sex journal called \"Open\" and an undergraduate science research magazine entitled \"Catalyst\".\n\"The Rice Thresher\" is published every Wednesday and is ranked by Princeton Review as one of the top campus newspapers nationally for student readership. It is distributed around campus, and at a few other local businesses and has a website. The \"Thresher\" has a small staff and has campus news, open submission opinion page, and the satirical Backpage, which has often been the center of controversy. The newspaper has won several awards from the College Media Association, Associated Collegiate Press and Texas Intercollegiate Press Association.\nThe Rice Campanile was first published in 1916 celebrating Rice's first graduating class. It has published continuously since then, publishing two volumes in 1944 since the university had two graduating classes due to World War II. The website was created sometime in the early to mid 2000s.\nKTRU Rice Radio is the student-run radio station. It plays genres and artists of music and sound unavailable on other radio stations in Houston, and often, the US. The station takes requests over the phone or https://. In 2000 and 2006, KTRU won Houston Press' Best Radio Station in Houston. In 2003, Rice alum and active KTRU DJ DL's hip-hip show won Houston Press' Best Hip-hop Radio Show. On August 17, 2010, it was announced that Rice University had been in negotiations to sell the station's broadcast tower, FM frequency and license to the University of Houston System to become a full-time classical music and fine arts programming station. The new station, KUHA, would be operated as a not-for-profit outlet with listener supporters. The FCC approved the sale and granted the transfer of license to the University of Houston System on April 15, 2011, however, KUHA proved to be an even larger failure and so after four and a half years of operation, The University of Houston System announced that KUHA's broadcast tower, FM frequency and license were once again up for sale in August 2015. KTRU continued to operate much as it did previously, streaming live on the Internet, via apps, and on HD2 radio using the 90.1 signal. Under student leadership, KTRU explored the possibility of returning to FM radio for a number of years. In spring 2015, KTRU was granted permission by the FCC to begin development of a new broadcast signal via LPFM radio. On October 1, 2015, KTRU made its official return to FM radio on the 96.1 signal. While broadcasting on HD2 radio has been discontinued, KTRU continues to broadcast via internet in addition to its LPFM signal.\nRTV5 is a student-run television network available as channel 5 on campus. RTV5 was created initially as Rice Broadcast Television in 1997; RBT began to broadcast the following year in 1998, and aired its first live show across campus in 1999. It experienced much growth and exposure over the years with successful programs like \"Drinking with Phil\u201d, \u201cThe Meg &amp; Maggie Show\u201d, which was a variety and call-in show, a weekly news show, and extensive live coverage in December 2000 of the shut down of KTRU by the administration. In spring 2001, the Rice undergraduate community voted in the general elections to support RBT as a blanket tax organization, effectively providing a yearly income of $10,000 to purchase new equipment and provide the campus with a variety of new programming. In the spring of 2005, RBT members decided the station needed a new image and a new name: Rice Television 5. One of RTV5's most popular shows was the 24-hour show, where a camera and couch placed in the RMC stayed on air for 24 hours. One such show is held in fall and another in spring, usually during a weekend allocated for visits by prospective students. RTV5 has a video on demand site at rtv5.rice.edu. The station went off the air in 2014 and changed its name to Rice Video Productions. In 2015 the group's funding was threatened, but ultimately maintained. In 2016 the small student staff requested to no longer be a blanket-tax organization.\n\"The Rice Review\", also known as R2, is a yearly student-run literary journal at Rice University that publishes prose, poetry, and creative nonfiction written by undergraduate students, as well as interviews. The journal was founded in 2004 by creative writing professor and author Justin Cronin.\n\"The Rice Standard\" was an independent, student-run variety magazine modeled after such publications as \"The New Yorker\" and \"Harper's\". Prior to fall 2009, it was regularly published three times a semester with a wide array of content, running from analyses of current events and philosophical pieces to personal essays, short fiction and poetry. In August 2009, the \"Standard\" transitioned to a completely online format with the launch of their redesigned website, ricestandard.org. The first website of its kind on Rice's campus, the \"Standard\" featured blog-style content written by and for Rice students. \"The Rice Standard\" had around 20 regular contributors, and the site features new content every day (including holidays).\nAthletics.\nRice plays in NCAA Division I athletics and has been a member of the American Athletic Conference since 2023. A founding member of the Southwest Conference until its dissolution in 1996, Rice was later a member of the Western Athletic Conference before joining Conference USA in 2005. Rice is the second-smallest school, measured by undergraduate enrollment, competing in NCAA Division I FBS football, only ahead of Tulsa.\nThe Rice baseball team won the 2003 College World Series, defeating Stanford, giving Rice its only national championship in a team sport. The victory made Rice University the smallest school in 51 years to win a national championship at the highest collegiate level of the sport. The Rice baseball team has played on campus at Reckling Park since the 2000 season. As of 2010[ [update]], the baseball team has won 14 consecutive conference championships in three different conferences: the final championship of the defunct Southwest Conference, all nine championships while a member of the Western Athletic Conference, and five more championships in its first five years as a member of Conference USA. Additionally, Rice's baseball team has finished third in both the 2006 and 2007 College World Series tournaments. Rice now has made six trips to Omaha for the CWS. In 2004, Rice became the first school ever to have three players selected in the first eight picks of the MLB draft when Philip Humber, Jeff Niemann, and Wade Townsend were selected third, fourth, and eighth, respectively. In 2007, Joe Savery was selected as the 19th overall pick.\nIn 2004\u201305, Rice sent its women's volleyball, soccer, and basketball teams to their respective NCAA tournaments. The women's swim team has consistently brought at least one member of their team to the NCAA championships since 2013. In 2005\u201306, the women's soccer, basketball, and tennis teams advanced, with five individuals competing in track and field. In 2006\u201307, the Rice women's basketball team made the NCAA tournament, while again five Rice track and field athletes received individual NCAA berths. In 2008, the women's volleyball team again made the NCAA tournament. \nIn 2011 the Women's Swim team won their first conference championship in the history of the university. This was an impressive feat considering they won without having a diving team. The team repeated their C-USA success in 2013 and 2014. \nIn 2017, the women's basketball team, led by second-year head coach Tina Langley, won the Women's Basketball Invitational, defeating UNC-Greensboro 74\u201362 in the championship game at Tudor Fieldhouse. \nThough not a varsity sport, Rice's ultimate frisbee women's team, named Torque, won consecutive Division III national championships in 2014 and 2015.\nIn 2006, the football team qualified for its first bowl game since 1961, ending the second-longest bowl drought in the country at the time. On December 22, 2006, Rice played in the New Orleans Bowl in New Orleans, Louisiana against the Sun Belt Conference champion, Troy. The Owls lost 41\u201317. The bowl appearance came after Rice had a 14-game losing streak from 2004 to 2005 and went 1\u201310 in 2005. The streak followed an internally authorized 2003 McKinsey report that stated football alone was responsible for a $4 million deficit in 2002. Tensions remained high between the athletic department and faculty, as a few professors who chose to voice their opinion were in favor of abandoning the football program. The program success in 2006, the \"Rice Renaissance,\" proved to be a revival of the Owl football program, quelling those tensions. David Bailiff took over the program in 2007 and has remained head coach. Jarett Dillard set an NCAA record in 2006 by catching a touchdown pass in 13 consecutive games and took a 15-game overall streak into the 2007 season.\nIn 2008, the football team posted a 9\u20133 regular season, capping off the year with a 38\u201314 victory over Western Michigan University in the Texas Bowl. The win over Western Michigan marked the Owls' first bowl win in 45 years.\nRice Stadium also serves as the performance venue for the university's Marching Owl Band, or \"MOB.\" Despite its name, the MOB is a scatter band that focuses on performing humorous skits and routines rather than traditional formation marching.\nRice Owls men's basketball won 10 conference titles in the former Southwest Conference (1918, 1935*, 1940, 1942*, 1943*, 1944*, 1945, 1949*, 1954*, 1970; * denotes shared title). Most recently, guard Morris Almond was drafted in the first round of the 2007 NBA draft by the Utah Jazz. Rice named former Cal Bears head coach Ben Braun as head basketball coach to succeed Willis Wilson, fired after Rice finished the 2007\u20132008 season with a winless (0\u201316) conference record and overall record of 3\u201327.\nRice's mascot is Sammy the Owl. In previous decades, the university kept several live owls on campus in front of Lovett College, but this practice has been discontinued, due to public concern regarding animal welfare.\nRice also has a 12-member coed cheerleading squad and a coed dance team, both of which perform at football and basketball games throughout the year.\nNotable people.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], Rice has graduated 98 classes of students consisting of 51,961 living alumni. Over 100 students at Rice have been Fulbright Scholars, 25 Marshall Scholars, 25 Mellon Fellows, 13 Rhodes Scholars, 6 Udall Scholars, and 65 Watson Fellows, among several other honors and awards.\nRice's distinguished faculty and alumni consists of five Nobel laureates, a Turing Award winner, two Pulitzer Prize award winners, six Fulbright Scholars, 29 Alexander von Humboldt Foundation Recipients, 14 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1 Abel Prize winner, 3 members of the American Philosophical Society, 35 Guggenheim Fellowships, 12 members of the National Academy of Engineering, 2 members of the National Academy of Medicine, 10 members of the National Academy of Sciences, five fellows of the National Humanities Center, and 86 fellows of the National Science Foundation.\nIn science and technology, Rice alumni include 14 NASA astronauts; Robert Curl, Nobel laureate discoverer of fullerene; Robert Woodrow Wilson, winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation; Matthew Sands, physicist and co-author of The Feynman Lectures on Physics; David Eagleman, celebrity neuroscientist and \"NYT\" bestselling author; and NASA former Apollo 11 and 13 warning systems engineer and motivational speaker Jerry Woodfill.\nIn business and entrepreneurship, Rice alumni include:\nIn government and politics, Rice alumni include:\nIn the arts, Rice alumni include:\nIn athletics, Rice alumni include: Lance Berkman, Brock Holt, Bubba Crosby, Harold Solomon, Frank Ryan, Tommy Kramer,Jose Cruz, Jr., O.J. Brigance, Larry Izzo, James Casey, Courtney Hall, Bert Emanuel, Luke Willson, Tony Cingrani, Anthony Rendon, Mike MacRae, and Leo Rucka, as well as three Olympians (Funmi Jimoh '06, Allison Beckford '04, and William Fred Hansen '63).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25814", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25814", "title": "Richard Smalley", "text": "American chemist and Nobel laureate (1943\u20132005)\n \nRichard Errett Smalley (June 6, 1943 \u2013 October 28, 2005) was an American chemist who was the Gene and Norman Hackerman Professor of Chemistry, Physics, and Astronomy at Rice University. In 1996, along with Robert Curl, also a professor of chemistry at Rice, and Harold Kroto, a professor at the University of Sussex, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of a new form of carbon, buckminsterfullerene, also known as buckyballs. He was an advocate of nanotechnology and its applications.\nEarly life and education.\nSmalley, the youngest of 4 siblings, was born in Akron, Ohio on June 6, 1943, to Frank Dudley Smalley, Jr., and Esther Virginia Rhoads. He grew up in Kansas City, Missouri. Richard Smalley credits his father, mother and aunt as formative influences in industry, science and chemistry. His father, Frank Dudley Smalley, Jr. worked with mechanical and electrical equipment and eventually became CEO of a trade journal for farm implements called \"Implement and Tractor\". His mother, Esther Rhoads Smalley, completed her B.A. Degree while Richard was a teenager. She was particularly inspired by mathematician Norman N. Royall Jr., who taught Foundations of Physical Science, and communicated her love of science to her son through long conversations and joint activities. Smalley's maternal aunt, pioneering female chemist Sara Jane Rhoads, interested Smalley in the field of chemistry, letting him work in her organic chemistry laboratory, and suggesting that he attend Hope College, which had a strong chemistry program.\nSmalley attended Hope College for two years before transferring to the University of Michigan where he received his Bachelor of Science in 1965, performing undergraduate research in the laboratory of Raoul Kopelman. Between his studies, he also worked in industry, where he developed his unique managerial style. He received his Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1973 after completing a doctoral dissertation, titled \"The lower electronic states of 1,3,5 (sym)-triazine\", under the supervision of Elliot R. Bernstein. He did postdoctoral work at the University of Chicago from 1973 to 1976, with Donald Levy and Lennard Wharton where he was a pioneer in the development of supersonic beam laser spectroscopy.\nCareer.\nIn 1976, Smalley joined Rice University. In 1982, he was appointed to the Gene and Norman Hackerman Chair in Chemistry at Rice. He helped to found the Rice Quantum Institute in 1979, serving as chairman from 1986 to 1996. In 1990, he became also a professor in the department of physics. In 1990, he helped to found the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology. In 1996, he was appointed its director.\nHe became a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1990, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1991.\nFullerenes.\nSmalley's research in physical chemistry investigated the formation of inorganic and semiconductor clusters using pulsed molecular beams and time-of-flight mass spectrometry. As a consequence of this expertise, Robert Curl introduced him to Harry Kroto in order to investigate a question about the constituents of astronomical dust. These are carbon-rich grains expelled by old stars such as R Coronae Borealis. The result of this collaboration was the discovery of C60 (known as Buckyballs) and the fullerenes as the third allotropic form of carbon.\nSmalley recognized that the structure of C60 was like that of a soccer ball after cutting and tapping hexagons together in a three-dimensional manner, utilizing 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons. He was also responsible for the name of C60, naming it after Buckminster Fuller, an American architect who was known for his use of geodesic domes in his designs. \nThe research that earned Kroto, Smalley and Curl the Nobel Prize mostly comprised three articles. First was the discovery of C60 in the November 14, 1985, issue of \"Nature\", \"C60: Buckminsterfullerene\". The second article detailed the discovery of the endohedral fullerenes in \"Lanthanum Complexes of Spheroidal Carbon Shells\" in the \"Journal of the American Chemical Society\" (1985). The third announced the discovery of the fullerenes in \"Reactivity of Large Carbon Clusters: Spheroidal Carbon Shells and Their Possible Relevance to the Formation and Morphology of Soot\" in the \"Journal of Physical Chemistry\" (1986).\nAlthough only three people can be cited for a Nobel Prize, graduate students James R. Heath, Yuan Liu, and Sean C. O'Brien participated in the work. Smalley mentioned Heath and O'Brien in his Nobel Lecture. Heath went on to become a professor at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and O'Brien joined Texas Instruments and is now at MEMtronics. Yuan Liu is a Senior Staff Scientist at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.\nThis research is significant for the discovery of a new allotrope of carbon known as a fullerene. Other allotropes of carbon include graphite, diamond and graphene. Harry Kroto's 1985 paper entitled \"C60: Buckminsterfullerine\", published with colleagues J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl, and R. E. Smalley, was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society, presented to Rice University in 2015. The discovery of fullerenes was recognized in 2010 by the designation of a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society at the Richard E. Smalley Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology at Rice University in Houston, Texas.\nNanotechnology.\nFollowing nearly a decade's worth of research into the formation of alternate fullerene compounds (e.g. C28, C70), as well as the synthesis of endohedral metallofullerenes (M@C60), reports of the identification of carbon nanotube structures led Smalley to begin investigating their iron-catalyzed synthesis.\nAs a consequence of this research, Smalley was able to persuade the administration of Rice University, under then-president Malcolm Gillis, to create Rice's Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (CNST) focusing on any aspect of molecular nanotechnology. It was renamed The Richard E. Smalley Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology after Smalley's death in 2005, and has since merged with the Rice Quantum Institute, becoming the Smalley-Curl Institute (SCI) in 2015.\nSmalley's latest research was focused on carbon nanotubes, specifically focusing on the chemical synthesis side of nanotube research. He is well known for his group's invention of the high-pressure carbon monoxide (HiPco) method of producing large batches of high-quality nanotubes. Smalley spun off his work into a company, Carbon Nanotechnologies Inc. and associated nanotechnologies.\nSmalley and his lab worked solely in this area of study and nothing else for approximately 10 years, up until the end of his life. His research lab carried the slogan \"If it ain't tubes, we don't do it\" proudly. \nDispute on molecular assemblers.\nHe was an outspoken skeptic of the idea of molecular assemblers, as advocated by K. Eric Drexler. His main scientific objections, which he termed the \"fat fingers problem\" and the \"sticky fingers problem\", argued against the feasibility of molecular assemblers being able to precisely select and place individual atoms. He also believed that Drexler's speculations about apocalyptic dangers of molecular assemblers threatened the public support for development of nanotechnology. He debated Drexler in an exchange of letters which were published in \"Chemical &amp; Engineering News\" as a point-counterpoint feature.\nAdvocacy.\nStarting in the late 1990s, Smalley advocated for the need for cheap, clean energy, which he described as the number one problem facing humanity in the 21st century. He described what he called \"The Terawatt Challenge\", the need to develop a new power source capable of increasing \"our energy output by a minimum factor of two, the generally agreed-upon number, certainly by the middle of the century, but preferably well before that.\"\nHe also presented a list entitled \"Top Ten Problems of Humanity for Next 50 Years\". It can be interesting to compare his list, in order of priority, to the Ten Threats formulated by the U.N.'s High Level Threat Panel in 2004. Smalley's list, in order of priority, was:\nSmalley regarded several problems as interlinked: the lack of people entering the fields of science and engineering, the need for an alternative to fossil fuels, and the need to address global warming. He felt that improved science education was essential, and strove to encourage young students to consider careers in science. His slogan for this effort was \"Be a scientist, save the world.\"\nSmalley was a leading advocate of the National Nanotechnology Initiative in 2003. Suffering from hair loss and weakness as a result of his chemotherapy treatments, Smalley testified before the congressional testimonies, arguing for the potential benefits of nanotechnology in the development of targeted cancer therapies. Bill 189, the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act, was introduced in the Senate on January 16, 2003, by Senator Ron Wyden, passed the Senate on November 18, 2003, and at the House of Representatives the next day with a 405\u201319 vote. President George W. Bush signed the act into law on December 3, 2003, as Public Law 108-\n153. Smalley was invited to attend.\nPersonal life.\nSmalley was married four times, to Judith Grace Sampieri (1968\u20131978), Mary L. Chapieski (1980\u20131994), JoNell M. Chauvin (1997\u20131998) and Deborah Sheffield (2005), and had two sons, Chad Richard Smalley (born June 8, 1969) and Preston Reed Smalley (born August 8, 1997).\nIn 1999, Smalley was diagnosed with cancer. Smalley died of leukemia, variously reported as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, on October 28, 2005, at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, at the age of 62.\nUpon Smalley's death, the US Senate passed a resolution to honor Smalley, crediting him as the \"Father of Nanotechnology.\"\nReligion during final years.\nSmalley, who had taken classes in religion as well as science at Hope College, rediscovered his religious foundation in later life, particularly during his final years while battling cancer. During the final year of his life, Smalley wrote: \"Although I suspect I will never fully understand, I now think the answer is very simple: it's true. God did create the universe about 13.7 billion years ago, and of necessity has involved Himself with His creation ever since.\"\nAt the Tuskegee University's 79th Annual Scholarship Convocation/Parents' Recognition Program he was quoted making the following statement regarding the subject of evolution while urging his audience to take seriously their role as the higher species on this planet. \"'Genesis' was right, and there was a creation, and that Creator is still involved ... We are the only species that can destroy the Earth or take care of it and nurture all that live on this very special planet. I'm urging you to look on these things. For whatever reason, this planet was built specifically for us. Working on this planet is an absolute moral code. ... Let's go out and do what we were put on Earth to do.\" Old Earth creationist and astronomer Hugh Ross spoke at Smalley's funeral, November 2, 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25815", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25815", "title": "Robert Curl", "text": "American chemist (1933\u20132022)\nRobert Floyd Curl Jr. (August 23, 1933 \u2013 July 3, 2022) was an American chemist who was Pitzer\u2013Schlumberger Professor of Natural Sciences and professor of chemistry at Rice University. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996 for the discovery of the nanomaterial buckminsterfullerene, and hence the fullerene class of materials, along with Richard Smalley (also of Rice University) and Harold Kroto of the University of Sussex.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Alice, Texas, United States, Curl was the son of a Methodist minister. Due to his father's missionary work, his family moved several times within southern and southwestern Texas, and the elder Curl was involved in starting the San Antonio Medical Center's Methodist Hospital. Curl attributes his interest in chemistry to a chemistry set he received as a nine-year-old, recalling that he ruined the finish on his mother's porcelain stove when nitric acid boiled over onto it. He is a graduate of Thomas Jefferson High School in San Antonio, Texas. His high school offered only one year of chemistry instruction, but in his senior year his chemistry teacher gave him special projects to work on.\nCurl received a Bachelor of Arts in chemistry from Rice Institute (now Rice University) in 1954. He was attracted to the reputation of both the school's academics and football team, and the fact that at the time it charged no tuition. He earned his doctorate in chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1957. At Berkeley, he worked in the laboratory of Kenneth Pitzer, then dean of the college of chemistry, with whom he would become a lifelong collaborator. Curl's graduate research involved performing infrared spectroscopy to determine the bond angle of disiloxane.\nScientific career.\nCurl was a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University with E. B. Wilson, where he used microwave spectroscopy to study the bond rotation barriers of molecules. After that, he joined the faculty of Rice University in 1958. He inherited the equipment and graduate students of George Bird, a professor who was leaving for a job at Polaroid. Curl's early research involved the microwave spectroscopy of chlorine dioxide. His research program included both experiment and theory, mainly focused on detection and analysis of free radicals using microwave spectroscopy and tunable lasers. He used these observations to develop the theory of their fine structure and hyperfine structure, as well as information about their structure and the kinetics of their reactions.\nNobel Prize.\nCurl's research at Rice involved the fields of infrared and microwave spectroscopy. Curl's research inspired Richard Smalley to come to Rice in 1976 with the intention of collaborating with Curl. In 1985, Curl was contacted by Harold Kroto, who wanted to use a laser beam apparatus built by Smalley to simulate and study the formation of carbon chains in red giant stars. Smalley and Curl had previously used this apparatus to study semiconductors such as silicon and germanium. They were initially reluctant to interrupt their experiments on these semiconductor materials to use their apparatus for Kroto's experiments on carbon, but eventually gave in.\nThey indeed found the long carbon chains they were looking for, but also found an unexpected product that had 60 carbon atoms. Over the course of 11 days, the team studied and determined its structure and named it buckminsterfullerene after noting its similarity to the geodesic domes for which the architect Buckminster Fuller was known. This discovery was based solely on the single prominent peak on the mass spectrograph, implying a chemically inert substance that was geometrically closed with no dangling bonds. Curl was responsible for determining the optimal conditions of the carbon vapor in the apparatus, and examining the spectrograph. Curl noted that James R. Heath and Sean C. O'Brien deserve equal recognition in the work to Smalley and Kroto. The existence of this type of molecule had earlier been theorized by others, but Curl and his colleagues were at the time unaware of this. Later experiments confirmed their proposed structure, and the team moved on to synthesize endohedral fullerenes that had a metal atom inside the hollow carbon shell. The fullerenes, a class of molecules of which buckminsterfullerene was the first member discovered, are now considered to have potential applications in nanomaterials and molecular scale electronics. Robert Curl's 1985 paper entitled \"C60: Buckminsterfullerine\", published with colleagues H. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O\u2019Brien, and R. E. Smalley, was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society, presented to Rice University in 2015. The discovery of fullerenes was recognized in 2010 by the designation of a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society at the Richard E. Smalley Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology at Rice University in Houston, Texas.\nAfter winning the Nobel Prize in 1996, Curl took a quieter path than Smalley, who became an outspoken advocate of nanotechnology, and Kroto, who used his fame to further his interest in science education, saying, \"After winning a Nobel, you can either become a scientific pontificator, or you can have some idea for a new science project and you can use your newfound notoriety to get the resources to do it. Or you can say, 'Well, I enjoy what I was doing, and I want to keep doing that.'\" True to that humility, when asked by the President of Rice what he would like, following the Nobel announcement, he asked that a bike rack be installed closer to his office and laboratory.\nLater research.\nCurl's later research interests involved physical chemistry, developing DNA genotyping and sequencing instrumentation, and creating photoacoustic sensors for trace gases using quantum cascade lasers. He is known in the residential college life at Rice University for being the first master of Lovett College.\nCurl retired in 2008 at the age of 74, becoming a University Professor Emeritus, Pitzer-Schlumberger Professor of Natural Sciences Emeritus, and Professor of Chemistry Emeritus at Rice University.\nPersonal life.\nCurl married Jonel Whipple in 1955, with whom he had two children. He cycled to his office and lab and every week played bridge with the Rice Bridge Brigade. Curl died in Houston on July 3, 2022, at the age of 88.\nAwards and honors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSelected publications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles:\nTechnical reports:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25816", "revid": "11042835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25816", "title": "Roman Republic", "text": "Period of Roman history (c. 509 \u2013 27 BC)\nThe Roman Republic ( ) was the era of classical Roman civilisation beginning with the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom (traditionally dated to 509\u00a0BC) and ending in 27\u00a0BC with the establishment of the Roman Empire following the War of Actium. During this period, Rome's control expanded from the city's immediate surroundings to hegemony over the entire Mediterranean world.\nRoman society at the time was primarily a cultural mix of Latin and Etruscan societies, as well as of Sabine, Oscan, and Greek cultural elements, which is especially visible in the ancient Roman religion and its pantheon. Its political organisation developed at around the same time as direct democracy in ancient Greece, with collective and annual magistracies, overseen by a senate. There were annual elections, but the republican system was an elective oligarchy, not a democracy, with a number of powerful families largely monopolising the senior magistracies. Roman institutions underwent considerable changes throughout the Republic to adapt to difficulties such as the creation of promagistracies to rule its conquered provinces and, after the Social War during the late Republic, the inclusion of peninsular Italians as citizens and senators.\nUnlike the of the Roman Empire, republican Rome was in a state of near-perpetual war. Its first enemies were its Latin and Etruscan neighbours, as well as the Gauls, who sacked Rome around 387\u00a0BC. After the Gallic sack, Rome conquered most of the Italian peninsula in a century and became one of the Mediterranean great powers. Its greatest strategic rival was Carthage, against which it waged three wars. Rome defeated Carthage at the Battle of Zama in 202\u00a0BC and in the following decades became the dominant power in the ancient Mediterranean world. It then embarked on a long series of difficult conquests, defeating Philip V and Perseus of Macedon, Antiochus III of the Seleucid Empire, the Lusitanian Viriathus, the Numidian Jugurtha, the Pontic king Mithridates VI, Vercingetorix of the Arverni tribe of Gaul, and the Egyptian queen Cleopatra.\nAt home, during the Conflict of the Orders, the patricians, the closed oligarchic elite, came into conflict with the more numerous \"plebs\"; this was resolved peacefully, with the plebs achieving political equality by the 4th century\u00a0BC. The late Republic, from 133\u00a0BC onward, saw substantial domestic strife, often anachronistically seen as a conflict between optimates and populares, referring to conservative and reformist politicians, respectively. The Social War between Rome and its Italian allies over citizenship and Roman hegemony in Italy greatly expanded the scope of civil violence. Mass slavery also contributed to three Servile Wars. Political violence at home coupled with powerful semi-autonomous generals led to civil wars that broke the Republic. The first involved Marius and Sulla. After a generation, the Republic fell into civil war again in 49\u00a0BC between Julius Caesar and Pompey. Despite his victory and appointment as dictator for life, Caesar was assassinated in 44\u00a0BC. Caesar's heir Octavian and lieutenant Mark Antony defeated Caesar's assassins in 42\u00a0BC, but they split, eventually resulting in Antony's defeat alongside his ally and lover Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31\u00a0BC. Octavian, the victor, then became the dominant force in Roman politics; Octavian's receipt of the title from the Senate in 27\u00a0BC is often seen to mark the end of the Republic and the beginning of the Roman Empire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nFounding.\nRome had been ruled by monarchs since its foundation. These monarchs were elected, for life, by the men of the Roman Senate. The last Roman monarch was called Tarquin the Proud, who in traditional histories was expelled from Rome in 509\u00a0BC because his son, Sextus Tarquinius, raped a noblewoman, Lucretia. The tradition asserted that the monarchy was abolished in a revolution led by the semi-mythical Lucius Junius Brutus and the king's powers were then transferred to two separate consuls elected to office for a term of one year; each was capable of checking his colleague by . Most modern scholarship describes these accounts as the quasi-mythological detailing of an aristocratic coup within Tarquin's own family or a consequence of an Etruscan occupation of Rome rather than a popular revolution.\nRome in Latium.\nEarly campaigns.\nAccording to Rome's traditional histories, Tarquin made several attempts to retake the throne, including the Tarquinian conspiracy, which involved Brutus's own sons, the war with Veii and Tarquinii, and finally the war between Rome and Clusium. The attempts to restore the monarchy did not succeed.\nThe first Roman republican wars were wars of expansion. One by one, Rome defeated both the persistent Sabines and the local cities. Rome defeated its rival Latin cities in the Battle of Lake Regillus in 496\u00a0BC, the Battle of Ariccia in 495\u00a0BC, the Battle of Mount Algidus in 458\u00a0BC, and the Battle of Corbio in 446\u00a0BC. But it suffered a significant defeat at the Battle of the Cremera in 477\u00a0BC, wherein it fought against the most important Etruscan city, Veii; this defeat was later avenged at the Battle of Veii in 396\u00a0BC, wherein Rome destroyed the city. By the end of this period, Rome had effectively completed the conquest of its immediate Etruscan and Latin neighbours and secured its position against the immediate threat posed by the nearby Apennine hill tribes.\nPlebeians and patricians.\nBeginning with their revolt against Tarquin, and continuing through the early years of the Republic, Rome's patrician aristocrats were the dominant force in politics and society. They initially formed a closed group of about 50 large families, called \"gentes\", who monopolised Rome's magistracies, state priesthoods, and senior military posts. The most prominent of these families were the Cornelii, Aemilii, Claudii, Fabii, and Valerii. The leading families' power, privilege and influence derived from their wealth, in particular from their landholdings, their position as patrons, and their numerous clients.\nThe vast majority of Roman citizens were commoners of various social degrees. They formed the backbone of Rome's economy, as smallholding farmers, managers, artisans, traders, and tenants. In wartime, they could be summoned for military service. Most had little direct political influence. During the early Republic, the \"plebs\" (or plebeians) emerged as a self-organised, culturally distinct group of commoners, with its own internal hierarchy, laws, customs, and interests. Plebeians had no access to high religious and civil office. For the poorest, one of the few effective political tools was their withdrawal of labour and services, in a \"secessio plebis\"; the first such secession occurred in 494\u00a0BC, in protest at the abusive treatment of plebeian debtors by the wealthy during a famine. The patrician Senate was compelled to give them direct access to the written civil and religious laws and to the electoral and political process. To represent their interests, the \"plebs\" elected tribunes, who were personally sacrosanct, immune to arbitrary arrest by any magistrate, and had veto power over legislation.\nCeltic invasion of Italy.\nBy 390\u00a0BC, several Gallic tribes were invading Italy from the north. The Romans met the Gauls in pitched battle at the Battle of Allia River around 390\u2013387\u00a0BC. The battle was fought at the confluence of the Tiber and Allia rivers, 11 Roman miles () north of Rome. The Romans were routed and subsequently Rome was sacked by the Senones. There is no destruction layer at Rome around this time, indicating that if a sack occurred, it was largely superficial.\nRoman expansion in Italy.\nWars against Italian neighbours.\nFrom 343 to 341\u00a0BC, Rome won two battles against its Samnite neighbours, but was unable to consolidate its gains, due to the outbreak of war with former Latin allies. In the Latin War (340\u2013338\u00a0BC), Rome defeated a coalition of Latins at the battles of Vesuvius and the Trifanum. The Latins submitted to Roman rule.\nA Second Samnite War began in 327\u00a0BC. The war ended with Samnite defeat at the Battle of Bovianum in 305\u00a0BC. By 304\u00a0BC, Rome had annexed most Samnite territory and begun to establish colonies there, but in 298\u00a0BC the Samnites rebelled, and defeated a Roman army, in a Third Samnite War. After this success, it built a coalition of several previous enemies of Rome. The war ended with Roman victory in 290\u00a0BC.\nAt the Battle of Populonia, in 282\u00a0BC, Rome finished off the last vestiges of Etruscan power in the region.\nRise of the plebeian nobility.\nIn the 4th century, plebeians gradually obtained political equality with patricians. The first plebeian consular tribunes were elected in 400. The reason behind this sudden gain is unknown, but it was limited as patrician tribunes retained preeminence over their plebeian colleagues. In 385\u00a0BC, the former consul and saviour of the besieged capital, Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, is said to have sided with the plebeians, ruined by the sack and largely indebted to patricians. According to Livy, Capitolinus sold his estate to repay the debt of many of them, and even went over to the plebs, the first patrician to do so. Nevertheless, the growing unrest he had caused led to his trial for seeking kingly power; he was sentenced to death and thrown from the Tarpeian Rock.\nBetween 376 and 367\u00a0BC, the tribunes of the plebs Gaius Licinius Stolo and Lucius Sextius Lateranus continued the plebeian agitation and pushed for an ambitious legislation, known as the \"leges Liciniae Sextiae\". The most important bill opened the consulship to plebeians. Other tribunes controlled by the patricians vetoed the bills, but Stolo and Lateranus retaliated by vetoing the elections for five years while being continuously reelected by the plebs, resulting in a stalemate. In 367\u00a0BC, they carried a bill creating the \"decemviri sacris faciundis\", a college of ten priests, of whom five had to be plebeians, thereby breaking patricians' monopoly on priesthoods. The resolution of the crisis came from the dictator Camillus, who made a compromise with the tribunes: he agreed to their bills, and they in return consented to the creation of the offices of praetor and curule aediles, both reserved to patricians. Lateranus became the first plebeian consul in 366\u00a0BC; Stolo followed in 361\u00a0BC.\nSoon after, plebeians were able to hold both the dictatorship and the censorship. The four-time consul Gaius Marcius Rutilus became the first plebeian dictator in 356\u00a0BC and censor in 351\u00a0BC. In 342\u00a0BC, the tribune of the plebs Lucius Genucius passed his \"leges Genuciae\", which abolished interest on loans, in a renewed effort to tackle indebtedness; required the election of at least one plebeian consul each year; and prohibited magistrates from holding the same magistracy for the next ten years or two magistracies in the same year. In 339\u00a0BC, the plebeian consul and dictator Quintus Publilius Philo passed three laws extending the plebeians' powers. His first law followed the \"lex Genucia\" by reserving one censorship to plebeians, the second made plebiscites binding on all citizens (including patricians), and the third required the Senate to give its prior approval to plebiscites before they became binding on all citizens.\nDuring the early Republic, consuls chose senators from among their supporters. Shortly before 312\u00a0BC, the \"lex Ovinia\" transferred this power to the censors, who could only remove senators for misconduct, thus appointing them for life. This law strongly increased the power of the Senate, which was by now protected from the influence of the consuls and became the central organ of government. In 312\u00a0BC, following this law, the patrician censor Appius Claudius Caecus appointed many more senators to fill the new limit of 300, including descendants of freedmen, which was deemed scandalous. Caecus also launched a vast construction programmee, building the first aqueduct, the \"aqua Appia\", and the first Roman road, the \"via Appia\".\nIn 300\u00a0BC, the two tribunes of the plebs Gnaeus and Quintus Ogulnius passed the \"lex Ogulnia\", which created four plebeian pontiffs, equalling the number of patrician pontiffs, and five plebeian augurs, outnumbering the four patricians in the college. The Conflict of the Orders ended with the last secession of the plebs around 287. The dictator Quintus Hortensius passed the \"lex Hortensia\", which reenacted the law of 339\u00a0BC, making plebiscites binding on all citizens, while also removing the requirement for prior Senate approval. These events were a political victory of the wealthy plebeian elite, who exploited the economic difficulties of the plebs for their own gain: Stolo, Lateranus, and Genucius bound their bills attacking patricians' political supremacy with debt-relief measures. As a result of the end of the patrician monopoly on senior magistracies, many small patrician \"gentes\" faded into history during the 4th and 3rd centuries\u00a0BC due to the lack of available positions. About a dozen remaining patrician \"gentes\" and twenty plebeian ones thus formed a new elite, called the \"nobiles\".\nPyrrhic War.\nBy the early 3rd century\u00a0BC, Rome had established itself as the major power in Italy, but had not yet come into conflict with the dominant military powers of the Mediterranean: Carthage and the Greek kingdoms. In 282, several Roman warships entered the harbour of Tarentum, triggering a violent reaction from the Tarentine democrats, who sank some. The Roman embassy sent to investigate the affair was insulted and war was promptly declared. Facing a hopeless situation, the Tarentines (together with the Lucanians and Samnites) appealed to Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, for military aid. A cousin of Alexander the Great, he was eager to build an empire for himself in the western Mediterranean and saw Tarentum's plea as a perfect opportunity.\nPyrrhus and his army of 25,500 men (with 20 war elephants) landed in the Italian peninsula in 280\u00a0BC. The Romans were defeated at Heraclea, as their cavalry were afraid of Pyrrhus's elephants. Pyrrhus then marched on Rome, but the Romans concluded a peace in the north and moved south with reinforcements, placing Pyrrhus in danger of being flanked by two consular armies; Pyrrhus withdrew to Tarentum. In 279\u00a0BC, Pyrrhus met the consuls Publius Decius Mus and Publius Sulpicius Saverrio at the Battle of Asculum, which remained undecided for two days. Finally, Pyrrhus personally charged into the melee and won his since-eponymous Pyrrhic victory, at the cost of an important part of his troops. He allegedly said, \"if we are victorious in one more battle with the Romans, we shall be utterly ruined.\"\nHe escaped the Italian deadlock by answering a call for help from Syracuse, where tyrant Thoenon was desperately fighting an invasion from Carthage. Pyrrhus could not let them take the whole island, as it would have compromised his ambitions in the western Mediterranean, and so declared war. The Carthaginians lifted the siege of Syracuse before his arrival, but he could not entirely oust them from the island as he failed to take their fortress of Lilybaeum. His harsh rule soon led to widespread antipathy among the Sicilians; some cities even defected to Carthage. In 275\u00a0BC, Pyrrhus left the island before he had to face a full-scale rebellion. He returned to Italy, where his Samnite allies were on the verge of losing the war. Pyrrhus again met the Romans at the Battle of Beneventum. This time, the consul Manius Dentatus was victorious and even captured eight elephants. Pyrrhus then withdrew from Italy, but left a garrison in Tarentum, to wage a new campaign in Greece against Antigonus II Gonatas of Macedonia. His death in battle at Argos in 272\u00a0BC forced Tarentum to surrender to Rome.\nPunic Wars and expansion in the Mediterranean.\nFirst Punic War (264\u2013241 BC).\nRome and Carthage were initially on friendly terms, lastly in an alliance against Pyrrhus, but tensions rapidly rose after the departure of the Epirote king. Between 288 and 283\u00a0BC, Messina in Sicily was taken by the Mamertines, a band of mercenaries formerly employed by Agathocles. They plundered the surroundings until Hiero II, the new tyrant of Syracuse, defeated them (in either 269 or 265\u00a0BC). In effect under a Carthaginian protectorate, the remaining Mamertines appealed to Rome to regain their independence. Senators were divided on whether to help. A supporter of war, the consul Appius Claudius Caudex, turned to one of the popular assemblies to get a favourable vote by promising plunder to the voters. After the assembly ratified an alliance with the Mamertines, Caudex was dispatched to cross the strait and lend aid.\nMessina fell under Roman control quickly. Syracuse and Carthage, at war for centuries, responded with an alliance to counter the invasion and blockaded Messina, but Caudex defeated Hiero and Carthage separately. His successor, Manius Valerius Maximus, landed with an army of 40,000 men and conquered eastern Sicily, which prompted Hiero to shift his allegiance and forge a long-lasting alliance with Rome. In 262\u00a0BC, the Romans moved to the southern coast and besieged Akragas. In order to raise the siege, Carthage sent reinforcements, including 60 elephants\u2014the first time they used them\u2014but still lost the battle. Nevertheless, Rome could not take all of Sicily because Carthage's naval superiority prevented it from effectively besieging coastal cities. Using a captured Carthaginian ship as blueprint, Rome therefore launched a massive construction programme and built 100 quinqueremes in only two months. It also invented a new device, the \"corvus\", a grappling engine that enabled a crew to board an enemy ship. The consul for 260\u00a0BC, Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Asina, lost the first naval skirmish of the war against Hannibal Gisco at Lipara, but his colleague Gaius Duilius won a great victory at Mylae. He destroyed or captured 44 ships and was the first Roman to receive a naval triumph, which also included captive Carthaginians for the first time. Although Carthage was victorious on land at Thermae in Sicily, the \"corvus\" gave a strong advantage to Rome on the waters. The consul Lucius Cornelius Scipio (Asina's brother) captured Corsica in 259\u00a0BC; his successors won the naval battles of Sulci in 258, Tyndaris in 257\u00a0BC, and Cape Ecnomus in 256.\nTo hasten the end of the war, the consuls for 256\u00a0BC decided to carry the operations to Africa, on Carthage's homeland. The consul Marcus Atilius Regulus landed on the Cap Bon peninsula with about 18,000 soldiers. He captured the city of Aspis, repulsed Carthage's counterattack at Adys, and took Tunis. The Carthaginians hired Spartan mercenaries, led by Xanthippus, to command their troops. In 255, the Spartan general marched on Regulus, crushing the Roman infantry on the Bagradas plain; only 2,000 soldiers escaped, and Regulus was captured. The consuls for 255 nonetheless won a naval victory at Cape Hermaeum, where they captured 114 warships. This success was spoilt by a storm that annihilated the victorious navy: 184 ships of 264 sank, 25,000 soldiers and 75,000 rowers drowned. The \"corvus\" considerably hindered ships' navigation and made them vulnerable during tempest. It was abandoned after another similar catastrophe in 253\u00a0BC. These disasters prevented any significant campaign between 254 and 252\u00a0BC.\nHostilities in Sicily resumed in 252\u00a0BC, with Rome's taking of Thermae. The next year, Carthage besieged Lucius Caecilius Metellus, who held Panormos (now Palermo). The consul had dug trenches to counter the elephants, which once hurt by missiles turned back on their own army, resulting in a great victory for Metellus. Rome then besieged the last Carthaginian strongholds in Sicily, Lilybaeum and Drepana, but these cities were impregnable by land. Publius Claudius Pulcher, the consul of 249, recklessly tried to take the latter from the sea, but suffered a terrible defeat; his colleague Lucius Junius Pullus likewise lost his fleet off Lilybaeum. Without the \"corvus\", Roman warships had lost their advantage. By now, both sides were drained and could not undertake large-scale operations. The only military activity during this period was the landing in Sicily of Hamilcar Barca in 247\u00a0BC, who harassed the Romans with a mercenary army from a citadel he built on Mt. Eryx.\nUnable to take the Punic fortresses in Sicily, Rome tried to decide the war at sea and built a new navy, thanks to a forced borrowing from the rich. In 242\u00a0BC, 200 quinqueremes under consul Gaius Lutatius Catulus blockaded Drepana. The rescue fleet from Carthage was soundly defeated by Catulus. Exhausted and unable to bring supplies to Sicily, Carthage sued for peace. Carthage had to pay 1,000 talents immediately and 2,200 over ten years and evacuate Sicily. The fine was so high that Carthage could not pay Hamilcar's mercenaries, who had been shipped back to Africa. They revolted during the Mercenary War, which Carthage suppressed with enormous difficulty. Meanwhile, Rome took advantage of a similar revolt in Sardinia to seize the island from Carthage, in violation of the peace treaty. This led to permanent bitterness in Carthage.\nSecond Punic War.\nAfter its victory, the Republic shifted its attention to its northern border as the Insubres and Boii were threatening Italy. Meanwhile, Carthage compensated the loss of Sicily and Sardinia with the conquest of Southern Hispania (up to Salamanca), and its rich silver mines. This rapid expansion worried Rome, which concluded a treaty with Hasdrubal in 226, stating that Carthage could not cross the Ebro river. But the city of Saguntum, south of the Ebro, appealed to Rome in 220 to act as arbitrator during a period of internal strife. Hannibal took the city in 219, triggering the Second Punic War.\nInitially, the Republic's plan was to carry war outside Italy, sending the consuls P. Cornelius Scipio to Hispania and Ti. Sempronius Longus to Africa, while their naval superiority prevented Carthage from attacking from the sea. This plan was thwarted by Hannibal's bold move to Italy. In May 218, he crossed the Ebro with a large army of about 100,000 soldiers and 37 elephants. He passed in Gaul, crossed the Rhone, then the Alps, possibly through the Col de Clapier. This exploit cost him almost half of his troops, but he could now rely on the Boii and Insubres, still at war with Rome. Publius Scipio, who had failed to block Hannibal on the Rhone, sent his elder brother Gnaeus with the main part of his army in Hispania according to the initial plan, and went back to Italy with the rest to resist Hannibal in Italy, but he was defeated and wounded near the Ticino river.\nHannibal then marched south and won three outstanding victories. The first one was on the banks of the Trebia in December 218, where he defeated the other consul Ti. Sempronius Longus. More than half the Roman army was lost. Hannibal then ravaged the country around Arretium to lure the new consul C. Flaminius into a trap at Lake Trasimene. This clever ambush resulted in the death of the consul and the complete destruction of his army of 30,000 men. In 216, the new consuls L. Aemilius Paullus and C. Terentius Varro mustered the biggest army possible, with eight legions\u2014some 80,000 soldiers, twice as many as the Punic army\u2014and confronted Hannibal, who was encamped at Cannae, in Apulia. Despite his numerical disadvantage, Hannibal used his heavier cavalry to rout the Roman wings and envelop their infantry, which he annihilated. In terms of casualties, the Battle of Cannae was the worst defeat in Roman history: only 14,500 soldiers escaped, and Paullus was killed as well as 80 senators. Soon after, the Boii ambushed the army of the consul-elect for 215, L. Postumius Albinus, who died with all his army of 25,000 men in the Battle of Silva Litana.\nThese disasters triggered a wave of defection among Roman allies, with the rebellions of the Samnites, Oscans, Lucanians, and Greek cities of Southern Italy. In Macedonia, Philip V also made an alliance with Hannibal in order to take Illyria and the area around Epidamnus, occupied by Rome. His attack on Apollonia started the First Macedonian War. In 215, Hiero II of Syracuse died of old age, and his young grandson Hieronymus broke the long alliance with Rome to side with Carthage. At this desperate point, the aggressive strategy against Hannibal the Scipiones advocated was abandoned in favour of a slow reconquest of the lost territories, since Hannibal could not be everywhere to defend them. Although he remained invincible on the battlefield, defeating all the Roman armies on his way, he could not prevent Claudius Marcellus from taking Syracuse in 212 after a long siege, nor the fall of his bases of Capua and Tarentum in 211 and 209.\nIn Hispania, Publius and Gnaeus Scipio won the battles of Cissa in 218, soon after Hannibal's departure, and Dertosa against his brother Hasdrubal in 215, which enabled them to conquer the eastern coast of Hispania. But in 211, Hasdrubal and Mago Barca successfully turned the Celtiberian tribes that supported the Scipiones, and attacked them simultaneously at the Battle of the Upper Baetis, in which the Scipiones died. Publius's son, the future Scipio Africanus, was then elected with a special proconsulship to lead the Hispanic campaign, winning a series of battles with ingenious tactics. In 209, he took Carthago Nova, the main Punic base in Hispania. The next year, he defeated Hasdrubal at the Battle of Baecula. After his defeat, Carthage ordered Hasdrubal to reinforce his brother in Italy. Since he could not use ships, he followed the same route as his brother through the Alps, but the consuls M. Livius Salinator and C. Claudius Nero were awaiting him and defeated him in the Battle of the Metaurus, where Hasdrubal died. It was the turning point of the war. The campaign of attrition had worked well: Hannibal's troops were now depleted; he only had one elephant left (Surus) and retreated to Bruttium, on the defensive. In Greece, Rome contained Philip V without devoting too many forces by allying with the Aetolian League, Sparta, and Pergamon, which also prevented Philip from aiding Hannibal. The war with Macedon resulted in a stalemate, with the Treaty of Phoenice signed in 205.\nIn Hispania, Scipio continued his successful campaign at the battles of Carmona in 207, and Ilipa (now Seville) in 206, which ended the Punic threat on the peninsula. Elected consul in 205, he convinced the Senate to invade Africa with the support of the Numidian king Masinissa, who had defected to Rome. Scipio landed in Africa in 204. He took Utica and then won the Battle of the Great Plains, which prompted Carthage to open peace negotiations. The talks failed because Scipio wanted to impose harsher terms on Carthage to prevent it from rising again as a threat. Hannibal was therefore sent to face Scipio at Zama. Scipio could now use the heavy Numidian cavalry of Massinissa\u2014which had hitherto been so successful against Rome\u2014to rout the Punic wings, then flank the infantry, as Hannibal had done at Cannae. Defeated for the first time, Hannibal convinced the Carthaginian Senate to pay the war indemnity, which was even harsher than that of 241: 10,000 talents in 50 instalments. Carthage also had to give up all its elephants, all its fleet but ten triremes, and all its possessions outside its core territory in Africa (what is now Tunisia), and it could not declare war without Roman authorisation. In effect, Carthage was condemned to be a minor power, while Rome recovered from a desperate situation to dominate the western Mediterranean.\nRoman supremacy in the Greek East.\nRome's preoccupation with its war with Carthage provided an opportunity for Philip V of Macedonia, in the north of the Greek peninsula, to attempt to extend his power westward. He sent ambassadors to Hannibal's camp in Italy, to negotiate an alliance as common enemies of Rome. But Rome discovered the agreement when Philip's emissaries were captured by a Roman fleet. The First Macedonian War saw the Romans involved directly in only limited land operations, but they achieved their objective of occupying Philip and preventing him from aiding Hannibal.\nThe past century had seen the Greek world dominated by the three primary successor kingdoms of Alexander the Great's empire: Ptolemaic Egypt, Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire. In 202, internal problems led to a weakening of Egypt's position, disrupting the power balance among the successor states. Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire agreed to an alliance to conquer and divide Egypt. Fearing this increasingly unstable situation, several small Greek kingdoms sent delegations to Rome to seek an alliance. Rome gave Philip an ultimatum to cease his campaigns against Rome's new Greek allies. Doubting Rome's strength, Philip ignored the request, and Rome sent an army of Romans and Greek allies, beginning the Second Macedonian War. In 197, the Romans decisively defeated Philip at the Battle of Cynoscephalae, and Philip was forced to give up his recent Greek conquests. The Romans declared the \"Peace of the Greeks\", believing that Philip's defeat now meant that Greece would be stable, and pulled out of Greece entirely.\nWith Egypt and Macedonia weakened, the Seleucid Empire made increasingly aggressive and successful attempts to conquer the entire Greek world. Now not only Rome's allies against Philip, but even Philip himself, sought a Roman alliance against the Seleucids. The situation was exacerbated by the fact that Hannibal was now a chief military advisor to the Seleucid emperor, and the two were believed to be planning outright conquest not just of Greece, but also of Rome. The Seleucids were much stronger than the Macedonians had ever been, because they controlled much of the former Persian Empire and had almost entirely reassembled Alexander the Great's former empire.\nFearing the worst, the Romans began a major mobilisation, all but pulling out of recently conquered Spain and Gaul. This fear was shared by Rome's Greek allies, who now followed Rome again for the first time since that war. A major Roman-Greek force was mobilised under the command of the great hero of the Second Punic War, Scipio Africanus, and set out for Greece, beginning the Roman\u2013Seleucid War. After initial fighting that revealed serious Seleucid weaknesses, the Seleucids tried to turn the Roman strength against them at the Battle of Thermopylae, but were forced to evacuate Greece. The Romans pursued the Seleucids by crossing the Hellespont, the first time a Roman army had ever entered Asia. The decisive engagement was fought at the Battle of Magnesia, resulting in complete Roman victory. The Seleucids sued for peace, and Rome forced them to give up their recent Greek conquests. Rome again withdrew from Greece, assuming (or hoping) that the lack of a major Greek power would ensure a stable peace. In fact, it did the opposite.\nConquest of Greece.\nIn 179, Philip died. His talented and ambitious son, Perseus, took the throne and showed a renewed interest in conquering Greece. With its Greek allies facing a major new threat, Rome declared war on Macedonia again, starting the Third Macedonian War. Perseus initially had some success against the Romans, but Rome responded by sending a stronger army which decisively defeated the Macedonians at the Battle of Pydna in 168. The Macedonians capitulated, ending the war.\nConvinced now that the Greeks (and therefore the rest of the region) would not have peace if left alone, Rome decided to establish its first permanent foothold in the Greek world, and divided Macedonia into four client republics. Yet Macedonian agitation continued. The Fourth Macedonian War, 150 to 148\u00a0BC, was fought against a Macedonian pretender to the throne who was again destabilising Greece by trying to reestablish the old kingdom. The Romans swiftly defeated the Macedonians at the second battle of Pydna.\nThe Achaean League, seeing the direction of Roman policy trending towards direct administration, met at Corinth and declared war \"nominally against Sparta but in reality, against Rome\". It was swiftly defeated: in 146, the same year as the destruction of Carthage, Corinth was besieged and destroyed, forcing the league's surrender. Rome decided to divide the Greek territories into two new, directly administered Roman provinces, Achaea and Macedonia.\nThird Punic War.\nFor Carthage, the Third Punic War was a simple punitive mission after the neighbouring Numidians allied to Rome robbed and attacked Carthaginian merchants. Treaties had forbidden any war with Roman allies; viewing defence against banditry as \"war action\", Rome decided to annihilate Carthage. Carthage was almost defenceless, and submitted when besieged. But the Romans demanded complete surrender and removal of the city into the desert hinterland, far from any coastal or harbour region; the Carthaginians refused. The city was besieged and completely destroyed. Rome acquired all of Carthage's North African and Iberian territories. The Romans rebuilt Carthage 100 years later as a Roman colony, by order of Julius Caesar. It flourished, becoming one of the most important cities in the Roman Empire.\nSocial troubles and first civil war.\nViews on the structural causes of the Republic's collapse differ. One enduring thesis is that Rome's expansion destabilised its social organisation between conflicting interests; the Senate's policymaking, blinded by its own short-term self-interest, alienated large portions of society, who then joined powerful generals who sought to overthrow the system. Two other theses have challenged this view. The first blames the Romans' inability to conceive of plausible alternatives to the traditional republican system in a \"crisis without alternative\". The second instead stresses the continuity of the republic: until its disruption by Caesar's civil war and the following two decades of civil war created conditions for autocratic rule and made return to republican politics impossible: and, per Erich S. Gruen, \"civil war caused the fall of the republic, not vice versa\".\nA core cause of the Republic's eventual demise was the loss of elite's cohesion from c.\u2009133\u00a0BC: the ancient sources called this moral decay from wealth and the hubris of Rome's domination of the Mediterranean. Modern sources have proposed multiple reasons why the elite lost cohesion, including wealth inequality and a growing willingness by aristocrats to transgress political norms, especially in the aftermath of the Social War.\nGracchan period.\nIn the winter of 138\u2013137\u00a0BC, a first slave uprising, known as the First Servile War, broke out in Sicily. After initial successes, the slaves led by Eunus and Cleon were defeated by Marcus Perperna and Publius Rupilius in 132\u00a0BC.\nIn this context, Tiberius Gracchus was elected plebeian tribune in 133\u00a0BC. He attempted to enact a law to limit the amount of land anyone could own and establish a commission to distribute public lands to poor rural plebs. The aristocrats, who stood to lose an enormous amount of money, bitterly opposed this proposal. Tiberius submitted this law to the Plebeian Council, but it was vetoed by fellow tribune Marcus Octavius. Tiberius induced the plebs to depose Octavius from his office on the grounds that Octavius acted contrary to the manifest will of the people, a position that was unprecedented and constitutionally dubious. His law was enacted and took effect, but, when Tiberius ostentatiously stood for reelection to the tribunate, he was murdered by his enemies.\nTiberius's brother Gaius was elected tribune ten years later in 123 and reelected for 122. He induced the plebs to reinforce rights of appeal to the people against capital extrajudicial punishments and institute reforms to improve the people's welfare. While ancient sources tend to \"conceive Gracchus' legislation as an elaborate plot against the authority of the Senate... he showed no sign of wanting to replace the Senate in its normal functions\". Amid wide-ranging and popular reforms to create grain subsidies, change jury pools, establish and require the Senate to assign provinces before elections, Gaius proposed a law that would grant citizenship rights to Rome's Italian allies. He stood for election to a third term in 121 but was defeated. During violent protests over repeal of an ally's colonisation bill, the Senate moved the first against him, resulting in his death, with many others, on the Aventine. His legislation (like that of his brother) survived; the Roman aristocracy disliked the Gracchan agitation but accepted their policies.\nIn 121, the province of Gallia Narbonensis was established after the victory of Quintus Fabius Maximus over a coalition of Arverni and Allobroges in southern Gaul in 123. Lucius Licinius Crassus founded the city of Narbo there in 118.\nRise of Marius.\nRome fought the Jugurthine War from 111 to 104\u00a0BC against the North African kingdom of Numidia (in what is now Algeria and Tunisia). In 118, its king, Micipsa, died, and an illegitimate son, Jugurtha, usurped the throne. Numidia had been a loyal ally of Rome since the Punic Wars. Initially, Rome mediated a division of the country. But Jugurtha renewed his offensive, leading to a long and inconclusive war with Rome. Gaius Marius was a legate under the consul directing the war and was elected consul in 107\u00a0BC over the objections of the aristocratic senators, relying on support from the businessmen and poor. Marius had the Numidian command reassigned to himself through the popular assembly and, with the capture of Jugurtha at the end of a long campaign, ended the war; in the aftermath, the Romans largely withdrew from the province after installing a client king. Marius's victory played on existing themes of senatorial corruption and incompetence, contrasted especially against the military failure of senatorial leadership in the Cimbrian War.\nThe Cimbrian War (113\u2013101) was a far more serious affair than the earlier Gallic clashes in 121. The Germanic tribes of the Cimbri and the Teutons migrated from northern Europe into Rome's northern territories, and clashed with Rome and its allies. The defeat of various aristocrats in the conflict, along with Marius's reputation for military victory, led to his holding five successive consulships with little to enable him to lead armies against the threat. At the Battle of Aquae Sextiae and the Battle of Vercellae, Marius led the Roman armies, which virtually annihilated both tribes, ending the threat.\nDuring the Cimbrian War, further conflicts embroiled the Republic: A Second Servile War waged in Sicily from 104 to 101; a campaign was waged against pirates in Cilicia; Rome campaigned in Thrace, adding lands to the province of Macedonia; and Lycaonia was annexed to Rome.\nFirst civil wars.\nIn 91, the Social War broke out between Rome and its former allies in Italy: the main causes of the war were Roman encroachment on allied lands due to the Republic's land redistribution programmes, harsh Roman treatment of the non-citizen allies, and Roman unwillingness to share in the spoils of the empire. After the assassination, in Rome, of a conservative tribune who sought to grant the Italians citizenship, the allies took up arms: most ancient writers explain the conflict in terms of demands for full citizenship, but contemporary rebel propaganda coins indicate it may have been a primarily anti-Roman secessionist movement. The Romans were able to stave off military defeat by conceding the main point almost immediately, tripling the number of citizens. More recent scholarship also has stressed the importance of the war on the allies in destabilising Roman military affairs by blurring the distinction between Romans and foreign enemies.\nFurther civil conflict emerged, starting in 88. One of the consuls that year, L. Cornelius Sulla, was assigned to take an army against the Pontic king Mithridates. The local governor there was defeated, but C. Marius induced a tribune to promulgate legislation reassigning Sulla's command to Marius. Sulla responded by suborning his army, marching on Rome (the city was undefended but politically outraged), and declaring Marius and 11 of his allies outlaws before departing east to war with Mithridates. Marius, who had escaped into exile, returned, and with L. Cornelius Cinna, took control of the city.\nAfter the Marians took control of the city, they started to purge their political enemies. They elected, in irregular fashion, Marius and Cinna to the consulship of 86\u00a0BC. Marius died a fortnight after assuming office. Cinna took control of the state: his policies are unclear and the record is muddled by Sulla's eventual victory. The Cinnan regime declared Sulla a public enemy and ostensibly replaced him in command in the east. Instead of cooperating with his replacement, which Sulla viewed as illegitimate, he made peace with Mithridates and prepared to return to Italy. By 85\u00a0BC, the Cinnans in Rome started preparations to defend the peninsula from invasion.\nIn 83, he returned from the east with a small but experienced army. Initial reactions were negative across the peninsula, but after winning a number of victories he was able to overcome resistance and capture the city. In the Battle of the Colline Gate, just outside Rome, Sulla's army defeated the Marian defenders and then proceeded to \"run riot... killing for profit, pleasure, or personal vengeance anyone they pleased\". He then instituted procedures to centralise the killing, creating lists of proscribed persons who could be killed for their property without punishment. After establishing political control, Sulla had himself made dictator and passed a series of constitutional reforms intended to strengthen the position of the magistrates and the senate in the state and replace custom with new rigid statute laws enforced by new permanent courts. Sulla resigned the dictatorship in 81 after election as consul for 80. He then retired, and died in 78\u00a0BC.\nSullan republic.\nCn. Pompey Magnus served the Sullan regime during a short conflict triggered by the republic's own consul, M. Aemilius Lepidus, in 77\u00a0BC and afterwards led troops successfully against the remaining anti-Sullan forces in the Sertorian War; he brought the war successfully to a close in 72\u00a0BC. While Pompey was in Spain, the Republic faced agitation both foreign and domestic. The main domestic political struggle was the restoration of tribunician powers stripped during Sulla's dictatorship. After rumours of a pact between Q. Sertorius's ostensible republic-in-exile, Mithridates, and various Mediterranean pirate groups, the Sullan regime feared encirclement and stepped up efforts against the threats: they reinforced Pompey in Spain and fortified Bithynia. In spring 73\u00a0BC, Mithridates did so, invading Bithynia.\nIn 73, a slave uprising started in southern Italy under Spartacus, a gladiator, who defeated the local Roman garrisons and four legions under the consuls of 72. At the head of some 70,000 men, Spartacus led them in a Third Servile War\u2014they sought freedom by escape from Italy\u2014before being defeated by troops raised by M. Licinius Crassus. Although Pompey and Crassus were rivals, they were elected to a joint consulship in 70. During their consulship, they brought\u2014with little opposition\u2014legislation to dismantle the tribunician disabilities imposed by Sulla's constitutional reforms. They also shepherded legislation to settle the contentious matter of jury reform.\nL. Licinius Lucullus, one of Sulla's ablest lieutenants, had fought against Mithridates during the first Mithridatic war before Sulla's civil war. Mithridates also had fought Rome in a second Mithridatic war (83\u201382\u00a0BC). Rome for its part seemed equally eager for war and the spoils and prestige that it might bring. After his invasion of Bithynia in 73, Lucullus was assigned against Mithridates and his Armenian ally Tigranes the Great in Asia Minor. Fighting a war of manoeuvre against Mithridates' supply lines, Lucullus was able force Mithridates from an attempted siege of Cyzicus and pursue him into Pontus and thence into Armenia. After defeat forced the Romans from large parts of Armenia and Pontus in 67, Lucullus was replaced in command by Pompey. Pompey moved against Mithridates in 66. Defeating him in battle and securing the submission of Tigranes, Mithridates fled to Crimea, where he was betrayed and killed by his son Pharnaces in 63. Pompey remained in the East to pacify and settle Roman conquests in the region, also extending Roman control south to Judaea.\nEnd of the Republic.\nFirst Triumvirate.\nPompey returned from the Third Mithridatic War at the end of 62\u00a0BC. In the interim, before his return to Italy, the senate had successfully suppressed a conspiracy and insurrection led by a senator, Lucius Sergius Catilina, to overthrow that year's consuls. In the aftermath of the conspiracy, which was abetted by popular discontent, the Senate moved legislation to temper unrest in Italy: expanding the grain dole and implementing other reforms. Pompey, landing in Brundisium, publicly dismissed his troops, indicating that he had no desire to follow Sulla's example and dominate the republic by force, as some conservative senators had feared. He attempted to have his eastern settlements passed by the Senate; ratification was not forthcoming, due to the opposition of Lucullus, Crassus, and Cato the Younger.\nAfter Julius Caesar's election as one of the consuls of 59\u00a0BC, Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus engaged in a political alliance (traditionally dubbed by scholars as the First Triumvirate). The alliance greatly benefited the three men: Caesar passed legislation to distribute state lands as poor relief while also providing land for Pompey's veterans; he also had Pompey's eastern settlements ratified; for Crassus, he secured relief for tax farmers and a place on agrarian commission. Caesar won for himself the political support needed to acquire a profitable provincial command in Gaul and secure his political future.\nAttempting first to pass portions of his programme through the Senate, Caesar found the curia obstinate. He thus unveiled his alliance with Pompey and Crassus and moved his legislation before the people instead. Political opposition to the allies was immense.\nCaesar also facilitated the election of the former patrician Publius Clodius Pulcher to the tribunate for 58. Clodius set about depriving Caesar's senatorial enemies of two of their more obstinate leaders in Cato and Cicero. Clodius attempted to try Cicero for executing citizens without a trial during the Catiline conspiracy, resulting in Cicero going into self-imposed exile. Clodius also passed a bill that forced Cato to lead the invasion of Cyprus, which would keep him away from Rome for some years. Clodius also passed a law to expand the previous partial grain subsidy to a fully free grain dole for citizens.\nAfter his term as consul in 59, Caesar was appointed to a five-year term as the proconsular Governor of Cisalpine Gaul (part of current northern Italy), Transalpine Gaul (current southern France) and Illyria (part of the modern Balkans). Caesar sought cause to invade Gaul (modern France and Belgium), which would give him the dramatic military success he sought. When two local tribes began to migrate on a route that would take them near (not into) the Roman province of Transalpine Gaul, Caesar had the barely sufficient excuse he needed for his Gallic Wars, fought between 58 and 49.\nCaesar defeated large armies at major battles 58 and 57. In 55 and 54 he made two expeditions into Britain, the first Roman to do so. Caesar then defeated a union of Gauls at the Battle of Alesia, completing the Roman conquest of Transalpine Gaul. By 50, all of Gaul lay in Roman hands.\nClodius formed armed gangs that terrorised the city and eventually began to attack Pompey's followers, who in response funded counter-gangs formed by Titus Annius Milo. The political alliance of the triumvirate was crumbling. Domitius Ahenobarbus ran for the consulship in 55, promising to take Caesar's command from him. Eventually, the triumvirate was renewed at Lucca. Pompey and Crassus were promised the consulship in 55, and Caesar's term as governor was extended for five years. Beginning in the summer of 54, a wave of political corruption and violence swept Rome. This chaos reached a climax in January of 52, as Clodius and his allies shut down the government by vetoing the election of consuls. That month, Milo murdered Clodius after a chance encounter on the via Appia, leading to Pompey's occupation of the city as sole consul and a forcible restoration of order.\nIn 53, Crassus launched a Roman invasion of the Parthian Empire (modern Iraq and Iran). After initial successes, his army was cut off deep in enemy territory, surrounded and slaughtered at the Battle of Carrhae, in which Crassus himself perished. Crassus's death destabilised the Triumvirate. While Caesar was fighting in Gaul, Pompey proceeded with a legislative agenda for Rome that revealed that he was at best ambivalent towards Caesar. Pompey's wife, Julia, who was Caesar's daughter, died in childbirth. This event severed the last remaining bond between Pompey and Caesar. In 51, some Roman senators demanded that Caesar not be permitted to stand for consul unless he turned over control of his armies to the state. Caesar chose civil war over laying down his command and facing trial.\nCaesar's civil war and dictatorship.\nOn 1 January 49, an agent of Caesar presented an ultimatum to the senate. The ultimatum was rejected, and the senate then passed a resolution declaring that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year, he would be considered an enemy of the Republic. Meanwhile, the senators adopted Pompey as their new champion against Caesar, passing a that vested Pompey with dictatorial powers. On 10 January, Caesar with his veteran army crossed the river Rubicon, the legal boundary of Roman Italy beyond which no commander might bring his army, in violation of Roman laws, and by the spring of 49 swept down the Italian peninsula towards Rome. His rapid advance forced Pompey, the consuls and the senate to abandon Rome for Greece. Caesar entered the city unopposed. Afterwards Caesar turned his attention to the Pompeian stronghold of Hispania (modern Spain) but decided to tackle Pompey himself in Greece. Pompey initially defeated Caesar, but failed to follow up on the victory, and was decisively defeated at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48. Pompey fled again, this time to Egypt, where he was murdered.\nPompey's death did not end the civil war. In 46 Caesar lost perhaps as much as a third of his army, but ultimately came back to defeat the Pompeian army of Metellus Scipio in the Battle of Thapsus, after which the Pompeians retreated yet again to Hispania. Caesar then defeated the combined Pompeian forces at the Battle of Munda.\nWith Pompey defeated and order restored, Caesar wanted to achieve undisputed control over the government. The powers he gave himself were later assumed by his imperial successors. Caesar held both the dictatorship and the tribunate, and alternated between the consulship and the proconsulship. In 48, he was given permanent tribunician powers. This made his person sacrosanct, gave him the power to veto the senate, and allowed him to dominate the Plebeian Council. In 46, Caesar was given censorial powers, which he used to fill the senate with his partisans. He then raised the membership of the Senate to 900. This robbed the senatorial aristocracy of its prestige, and made it increasingly subservient to him. Caesar began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire. Since his absence from Rome would limit his ability to install consuls, he passed a law that allowed him to appoint all magistrates, and later all consuls and tribunes. This transformed the magistrates from representatives of the people to representatives of the dictator.\nCaesar was now the primary figure of the Roman state, enforcing and entrenching his powers. His enemies feared that he had ambitions to become an autocratic ruler. Arguing that the Roman Republic was in danger, a group of senators led by Gaius Cassius and Marcus Brutus hatched a conspiracy and assassinated Caesar at a meeting of the Senate on 15 March 44. Virtually all the conspirators fled the city after Caesar's death in fear of retaliation.\nSecond Triumvirate.\nThe civil wars that followed destroyed what was left of the Republic.\nAfter the assassination, Caesar's three most important associates, Mark Antony, Caesar's co-consul, Octavian, Caesar's adopted son and great-nephew, and Lepidus, Caesar's , formed an alliance known as the Second Triumvirate. The conspirators were defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42.\nFollowing Philippi, Rome's territories were divided between the triumvirs, but the agreement was fragile. Antony detested Octavian and spent most of his time in the East, while Lepidus favoured Antony but felt himself obscured by his colleagues. Following the defeat of Sextus Pompeius, a dispute between Lepidus and Octavian regarding the allocation of lands broke out and, in 36\u00a0BC, Lepidus was forced into exile in Circeii and stripped of all his offices except that of . His former provinces were awarded to Octavian.\nAntony, meanwhile, married Caesar's lover, Cleopatra of Ptolemaic Egypt, intending to use wealthy Egypt as a base to dominate Rome. The ambitious Octavian built a power base of patronage and then launched a campaign against Antony. Another civil war broke out between Octavian on one hand and Antony and Cleopatra on the other. This culminated in the latter's defeat at Actium in 31\u00a0BC; Octavian's forces then chased Antony and Cleopatra to Alexandria, where they both committed suicide in 30\u00a0BC.\nOctavian was granted a series of special powers, including sole within the city of Rome, permanent consular powers, and credit for every Roman military victory. In 27, he was granted the use of the name \"Augustus\", from which point he is generally considered the first Roman emperor.\nConstitutional system.\nThe constitutional history of the Roman Republic began with the revolution that overthrew the monarchy in 509\u00a0BC and ended with constitutional reforms that transformed the Republic into what would effectively be the Roman Empire, in 27\u00a0BC. The Roman Republic's constitution was a constantly evolving, unwritten set of guidelines and principles passed down mainly through precedent, by which the government and its politics operated.\nSenate.\nThe senate's authority derived from the senators' esteem and prestige. This esteem and prestige were based on both precedent and custom, as well as the senators' calibre and reputation. The senate passed decrees called . These were officially \"advice\" from the senate to a magistrate, but in practice, the magistrates usually followed them. Through the course of the middle republic and Rome's expansion, the senate became more dominant in the state: the only institution with the expertise to administer the empire effectively, it controlled state finances, assignment of magistrates, external affairs, and deployment of military forces. Also, a powerful religious body, it received reports of omens and directed Roman responses thereto.\nWhen its prerogatives started to be challenged in the 2nd century, the senate lost its customary preapproval for legislation. Moreover, after the precedent set in 121\u00a0BC with the killing of Gaius Gracchus, the senate claimed to assume the power to issue a : such decrees directed magistrates to take whatever actions were necessary to safeguard the state, irrespective of legality, and signalled the senate's willingness to support that magistrate if such actions were later challenged in the courts.\nIts members were usually appointed by censors, who ordinarily selected newly elected magistrates for membership in the senate, making the senate a partially elected body. Status was not hereditary and there were always some new men, though sons of former magistrates found it easier to be elected to the qualifying magistracies. During emergencies, a dictator could be appointed for the purpose of appointing senators (as was done after the Battle of Cannae). However, by the end of the republic men such as Caesar and the members of the Second Triumvirate usurped these powers for themselves.\nLegislative assemblies.\nThe legal status of Roman citizenship was limited and a vital prerequisite to possessing many important legal rights, such as the right to trial and appeal, marry, vote, hold office, enter binding contracts, and to special tax exemptions. An adult male citizen with the full complement of legal and political rights was called (lit.\u2009'having the greatest rights'). Citizens could participate in assemblies that elected magistrates, enacted legislation, presided over trials in capital cases, declared war and peace, and forged or dissolved treaties. Assemblies were called , in which all citizens could vote, and (sg. ), 'councils', for specific groups of citizens , e.g., the plebeians.\nCitizens were organised on the basis of and divided into centuries and tribes. Each century or tribe cast a collective vote. The centuriate assembly () was said to be traced from the Roman centuries of soldiers, and was usually presided over by a consul. The centuries voted, one at a time, until a measure received support from a majority. The centuriate assembly elected magistrates who had (consuls and praetors). It also elected censors. Only the centuriate assembly could declare war and ratify the results of a census. It served as the highest court of appeal in certain judicial cases.\nThe tribal assembly () was presided over by a consul, and composed of 35 tribes. Once a measure received support from a majority of the tribes, voting ended. While it did not pass many laws, the tribal assembly did elect quaestors, curule aediles, and military tribunes. The plebeian council () was identical to the tribal assembly, but excluded the patricians. They elected their own officers, plebeian tribunes and plebeian aediles. Usually, a plebeian tribune would preside over the assembly. This assembly passed most laws and could act as a court of appeal.\nMagistrates.\nEach republican magistrate held certain constitutional powers. Each was assigned a by the Senate. This was the scope of that particular office holder's authority. It could apply to a geographic area or to a particular responsibility or task. The powers of a magistrate came from the people of Rome (both plebeians and patricians). was held by both consuls and praetors. Strictly speaking, it was the authority to command a military force, but in reality, it carried broad authority in other public spheres, such as diplomacy and the justice system. In extreme cases, those with the imperium power could sentence Roman Citizens to death. All magistrates also had the power of (coercion). Magistrates used this to maintain public order by imposing punishment for crimes. Magistrates also had both the power and the duty to look for omens. This power could also be used to obstruct political opponents.\nOne check on a magistrate's power was (collegiality). Each magisterial office was held concurrently by at least two people. Another such check was . While in Rome, all citizens were protected from coercion, by , an early form of due process. It was a precursor to . If any magistrate tried to use the powers of the state against a citizen, that citizen could appeal the magistrate's decision to a tribune. In addition, once a magistrate's one-year term of office expired, he would have to wait ten years before serving in that office again. This created problems for some consuls and praetors, and these magistrates occasionally had their extended. In effect, they retained the powers of the office (as a promagistrate) without officially holding that office.\nIn times of military emergency, a dictator was appointed for a term of six months. Constitutional government was dissolved, and the dictator was the absolute master of the state. When the dictator's term ended, constitutional government was restored.\nThe censor was a magistrate in ancient Rome who was responsible for maintaining the census, supervising public morality, and overseeing certain aspects of the government's finances. The power of the censor was absolute: no magistrate could oppose his decisions, and only another censor who succeeded him could cancel those decisions. The censor's regulation of public morality is the origin of the modern meaning of the words \"censor\" and \"censorship\". During the census, they could enroll citizens in the senate or purge them from the senate.\nThe consuls of the Roman Republic were the highest-ranking ordinary magistrates. Each served for one year. Consular powers included the kings' former and appointment of new senators. Consuls had supreme power in both civil and military matters. While in the city of Rome, the consuls were the head of the Roman government. They presided over the senate and the assemblies. While abroad, each consul commanded an army. His authority abroad was nearly absolute.\nSince the tribunes were considered the embodiment of the plebeians, they were sacrosanct. Their sacrosanctity was enforced by a pledge the plebeians took to kill anyone who harmed or interfered with a tribune during his term of office. It was a capital offence to harm a tribune, disregard his veto, or otherwise interfere with him.\nPraetors administered civil law and commanded provincial armies. Aediles were officers elected to conduct domestic affairs in Rome, such as managing public games and shows. The quaestors usually assisted the consuls in Rome, and the governors in the provinces. Their duties were often financial.\nMilitary.\nRome's military secured Rome's territory and borders and helped to impose tribute on conquered peoples. Rome's armies had a formidable reputation; but Rome also \"produced [its] share of incompetents\" and catastrophic defeats. Nevertheless, it was generally the fate of Rome's greatest enemies, such as Pyrrhus and Hannibal, to win early battles but lose the war.\nHoplite armies.\nDuring this period, Roman soldiers seem to have been modelled after those of the Etruscans to the north, who themselves are believed to have copied their style of warfare from the Greeks. Traditionally, the introduction of the phalanx formation into the Roman army is ascribed to the city's penultimate king, Servius Tullius (ruled 578\u2013534). The phalanx was effective in large, open spaces, but not on the hilly terrain of the central Italian peninsula. In the 4th century, the Romans replaced it with the more flexible manipular formation. This change is sometimes attributed to Marcus Furius Camillus and placed shortly after the Gallic invasion of 390; more likely, it was copied from Rome's Samnite enemies to the south.\nManipular legion.\nDuring this period, an army formation of around 5,000 men (of both heavy and light infantry) was known as a legion. \"Maniples\" were units of 120 men each drawn from a single infantry class. They were typically deployed into three discrete lines based on the three heavy infantry types:\nThe three infantry classes may have retained some slight parallel to social divisions within Roman society, but at least officially the three lines were based upon age and experience rather than social class. Young, unproven men served in the first line, older men with some military experience in the second, and veteran troops of advanced age and experience in the third.\nThe heavy infantry of the maniples was supported by a number of light infantry and cavalry troops, typically 300 horsemen per manipular legion. The cavalry was drawn primarily from the richest class of equestrians. There was an additional class of troops that followed the army without specific martial roles and was deployed to the rear of the third line. Its role in accompanying the army was primarily to supply any vacancies that might occur in the maniples. The light infantry consisted of 1,200 unarmoured skirmishing troops drawn from the youngest and lower social classes. They were armed with a sword, a small shield, and several light javelins.\nRome's military confederation with the other peoples of the Italian peninsula meant that half of its army was provided by the Socii. According to Polybius, Rome could draw on 770,000 men at the beginning of the Second Punic War, of which 700,000 were infantry and 70,000 met the requirements for cavalry.\nA small navy had operated at a fairly low level after about 300, but it was massively upgraded about 40 years later, during the First Punic War. After a period of frenetic construction, the navy mushroomed to more than 400 ships on the Carthaginian (\"Punic\") pattern. Once completed, it could accommodate up to 100,000 sailors and embarked troops for battle. The navy thereafter declined in size.\nIn 217, near the beginning of the Second Punic War, Rome was forced to effectively ignore its long-standing principle that its soldiers must be both citizens and property owners. Severe social stresses, population decline, and the greater collapse of the middle classes meant that the Roman state was forced to arm its soldiers at the expense of the state, which it had not had to do before. The distinction between the heavy infantry types began to blur, perhaps because the state was now assuming the responsibility of providing standard-issue equipment. In addition, the shortage of available manpower led to a greater burden upon Rome's allies for the provision of allied troops. Eventually, the Romans were forced to begin hiring mercenaries to fight alongside the legions.\nLate Republican legions.\nThe organisation of the legions evolved throughout the Republican period. In 107, all citizens, regardless of their wealth or social class, were made eligible for entry into the Roman army. The distinction among the three heavy infantry classes, which had already blurred, had collapsed into a single class of heavy legionary infantry. The heavy infantry legionaries were drawn from citizen stock, while non-citizens came to dominate the ranks of the light infantry. The army's higher-level officers and commanders were still drawn exclusively from the Roman aristocracy. Unlike earlier in the Republic, legionaries were no longer fighting on a seasonal basis to protect their land. Instead, they received standard pay and were employed by the state on a fixed-term basis. As a consequence, military duty began to appeal most to the poorest sections of society, to whom a salaried pay was attractive.\nThe legions of the late Republic were almost entirely heavy infantry. The main legionary sub-unit was a \"cohort\" of approximately 480 infantrymen, further divided into six centuries of 80 men each. Each century comprised 10 \"tent groups\" of eight men. Cavalry were used as scouts and dispatch riders rather than as battlefield forces. Legions also contained a dedicated group of artillery crew of perhaps 60 men. Each legion was normally partnered with an approximately equal number of allied (non-Roman) troops.\nThe army's most obvious deficiency lay in its shortage of cavalry, especially heavy cavalry. Particularly in the East, Rome's slow-moving infantry legions were often confronted by fast-moving cavalry troops and found themselves at a tactical disadvantage.\nAfter Rome's subjugation of the Mediterranean, its navy declined in size, although it underwent short-term upgrading and revitalisation in the late Republic to meet several new demands. Julius Caesar assembled a fleet to cross the English Channel and invade Britannia. Pompey raised a fleet to deal with the Cilician pirates who threatened Rome's Mediterranean trading routes. During the civil war that followed, as many as 1,000 ships were either constructed or pressed into service from Greek cities.\nSocial structure.\nCitizen families were headed by the family's oldest male, the , who was lawfully entitled to exercise complete authority () over family property and all family members. Citizenship offered legal protection and rights, but citizens who offended Rome's traditional moral code could be declared infamous and lose certain legal and social privileges. Citizenship was also taxable, and undischarged debt was potentially a capital offence. A form of limited, theoretically voluntary slavery (debt bondage, or nexum) allowed wealthy creditors to negotiate payment of debt through bonded service. Poor, landless citizens of the lowest class () might contract their sons to a creditor, patron or third party employer to obtain an income or pay off family debts. was abolished only when slave labour became more readily available, most notably during the Punic wars.\nSlaves could be bought, sold, acquired through warfare, or born and raised in slavery. There were no legal limits on the slave-owner's power over them. A few slaves were freed by their owners, becoming freedmen and in some circumstances citizens too. This degree of social mobility was unusual in the ancient world but itself limited; for example, freedmen were seen as permanently tainted, and their children could not become magistrates. Freedmen could play notable roles in various crafts and trades, particularly those who had been manumitted by the upper classes. Freed slaves and the master who freed them retained certain legal and moral mutual obligations.\nAt the other extreme were the senatorial families of the landowning nobility, both patrician and plebeian, bound by shifting allegiances and mutual competition. A plebiscite of 218 forbade senators and their sons to engage in substantial trade or money-lending. A wealthy equestrian class emerged, not subject to the same trading constraints as senators.\nOne of Rome's fundamental social and economic institutions was the client-patron relationship; its obligations were largely moral and social rather than legal, but permeated society, including in politics.\nCitizen men and citizen women were expected to marry, produce as many children as possible, and improve\u2014or at worst, conserve\u2014their family's wealth, fortune, and public profile. Marriage offered opportunities for political alliance and social advancement. Patricians usually married in a form known as , which transferred the bride from her father's legal control () to that of her husband. Patrician status could be inherited only through birth; an early law, introduced by the reactionary Decemviri but rescinded in 445, sought to prevent marriages between patricians and plebeians. Among ordinary plebeians, different marriage forms offered married women considerable more freedom than their patrician counterparts, until marriage was replaced by \"free marriage\", in which the wife remained under her absent father's legal authority, not her husband's. Infant mortality was high. Towards the end of the Republic, the birthrate began to fall among the elite. Some wealthy, childless citizens resorted to adoption to provide male heirs for their estates and to forge political alliances. Adoption was subject to the senate's approval.\nPeople and economy.\nThe Roman Republic's economy was predominantly agrarian, but also highly complex. As the Romans continued to conquer the Mediterranean basin, it became fully integrated with the wider Mediterranean economy, a process which completed during the first century\u00a0BC. The population of the republic expanded considerably during the centuries of its existence; indeed, the vastness of the Roman citizen population was part of how it was able to mobilise such expansive military power.\nAgricultural production during the republic was highly regional. Literary evidence from ancient elite writers was highly simplifying and is not entirely consistent with the regional differences revealed by modern archaeology. Such differences were driven not only by soil productivity but also market access, mainly mediated by distance from large urban centres such as Rome, and changes in tenancy.\nDemography.\nEvidence for the republic's population largely comes from thirty-nine republican and early imperial censuses. The reported population increased substantially from the first, reporting 130,000 Romans in 509\u00a0BC, to the last, reporting 4,937,000 in AD\u00a014. It is generally believed that the censuses prior to those of Augustus starting in 28\u00a0BC reported only free adult males. It is also not clear to what extent these census figures include (or not) the expansion of citizenship through the Roman conquest of Italy and the late republican extension of citizenship to Transpadane Gaul from 49\u00a0BC, the manumission of slaves (slaves received citizenship when manumitted), losses from war, and losses to non-citizen towns.\nThere was fierce debate over the population of Italy from the third century onwards. Estimates of the Italian population c.\u2009225\u00a0BC place it around 4.5 million. This debate is based both on censuses and also on arguments from grain accounting and survey archaeology. The two main approaches were the \"low\" and \"high\" counts. The former posited that at the end of the republic there was an Italian population of around four million which was sightly lower than that of the estimated 4.5 million in 225. The high count, on the other hand, suggested that the population of the peninsula had increased to between seven and twelve million.\nMore recent approaches have suggested a \"middle\" count which views the census in terms of a device for counting military-age males which under the empire transformed into one to further imperial expansionist ideology. This reconstruction argues that imperial censuses inflated numbers, relative to their republican counterparts, by inclusion of women and children who were legally independent. This middle count instead suggests an Italian population between 4.6 and 5.9 million. All three modern accounts, however, are generally agreed to suggest an increase in the population of Italy which precludes ancient narratives of rural depopulation.\nThe population of all Roman possessions at the death of Augustus was in excess of 54 million, with considerable population flows across the Mediterranean basin. The population of Rome itself in the early imperial period was around one million, which it may have reached during the late republic by 57\u00a0BC, with other large cities such as Alexandria or Pergamum having between 100,000 and 300,000 inhabitants.\nAgriculture.\nThe agricultural production of republican-era Italy was concentrated in cereals (barley, wheat, and millet), vines, and olives. Grasses and legumes would have required irrigation; localised decay of such infrastructure may in part explain depopulation. Animal pasture was possible on the Appennines and low-lying plains during the winter seasons. Much of the peninsula was not yet cleared for farmland; the old-growth forests provided pasture for pigs, served as a habitat for other wild game, and were a source of timber. Areas of Italy were specialised in terms of their agricultural exports: Campania was notable for its wine and olives; other areas, like the Po Valley, Samnium, and the Appennine highlands generally, were noted for sheep and pig raising. The emergence of large urban elites in the late republic also catalysed the creation of villas close to cities to raise and grow luxury items for local consumption. \nFaced with increasing competition from provincial and allied grain suppliers, many Roman farmers turned to more profitable crops, especially grapes for wine production. By the late Republican era, Roman wine had been transformed from an indifferent local product for local consumption to a major domestic and export commodity, with some renowned, costly and collectable vintages.\nAgricultural tooling was continuous with earlier Iron Age tools: wheel-less and mouldboard-less ploughs with sickles. Powered by man (free or slave) and animal, most farms were relatively small. Even large farms were dependent on hired slave or free labour. Labour was necessary to take in the harvest and operate farm machinery, such as olive and grape presses. Evidence of olive and grape vines' ubiquitousness suggests polyculture was commonly employed to diversify a farm's agricultural output. Such practices also extended to simple crop rotations with fallow fields and legumes such as peas, chickpeas, and lentils.\nNon-agricultural gathering was also common in rural areas. Subsistence farming and gathering of this sort was the norm and commercial agriculture was concentrated only in areas on the coast and close to Rome, where there was urban demand large-scale commercial agricultural operations.\nFarming was not the only form of agriculture. Cattle were also bred to provide traction, along with meat and hides as a by-product, with horses, mules, and donkeys also bred for tractive purposes. Other animals, such as sheep and pigs, were also raised for their wool and meat respectively. Pigs especially bred prolifically and could be raised at little cost by any small farmer with rights to pannage. In many parts of Roman Italy, transhumance was also predominant, with shepherds leading flocks from the lowlands in winter to highlands in summer for grazing.\nIndustry.\nThe mining and processing of metals was a core part of Roman industry. During the early republic Italy itself was generally considered to be rich in copper and iron, but by the late republic these deposits had largely exhaused. Mining by the second century\u00a0BC had moved to Elba and Cisalpine Gaul. But the taking of Spain from Carthage during the Second Punic War opened huge and profitable mines in Iberia. Techniques for mining were sophisticated, with complex mechanisms to pump and move water for industrial purposes. \nTextile manufacture was in part domestic, with notable production at Rome and in Sicily. Production was likely organised via subcontracting networks which split up work between large numbers of small workshops.\nTrade, money, and finance.\nTrade at Rome was well underway by the second century\u00a0BC, with the development of a large port district (eventually stretching two kilometres) on the banks of the Tiber in central Rome. Large warehouses also were erected in the area. The republican period also saw, after the institution of Roman hegemony over the peninsula, the emergence of Brundisium and Puteoli as major ports in place of Tarentum and Naples. With the ports came partnerships to dispatch, send, and profit off maritime trade. Such partnerships, called \"societates\", also allowed under formal laws the grouping of the partners' capital to productive ends such as running mines and production.\nThe largest partnerships were the \"societates publicanorum\". These partnerships, which expanded with the empire, took government contracts for matters such as tax farming (where a partnership paid the state a fee for the right to collect taxes on its behalf), operation of large mines or quarries, and provision of supplies to soldiers or building projects. Due to their importance to the state, they also came to have a fully corporate existence, outliving their partners \u2013 most partnerships otherwise dissolved if one of the partners died \u2013 with inheritable shares (\"partes\"), directors (\"magistri\"), shareholder meetings for corporate governance.\nRoman coinage emerged during the republic. The denarius, a silver coin, was introduced c.\u2009211\u00a0BC worth at the time 10 bronze asses. Currency remained bimetallic (silver and bronze) through the whole period, though bronze decreased in value over time and the standard unit of account remained the bronze \"sestertius\" worth a quarter denarius. These coins were minted under the supervision of the tresviri monetales, junior magistrates who supervised the mint. Other magistrates, such as the aediles and praetors, also had powers to regulate markets and judge commercial disputes.\nLarge transactions were conducted with gold bars or through banking intermediaries, especially by exchange of large debts owed by and between aristocrats. Banks emerged by the second century\u00a0BC in two types (deposit-taking banking firms called \"argentariae\" and aristocratic financiers) and are poorly attested in the literary evidence of the late republic. It would not have been possible to conduct large business transactions (including the making of loans) without them. Deposit and lending activities by the first century were so ubiquitous to be little worth mentioning in the Ciceronean corpus, though the effects of conquest on financiers in the late republic is well attested.\nReligion.\nRepublican Rome's religious practices harked back to Rome's quasi-mythical history. Romulus, a son of Mars, founded Rome after Jupiter granted him favourable bird-signs regarding the site. Numa Pompilius, Rome's second king, had established its basic religious and political institutions after direct instructions from the gods, given through augury, dreams and oracle. Each king thereafter was credited with some form of divinely approved innovation, adaptation or reform. An Imperial-era source claims that the Republic's first consul, Brutus, effectively abolished human sacrifice to the goddess Mania, instituted by the last king, Tarquinius.\nRomans acknowledged the existence of innumerable deities who controlled the natural world and human affairs. The Roman state's well-being depended on its state deities, whose opinions and will could be discerned by priests and magistrates, trained in augury, haruspicy, oracles and the interpretation of omens. The gods were thought to communicate their wrath (\"ira deorum\") through prodigies (unnatural or aberrant phenomena).\nIndividuals, occupations and locations had their own protective tutelary deity, or several. Each was associated with a particular, highly prescriptive form of prayer and sacrifice. Piety () was the correct, dutiful and timely performance of such actions. The well-being of each Roman household was thought to depend on daily cult to its Lares and Penates (guardian deities, or spirits), ancestors, and the divine generative essence embodied within its \"pater familias\". A family which neglected its religious responsibilities could not expect to prosper.\nRoman religious authorities were unconcerned with personal beliefs or privately funded cults unless they offended natural or divine laws or undermined the \"mos maiorum\" (roughly, \"the way of the ancestors\"); the relationship between gods and mortals should be sober, contractual, and of mutual benefit. Undignified grovelling, excessive enthusiasm (\"superstitio\") and secretive practices were \"weak-minded\" and morally suspect. Magical practices were officially banned, as attempts to subvert the will of the gods for personal gain but were probably common among all classes. Private cult organisations that seemed to threaten Rome's political and priestly hierarchy were investigated by the Senate, with advice from the priestly colleges. The Republic's most notable religious suppression was that of the Bacchanalia, a widespread, unofficial, enthusiastic cult to the Greek wine-god Bacchus. The cult organisation was ferociously suppressed, and its deity was absorbed within the official cult to Rome's own wine god, Liber. The official recognition, adoption and supervision of foreign deities and practices had been an important unitary feature in Rome's territorial expansion and dominance since the days of the kings.\nPriesthoods.\nWith the abolition of monarchy, some of its sacral duties were shared by the consuls, while others passed to a Republican \"rex sacrorum\" (\"king of the sacred rites\"), a patrician \"king\", elected for life, with great prestige but no executive or kingly powers. Rome had no specifically priestly class or caste. As every family's \"pater familias\" was responsible for his family's cult activities, he was effectively the senior priest of his own household. In the early Republic, the patricians, as \"fathers\" to the Roman people, claimed the right of seniority to lead and control the state's relationship with the divine. Patrician families, in particular the \"Cornelii\", \"Postumii\" and \"Valerii\", monopolised the leading state priesthoods. The patrician \"Flamen Dialis\" employed the \"greater auspices\" (\"auspicia maiora\") to consult with Jupiter on significant matters of state.\nTwelve \"lesser flaminates\" (\"Flamines minores\") were open to plebeians or reserved to them. They included a \"Flamen Cerealis\" in service of Ceres, goddess of grain and growth, and protector of plebeian laws and tribunes. The priesthoods of local urban and rustic \"Compitalia\" street festivals, dedicated to the lares of local communities, were open to freedmen and slaves..\nThe \"Lex Ogulnia\" (300) gave patricians and plebeians more-or-less equal representation in the augural and pontifical colleges; other important priesthoods, such as the Quindecimviri (\"The Fifteen\"), and the \"epulones\" were opened to any member of the senatorial class. To restrain the accumulation and potential abuse of priestly powers, each \"gens\" was permitted one priesthood at a time, and the censors monitored the senators' religious activities. Magistrates who held an augurate could claim divine authority for their position and policies. In the late Republic, augury came under the control of the \"pontifices\", whose powers were increasingly woven into the civil and military \"cursus honorum\". Eventually, the office of \"pontifex maximus\" became a \"de facto\" consular prerogative.\nSome cults may have been exclusively female; for example, the rites of the Good Goddess (\"Bona Dea\"). Towards the end of the second Punic War, Rome rewarded priestesses of Demeter from \"Graeca Magna\" with Roman citizenship for training respectable, leading matrons as \"sacerdotes\" of \"Greek rites\" to Ceres. Every matron of a family (the wife of its \"pater familias\") had a religious duty to maintain the household fire, which was considered an extension of Vesta's sacred fire, tended in perpetuity by the chaste Vestal Virgins. The Vestals also made the sacrificial \"mola salsa\" employed in many State rituals, and represent an essential link between domestic and state religion. Rome's survival was thought to depend on their sacred status and ritual purity.\nTemples and festivals.\nRome's major public temples were within the city's sacred, augural boundary (\"pomerium\"), which had supposedly been marked out by Romulus, with Jupiter's approval. The Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus (\"Jupiter, Best and Greatest\") stood on the Capitoline Hill. Among the settled areas outside the \"pomerium\" was the nearby Aventine Hill. It was traditionally associated with Romulus's unfortunate twin, Remus, and in later history with the Latins, and the Roman \"plebs\". The Aventine seems to have functioned as a place for the introduction of \"foreign\" deities. In 392, Camillus established a temple there to Juno Regina, Etruscan Veii's protective goddess. Later introductions include Summanus, c.\u2009278, Vortumnus c.\u2009264, and at some time before the end of the 3rd century, Minerva. While Ceres's Aventine temple was most likely built at patrician expense, to mollify the \"plebs\", the patricians brought the Magna Mater (\"Great mother of the Gods\") to Rome as their own \"Trojan\" ancestral goddess, and installed her on the Palatine.\nRomulus was said to have pitched his augural tent atop the Palatine. Beneath its southern slopes ran the sacred way, next to the former palace of the kings (Regia), the House of the Vestals and Temple of Vesta. Close by were the Lupercal shrine and the cave where Romulus and Remus were said to have been suckled by the she-wolf. On the flat area between the Aventine and Palatine was the Circus Maximus, which hosted chariot races and religious games. Its several shrines and temples included those to Rome's indigenous sun god, Sol, the moon-goddess Luna, the grain-storage god, Consus, and the obscure goddess Murcia.\nWhereas Romans marked the passage of years with the names of their ruling consuls, their calendars marked the anniversaries of religious foundations to particular deities, the days when official business was permitted (\"fas\"), and those when it was not (\"nefas\"). The Romans observed an eight-day week; law courts were closed and markets were held on the ninth day. Each month was presided over by a particular, usually major deity. The oldest calendars were lunar.\nIn the military.\nBefore any campaign or battle, Roman commanders took auspices, or haruspices, to seek the gods' opinion regarding the likely outcome. Military success was achieved through a combination of personal and collective \"virtus\" (roughly, \"manly virtue\") and divine will. Triumphal generals dressed as Jupiter Capitolinus and laid their victor's laurels at his feet. Religious negligence, or lack of \"virtus\", provoked divine wrath and led to military disaster. Military oaths dedicated the oath-takers life to Rome's gods and people; defeated soldiers were expected to take their own lives, rather than survive as captives. Examples of \"devotio\", as performed by the Decii Mures, in which soldiers offered and gave their lives to the \"Di inferi\" (gods of the underworld) in exchange for Roman victory were celebrated as the highest good.\nCities, towns and villas.\nCity of Rome.\nLife in the Roman Republic revolved around the city of Rome. The most important governing, administrative and religious institutions were concentrated at its heart, on and around the Capitoline and Palatine Hills. The city rapidly outgrew its original sacred boundary (\"pomerium\"), and its first city walls. Rome's first aqueduct (312), built during the Punic wars crisis, provided a plentiful, clean water supply. The building of further aqueducts led to the city's expansion and the establishment of public baths (\"thermae\") as a central feature of Roman culture. The city also had several theatres, gymnasiums, and many taverns and brothels. Living space was at a premium. Some ordinary citizens and freedmen of middling income might live in modest houses but most of the population lived in apartment blocks (\"insulae,\" literally \"islands\"), where the better-off might rent an entire ground floor, and the poorest a single, possibly windowless room at the top, with few or no amenities. Nobles and rich patrons lived in spacious, well-appointed town houses; they were expected to keep \"open house\" for their peers and clients. A semi-public \"atrium\" typically functioned as a meeting-space, and a vehicle for display of wealth, artistic taste, and religious piety. Noble \"atria\" were also display areas for ancestor-masks (\"imagines\").\nMost Roman towns and cities had a forum and temples, as did the city of Rome itself. Aqueducts brought water to urban centres. Landlords generally resided in cities and left their estates in the care of farm managers.\nCulture.\nClothing.\nThe basic Roman garment was the Greek-style tunic, worn knee-length and short-sleeved (or sleeveless) for men and boys, and ankle-length and long-sleeved for women and girls. The toga was distinctively Roman and became a mark of male citizenship, a statement of social degree. Convention also dictated the type, colour and style of (ankle-boots) appropriate to each level of male citizenship.\nThe whitest, most voluminous togas were worn by the senatorial class. High-ranking magistrates, priests, and citizen's children were entitled to a purple-bordered . Triumphal generals wore an all-purple, gold-embroidered , associated with the image of Jupiter and Rome's former kings\u00a0\u2013 but only for a single day; Republican mores simultaneously fostered competitive display and attempted its containment, to preserve at least a notional equality between peers and reduce the potential threats of class envy. Most Roman citizens, particularly the lower class of plebs, opted for more comfortable and practical garments, such as tunics and cloaks.\nLuxurious and highly coloured clothing had always been available to those who could afford it, particularly women of the leisured classes. There is material evidence for cloth-of-gold (lam\u00e9) as early as the 7th century. By the 3rd century, significant quantities of raw silk were being imported from Han China. Tyrian purple, a quasi-sacred colour, was officially reserved for the border of the and for the solid purple .\nFor most Romans, even the cheapest linen or woolen clothing represented a major expense. Worn clothing was passed down the social scale until it fell to rags, and these were used for patchwork. Wool and linen were the mainstays of Roman clothing, idealised by moralists as simple and frugal. For most women, the preparation and weaving of wool were part of daily housekeeping, either for family use or for sale. In traditionalist, wealthy households, the family's spindles and looms were positioned in the semi-public reception area (), so the and her could demonstrate their industry and frugality: a largely symbolic and moral activity for those of their class, rather than practical necessity.\nAs the Republic wore on, its trade, territories and wealth increased. Roman conservatives deplored the apparent erosion of traditional, class-based dress distinctions, and an increasing Roman appetite for luxurious fabrics and exotic \"foreign\" styles among all classes, including their own. Towards the end of the Republic, the ultra-traditionalist Cato the Younger publicly protested the self-indulgence of his peers, and the loss of Republican \"manly virtues\", by wearing a \"skimpy\" dark woolen toga, without tunic or footwear.\nFood and dining.\nModern study of the dietary habits during the Republic are hampered by various factors. Few writings have survived, and because different components of their diet are more or less likely to be preserved, the archaeological record cannot be relied on. In the early Republic, the main meal (cena) essentially consisted of a kind of porridge, the \"puls\". The simplest kind would be made from emmer, water, salt and fat. The wealthy commonly ate their \"puls\" with eggs, cheese, and honey, and it was also occasionally served with meat or fish. Over the course of the Republican period, the \"cena\" developed into two courses: the main course and a dessert with fruit and seafood (e.g. molluscs or shrimp). By the late Republic, it was usual for the meal to be served in three parts: an appetiser (\"gustatio\"), main course (\"primae mensae\"), and dessert (\"secundae mensae\").\nDuring the mid-to-later Republic, wine was increasingly treated as a necessity rather than a luxury. In ancient Rome, wine was normally mixed with water immediately before drinking, since the fermentation was not controlled and the alcohol proof was high. Sour wine mixed with water and herbs (\"posca\") was a popular drink for the lower classes and a staple part of the Roman soldier's ration. Beer (\"cerevisia\") was known but considered vulgar, and was associated with barbarians.\nFrom 123\u00a0BC, a ration of unmilled wheat (as much as 33\u00a0kg), known as the \"frumentatio\", was distributed to as many as 200,000 people every month by the Roman state.\nEducation and language.\nRome's original native language was early Latin, the language of the Italic Latins. Most surviving Latin literature is written in Classical Latin, a highly stylised and polished literary language which developed from early and vernacular spoken Latin, from the 1st century. Most Latin speakers used Vulgar Latin, which significantly differed from Classical Latin in grammar, vocabulary, and eventually pronunciation.\nFollowing various military conquests in the Greek East, Romans adapted a number of Greek educational precepts to their own fledgling system. Strenuous, disciplined physical training helped prepare boys of citizen class for their eventual citizenship and a military career. Girls generally received instruction from their mothers in the art of spinning, weaving, and sewing. Schooling of a more formal sort began around 200. Education began at the age of around six, and in the next six to seven years, boys and girls were expected to learn reading, writing and counting. By the age of twelve, they would be learning Latin, Greek, grammar and literature, followed by training for public speaking. Effective oratory and good Latin were highly valued among the elite, and were essential to a career in law or politics.\nArts.\nIn the 3rd century, Greek art taken as the spoils of war became popular, and many Roman homes were decorated with landscapes by Greek artists.\nOver time, Roman architecture was modified as their urban requirements changed, and the civil engineering and building construction technology became developed and refined. Factors such as wealth and high population densities in cities forced the ancient Romans to discover new architectural solutions of their own. The use of vaults and arches, together with a sound knowledge of building materials, enabled them to achieve unprecedented successes in the construction of imposing infrastructure for public use. These were reproduced at a smaller scale in the most important towns and cities in the Roman Republic. The administrative structure and wealth of the Empire made possible very large projects even in locations remote from the main centres.\nLiterature.\nEarly Roman literature was influenced heavily by Greek authors. From the mid-Republic, Roman authors followed Greek models, to produce free-verse and verse-form plays and other in Latin; for example, Livius Andronicus wrote tragedies and comedies. The earliest Latin works to have survived intact are the comedies of Plautus, written during the mid-Republic. Works of well-known, popular playwrights were sometimes commissioned for performance at religious festivals; many of these were satyr plays, based on Greek models and Greek myths. The poet Naevius may be said to have written the first Roman epic poem, although Ennius was the first Roman poet to write an epic in an adapted Latin hexameter. However, only fragments of Ennius' epic, the \"Annales\", have survived, yet both Naevius and Ennius influenced later Latin epic, especially Virgil's \"Aeneid\". Lucretius, in his \"On the Nature of Things\", explicated the tenets of Epicurean philosophy.\nThe politician, poet and philosopher Cicero's literary output was remarkably prolific and so influential on contemporary and later literature that the period from 83 to 43\u00a0BC has been called the \"Age of Cicero\". His oratory continues to influence modern speakers, while his philosophical works, particularly Cicero's Latin adaptations of Greek Platonic and Epicurean works, influenced many later philosophers. Other prominent writers of this period include the grammarian and historian of religion Varro, the politician, general and military commentator Julius Caesar, the historian Sallust and the love poet Catullus.\nSports and entertainment.\nThe Campus Martius was Rome's track and field playground, where youth assembled to play and exercise, which included jumping, wrestling, boxing and racing. Equestrian sports, throwing, and swimming were also preferred physical activities. In the countryside, pastimes included fishing and hunting. Board games played in Rome included dice (Tesserae or Tali), Roman chess (Latrunculi), Roman checkers (Calculi), Tic-tac-toe (Terni Lapilli), and Ludus duodecim scriptorum and Tabula, predecessors of backgammon. Other activities included chariot races, and musical and theatrical performances.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25817", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25817", "title": "RUF", "text": "Ruf or RUF may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25818", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25818", "title": "Rock and Roll", "text": ""}
{"id": "25819", "revid": "49417305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25819", "title": "Rickenbacker", "text": "Guitar manufacturer based in California\nRickenbacker International Corporation is a string instrument manufacturer based in Santa Ana, California, United States. Rickenbacker is the first known maker of electric guitars, having introduced an electric lap steel guitar in 1932, and produces a range of electric guitar and bass guitar models.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nAdolph Rickenbacker and George Beauchamp founded the company in 1931 as the Ro-Pat-In Corporation (ElectRo-Patent-Instruments) to sell electric lap steel guitars. Beauchamp designed his instruments in collaboration with Paul Barth and Harry Watson, who had been active in the National String Instrument Corporation. The Ro-Pat-In brand name would eventually transform into the \"Rickenbacher\" brand, and ultimately the modern 'Rickenbacker\u2019 was adopted. Early examples bear the brand name \"Electro\" or \"Electro String\".\nThe early instruments were nicknamed \"Frying Pan\" because of their long necks and small circular bodies. They are the first known solid body electric guitars. They had a single pickup with two magnetized steel covers, shaped like horseshoes, that arched over the strings. By the time Rickenbacker ceased producing the \"frying pan\" in 1939, they had made several thousand units.\nElectro String also sold amplifiers to accompany their guitars. A Los Angeles radio manufacturer named Van Nest designed the first Electro String production-model amplifier. Shortly thereafter, design engineer Ralph Robertson refined the amplifiers, and by the 1940s at least four different Rickenbacker models were available. James B. Lansing of the Lansing Manufacturing Company designed the speaker in the Rickenbacker professional model. During the early 1940s, Rickenbacker amps were sometimes repaired by Leo Fender, whose repair shop evolved into the Fender Electric Instrument Manufacturing Company.\nEarly history.\nGeorge Beauchamp was a vaudeville performer, violinist, and steel guitarist who, like many acoustic guitarists in the 1920s, was looking for some way to make his instrument cut through an orchestra. He first conceived of a guitar fitted with a phonograph-like amplifying horn. He approached inventor and violin-maker John Dopyera, who made a prototype that was, by all accounts, a failure. Their next collaboration involved experiments with mounting three conical aluminum resonators into the body of the guitar beneath the bridge. These efforts produced an instrument that so pleased Beauchamp that he told Dopyera that they should go into business to manufacture them. After further refinements, Dopyera applied for a patent on the so-called tri-cone guitar on April 9, 1927. Thereafter, Dopyera and his brothers made the tri-cone guitars in their Los Angeles shop, under the brand name \"National\". On January 26, 1928, the National String Instrument Corporation opened, with a new factory located near a metal-stamping shop owned by Adolph Rickenbacher and staffed by experienced and competent craftsmen. The company made Spanish and Hawaiian style tri-cone guitars as well as four-string tenor guitars, mandolins, and ukuleles.\nAdolph Rickenbacher was born in Basel, Switzerland in 1887 and emigrated to the United States to live with relatives after the death of his parents. Sometime after moving to Los Angeles in 1918, he changed his surname to \"Rickenbacker\". In 1925, Rickenbacker and two partners formed the Rickenbacker Manufacturing Company and incorporated it in 1927. By the time he met George Beauchamp and began manufacturing metal bodies for the \"Nationals\" being produced by the National String Instruments Corporation, Rickenbacker was a highly skilled production engineer and machinist. Adolph Rickenbacker became a shareholder in National and, with the assistance of his Rickenbacker Manufacturing Company, National boosted production to fifty guitars a day.\nUnfortunately, National's line of instruments was not well diversified and, as demand for the expensive and hard-to-manufacture tri-cone guitars began to slip, the company realized that it would need to produce instruments with a lower production cost to remain competitive. Dissatisfaction with what John Dopyera felt was mismanagement led him to resign from National in January 1929. He subsequently formed the Dobro Manufacturing Corporation, later called Dobro Corporation, Ltd, and began to manufacture his own line of resonator-equipped instruments (dobros). Patent infringement disagreements between National and Dobro led to a lawsuit in 1929, with Dobro suing National for $2 million in damages. Problems within National's management, as well as pressure from the deepening Great Depression, led to a production slowdown at National. This ultimately resulted in part of the company's fractured management structure organizing support for George Beauchamp's newest project: development of a fully electric guitar.\nBy the late twenties, the pursuit of electrified instruments had been accelerating and experimental banjo, violin, and acoustic guitar pickups had been growing works in progress. George Beauchamp had experimented with electric amplification as early as 1925, but his early efforts utilizing microphones, did not produce his desired effects. Beauchamp also pursued constructing a one-string test guitar out of a 2X4 piece of lumber and an electric phonograph pickup. As problems at National became more apparent, Beauchamp's home experiments became more rigorous, and he began to attend night classes in electronics and collaborate with fellow National employee Paul Barth. When they finally developed a prototype electric pickup that met their satisfaction, Beauchamp asked former National shop craftsman Harry Watson to make a wooden neck and body to hold the pickup. Somebody nicknamed it the \"fry-pan\" because of its shape, though Rickenbacker liked to call it the pancake. The final design Beauchamp and Barth developed was an electric pickup consisting of a pair of horseshoe-shaped magnets that enclosed the pickup coil and completely surrounded the strings.\nFry-pan &amp; Electro-Spanish.\nAt the end of 1931, Beauchamp, Barth, Rickenbacker and several other individuals banded together and formed the Ro-Pat-In Corporation (elekt\"RO\"-\"PAT\"ent-\"IN\"struments) to manufacture and distribute electrically amplified musical instruments, with an emphasis on their newly developed A-25 Hawaiian Guitar, often referred to as the \"fry-pan\" lap-steel electric guitar, as well as an Electric Spanish (standard) model and companion amplifiers. In the summer of 1932, Ro-Pat-In began to manufacture cast aluminum production versions of the Fry-Pan as well as a lesser number of standard Spanish Electrics also known as \"Electro-Spanish\" models, built from wooden bodies similar to those made in Chicago for the National Company. These instruments constitute the origin of the electric guitar by virtue of their string-driven electro-magnetic pick-ups. In 1933 the Ro-Pat-In company's name was changed to Electro String Instrument Corporation and its instruments were labeled simply as \"Electro\". In 1934 the name of \"Rickenbacker\" was added in honor of the company's principal partner, Adolph Rickenbacker.\nDuring the early production of the A-22 Fry-Pan, Beauchamp and Rickenbacker would experiment with wooden-bodied Spanish guitars and solid body prototypes; ultimately giving birth to the Electro-Spanish Model B and the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts. Both models had been experimental, produced as early as 1931, and officially released in 1935. The Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts model was subject to a limited production of forty-six. There were several new design elements found on the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts. The instrument was the first of its kind to be named for an endorser. While most arch-top guitars had 14-fret neck joints, the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts fingerboard joined the body at the 17th fret allowing much greater access to the higher frets, creating a full 25-1/2\" inch scale. This addition made the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts the first production full-scale (25-1/2\") electrified guitar.\nAnother new feature on the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts is the stock Kauffman Vib-rola tailpiece, the world's first patented tremolo (https://). The Ken Roberts is the first instrument of any type to feature a hand-operated vibrato as standard equipment. It also marks Rickenbacker's first link to the unit's originator, Clayton Doc Kauffman, who would become a design collaborator for the company a couple of years later.\nModel B Electric.\nIn 1935, the company introduced several new models including the Model \"B\" Electric Spanish guitar, which is the first known solid-body electric guitar. Because the original aluminum Fry-Pans were susceptible to tuning problems from expansion of the metal under hot performing lights, they made many of the new models from cast Bakelite, an early synthetic plastic used in bowling balls.\nRickenbacker continued to specialize in steel guitars well into the 1950s, but with the advent of rock and roll, F.C. Hall, owner of Radio &amp; Television Equipment Co. (Radio-Tel), purchased the Electro String Company from Adolph Rickenbacker in 1953. Hall overhauled the business and began focusing on standard electric and acoustic guitars rather than the steel guitars the company pioneered. In 1956, Rickenbacker introduced two instruments with the \"neck through body\" construction that became a standard feature of many of the company's products, including the Combo 400 guitar, the model 4000 bass, and, later, the 600 series. Neck Thru consists of a single wooden piece from the neck through the central body section.\nIn 1958, Hall introduced prototype called \"capris\" (the same name of Hall family's cat from the pronunciation of the French noun for whim).\nIn 1963, Rickenbacker developed an electric twelve-string guitar with an innovative headstock design that fit all twelve machine heads onto a standard-length headstock by mounting alternate pairs of machine heads at right-angles to each other. After including the twelve-string guitar in the Rickenbacker 300 Series.\nGuitars and 1960s rock and roll.\nIn the 1960s, Rickenbacker benefited tremendously when a couple of Rickenbacker guitar models became permanently intertwined with the sound and look of the Beatles. In Hamburg in 1960, Beatles guitarist John Lennon bought a Rickenbacker 325, which he used throughout the early days of the Beatles. He eventually had the guitar's natural alder body refinished in black and made other modifications, including adding a Bigsby vibrato tailpiece and regularly changing the control knobs. Lennon played this guitar for the Beatles' 1964 debut on \"The Ed Sullivan Show,\" as well as for their third Sullivan appearance, pre-taped the same day but broadcast two weeks later. During Lennon's post-Beatles years in New York, he had this guitar restored to its original natural wood finish and the cracked gold pickguard replaced with a white one.\nRickenbacker made two new 325s for Lennon and shipped them to him. At the same time, the Beatles were in Miami Beach, Florida, on the same 1964 visit to the United States: a one-off custom 12-string 325 model and an updated six-string model with modified electronics and vibrato. He used this newer six-string model on the Beatles' second appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show.\nLennon accidentally dropped the second 325 model during a 1964 Christmas show, breaking the headstock. While it was being repaired, Rickenbacker's UK distributor Rose Morris gave Lennon a model 1966 (the export version of a 325, available exclusively in a red finish and with an F-hole). Lennon later gave the 1966 to fellow Beatle Ringo Starr.\nBeatles guitarist George Harrison bought a 420 during a brief visit to the United States in 1963. In February 1964, while in New York City, F.C. Hall of Rickenbacker met with the band and their manager and gave Harrison a 360/12, the second electric twelve-string built by Rickenbacker. This instrument became a key part of the Beatles' sound on their LP \"A Hard Day's Night\" and other Beatles songs through late 1964. Harrison played this guitar sporadically throughout the remainder of his life.\nOn August 21, 1965, during a Beatles concert tour, Randy Resnick of B-Sharp, a Minnesota music store, presented Harrison with a second model 360/12 FG \"New Style\" 12-string electric guitar, distinguishable from Harrison's first 12-string by its rounded cutaways and edges. A television documentary produced by KSTP-TV in Minneapolis documents the event. Harrison used this guitar on the song \"If I Needed Someone\" and during the Beatles' 1966 tours. This 12-string's whereabouts are unknown, as it was stolen at some point after the band ceased touring.\nAfter the Beatles' 1965 summer tour, Paul McCartney frequently used a left-handed 1964 4001S FG Rickenbacker bass rather than the lightweight H\u00f6fner basses he had used previously. The instrument gained popularity among other bassists influenced by McCartney's highly melodic style.\nIn 1967, McCartney gave his 4001 a psychedelic paint job, as seen in the promo film for \"Hello, Goodbye\" and in the \"Magical Mystery Tour\" film. A year or so later, someone sanded off the finish. A second, over-zealous sanding in the early 1970s removed the \"points\" of the bass's cutaways. McCartney used the Rickenbacker bass during his time with Wings and through his solo career. He continues to record with it to this day.\nPartly because of the Beatles' popularity and their consistent use of the Rickenbacker brand, many guitarists adopted them, including John Fogerty (Creedence Clearwater Revival), Paul Kantner (Jefferson Airplane), and John Entwistle and Pete Townshend of The Who. As both the British Invasion and the 1960s wound down, Rickenbacker guitars fell out of fashion for a time. Rickenbacker basses, however, remained popular through the 1970s and beyond. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Rickenbacker guitars experienced a renaissance as new wave and jangle pop groups turned to them for their distinctive chime. Demand is particularly high among retro groups influenced by the sound and look of the 1960s.\nIn 1971, Rickenbacker offered their 331LS \"Lightshow\" model and matching bass (model 4005LS), which contained a three-channel light organ with a dimmer. Each channel corresponded to the pitch of the strings being played. The soundboard on these models was replaced with thin Plexiglas cutouts over a translucent moire diffraction material.\nHallmarks of Rickenbackers.\nSome Rickenbacker models feature a stereo \"Rick-O-Sound\" output socket, allowing each pickup to be routed to different amplifiers or effects chains. Another feature is the use of two truss rods to correct twists and curvature in the neck. Rickenbacker guitars typically have a set neck made of multiple pieces of wood laminated together lengthwise, while their basses have a one-piece neck that extends through the entire body. Rickenbacker instruments are known for narrower necks (41.4\u00a0mm versus 43\u00a0mm at the nut for most competitors) and lacquered rosewood fingerboards, giving them a different feel.\nKnown for their bright jangle and chime, early Rickenbacker guitars were often favored by folk rock, and British Invasion bands such as the Searchers, the Beatles and the Who. The early models were equipped with low-output toaster pickups. With the late-1960s advent of heavy rock, these were phased out circa 1969\u201370, and replaced by high-gain pickups with twice the output. Still, the early models were viewed by Pete Townshend as pivotal in his refinement of feedback techniques and the eventual development of the Marshall sound.\nSince the 1960s, a diverse cross-section of artists have played Rickenbacker guitars. In 1979, Tom Petty and Mike Campbell of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers used vintage 1960s models to attain that toaster-pickup jangle. The high-gain pickup sound is associated with acts such as the Jam and R.E.M.\nBasses.\nThe 4000 series were the first Rickenbacker bass guitars, introduced in 1957. They followed the 4000 with the 4001 (in 1961), 4002 (limited edition bass introduced in 1977), 4008 (an eight-string model introduced in the mid-1970s), 4003 (in 1979, replacing the 4001 entirely in 1986 and still in production in 2024), and most recently the 4004 series. They also made the 4005, a hollow-bodied bass guitar (from 1965 to 1984)\u2014which did not resemble other 4000 series basses, but rather the new style 360-370 guitars. The 4001S (introduced 1964) was basically a 4001 but with no binding and dot fingerboard inlays. It was exported to England as the RM1999. However, Paul McCartney received one of the early 4001S instruments (his unit was left-handed, and later modified to include a zero fret). Along with McCartney, other early adopters of the 4001 were Roger Waters of Pink Floyd, John Entwistle of The Who, Pete Quaife of The Kinks, Chris Squire of Yes (who technically used the RM1999 British import) and Geddy Lee of Rush.\nThe model 4003S (\"standard\") arrived in 1985, was discontinued in 2000, and relaunched in 2015. This was similar to the 4001S with its dot neck markers and no binding. From 1985 to 2002, the 4003 and 4003S had black hardware and black binding options available. Later special editions included the 4003 Blue Boy, 4003 CS (Chris Squire), Blackstar, Shadow Bass, Tuxedo and 4003 Redneck.\nRickenbacker basses have a distinctive tone. The 4001 and 4003 basses have neck-through construction. The 3000 series, made from the mid-1970s to mid-1980s, were cheaper instruments with bolt-on 21-fret necks. There was also a glued-in \"set neck\" 4000 version in 1975-76 (neck set like a Gibson Les Paul), which featured a 20-fret neck, dot inlays, no binding (similar to the 4001S) and only a single bridge-position mono pickup. Fred Turner of Bachman-Turner Overdrive used the 4000 extensively on the \"Not Fragile\" album, as seen in a promotional clip for \"You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet.\" This bass also appears on the gatefold sleeve of \"Four Wheel Drive\".\nIn the 1970s, the Rickenbacker bass became a staple of progressive rock, as exemplified by British bassists Mike Rutherford (Genesis) and Chris Squire (Yes). Squire was one of the first to run a Rickenbacker in stereo by splitting the signal, sending the signal through both a guitar amp and a bass amp. Combined with his aggressive picking technique on Rotosound roundwound strings, the effect was a growling, grinding, \"concrete mixer\" tone that continues to be admired and emulated.\nIn the hard rock vein, Deep Purple's Roger Glover was a prominent Rickenbacker aficionado. Geddy Lee of Rush used a Rickenbacker on the band's earlier material. Another enthusiast was Metallica bassist Cliff Burton, whose heavily modified 4001, red with white hardware and trim, debuted during the group's \"Kill 'Em All\" era. Also noteworthy was Mot\u00f6rhead vocalist/bassist Ian \"Lemmy\" Kilmister, for whom Rickenbacker produced a 60-bass run of \"Lemmy Kilmister\" signature basses: the 4004LK, fitted with three pickups, gold hardware, and elaborate wood carving in the shape of oak leaves. In 2019, the company produced a 420-bass run of Al Cisneros signature basses honoring the prominent Sleep and Om bassist, a long-time Rickenbacker proponent. Cisneros's 4003AC model features a signature pickguard, green inlays on the fingerboard, and a removable thumb rest.\nThe sound of Rickenbacker basses featured early on in the UK punk/new wave explosion of the late 1970s and early 80s and was used by: Glen Matlock (Sex Pistols), Paul Simonon (The Clash), Peter Hook (Joy Division), Bruce Foxton (The Jam), Paul Gray (The Damned, Eddie &amp; the Hot Rods), Tony James (Generation X), Michael Bradley (The Undertones), Youth (Killing Joke) and in the U.S., Mike Mills (R.E.M.) and Kira Roessler (Black Flag).\nBrazilian bassist Alex Malheiros from Azymuth used a 4001 bass during the band's early years (most notably between 1972 and 1977). His very rich approach to samba, jazz and funk has some echoes of Chris Squire and Paul McCartney these genres can be tackled by the instrument; it is not only a rock bass and, in the right hands, can be good fit for many genres.\nAcoustic guitars.\nRickenbacker has produced a number of uniquely designed and distinctively trimmed acoustic guitars. Although a small number of Rickenbacker acoustics were sold in the 1950s and were seen in the hands of stars like Ricky Nelson and Sam Cooke, the company concentrated on their electric guitar and western steel guitar business from the early 1960s onward. From about 1959 through 1994, very few Rickenbacker acoustic guitars were made.\nIn 1995, an effort was made to re-introduce Rickenbacker acoustics, with factory production beginning in their Santa Ana manufacturing facility in 1996. Four models of flat top acoustic Rickenbackers were depicted in factory literature (maple or rosewood back and sides, jumbo or dreadnaught shape). Each of these four models was also available in both six- and twelve-string configurations, yielding a range of eight distinct instruments. (The 760J \"Jazzbo\", an archtop model, was only built as a prototype, with three examples known to exist.) It is estimated that fewer than 500 Rickenbacker acoustic guitars were built before the factory shut down the acoustic department in mid-2006.\nIn late 2006, Rickenbacker gave a license to build Rickenbacker-branded acoustics to Paul Wilczynski, a luthier with a workshop in San Francisco, California. He continued to offer all eight models of the Rickenbacker flat top guitar line, building each instrument to order, until his license expired on February 1, 2013.\nPickups.\nRickenbacker manufactures three pickups for their current standard models: high-gain single-coil, Vintage Toaster single coil, and humbucking. All three pickup designs share the same footprint, so they can retrofit into most current or vintage models. The tone varies from one style to the next, partially because of the types of magnets used but also due to the amount of wire wound around the pickup's bobbin.\nMost contemporary models come with single-coil high-gain pickups as standard equipment. Many post-British-Invasion players such as Peter Buck, Paul Weller, and Johnny Marr have used instruments with these pickups. Rickenbacker's HB1 humbucker/dual coil pickup has a similar tone to a Gibson mini-humbucker pickup, and comes standard on the Rickenbacker 650C and 4004 basses. Vintage reissue models, and some signature models, come with Toaster Top pickups, which resemble a classic two-slotted chrome toaster. Despite their slightly lower output, Toasters produce a brighter, cleaner sound, and are generally seen as key to obtaining the true British Invasion guitar tone, as they were original equipment of the era.\nIn addition to the standard pickups, vintage reissue bass models are equipped with Horseshoe wrap-around style pickups, very similar to the pickups on the earliest Rickenbacker Frying Pan models.\nTrademark enforcement.\nRickenbacker are known for their efforts to prevent the sale of counterfeits of their instruments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25821", "revid": "25607489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25821", "title": "Romeo and Juliet", "text": "Tragedy by William Shakespeare\nThe Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet, often shortened to Romeo and Juliet, is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare about the romance between two young Italians from feuding families. It was among Shakespeare's most popular plays during his lifetime and, along with \"Hamlet\", is one of his most frequently performed. Today, the title characters are regarded as archetypal young lovers.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" belongs to a tradition of tragic romances stretching back to antiquity. The plot is based on an Italian tale written by Matteo Bandello, translated into verse as \"The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet\" by Arthur Brooke in 1562, and retold in prose in \"Palace of Pleasure\" by William Painter in 1567. Shakespeare borrowed heavily from both but expanded the plot by developing a number of supporting characters, in particular Mercutio and Paris. Believed to have been written between 1591 and 1595, the play was first published in a quarto version in 1597. The text of the first quarto version was of poor quality, however, and later editions corrected the text to conform more closely with Shakespeare's original.\nShakespeare's use of poetic dramatic structure (including effects such as switching between comedy and tragedy to heighten tension, the expansion of minor characters, and numerous sub-plots to embellish the story) has been praised as an early sign of his dramatic skill. The play ascribes different poetic forms to different characters, sometimes changing the form as the character develops. Romeo, for example, grows more adept at the sonnet over the course of the play.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" has been adapted numerous times for stage, film, musical, and opera venues. During the English Restoration, it was revived and heavily revised by William Davenant. David Garrick's 18th-century version also modified several scenes, removing material then considered indecent, and Georg Benda's \"Romeo und Julie\" omitted much of the action and used a happy ending. Performances in the 19th century, including Charlotte Cushman's, restored the original text and focused on greater realism. John Gielgud's 1935 version kept very close to Shakespeare's text and used Elizabethan costumes and staging to enhance the drama. In the 20th and into the 21st century, the play has been adapted to film in versions as diverse as George Cukor's \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1936), Franco Zeffirelli's \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1968), Baz Luhrmann's \"Romeo + Juliet\" (1996), and Carlo Carlei's \"Romeo &amp; Juliet\" (2013).\nCharacters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRuling house of Verona\nHouse of Capulet\nHouse of Montague\nOthers\nSynopsis.\nThe play, set in Verona, Italy, begins with a street brawl between Montague and Capulet servants who, like the masters they serve, are sworn enemies. Prince Escalus of Verona intervenes and declares that further breach of the peace will be punishable by death. Later, Count Paris talks to Capulet about marrying his daughter Juliet, but Capulet asks Paris to wait another two years and invites him to attend a planned Capulet ball. Lady Capulet and Juliet's nurse try to persuade Juliet to accept Paris's courtship.\nMeanwhile, Benvolio talks with his cousin Romeo, Montague's son, about Romeo's recent depression. Benvolio discovers that it stems from unrequited infatuation for a girl named Rosaline, one of Capulet's nieces. Persuaded by Benvolio and Mercutio, Romeo attends the ball at the Capulet house in hopes of meeting Rosaline. However, Romeo instead meets and falls in love with Juliet. Juliet's cousin, Tybalt, is enraged at Romeo for sneaking into the ball but is stopped from killing Romeo by Juliet's father, who does not wish to shed blood in his house. After the ball, in what is now famously known as the \"balcony scene\", Romeo sneaks into the Capulet orchard and overhears Juliet at her window vowing her love to him in spite of her family's hatred of the Montagues. Romeo makes himself known to her, and they agree to be married. With the help of Friar Laurence, who hopes to reconcile the two families through their children's union, they are secretly married the next day.\nTybalt, meanwhile, still incensed that Romeo had sneaked into the Capulet ball, challenges him to a duel. Romeo, now considering Tybalt his kinsman, refuses to fight. Mercutio is offended by Tybalt's insolence, as well as Romeo's \"vile submission\", and accepts the duel on Romeo's behalf. Mercutio is fatally wounded when Romeo attempts to break up the fight, and declares a curse upon both households before he dies (\"A plague on both your houses!\"). Grief-stricken and racked with guilt, Romeo confronts and slays Tybalt.\nMontague argues that Romeo has justly executed Tybalt for the murder of Mercutio. The Prince, now having lost a kinsman in the warring families' feud, exiles Romeo from Verona under penalty of death if he ever returns. Romeo secretly spends the night in Juliet's chamber, where they consummate their marriage. Capulet, misinterpreting Juliet's grief, agrees to marry her to Count Paris and threatens to disown her when she refuses to become Paris's \"joyful bride\". When she then pleads for the marriage to be delayed, her mother rejects her.\nJuliet visits Friar Laurence for help, and he offers her a potion that will put her into a deathlike coma or catalepsy for \"two and forty hours\". The friar promises to send a messenger, Friar John, to inform Romeo of the plan so that he can rejoin her when she awakens. On the night before the wedding, she takes the drug and, when discovered apparently dead, she is laid in the family crypt.\nFriar John, however, is unable to deliver the message about Juliet to Romeo because the onset of a plague makes travel impossible. Instead, Romeo learns of Juliet's apparent death from his servant, Balthasar. Heartbroken, Romeo buys poison from an apothecary and goes to the Capulet crypt. He encounters Paris who has come to mourn Juliet privately. Believing Romeo to be a vandal, Paris confronts him and, in the ensuing battle, Romeo kills Paris. Still believing Juliet to be dead, he drinks the poison. Juliet then awakens and, discovering that Romeo is dead, stabs herself with his dagger and joins him in death. The feuding families and the Prince meet at the tomb to find all three dead. Friar Laurence recounts the story of the two \"star-cross'd lovers\", fulfilling the curse that Mercutio swore. The families are reconciled by their children's deaths and agree to end their violent feud. The play ends with the Prince's elegy for the lovers: \"For never was a story of more woe / Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.\"\nSources.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" borrows from a tradition of tragic love stories dating back to antiquity. One of these is Pyramus and Thisbe, from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", which contains parallels to Shakespeare's story: the lovers' parents despise each other, and Pyramus falsely believes his lover Thisbe is dead. The myth of Pyramus and Thisbe was inspired in turn by a pattern common in Hellenistic love tales in which a woman dies and her lover dies or kills himself, usually due to causing her death in the first place, as seen with the myths of Cyanippus and Leucone or Anthippe and Cichyrus. The \"Ephesiaca\" of Xenophon of Ephesus, written in the 3rd century, also contains several similarities to the play, including the separation of the lovers, and a potion that induces a deathlike sleep.\nOne of the earliest references to the names \"Montague\" and \"Capulet\" is from Dante's \"Divine Comedy\", who mentions the Montecchi (\"Montagues\") and the Cappelletti (\"Capulets\") in canto six of \"Purgatorio\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Come and see, you who are negligent,\nMontagues and Capulets, Monaldi and Filippeschi\nOne lot already grieving, the other in fear.&lt;/poem&gt;\nHowever, the reference is part of a polemic against what Dante saw as moral decay of Florence, Lombardy, and the Italian states in general; through his characters, Dante aimed to chastise Albert I of Germany for neglecting what Dante felt were his responsibilities towards Italy (\"you who are negligent\") as \"King of the Romans\", as well as successive popes for their encroachment from purely spiritual affairs, thus leading to a climate of incessant bickering and warfare between rival political parties in Lombardy. History records the name of the family \"Montague\" as being lent to such a political party in Verona, but that of the \"Capulets\" as from a Cremonese family, both of whom play out their conflict in Lombardy as a whole rather than within the confines of Verona. Allied to rival political factions, the parties are grieving (\"One lot already grieving\") because their endless warfare has led to the destruction of both parties, rather than a grief from the loss of their ill-fated offspring as the play sets forth, which appears to be a solely poetic creation within this context.\nThe earliest known version of the \"Romeo and Juliet\" tale akin to Shakespeare's play is the story of Mariotto and Ganozza by Masuccio Salernitano, in the 33rd novel of his \"Il Novellino\" published in 1476. Salernitano sets the story in Siena and insists its events took place in his own lifetime. His version of the story includes the secret marriage, the colluding friar, the fray where a prominent citizen is killed, Mariotto's exile, Ganozza's forced marriage, the potion plot, and the crucial message that goes astray. In this version, Mariotto is caught and beheaded and Ganozza dies of grief.\nLuigi da Porto (1485\u20131529) adapted the story as \"Giulietta e Romeo\" and included it in his \"Historia novellamente ritrovata di due nobili amanti\" \"(A Newly-Discovered History of two Noble Lovers\"), written in 1524 and published posthumously in 1531 in Venice. Da Porto drew on \"Pyramus and Thisbe\", Boccaccio's \"Decameron\", and Salernitano's \"Mariotto e Ganozza\", but it is likely that his story is also autobiographical: He was a soldier present at a ball on 26 February 1511, at a residence of the pro-Venice Savorgnan clan in Udine, following a peace ceremony attended by the opposing pro-Imperial Strumieri clan. There, Da Porto fell in love with Lucina, a Savorgnan daughter, but the family feud frustrated their courtship. The next morning, the Savorgnans led an attack on the city, and many members of the Strumieri were murdered. Years later, still half-paralyzed from a battle-wound, Luigi wrote \"Giulietta e Romeo\" in Montorso Vicentino (from which he could see the \"castles\" of Verona), dedicating the \"novella\" to the \"bellisima e leggiadra\" (the beautiful and graceful) Lucina Savorgnan. Da Porto presented his tale as historically factual and claimed it took place at least a century earlier than Salernitano had it, in the days Verona was ruled by Bartolomeo della Scala (anglicized as Prince Escalus).\nDa Porto presented the narrative in close to its modern form, including the names of the lovers, the rival families of Montecchi and Capuleti (Cappelletti) and the location in Verona. He named the friar Laurence (\"frate Lorenzo\") and introduced the characters Mercutio (\"Marcuccio Guertio\"), Tybalt (\"Tebaldo Cappelletti\"), Count Paris (\"conte (Paride) di \"), the faithful servant, and Giulietta's nurse. Da Porto originated the remaining basic elements of the story: the feuding families, Romeo\u2014left by his mistress\u2014meeting Giulietta at a dance at her house, the love scenes (including the balcony scene), the periods of despair, Romeo killing Giulietta's cousin (Tebaldo), and the families' reconciliation after the lovers' suicides. In da Porto's version, Romeo takes poison and Giulietta keeps her breath until she dies.\nIn 1554, Matteo Bandello published the second volume of his \"Novelle\", which included his version of \"Giulietta e Romeo\", probably written between 1531 and 1545. Bandello lengthened and weighed down the plot while leaving the storyline basically unchanged (though he did introduce Benvolio). Bandello's story was translated into French by Pierre Boaistuau in 1559 in the first volume of his \"Histoires Tragiques\". Boaistuau adds much moralising and sentiment, and the characters indulge in rhetorical outbursts.\nIn his 1562 narrative poem \"The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet\", Arthur Brooke translated Boaistuau faithfully but adjusted it to reflect parts of Chaucer's \"Troilus and Criseyde\". There was a trend among writers and playwrights to publish works based on Italian \"novelle\"\u2014Italian tales were very popular among theatre-goers\u2014and Shakespeare may well have been familiar with William Painter's 1567 collection of Italian tales titled \"Palace of Pleasure\". This collection included a version in prose of the \"Romeo and Juliet\" story named \"The goodly History of the true and constant love of Romeo and Juliett\". Shakespeare took advantage of this popularity: \"The Merchant of Venice\", \"Much Ado About Nothing\", \"All's Well That Ends Well\", \"Measure for Measure\", and \"Romeo and Juliet\" are all from Italian \"novelle\". \"Romeo and Juliet\" is a dramatization of Brooke's translation, and Shakespeare follows the poem closely but adds detail to several major and minor characters (the Nurse and Mercutio in particular).\nChristopher Marlowe's \"Hero and Leander\" and \"Dido, Queen of Carthage\", both similar stories written in Shakespeare's day, are thought to be less of a direct influence, although they may have helped create an atmosphere in which tragic love stories could thrive.\nDate and text.\nIt is unknown when exactly Shakespeare wrote \"Romeo and Juliet\". Juliet's Nurse refers to an earthquake she says occurred 11 years ago. This may refer to the Dover Straits earthquake of 1580, which would date that particular line to 1591. Other earthquakes\u2014both in England and in Verona\u2014have been proposed in support of the different dates. But the play's stylistic similarities with \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" and other plays conventionally dated around 1594\u201395, place its composition sometime between 1591 and 1595. One conjecture is that Shakespeare may have begun a draft in 1591, which he completed in 1595.\nShakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\" was published in two quarto editions prior to the publication of the First Folio of 1623. These are referred to as Q1 and Q2. The first printed edition, Q1, appeared in early 1597, printed by John Danter. Because its text contains numerous differences from the later editions, it is labelled a so-called 'bad quarto'; the 20th-century editor T. J. B. Spencer described it as \"a detestable text, probably a reconstruction of the play from the imperfect memories of one or two of the actors\", suggesting that it had been pirated for publication. An alternative explanation for Q1's shortcomings is that the play (like many others of the time) may have been heavily edited before performance by the playing company. However, \"the theory, formulated by [Alfred] Pollard,\" that the 'bad quarto' was reconstructed from memory by some of the actors is now under attack. Alternative theories are that some or all of 'the bad quartos' are early versions by Shakespeare or abbreviations made either for Shakespeare's company or for other companies.\" In any event, its appearance in early 1597 makes 1596 the latest possible date for the play's composition.\nThe superior Q2 called the play \"The Most Excellent and Lamentable Tragedie of Romeo and Juliet\". It was printed in 1599 by Thomas Creede and published by Cuthbert Burby. Q2 is about 800 lines longer than Q1. Its title page describes it as \"Newly corrected, augmented and amended\". Scholars believe that Q2 was based on Shakespeare's pre-performance draft (called his foul papers) since there are textual oddities such as variable tags for characters and \"false starts\" for speeches that were presumably struck through by the author but erroneously preserved by the typesetter. It is a much more complete and reliable text and was reprinted in 1609 (Q3), 1622 (Q4) and 1637 (Q5). In effect, all later Quartos and Folios of \"Romeo and Juliet\" are based on Q2, as are all modern editions since editors believe that any deviations from Q2 in the later editions (whether good or bad) are likely to have arisen from editors or compositors, not from Shakespeare.\nThe First Folio text of 1623 was based primarily on Q3, with clarifications and corrections possibly coming from a theatrical prompt book or Q1. Other Folio editions of the play were printed in 1632 (F2), 1664 (F3), and 1685 (F4). Modern versions\u2014that take into account several of the Folios and Quartos\u2014first appeared with Nicholas Rowe's 1709 edition, followed by Alexander Pope's 1723 version. Pope began a tradition of editing the play to add information such as stage directions missing in Q2 by locating them in Q1. This tradition continued late into the Romantic period. Fully annotated editions first appeared in the Victorian period and continue to be produced today, printing the text of the play with footnotes describing the sources and culture behind the play.\nThemes and motifs.\nScholars have found it extremely difficult to assign one specific, overarching theme to the play. Proposals for a main theme include a discovery by the characters that human beings are neither wholly good nor wholly evil, but instead are more or less alike, awaking out of a dream and into reality, the danger of hasty action, or the power of tragic fate. None of these have widespread support. However, even if an overall theme cannot be found it is clear that the play is full of several small thematic elements that intertwine in complex ways. Several of those most often debated by scholars are discussed below.\nLove.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"Romeo\nIf I profane with my unworthiest hand\nThis holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:\nMy lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand\nTo smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.\nJuliet\nGood pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,\nWhich mannerly devotion shows in this;\nFor saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,\nAnd palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014\"Romeo and Juliet\", Act I, Scene V\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" is sometimes considered to have no unifying theme, save that of young love. Romeo and Juliet have become emblematic of young lovers and doomed love. Since it is such an obvious subject of the play, several scholars have explored the language and historical context behind the romance of the play.\nOn their first meeting, Romeo and Juliet use a form of communication recommended by many etiquette authors in Shakespeare's day: metaphor. By using metaphors of saints and sins, Romeo was able to test Juliet's feelings for him in a non-threatening way. This method was recommended by Baldassare Castiglione (whose works had been translated into English by this time). He pointed out that if a man used a metaphor as an invitation, the woman could pretend she did not understand him, and he could retreat without losing honour. Juliet, however, participates in the metaphor and expands on it. The religious metaphors of \"shrine\", \"pilgrim\", and \"saint\" were fashionable in the poetry of the time and more likely to be understood as romantic rather than blasphemous, as the concept of sainthood was associated with the Catholicism of an earlier age. Later in the play, Shakespeare removes the more daring allusions to Christ's resurrection in the tomb he found in his source work: Brooke's \"Romeus and Juliet\".\nIn the later balcony scene, Shakespeare has Romeo overhear Juliet's soliloquy, but in Brooke's version of the story, her declaration is done alone. By bringing Romeo into the scene to eavesdrop, Shakespeare breaks from the normal sequence of courtship. Usually, a woman was required to be modest and shy to make sure that her suitor was sincere, but breaking this rule serves to speed along the plot. The lovers are able to skip courting and move on to plain talk about their relationship\u2014agreeing to be married after knowing each other for only one night. In the final suicide scene, there is a contradiction in the message\u2014in the Catholic religion, suicides were often thought to be condemned to Hell, whereas people who die to be with their loves under the \"Religion of Love\" are joined with their loves in Paradise. Romeo and Juliet's love seems to be expressing the \"Religion of Love\" view rather than the Catholic view. Another point is that, although their love is passionate, it is only consummated in marriage, which keeps them from losing the audience's sympathy.\nThe play arguably equates love and sex with death. Throughout the story, both Romeo and Juliet, along with the other characters, fantasise about it as a dark being, often equating it with a lover. Capulet, for example, when he first discovers Juliet's (faked) death, describes it as having deflowered his daughter. Juliet later erotically compares Romeo and death. Right before her suicide, she grabs Romeo's dagger, saying \"O happy dagger! This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die.\"\nFate and chance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"O, I am fortune's fool!\"\n\u2014Romeo, Act III Scene I\nScholars are divided on the role of fate in the play. No consensus exists on whether the characters are truly fated to die together or whether the events take place by a series of unlucky chances. Arguments in favour of fate often refer to the description of the lovers as \"star-cross'd\". This phrase seems to hint that the stars have predetermined the lovers' future. John W. Draper points out the parallels between the Elizabethan belief in the four humours and the main characters of the play (for example, Tybalt as a choleric). Interpreting the text in the light of humours reduces the amount of plot attributed to chance by modern audiences. Still, other scholars see the play as a series of unlucky chances\u2014many to such a degree that they do not see it as a tragedy at all, but an emotional melodrama. Ruth Nevo believes the high degree to which chance is stressed in the narrative makes \"Romeo and Juliet\" a \"lesser tragedy\" of happenstance, not of character. For example, Romeo's challenging Tybalt is not impulsive; it is, after Mercutio's death, the expected action to take. In this scene, Nevo reads Romeo as being aware of the dangers of flouting social norms, identity, and commitments. He makes the choice to kill, not because of a tragic flaw, but because of circumstance.\nDuality (light and dark).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"O brawling love, O loving hate,\nO any thing of nothing first create!\nO heavy lightness, serious vanity,\nMisshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,\nFeather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,\nStill-waking sleep, that is not what it is!\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014Romeo, Act I, Scene I\nScholars have long noted Shakespeare's widespread use of light and dark imagery throughout the play. Caroline Spurgeon considers the theme of light as \"symbolic of the natural beauty of young love\" and later critics have expanded on this interpretation. For example, both Romeo and Juliet see the other as light in a surrounding darkness. Romeo describes Juliet as being like the sun, brighter than a torch, a jewel sparkling in the night, and a bright angel among dark clouds. Even when she lies apparently dead in the tomb, he says her \"beauty makes / This vault a feasting presence full of light.\" Juliet describes Romeo as \"day in night\" and \"Whiter than snow upon a raven's back.\" This contrast of light and dark can be expanded as symbols\u2014contrasting love and hate, youth and age in a metaphoric way. Sometimes these intertwining metaphors create dramatic irony. For example, Romeo and Juliet's love is a light in the midst of the darkness of the hate around them, but all of their activity together is done in night and darkness while all of the feuding is done in broad daylight. This paradox of imagery adds atmosphere to the moral dilemma facing the two lovers: loyalty to family or loyalty to love. At the end of the story, when the morning is gloomy and the sun hiding its face for sorrow, light and dark have returned to their proper places, the outward darkness reflecting the true, inner darkness of the family feud out of sorrow for the lovers. All characters now recognise their folly in light of recent events, and things return to the natural order, thanks to the love and death of Romeo and Juliet. The \"light\" theme in the play is also heavily connected to the theme of time since light was a convenient way for Shakespeare to express the passage of time through descriptions of the sun, moon, and stars.\nTime.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"These times of woe afford no time to woo.\"\n\u2014Paris, Act III, Scene IV\nTime plays an important role in the language and plot of the play. Both Romeo and Juliet struggle to maintain an imaginary world void of time in the face of the harsh realities that surround them. For instance, when Romeo swears his love to Juliet by the moon, she protests \"O swear not by the moon, th'inconstant moon, / That monthly changes in her circled orb, / Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.\" From the very beginning, the lovers are designated as \"star-cross'd\" referring to an astrologic belief associated with time. Stars were thought to control the fates of humanity, and as time passed, stars would move along their course in the sky, also charting the course of human lives below. Romeo speaks of a foreboding he feels in the stars' movements early in the play, and when he learns of Juliet's death, he defies the stars' course for him.\nAnother central theme is haste: Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\" spans a period of four to six days, in contrast to Brooke's poems spanning nine months. Scholars such as G. Thomas Tanselle believe that time was \"especially important to Shakespeare\" in this play, as he used references to \"short-time\" for the young lovers as opposed to references to \"long-time\" for the \"older generation\" to highlight \"a headlong rush towards doom\". Romeo and Juliet fight time to make their love last forever. In the end, the only way they seem to defeat time is through a death that makes them immortal through art.\nTime is also connected to the theme of light and dark. In Shakespeare's day, plays were most often performed at noon or in the afternoon in broad daylight. This forced the playwright to use words to create the illusion of day and night in his plays. Shakespeare uses references to the night and day, the stars, the moon, and the sun to create this illusion. He also has characters frequently refer to days of the week and specific hours to help the audience understand that time has passed in the story. All in all, no fewer than 103 references to time are found in the play, adding to the illusion of its passage.\nCriticism and interpretation.\nCritical history.\nThe earliest known critic of the play was diarist Samuel Pepys, who wrote in 1662: \"it is a play of itself the worst that I ever heard in my life.\" Poet John Dryden wrote 10 years later in praise of the play and its comic character Mercutio: \"Shakespear show'd the best of his skill in his \"Mercutio\", and he said himself, that he was forc'd to kill him in the third Act, to prevent being killed by him.\" Criticism of the play in the 18th century was less sparse but no less divided. Publisher Nicholas Rowe was the first critic to ponder the theme of the play, which he saw as the just punishment of the two feuding families. In mid-century, writer Charles Gildon and philosopher Lord Kames argued that the play was a failure in that it did not follow the classical rules of drama: the tragedy must occur because of some character flaw, not an accident of fate. Writer and critic Samuel Johnson, however, considered it one of Shakespeare's \"most pleasing\" plays.\nIn the later part of the 18th and through the 19th century, criticism centred on debates over the moral message of the play. Actor and playwright David Garrick's 1748 adaptation excluded Rosaline: Romeo abandoning her for Juliet was seen as fickle and reckless. Critics such as Charles Dibdin argued that Rosaline had been included in the play in order to show how reckless the hero was and that this was the reason for his tragic end. Others argued that Friar Laurence might be Shakespeare's spokesman in his warnings against undue haste. At the beginning of the 20th century, these moral arguments were disputed by critics such as Richard Green Moulton: he argued that accident, and not some character flaw, led to the lovers' deaths.\nDramatic structure.\nIn \"Romeo and Juliet\", Shakespeare employs several dramatic techniques that have garnered praise from critics, most notably the abrupt shifts from comedy to tragedy (an example is the punning exchange between Benvolio and Mercutio just before Tybalt arrives). Before Mercutio's death in Act III, the play is largely a comedy. After his accidental demise, the play suddenly becomes serious and takes on a tragic tone. When Romeo is banished, rather than executed, and Friar Laurence offers Juliet a plan to reunite her with Romeo, the audience can still hope that all will end well. They are in a \"breathless state of suspense\" by the opening of the last scene in the tomb: If Romeo is delayed long enough for the Friar to arrive, he and Juliet may yet be saved. These shifts from hope to despair, reprieve, and new hope serve to emphasise the tragedy when the final hope fails and both the lovers die at the end.\nShakespeare also uses sub-plots to offer a clearer view of the actions of the main characters. For example, when the play begins, Romeo is in love with Rosaline, who has refused all of his advances. Romeo's infatuation with her stands in obvious contrast to his later love for Juliet. This provides a comparison through which the audience can see the seriousness of Romeo and Juliet's love and marriage. Paris' love for Juliet also sets up a contrast between Juliet's feelings for him and her feelings for Romeo. The formal language she uses around Paris, as well as the way she talks about him to her Nurse, show that her feelings clearly lie with Romeo. Beyond this, the sub-plot of the Montague\u2013Capulet feud overarches the whole play, providing an atmosphere of hate that is the main contributor to the play's tragic end.\nLanguage.\nShakespeare uses a variety of poetic forms throughout the play. He begins with a 14-line prologue in the form of a Shakespearean sonnet, spoken by a Chorus. Most of \"Romeo and Juliet\" is, however, written in blank verse, and much of it in strict iambic pentameter, with less rhythmic variation than in most of Shakespeare's later plays. In choosing forms, Shakespeare matches the poetry to the character who uses it. Friar Laurence, for example, uses sermon and sententiae forms and the Nurse uses a unique blank verse form that closely matches colloquial speech. Each of these forms is also moulded and matched to the emotion of the scene the character occupies. For example, when Romeo talks about Rosaline earlier in the play, he attempts to use the Petrarchan sonnet form. Petrarchan sonnets were often used by men to exaggerate the beauty of women who were impossible for them to attain, as in Romeo's situation with Rosaline. This sonnet form is used by Lady Capulet to describe Count Paris to Juliet as a handsome man. When Romeo and Juliet meet, the poetic form changes from the Petrarchan (which was becoming archaic in Shakespeare's day) to a then more contemporary sonnet form, using \"pilgrims\" and \"saints\" as metaphors. Finally, when the two meet on the balcony, Romeo attempts to use the sonnet form to pledge his love, but Juliet breaks it by saying \"Dost thou love me?\" By doing this, she searches for true expression, rather than a poetic exaggeration of their love. Juliet uses monosyllabic words with Romeo but uses formal language with Paris. Other forms in the play include an epithalamium by Juliet, a rhapsody in Mercutio's Queen Mab speech, and an elegy by Paris. Shakespeare saves his prose style most often for the common people in the play, though at times he uses it for other characters, such as Mercutio. Humour, also, is important: scholar Molly Mahood identifies at least 175 puns and wordplays in the text. Many of these jokes are sexual in nature, especially those involving Mercutio and the Nurse.\nPsychoanalytic criticism.\nEarly psychoanalytic critics saw the problem of \"Romeo and Juliet\" in terms of Romeo's impulsiveness, deriving from \"ill-controlled, partially disguised aggression\", which leads both to Mercutio's death and to the double suicide. \"Romeo and Juliet\" is not considered to be exceedingly psychologically complex, and sympathetic psychoanalytic readings of the play make the tragic male experience equivalent with sicknesses. Norman Holland, writing in 1966, considers Romeo's dream as a realistic \"wish fulfilling fantasy both in terms of Romeo's adult world and his hypothetical childhood at stages oral, phallic and oedipal\" \u2013 while acknowledging that a dramatic character is not a human being with mental processes separate from those of the author. Critics such as Julia Kristeva focus on the hatred between the families, arguing that this hatred is the cause of Romeo and Juliet's passion for each other. That hatred manifests itself directly in the lovers' language: Juliet, for example, speaks of \"my only love sprung from my only hate\" and often expresses her passion through an anticipation of Romeo's death. This leads on to speculation as to the playwright's psychology, in particular to a consideration of Shakespeare's grief for the death of his son, Hamnet.\nFeminist criticism.\nFeminist literary critics argue that the blame for the family feud lies in Verona's patriarchal society. For Copp\u00e9lia Kahn, for example, the strict, masculine code of violence imposed on Romeo is the main force driving the tragedy to its end. When Tybalt kills Mercutio, Romeo shifts into a violent mode, regretting that Juliet has made him so \"effeminate\". In this view, the younger males \"become men\" by engaging in violence on behalf of their fathers, or in the case of the servants, their masters. The feud is also linked to male virility, as the numerous jokes about maidenheads aptly demonstrate. Juliet also submits to a female code of docility by allowing others, such as the Friar, to solve her problems for her. Other critics, such as Dympna Callaghan, look at the play's feminism from a historicist angle, stressing that when the play was written the feudal order was being challenged by increasingly centralised government and the advent of capitalism. At the same time, emerging Puritan ideas about marriage were less concerned with the \"evils of female sexuality\" than those of earlier eras and more sympathetic towards love-matches: when Juliet dodges her father's attempt to force her to marry a man she has no feeling for, she is challenging the patriarchal order in a way that would not have been possible at an earlier time.\nQueer theory.\nA number of critics have found the character of Mercutio to have unacknowledged homoerotic desire for Romeo. Jonathan Goldberg examined the sexuality of Mercutio and Romeo utilising queer theory in \"Queering the Renaissance\" (1994), comparing their friendship with sexual love. Mercutio, in friendly conversation, mentions Romeo's phallus, suggesting traces of homoeroticism. An example is his joking wish \"To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle ... letting it there stand / Till she had laid it and conjured it down.\" Romeo's homoeroticism can also be found in his attitude to Rosaline, a woman who is distant and unavailable and brings no hope of offspring. As Benvolio argues, she is best replaced by someone who will reciprocate. Shakespeare's procreation sonnets describe another young man who, like Romeo, is having trouble creating offspring and who may be seen as being a homosexual. Goldberg believes that Shakespeare may have used Rosaline as a way to express homosexual problems of procreation in an acceptable way. In this view, when Juliet says \"...that which we call a rose, by any other name would smell as sweet\", she may be raising the question of whether there is any difference between the beauty of a man and the beauty of a woman.\nThe balcony scene.\nThe balcony scene was introduced by Da Porto in 1524. He had Romeo walk frequently by her house, \"sometimes climbing to her chamber window\", and wrote, \"It happened one night, as love ordained, when the moon shone unusually bright, that whilst Romeo was climbing the balcony, the young lady ... opened the window, and looking out saw him\". After this they have a conversation in which they declare eternal love to each other. A few decades later, Bandello greatly expanded this scene, diverging from the familiar one: Julia has her nurse deliver a letter asking Romeo to come to her window with a rope ladder, and he climbs the balcony with the help of his servant, Julia and the nurse (the servants discreetly withdraw after this).\nNevertheless, in October 2014, Lois Leveen pointed out in \"The Atlantic\" that the original Shakespeare play did not contain a balcony; it just says that Juliet appears at a window. The word \"balcone\" is not known to have existed in the English language until two years after Shakespeare's death. The balcony was certainly used in Thomas Otway's 1679 play, \"The History and Fall of Caius Marius\", which had borrowed much of its story from \"Romeo and Juliet\" and placed the two lovers in a balcony reciting a speech similar to that between Romeo and Juliet. Leveen suggested that during the 18th century, David Garrick chose to use a balcony in his adaptation and revival of \"Romeo and Juliet\" and modern adaptations have continued this tradition.\nLegacy.\nShakespeare's day.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" ranks with \"Hamlet\" as one of Shakespeare's most performed plays. Its many adaptations have made it one of his most enduring and famous stories. Even in Shakespeare's lifetime, it was extremely popular. Scholar Gary Taylor measures it as the sixth most popular of Shakespeare's plays, in the period after the death of Christopher Marlowe and Thomas Kyd but before the ascendancy of Ben Jonson during which Shakespeare was London's dominant playwright. The date of the first performance is unknown. The First Quarto, printed in 1597, reads \"it hath been often (and with great applause) plaid publiquely\", setting the first performance before that date. The Lord Chamberlain's Men were certainly the first to perform it. Besides their strong connections with Shakespeare, the Second Quarto names one of its actors, Will Kemp, instead of Peter, in a line in Act V. Richard Burbage was probably the first Romeo, being the company's chief tragedian; and Master Robert Goffe (a boy), the first Juliet. The premiere is likely to have been at The Theatre, with other early productions at the Curtain. \"Romeo and Juliet\" is one of the first Shakespeare plays to have been performed outside England: a shortened and simplified version was performed in N\u00f6rdlingen, Germany, in 1604.\nRestoration and 18th-century theatre.\nAll theatres were closed down by the Puritan government on 6 September 1642. Upon the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, two patent companies (the King's Company and the Duke's Company) were established, and the existing theatrical repertoire was divided between them.\nSir William Davenant of the Duke's Company staged a 1662 adaptation in which Henry Harris played Romeo, Thomas Betterton Mercutio, and Betterton's wife Mary Saunderson Juliet: she was probably the first woman to play the role professionally. Another version closely followed Davenant's adaptation and was also regularly performed by the Duke's Company. This was a tragicomedy by James Howard, in which the two lovers survive.\nThomas Otway's \"The History and Fall of Caius Marius\", one of the more extreme of the Restoration adaptations of Shakespeare, debuted in 1679. The scene is shifted from Renaissance Verona to ancient Rome with a balcony featuring; Romeo is Marius, Juliet is Lavinia, the feud is between patricians and plebeians; Juliet/Lavinia wakes from her potion before Romeo/Marius dies. Otway's version was a hit, and was acted for the next seventy years. His innovation in the closing scene was even more enduring, and was used in adaptations throughout the next 200 years: Theophilus Cibber's adaptation of 1744, and David Garrick's of 1748 both used variations on it. These versions also eliminated elements deemed inappropriate at the time. For example, Garrick's version transferred all language describing Rosaline to Juliet, to heighten the idea of faithfulness and downplay the love-at-first-sight theme. In 1750, a \"Battle of the Romeos\" began, with Spranger Barry and Susannah Maria Arne (Mrs. Theophilus Cibber) at Covent Garden versus David Garrick and George Anne Bellamy at Drury Lane.\nThe earliest known production in North America was an amateur one: on 23 March 1730, a physician named Joachimus Bertrand placed an advertisement in the \"Gazette\" newspaper in New York, promoting a production in which he would play the apothecary. The first professional performances of the play in North America were those of the Hallam Company.\n19th-century theatre.\nGarrick's altered version of the play was very popular, and ran for nearly a century. Not until 1845 did Shakespeare's original return to the stage in the United States with the sisters Susan and Charlotte Cushman as Juliet and Romeo, respectively, and then in 1847 in Britain with Samuel Phelps at Sadler's Wells Theatre. Charlotte Cushman adhered to Shakespeare's version, beginning a string of eighty-four performances. Her portrayal of Romeo was considered genius by many. \"The Times\" wrote: \"For a long time Romeo has been a convention. Miss Cushman's Romeo is a creative, a living, breathing, animated, ardent human being.\" Queen Victoria wrote in her journal that \"no-one would ever have imagined she was a woman\". Cushman's success broke the Garrick tradition and paved the way for later performances to return to the original storyline.\nProfessional performances of Shakespeare in the mid-19th century had two particular features: firstly, they were generally star vehicles, with supporting roles cut or marginalised to give greater prominence to the central characters. Secondly, they were \"pictorial\", placing the action on spectacular and elaborate sets (requiring lengthy pauses for scene changes) and with the frequent use of tableaux. Henry Irving's 1882 production at the Lyceum Theatre (with himself as Romeo and Ellen Terry as Juliet) is considered an archetype of the pictorial style. In 1895, Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson took over from Irving and laid the groundwork for a more natural portrayal of Shakespeare that remains popular today. Forbes-Robertson avoided the showiness of Irving and instead portrayed a down-to-earth Romeo, expressing the poetic dialogue as realistic prose and avoiding melodramatic flourish.\nAmerican actors began to rival their British counterparts. Edwin Booth (brother to John Wilkes Booth) and Mary McVicker (soon to be Edwin's wife) opened as Romeo and Juliet at the sumptuous Booth's Theatre (with its European-style stage machinery, and an air conditioning system unique in New York) on 3 February 1869. Some reports said it was one of the most elaborate productions of \"Romeo and Juliet\" ever seen in America; it was certainly the most popular, running for over six weeks and earning over $60,000 (). The programme noted that: \"The tragedy will be produced in strict accordance with historical propriety, in every respect, following closely the text of Shakespeare.\"\nThe 19th century also marked the first time \"Romeo and Juliet\" was performed in Italy. The first four Italian translations of the play appeared in the early 19th century: in 1814 by Michele Leoni (although his translation was based on the 1778 French version by Pierre Le Tourneur), in 1831 by Gaetano Barbieri, in 1838 by Carlo Rusconi, and in 1847 by Giulio Carcano. However, it was first staged in Italy only in 1869, when Ernesto Rossi produced a successful adaptation and performed as Romeo at the Teatro Re in Milan. Despite its late debut, the production marked a significant moment in the growing interest in the Bard's works, which had been present in Italy since the early decades of the 19th century. From as early as 1818, authors such as Luigi Scevola, Giuseppe Morosini, Angelica Palli, and especially Cesare della Valle\u2014whose \"Giulietta e Romeo\" (1826) dominated the stage for decades until being replaced by Rossi's Shakespearean version\u2014had created original works on the Veronese subject. Often compared by contemporary critics to Shakespeare's tragedy, these adaptations offered a different interpretation of the story, which also influenced Rossi's later staging. In these Italian dramas, the lovers do not engage in any reflection on their individuality nor do they struggle to assert their choices; rather, they are swept away by a whirlwind of sudden passion and inescapable events, to which they passively submit.\nThe first professional performance of the play in Japan may have been George Crichton Miln's company's production, which toured to Yokohama in 1890. Throughout the 19th century, \"Romeo and Juliet\" had been Shakespeare's most popular play, measured by the number of professional performances. In the 20th century it would become the second most popular, behind \"Hamlet\".\n20th-century theatre.\nIn 1933, the play was revived by actress Katharine Cornell and her director husband Guthrie McClintic and was taken on a seven-month nationwide tour throughout the United States. It starred Orson Welles, Brian Aherne and Basil Rathbone. The production was a modest success, and so upon the return to New York, Cornell and McClintic revised it, and for the first time the play was presented with almost all the scenes intact, including the Prologue. The new production opened on Broadway in December 1934. Critics wrote that Cornell was \"the greatest Juliet of her time\", \"endlessly haunting\", and \"the most lovely and enchanting Juliet our present-day theatre has seen\".\nJohn Gielgud's New Theatre production in 1935 featured Gielgud and Laurence Olivier as Romeo and Mercutio, exchanging roles six weeks into the run, with Peggy Ashcroft as Juliet. Gielgud used a scholarly combination of Q1 and Q2 texts and organised the set and costumes to match as closely as possible the Elizabethan period. His efforts were a huge success at the box office, and set the stage for increased historical realism in later productions. Olivier later compared his performance and Gielgud's: \"John, all spiritual, all spirituality, all beauty, all abstract things; and myself as all earth, blood, humanity\u00a0... I've always felt that John missed the lower half and that made me go for the other\u00a0... But whatever it was, when I was playing Romeo I was carrying a torch, I was trying to sell realism in Shakespeare.\"\nPeter Brook's 1947 version was the beginning of a different style of \"Romeo and Juliet\" performances. Brook was less concerned with realism, and more concerned with translating the play into a form that could communicate with the modern world. He argued, \"A production is only correct at the moment of its correctness, and only good at the moment of its success.\" Brook excluded the final reconciliation of the families from his performance text.\nThroughout the century, audiences, influenced by the cinema, became less willing to accept actors distinctly older than the teenage characters they were playing. A significant example of more youthful casting was in Franco Zeffirelli's Old Vic production in 1960, with John Stride and Judi Dench, which would serve as the basis for his 1968 film. Zeffirelli borrowed from Brook's ideas, altogether removing around a third of the play's text to make it more accessible. In an interview with \"The Times\", he stated that the play's \"twin themes of love and the total breakdown of understanding between two generations\" had contemporary relevance.\nRecent performances often set the play in the contemporary world. For example, in 1986, the Royal Shakespeare Company set the play in modern Verona. Switchblades replaced swords, feasts and balls became drug-laden rock parties, and Romeo killed himself by hypodermic needle.\nNeil Bartlett's production of Romeo and Juliet themed the play very contemporary with a cinematic look which started its life at the Lyric Hammersmith, London then went to West Yorkshire Playhouse for an exclusive run in 1995. The cast included Emily Woof as Juliet, Stuart Bunce as Romeo, Sebastian Harcombe as Mercutio, Ashley Artus as Tybalt, Souad Faress as Lady Capulet and Silas Carson as Paris. In 1997, the Folger Shakespeare Theatre produced a version set in a typical suburban world. Romeo sneaks into the Capulet barbecue to meet Juliet, and Juliet discovers Tybalt's death while in class at school.\nThe play is sometimes given a historical setting, enabling audiences to reflect on the underlying conflicts. For example, adaptations have been set in the midst of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, in the apartheid era in South Africa, and in the aftermath of the Pueblo Revolt. Similarly, Peter Ustinov's 1956 comic adaptation, \"Romanoff and Juliet\", is set in a fictional mid-European country in the depths of the Cold War. A mock-Victorian revisionist version of \"Romeo and Juliet\"'s final scene (with a happy ending, Romeo, Juliet, Mercutio, and Paris restored to life, and Benvolio revealing that he is Paris's love, Benvolia, in disguise) forms part of the 1980 stage-play \"The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby\". \"Shakespeare's R&amp;J\", by Joe Calarco, spins the classic in a modern tale of gay teenage awakening. A recent comedic musical adaptation was \"The Second City's Romeo and Juliet Musical: The People vs. Friar Laurence, the Man Who Killed Romeo and Juliet\", set in modern times.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, \"Romeo and Juliet\" has often been the choice of Shakespeare plays to open a classical theatre company, beginning with Edwin Booth's inaugural production of that play in his theatre in 1869, the newly re-formed company of the Old Vic in 1929 with John Gielgud, Martita Hunt, and Margaret Webster, as well as the Riverside Shakespeare Company in its founding production in New York City in 1977, which used the 1968 film of Franco Zeffirelli's production as its inspiration.\n21st-century theatre.\nIn 2009, Shakespeare's Globe ran a production of \"Romeo and Juliet\" which was directed by Dominic Dromgoole, and starred Adetomiwa Edun as Romeo and Ellie Kendrick as Juliet.\nIn 2013, \"Romeo and Juliet\" ran on Broadway at Richard Rodgers Theatre from 19 September to 8 December for 93 regular performances after 27 previews starting on 24 August with Orlando Bloom and Condola Rashad in the starring roles.\nA production of the play starring Tom Holland and Francesca Amewudah-Rivers ran at Duke of York's Theatre in London's West End from 11 May 2024 for a 12-week limited run. The production was directed by Jamie Lloyd.\nA production of the play starring Kit Connor and Rachel Zegler opened on Broadway in Fall 2024. The production featured music by Jack Antonoff, direction by Sam Gold, and movement by Sonya Tayeh. The production achieved the youngest ticket buying audience in Broadway history and received a Drama League Award nomination for Best Revival of a Play, along with Connor receiving a nomination for Distinguished Performance. It also received an Outer Critics Circle Award nomination for Best Revival of a Play, along with Connor receiving a nomination for Outstanding Lead Performer in a Broadway Play. The play received a Tony Awards nomination for Best Revival of a Play, the first Tony nomination for a revival of this play in history.\nA new production of the play directed by Robert Icke and starring Sadie Sink and Noah Jupe is scheduled to open at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London's West End in March 2026.\nBallet.\nThe best-known ballet version is Prokofiev's \"Romeo and Juliet\". Originally commissioned by the Kirov Ballet, it was rejected by them when Prokofiev attempted a happy ending and was rejected again for the experimental nature of its music. It has subsequently attained an \"immense\" reputation, and has been choreographed by John Cranko (1962) and Kenneth MacMillan (1965) among others.\nIn 1977, Michael Smuin's production of one of the play's most dramatic and impassioned dance interpretations was debuted in its entirety by San Francisco Ballet. This production was the first full-length ballet to be broadcast by the PBS series \"Great Performances: Dance in America\"; it aired in 1978.\nDada Masilo, a South African dancer and choreographer, reinterpreted Romeo and Juliet in a new modern light. She introduced changes to the story, notably that of presenting the two families as multiracial.\nMusic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"Romeo loved Juliet\nJuliet, she felt the same\nWhen he put his arms around her\nHe said Julie, baby, you're my flame\nThou givest fever\u00a0...\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014Peggy Lee's rendition of \"Fever\"\nAt least 24 operas have been based on \"Romeo and Juliet\". The earliest, \"Romeo und Julie\" in 1776, a Singspiel by Georg Benda, omits much of the action of the play and most of its characters and has a happy ending. It is occasionally revived. The best-known is Gounod's 1867 \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" (libretto by Jules Barbier and Michel Carr\u00e9), a critical triumph when first performed and frequently revived today. Bellini's \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\" is also revived from time to time, but has sometimes been judged unfavourably because of its perceived liberties with Shakespeare; however, Bellini and his librettist, Felice Romani, worked from Italian sources\u2014principally Romani's libretto for \"Giulietta e Romeo\" by Nicola Vaccai\u2014rather than directly adapting Shakespeare's play. Among later operas, there is Heinrich Sutermeister's 1940 work \"Romeo und Julia\" and Pascal Dusapin's first opera \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\u200a\" on a libretto by Olivier Cadiot (1988).\n\"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" by Berlioz is a \"symphonie dramatique\", a large-scale work in three parts for mixed voices, chorus, and orchestra, which premiered in 1839. Tchaikovsky's \"Romeo and Juliet\" Fantasy-Overture (1869, revised 1870 and 1880) is a 20-minute symphonic poem, containing the famous melody known as the \"love theme\". Tchaikovsky's device of repeating the same musical theme at the ball, in the balcony scene, in Juliet's bedroom and in the tomb has been used by subsequent directors: for example, Nino Rota's love theme is used in a similar way in the 1968 film of the play, as is Des'ree's \"Kissing You\" in the 1996 film. Other classical composers influenced by the play include Henry Hugh Pearson (\"Romeo and Juliet, overture for orchestra\", Op. 86), Svendsen (\"Romeo og Julie\", 1876), Delius (\"A Village Romeo and Juliet\", 1899\u20131901), Stenhammar (\"Romeo och Julia\", 1922), and Kabalevsky (\"Incidental Music to Romeo and Juliet\", Op. 56, 1956).\nThe play has influenced several jazz works, including Duke Ellington's \"Such Sweet Thunder\" contains a piece entitled \"The Star-Crossed Lovers\" in which the pair are represented by tenor and alto saxophones. The play has also influenced popular music, including songs by The Supremes, Bruce Springsteen, Tom Waits, The Reflections (Detroit band), Lou Reed. The most famous songs are Swift's Love Story and Dire Straits' \"Romeo and Juliet\".\nThe most famous musical theatre adaptation is \"West Side Story\" with music by Leonard Bernstein and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim. It d\u00e9buted on Broadway in 1957 and in the West End in 1958 and was twice adapted as popular films in 1961 and in 2021. This version updated the setting to mid-20th-century New York City and the warring families to ethnic gangs. Other musical adaptations include Terrence Mann's 1999 rock musical \"William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet\", co-written with Jerome Korman; G\u00e9rard Presgurvic's 2001 \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette, de la Haine \u00e0 l'Amour\"; Riccardo Cocciante's 2007 \"Giulietta &amp; Romeo\" and Johan Christher Sch\u00fctz; and Johan Petterssons's 2013 adaptation \"Carnival Tale ()\", which takes place at a travelling carnival.\nLiterature and art.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" had a profound influence on subsequent literature. Before then, romance had not even been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy. In Harold Bloom's words, Shakespeare \"invented the formula that the sexual becomes the erotic when crossed by the shadow of death\". Of Shakespeare's works, \"Romeo and Juliet\" has generated the most\u2014and the most varied\u2014adaptations, including prose and verse narratives, drama, opera, orchestral and choral music, ballet, film, television, and painting. The word \"Romeo\" has even become synonymous with \"male lover\" in English.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" was parodied in Shakespeare's own lifetime: Henry Porter's \"Two Angry Women of Abingdon\" (1598) and Thomas Dekker's \"Blurt, Master Constable\" (1607) both contain balcony scenes in which a virginal heroine engages in bawdy wordplay. The play directly influenced later literary works. For example, the preparations for a performance form a major plot in Charles Dickens' \"Nicholas Nickleby\".\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" is one of Shakespeare's most-illustrated works. The first known illustration was a woodcut of the tomb scene, thought to be created by Elisha Kirkall, which appeared in Nicholas Rowe's 1709 edition of Shakespeare's plays. Five paintings of the play were commissioned for the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery in the late 18th century, one representing each of the five acts of the play. Early in the 19th century, Henry Thomson painted \"Juliet after the Masquerade\", an . of which was published in The Literary Souvenir, 1828, with an accompanying poem by Letitia Elizabeth Landon. The 19th-century fashion for \"pictorial\" performances led to directors' drawing on paintings for their inspiration, which, in turn, influenced painters to depict actors and scenes from the theatre. In the 20th century, the play's most iconic visual images have derived from its popular film versions.\nDavid Blixt's 2007 novel \"The Master of Verona\" imagines the origins of the famous Capulet-Montague feud, combining the characters from Shakespeare's Italian plays with the historical figures of Dante's time. Blixt's subsequent novels \"Voice of the Falconer\" (2010), \"Fortune's Fool\" (2012), and \"The Prince's Doom\" (2014) continue to explore the world, following the life of Mercutio as he comes of age. More tales from Blixt's \"Star-Cross'd\" series appear in \"Varnished Faces: Star-Cross'd Short Stories\" (2015) and the plague anthology, \"We All Fall Down\" (2020). Blixt also authored \"Shakespeare's Secrets: Romeo &amp; Juliet\" (2018), a collection of essays on the history of Shakespeare's play in performance, in which Blixt asserts the play is structurally not a Tragedy, but a Comedy-Gone-Wrong. In 2014 Blixt and his wife, stage director Janice L. Blixt, were guests of the city of Verona, Italy for the launch of the Italian language edition of \"The Master Of Verona\", staying with Dante's descendants and filmmaker Anna Lerario, with whom Blixt collaborated on a film about the life of Veronese prince Cangrande della Scala.\nLois Leveen's 2014 novel \"Juliet's Nurse\" imagined the fourteen years leading up to the events in the play from the point of view of the nurse. The nurse has the third largest number of lines in the original play; only the eponymous characters have more lines.\nThe play was the subject of a 2017 General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) question by the Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations board that was administered to c.\u200914000 students. The board attracted widespread media criticism and derision after the question appeared to confuse the Capulets and the Montagues, with exams regulator Ofqual describing the error as unacceptable.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" was adapted into manga format by publisher UDON Entertainment's Manga Classics imprint and was released in May 2018.\nScreen.\n\"Romeo and Juliet\" may be the most-filmed play of all time. The most notable theatrical releases were George Cukor's multi-Oscar-nominated 1936 production, Franco Zeffirelli's 1968 version, and Baz Luhrmann's 1996 MTV-inspired \"Romeo + Juliet\". The latter two were both, in their time, the highest-grossing Shakespeare film ever. \"Romeo and Juliet\" was first filmed in the silent era, by Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s, although his film is now lost. The play was first heard on film in \"The Hollywood Revue of 1929\", in which John Gilbert recited the balcony scene opposite Norma Shearer.\nShearer and Leslie Howard, with a combined age over 75, played the teenage lovers in George Cukor's MGM 1936 film version. Neither critics nor the public responded enthusiastically. Cinema-goers considered the film too \"arty\", staying away as they had from Warner's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" a year before: leading to Hollywood abandoning the Bard for over a decade. Renato Castellani won the \"Grand Prix\" at the Venice Film Festival for his 1954 film of \"Romeo and Juliet\". His Romeo, Laurence Harvey, was already an experienced screen actor. By contrast, Susan Shentall, as Juliet, was a secretarial student who was discovered by the director in a London pub and was cast for her \"pale sweet skin and honey-blonde hair\".\nStephen Orgel describes Franco Zeffirelli's 1968 \"Romeo and Juliet\" as being \"full of beautiful young people, and the camera and the lush technicolour make the most of their sexual energy and good looks\". Zeffirelli's teenage leads, Leonard Whiting and Olivia Hussey, had virtually no previous acting experience but performed capably and with great maturity. Zeffirelli has been particularly praised for his presentation of the duel scene as bravado getting out-of-control. The film courted controversy by including a nude wedding-night scene while Olivia Hussey was only fifteen.\nBaz Luhrmann's 1996 \"Romeo + Juliet\" and its accompanying soundtrack successfully targeted the \"MTV Generation\": a young audience of similar age to the story's characters. Far darker than Zeffirelli's version, the film is set in the \"crass, violent and superficial society\" of Verona Beach and Sycamore Grove. Leonardo DiCaprio was Romeo and Claire Danes was Juliet.\nThe play has been widely adapted for TV and film. In 1960, Peter Ustinov's cold-war stage parody, \"Romanoff and Juliet\" was filmed. The 1961 film \"West Side Story\"\u2014set among New York gangs\u2014featured the Jets as white youths, equivalent to Shakespeare's Montagues, while the Sharks, equivalent to the Capulets, are Puerto Rican. In 2006, Disney's \"High School Musical\" made use of \"Romeo and Juliet\"'s plot, placing the two young lovers in different high-school cliques instead of feuding families. Film-makers have frequently featured characters performing scenes from \"Romeo and Juliet\". The conceit of dramatising Shakespeare writing \"Romeo and Juliet\" has been used several times, including John Madden's 1998 \"Shakespeare in Love\", in which Shakespeare writes the play against the backdrop of his own doomed love affair. An anime series produced by Gonzo and SKY Perfect Well Think, called \"Romeo x Juliet\", was made in 2007 and the 2013 version is the latest English-language film based on the play. In 2013, Sanjay Leela Bhansali directed the Bollywood film \"Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela\", a contemporary version of the play which starred Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone in leading roles. The film was a commercial and critical success. In February 2014, BroadwayHD released a filmed version of the 2013 Broadway Revival of \"Romeo and Juliet\". The production starred Orlando Bloom and Condola Rashad.\nModern social media and virtual world productions.\nIn April and May 2010, the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Mudlark Production Company presented a version of the play, entitled \"Such Tweet Sorrow\", as an improvised, real-time series of tweets on Twitter. The production used RSC actors who engaged with the audience as well each other, performing not from a traditional script but a \"Grid\" developed by the Mudlark production team and writers Tim Wright and Bethan Marlow. The performers also make use of other media sites such as YouTube for pictures and video.\nArchitecture.\nA Juliet balcony (or Juliette balcony) is a balustrade connected to the fa\u00e7ade of a building.\nAstronomy.\nTwo of Uranus's moons, Juliet and Mab, are named for the play.\nVideo games.\n\"The Sims 2\" features a neighborhood called Veronaville that features the Capps (Capulet) and the Monty (Montague) families as playable families. The game features the patriarchs of the Capps and Monty families as hating each other, with a love triangle throughout the neighborhood.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll references to \"Romeo and Juliet\", unless otherwise specified, are taken from the Arden Shakespeare second edition (Gibbons, 1980) based on the Q2 text of 1599, with elements from Q1 of 1597. Under its referencing system, which uses Roman numerals, II.ii.33 means act 2, scene 2, line 33, and a 0 in place of a scene number refers to the prologue to the act.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nEditions of \"Romeo and Juliet\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25822", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25822", "title": "Rube Goldberg", "text": "American cartoonist (1883\u20131970)\nReuben Garrett Lucius Goldberg (July 4, 1883 \u2013 December 7, 1970), better known as Rube Goldberg (), was an American cartoonist, sculptor, author, engineer, and inventor.\nGoldberg is best known for his popular cartoons depicting complicated gadgets performing simple tasks in indirect, convoluted ways. The cartoons led to the expression \"Rube Goldberg machines\" to describe similar gadgets and processes. Goldberg received many honors in his lifetime, including a Pulitzer Prize for political cartooning in 1948, the National Cartoonists Society's Gold T-Square Award in 1955, and the Banshees' Silver Lady Award in 1959. He was a founding member and first president of the National Cartoonists Society, which hosts the annual Reuben Award, honoring the top cartoonist of the year and named after Goldberg, who won the award in 1967. He is the inspiration for international competitions known as Rube Goldberg Machine Contests, which challenge participants to create a complicated machine to perform a simple task.\nEarly life and education.\nGoldberg was born on July 4, 1883, in San Francisco, California, to Jewish parents Max \nand Hannah (n\u00e9e Cohn) Goldberg. He was the third of seven children, three of whom died as children; older brother Garrett, younger brother Walter, and younger sister Lillian also survived. Goldberg began tracing illustrations when he was four years old, and he took his only drawing lessons with a local sign painter.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1911, he built the R. L. Goldberg Building at 182\u2013198 Gough Street, San Francisco, for his widowed father to live in, as well as to collect rental income.\nGoldberg married Irma Seeman on October 17, 1916. They lived at 98 Central Park West in New York City and had two sons: Thomas and George. During World War II, as each of his sons headed off to college, Goldberg insisted that they change their surname because of antisemitic sentiment toward him stemming from the political nature of his cartoons. Thomas chose the surname George, and his brother, whose given name was already George, followed suit. In adopting the same surname, George wanted to keep a sense of family cohesiveness.\nCareer.\nGoldberg's father was a San Francisco police and fire commissioner, who encouraged the young Reuben to pursue a career in engineering. Rube graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1904 with a degree in Engineering and was hired by the city of San Francisco as an engineer for the Water and Sewers Department. After six months he resigned his position with the city to join the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" where he became a sports cartoonist. The following year, he took a job with the \"San Francisco Bulletin\", where he remained until he moved to New York City in 1907, finding employment as a sports cartoonist with the \"New York Evening Mail\".\nGoldberg's first public hit was a comic strip called \"Foolish Questions\", beginning in 1908. The invention cartoons began in 1912. The \"New York Evening Mail\" was syndicated to the first newspaper syndicate, the McClure Newspaper Syndicate, giving Goldberg's cartoons a wider distribution, and by 1915 he was earning $25,000 per year and being billed by the paper as America's most popular cartoonist. Arthur Brisbane had offered Goldberg $2,600 per year in 1911 in an unsuccessful attempt to get him to move to William Randolph Hearst's newspaper chain, and in 1915 raised the offer to $50,000 per year. Rather than lose Goldberg to Hearst, the \"New York Evening Mail\" matched the salary offer and formed the Evening Mail Syndicate to syndicate Goldberg's cartoons nationally.\nIn 1916, Goldberg created a series of seven short animated films which focus on humorous aspects of everyday situations in the form of an animated newsreel. The seven films were released on these dates in 1916: May 8, \"The Boob Weekly\"; May 22, \"Leap Year\"; June 5, \"The Fatal Pie\"; Jun 19, \"From Kitchen Mechanic to Movie Star\"; July 3, \"Nutty News\"; July 17, \"Home Sweet Home\"; July 31, \"Losing Weight\".\nGoldberg was syndicated by the McNaught Syndicate from 1922 until 1934.\nA prolific artist, it has been estimated that Goldberg created 50,000 cartoons during his lifetime. Some of these cartoons include \"Mike and Ike (They Look Alike)\", \"Boob McNutt\", \"Foolish Questions\", \"What Are You Kicking About\", \"Telephonies\", \"Lala Palooza\", \"The Weekly Meeting of the Tuesday Women's Club\", and the uncharacteristically serious soap-opera strip, \"Doc Wright\", which ran for 10 months beginning January 29, 1933.\nThe cartoon series that brought him lasting fame was \"The Inventions of Professor Lucifer Gorgonzola Butts, A.K.\", which ran in \"Collier's Weekly\" from January 26, 1929, to December 26, 1931. In that series, Goldberg drew labeled schematics in the form of patent applications of the comically intricate \"inventions\" that would later bear his name. The character of Professor Butts was based on Rube's professor Frederick Slate at the College of Mining and Engineering at the University of California, where Rube attended from 1901 to 1903. Frederick Slate gave his engineering students the task of building a scale that could weigh the Earth. The scale was called the \u201cBarodik\". To Goldberg, this exemplified a comical combination of seriousness and ridiculousness that would come to serve as an inspiration in his work.\nFrom 1938 to 1941, Goldberg drew two weekly strips for the Register and Tribune Syndicate: \"Brad and Dad\" (1939\u20131941) and \"Side Show\" (1938\u20131941), a continuation of the invention drawings.\nStarting in 1938, Goldberg worked as the editorial cartoonist for the \"New York Sun\". He won the 1948 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning for a cartoon entitled \"\". He moved to the \"New York Journal-American\" in 1949 and worked there until his retirement in 1963. In the 1960s, Goldberg began a sculpture career, primarily creating busts.\nCultural legacy.\nThe popularity of Goldberg's cartoons was such that the term \"Goldbergian\" was in use in print by 1915, and \"Rube Goldberg\" by 1928. \"Rube Goldberg\" appeared in the \"Random House Dictionary of the English Language\" in 1966 meaning \"having a fantastically complicated improvised appearance\", or \"deviously complex and impractical.\" The 1915 usage of \"Goldbergian\" was in reference to Goldberg's early comic strip \"Foolish Questions\", which he drew from 1909 to 1934, while later use of the terms \"Goldbergian\", \"Rube Goldberg\" and \"Rube Goldberg machine\" refer to the crazy inventions for which he is now best known from his strip \"The Inventions of Professor Lucifer Gorgonzola Butts\", drawn from 1914 to 1964.\nThe corresponding term in the UK was, and still is, \"Heath Robinson\", after the English illustrator with an equal devotion to odd machinery, also portraying sequential or chain reaction elements. The Danish equivalent was the painter, author and cartoonist Robert Storm Petersen, better known under his pen name Storm P. To this day, an overly complicated and/or useless object is known as a \"Storm P.-machine\" in Denmark.\nGoldberg's work was commemorated posthumously in 1995 with the inclusion of \"Rube Goldberg's Inventions\", depicting his 1931 \"Self-Operating Napkin\" in the Comic Strip Classics series of U.S. postage stamps.\nThe Rube Goldberg Machine Contest originated in 1949 as a competition at Purdue University between two fraternities. It ran until 1956, and was revived in 1983 as a university-wide competition. In 1989 it became a national competition, with a high school division added in 1996. Devices must complete a simple task in a minimum of twenty steps and a maximum of seventy-five in the style of Goldberg. The contest is hosted nationwide by Rube Goldberg Inc., a not-for-profit 501(c)(3), founded by Rube's son George W. George, and currently managed by Rube's granddaughter, Jennifer George.\nIn 1998, Justice Scalia remarked in a dissent in a habeas case that \"Rube Goldberg would envy the scheme the Court has created.\"\nFilm and television.\nRube Goldberg wrote the first feature film for the pre-Curly Howard version of The Three Stooges called \"Soup to Nuts\", which was released in 1930 and starred Ted Healy. The film featured his machines and included cameos of Rube himself.\nIn the 1962 John Wayne movie \"Hatari!\", an invention to catch monkeys by character Pockets, played by Red Buttons, is described as a \"Rube Goldberg.\"\nIn the late 1960s and early '70s, educational shows like \"Sesame Street\", \"Vision On\" and \"The Electric Company\" routinely showed bits that involved Rube Goldberg devices, including the \"Rube Goldberg Alphabet Contraption\", and the \"What Happens Next Machine\".\nVarious other films and cartoons have included highly complicated machines that perform simple tasks. Among these are \"Fl\u00e5klypa Grand Prix\", \"Looney Tunes\", \"Tom and Jerry\", \"Wallace and Gromit\", \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\", \"The Way Things Go\", \"Edward Scissorhands\", \"Back to the Future\", \"Honey, I Shrunk the Kids\", \"The Goonies\", \"Gremlins\", the \"Saw\" film series, \"Chitty Chitty Bang Bang\", \"The Cat from Outer Space\", \"Malcolm\", \"Hotel for Dogs\", the \"Home Alone\" film series, \"Family Guy\", \"American Dad!\", \"Casper\", and \"Waiting...\"\nIn the \"Final Destination\" film series the characters often die in Rube Goldberg-esque ways. In the film \"The Great Mouse Detective\", the villain Ratigan attempts to kill the film's heroes, Basil of Baker Street and David Q. Dawson, with a Rube Goldberg style device.\nThe classic video in this genre was done by the artist duo Peter Fischli &amp; David Weiss in 1987 with their 30-minute video \"Der Lauf der Dinge\" or \"The Way Things Go.\"\nHonda produced a video in 2003 called \"The Cog\" using many of the same principles that Fischli and Weiss had done in 1987.\nIn 2005, the American alternative rock/indie band The Bravery released a video for their debut single, \"An Honest Mistake,\" which features the band performing the song in the middle of a Rube Goldberg machine.\nIn 1999, an episode of \"The X-Files\" was titled \"The Goldberg Variation\". The episode intertwined characters FBI agents Mulder and Scully, a simple apartment super, Henry Weems (Willie Garson) and an ailing young boy, Ritchie Lupone (Shia LaBeouf) in a real-life Goldberg device.\nIn the \"ICarly\" (2007) episode \"iDon\u2019t Want to Fight\", Spencer built a Rube Goldberg Machine to feed his fish.\nIn the \"Suite Life on Deck\" episode \"A London Carol\", Cody built a Rube Goldberg Machine to help Zack wake up at six a.m.\nThe 2010 music video \"This Too Shall Pass \u2013 RGM Version\" by the rock band OK Go features a machine that, after four minutes of kinetic activity, shoots the band members in the face with paint. \"RGM\" presumably stands for Rube Goldberg Machine.\n2012 The CBS show \"Elementary\" features a machine in its opening sequence.\nThe 2012 Discovery Channel show \"Unchained Reaction\" pitted two teams against each other to create an elaborate Rube Goldberg machine. It was judged and executive-produced by Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman, known for hosting the science entertainment series \"MythBusters\".\nThe 2014 web series \"Deadbeat\" on Hulu features an episode titled \"The Ghost in the Machine,\" which features the protagonist Kevin helping the ghost of Rube Goldberg complete a contraption. It will bring his grandchildren together after they make a collection of random items into a machine that ends up systematically injuring two of his grandchildren so they end up in the same hospital and finally meet.\nGames.\nBoth board games and video games have been inspired by Goldberg's creations, such as the '60s board game \"Mouse Trap\", the 1990s series of \"The Incredible Machine\" games, and \"Crazy Machines\". The Humongous Entertainment game \"\" involves searching for the missing pieces to a Rube Goldberg machine to complete the game.\nIn 1909 Goldberg invented the \"Foolish Questions\" game based on his successful cartoon by the same name. The game was published in many versions from 1909 to 1934.\n\"Rube Works: The Official Rube Goldberg Invention Game\", the first game authorized by The Heirs of Rube Goldberg, was published by Unity Games (the publishing arm of Unity Technologies) in November 2013.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25823", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25823", "title": "Robert Stickgold", "text": "American sleep researcher (born 1945)\nRobert Stickgold is a professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. A sleep researcher, his work focuses on the relationship between sleep and learning. Stickgold's articles in the popular press are intended to illustrate the dangers of sleep deprivation.\nStickgold was born in Chicago. He graduated from Harvard University before attending the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, where he received his doctorate in biochemistry. He worked with the sleep researcher J. Allan Hobson for many years and has been known to quote Hobson's quip: \"The only known function of sleep is to cure sleepiness\". Stickgold's research has focused on sleep and cognition, dreaming, and conscious states. He has been a proponent of the role of sleep in memory consolidation. Additional research has focused on dreaming. In one experiment, participants played the computer game Tetris for three days and reported dreaming about falling geometric shapes\u2014a phenomenon now known as the Tetris effect. Even patients with anterograde amnesia, who did not remember playing the game, had similar dreams as normal participants. Similar results were found in another study utilizing the video game Alpine Racer 2. Participants reported dreaming about skiing.\nStickgold lives in Cambridge, Massachusetts and has four children.\nStickgold is also a published science fiction author. In 1973, he had his novelette \"Susies Reality\" published in the May/June issue of \"Worlds of IF Science Fiction\" anthology magazine. With Mark Noble, he wrote \"Gloryhits\" in 1978. In 1981, he published \"The California Coven Project\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25824", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25824", "title": "Religion and mythology", "text": "Overlapping concepts in myth and religion\nReligion and mythology differ in scope but have overlapping aspects. Both are systems of concepts that are of high importance to a certain community, making statements concerning the supernatural or sacred. Generally, mythology is considered one component or aspect of religion. Religion is the broader term: besides mythological aspects, it includes aspects of ritual, morality, theology, and mystical experience. A given mythology is almost always associated with a certain religion such as Greek mythology with Ancient Greek religion. Disconnected from its religious system, a myth may lose its immediate relevance to the community and evolve\u2014away from sacred importance\u2014into a legend or folktale.\nThere is a complex relationship between recital of myths and enactment of rituals.\nIntroduction.\nThe relationship between religion and myth depends on what definition of \"myth\" one uses. By Robert Graves's definition, a religion's traditional stories are \"myths\" if and only if one does not belong to the religion in question. By Segal's definition, all religious stories are myths\u2014but simply because nearly all stories are myths. By the folklorists' definition, all myths are religious (or \"sacred\") stories, but not all religious stories are myths: religious stories that involve the creation of the world (e.g., the stories in the Book of Genesis) are myths; however, some religious stories that don't explain how things came to be in their present form (e.g., hagiographies of famous saints) are not myths. Generally, mythology is the main component of religion alongside ritual. For example, in the early modern period, distinguished Christian theologians developed elaborated witch mythologies which contributed to the intensification of witch trials. \"The Oxford Companion to World Mythology\" provides the following summary and examples:Religious stories are \"holy scripture\" to believers\u2014narratives used to support, explain, or justify a particular system's rituals, theology, and ethics\u2014and are myths to people of other cultures or belief systems. [\u2026] It\u00a0is\u00a0difficult to believe that the Buddha was conceived in a dream by a white elephant, so we call that story a myth as well. But, of course, stories such as the parting of the Sea of Reeds for the fleeing Hebrews, Muhammad's Night Journey, and the dead Jesus rising from the tomb are just as clearly irrational narratives to which a Hindu or a Buddhist might understandably apply the word \"myth\". All of these stories are definable as myths because they contain events that contradict both our intellectual and physical experience of reality.\nMost definitions of \"myth\" limit myths to stories. Thus, non-narrative elements of religion, such as ritual, are not myths.\nTheology and myth.\nThe term theology for the first time appears in the writings of the Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle. Initially, theology and mythology were synonymous. With time, both terms gained distinctive qualities:\nIn the first place, theology is a spiritual or religious attempt of \"believers\" to explicate their faith. In this sense it is not neutral and is not attempted from the perspective of removed observation\u2014in contrast to a general history of religions. The implication derived from the religious approach is that it does not provide a formal and indifferent scheme devoid of presuppositions within which all religions could be subsumed. In the second place, theology is influenced by its origins in the Greek and Christian traditions, with the implication that the transmutation of this concept to other religions is endangered by the very circumstances of origination.\nAccording to Hege, both primitive and modern theology is inescapably constrained by its mythical backbone:\nHermeneutically, theologians must recognize that mythical thought permeates the biblical texts. Dogmatically, theologians must be aware of the mythological elements of theology and of how extensively theology relies on mythical forms and functions, especially in light of our awareness of the ubiquity of myth.\nReligion.\n\"Religion\" is a belief concerning the supernatural, sacred, or divine, and the moral codes, practices, values, and institutions associated with such belief, although some scholars, such as Durkheim, would argue that the supernatural and the divine are not aspects of all religions. Religious beliefs and practices may include the following: a deity or higher being, eschatology, practices of worship, practices of ethics and politics. Some religions do not include all these features.\nMythology.\nThe term \"mythology\" usually refers either to a system of myths or to the study of myths. However, the word \"myth\" itself has multiple (and some contradictory) definitions:\nIn regards to the study of culture and religion, these are some of the definitions scholars have used:\nSimilarities between different religious mythologies.\nGiven any of the above definitions of \"myth\", the myths of many religions, both ancient and modern, share common elements. Widespread similarities between religious mythologies include the following:\nThe similarities between cultures and time periods can be useful, but it is usually not easy to combine beliefs and histories from different groups. Simplification of cultures and time periods by eliminating detailed data remain vulnerable or flimsy in this area of research.\nContrasts between different religious mythologies.\nThough there are similarities among most religious mythologies, there are also contrasts. Many mythologies focus on explanations of the universe, natural phenomena, or other themes of human existence, often ascribing agency to one or more deities or other supernatural forces. However, some religions have very few of this kind of story of cosmic explanation. For instance, the Buddhist parable of the arrow warns against such speculations as \"[Is] the world eternal or not eternal? [Is] the soul different from the body? [Does] the enlightened exist after death or not?\", viewing them as irrelevant to the goal of escaping suffering.\nAcademic views.\nIn academia, the term \"myth\" often refers to stories whose culture regards them as true (as opposed to fictitious). Thus, many scholars will call a body of stories \"mythology\", leaving open the question of whether the stories are true or false. For example, in \"Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism\", English professor Howard Schwartz writes, \"the definition of 'mythology' offered here does not attempt to determine if biblical or subsequent narratives are true or false, i.e., historically accurate or not\".\nSince the beginning of modern philosophy and science in the 16th century, many Western intellectuals have seen myth as outdated. In fact, some argued that the Christian religion would be better off without mythology, or even that Christianity would be better off without religion:\n[J. A. T.] Robinson argued in favor of \"the detaching of the Christian doctrine of God from any necessary dependence on a 'supernaturalistic' worldview\". He understood this as a prophetic aspect of the Church's ministry to the world. [...] At this time atheism was regarded as the Christian Gospel that should be preached to the world. J. J. Altizer, for example, maintained [this] boldly by stating, \"Throughout its history Christian theology has been thwarted from reaching its intrinsic goal by its bondage to a transcendent, a sovereign, and an impassive God\". [...] [Dietrich] Bonhoffer called persistently for \"Religionless Christianity\".\nIn the 20th century, many scholars have resisted this trend, defending myth from modern criticism. Mircea Eliade, a professor of the history of religions, declared that myth did not hold religion back, that myth was an essential foundation of religion, and that eliminating myth would eliminate a piece of the human psyche. Eliade approached myth sympathetically at a time when religious thinkers were trying to purge religion of its mythological elements:\nEliade wrote about \"sky and sky gods\" when Christian theology was shaken at its very foundations by the \"death of God\" theology. He spoke of \"God up there\" when theologians such as J. A. T. Robinson were busy with erasing the mythical language of [a] three-storied universe that underlies the early Christian thought and experience.\nSimilarly, Joseph Campbell believed that people could not understand their individual lives without mythology to aid them. By recalling the significance of old myths, he encouraged awareness of them. In responding to the interview question \"How would you define mythology?\", Joseph Campbell answered:\nMy favorite definition of mythology: other people's religion. My favorite definition of religion: misunderstanding of mythology.\nReligious views.\nMost religions contain a body of traditional sacred stories that are believed to express profound truth. Some religious organizations and practitioners believe that some or all of their traditional stories are not only sacred and \"true\" but also historically accurate and divinely revealed and that calling such stories \"myths\" disrespects their special status. Other religious organizations and practitioners have no problem with categorizing their sacred stories as myths.\nOpposition to categorizing all sacred stories as myths.\nModern-day opposition.\nSome religious believers take offense when what they consider to be historical aspects of their faith are labeled as \"myth\". Such believers distinguish between religious fables or myths, on one hand, and those sacred narratives which are described by their tradition as being history or revelation, on the other. For instance, Catholic priest Father John A. Hardon insists that \"Christianity is not mythology. What we believe in is not religious fantasies, no matter how pious.\" Evangelical Christian theologian Carl F. H. Henry insisted that \"Judeo-Christian revelation has nothing in common with the category of myth\".\nThe roots of the popular meaning of \"myth\".\nEspecially within Christianity, objection to the word \"myth\" rests on a historical basis. By the time of Christ, the Greco-Roman world had started to use the term \"myth\" (Greek \"muthos\") to mean \"fable, fiction, lie\"; as a result, the early Christian theologians used \"myth\" in this sense. Thus, the derogatory meaning of the word \"myth\" is the traditional Christian meaning, and the expression \"Christian mythology\", as used in academic discourse, may offend Christians for this reason.\nIn addition, this early Christian use of the term \"myth\" passed into popular usage. Thus, when essential sacred mysteries and teachings are described as \"myth\", in modern English, the word often still implies that it is \"idle fancy, fiction, or falsehood\". This description could be taken as a direct attack on religious belief, quite contrary to the meaning ostensibly intended by the academic use of the term. Further, in academic writing, though \"myth\" usually means a fundamental worldview story, even there it is occasionally ambiguous or clearly denotes \"falsehood\", as in the \"Christ myth theory\". The original term \"mythos\" (which has no pejorative connotation in English) may be a better word to distinguish the positive definition from the negative.\nNon-opposition to categorizing sacred stories as myths.\nModern day clergy and practitioners within some religious movements have no problem classifying the religion's sacred stories as \"myths\". They see the sacred texts as indeed containing religious truths, divinely inspired but delivered in the language of mankind. Some examples follow.\nChristianity.\nJ.R.R. Tolkien's love of myths and devout Catholic faith came together in his assertion that mythology is the divine echo of \"the Truth\". Tolkien wrote that myths held \"fundamental things\". He expressed these beliefs in his poem \"Mythopoeia\" circa 1931, which describes myth-making as an act of \"sub-creation\" within God's primary creation. The poem in part says creation is \"myth-woven and elf-patterned\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;... There is no firmament,\nonly a void, unless a jewelled tent\nmyth-woven and elf-patterned; and no earth,\nunless the mother's womb whence all have birth.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nTolkien's opinion was adopted by another Christian writer, C. S. Lewis, in their conversations: \"Tolkien explained to Lewis that the story of Christ was the true myth at the very heart of history and at the very root of reality.\" C. S. Lewis freely called the Christ story a \"true myth\", and he believed that even pagan myths express spiritual truths. In his opinion, the difference between the Christ story and pagan myths is that the Christ story is historically as well as spiritually true. Lewis writes,\nThe story of Christ is simply a true myth: a myth working on us in the same way as the others, but with this tremendous difference that it really happened: and one must be content to accept it in the same way, remembering that it is God's myth where the others are men's myths: i. e. the Pagan stories are God expressing Himself through the minds of poets, using such images as He found there, while Christianity is God expressing Himself through what we call real things.\nAnother Christian writer, the Catholic priest Father Andrew Greeley, freely applies the term \"myth\" to Christianity. In his book \"Myths of Religion\", he defends this terminology:\nMany Christians have objected to my use of this word [myth] even when I define it specifically. They are terrified by a word which may even have a slight suggestion of fantasy. However, my usage is the one that is common among historians of religion, literary critics, and social scientists. It is a valuable and helpful usage; there is no other word which conveys what these scholarly traditions mean when they refer to myth. The Christian would be well advised to get over his fear of the word and appreciate how important a tool it can be for understanding the content of his faith.\nAt a \"Consultation on the Relationship Between the Wesleyan Tradition\nand the Natural Sciences\" in Kansas City, Missouri, on October 19, 1991, Dennis Bratcher presented a discussion of the adaptation of Near Eastern mythical thought by the Israelites. Bratcher argued that the Old Testament absorbed Near Eastern pagan mythology (although he drew a sharp distinction between the literally-interpreted myths of the Near Eastern pagans and the \"mythopoetic\" use of imagery from pagan myths by the Hebrews). During this presentation, he gave the following disclaimer:\nthe term \"myth\" as used here does not mean \"false\" or \"fiction\". Even in my old and yellowed Webster's, \"fiction\" is the \"third\" meaning of the word. In its primary and more technical meaning \"myth\" refers to a story or group of stories that serve to explain how a particular society views their world.\nJudaism.\nSome Jewish scholars, including Dov Noy, a professor of folklore at Hebrew University and founder of the Israel Folktale Archives, and Howard Schwartz, Jewish anthologist and English professor at the University of Missouri \u2013 St. Louis, have discussed traditional Jewish stories as \"mythology\".\nSchwartz authored the book \"Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism\". It consists of myths and belief statements excerpted from\u2014and, in some cases, synthesized from a number of excerpts from\u2014both Biblical and non-Biblical Jewish texts. According to Schwartz, the Jewish people continue to elaborate on, and compose additions to, their traditional mythology. In the book's introduction, Schwartz states that the word \"myth\", as used in the book, \"is not offered to mean something that is not true, as in the current popular usage\".\nNeopaganism.\nNeopagans frequently refer to their sacred stories as \"myths\". Asatru, a modern-day revival of Germanic Paganism, holds \"that the Eddas, Myths and Norse Sagas are the divinely inspired wisdom of [its] religion\". Wicca, another Neopagan movement, also applies the term \"mythology\" to its stories.\nMiscellaneous.\nThe Dewey Decimal system covers \"religion\" in the 200 range, with books on \"\"Religious mythology &amp; social theology\", a subset listed under 201.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
